TechBeacon ' s top 12 app dev and testing articles of 2021
public :  /  / pictures / Jaikumar-Vijayan-Freelance-Writer . png 
Jaikumar Vijayan
Freelance writer
Which TechBeacon articles on App Dev and Testing bubbled to the top in 2021 

Application development and testing practices continued to evolve last year , as they have done for the past several years . 

Organizations moving to a digital-first model because of the global coronavirus pandemic put increasing pressure on development teams to push out applications faster than ever , raising concerns over security and code quality in the process . 

In this roundup of TechBeacon ' s Top 12 application development and testing articles for 2021 , you ' ll find best practices and tips from experts on navigating challenges in the DevOps space , best practices and tips you can use to grow in your field , and resources you can use to gather actionable information for your job . 

1 . The best DevOps conferences of 2021
Conferences and trade shows have long been vital venues for IT practitioners to stay on top of the latest trends in their specific fields . The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in many of these events being canceled or transitioned into virtual events . Even so , there were plenty of useful in-person and online conferences for DevOps professionals last year . Freelance writer editor Linda Rosencrance highlights 10 of the best DevOps conferences of 2021 . 

2 . Climb the automation engineer career ladder : 6 roles , requirements
Test automation engineers play a critical role in DevOps environments . However , there can sometimes be considerable ambiguity about their potential career trajectories within the field . Some perceive the role as a flat one with little clarity on how to grow within it . Here , Angie Jones , senior director of developer relations at Applitools , offers a guide to understanding the different levels available to automation engineers and the requirements for each role . 

3 . How to do web performance testing with Google Lighthouse and Cypress
Web performance testing is critical for ensuring users have an optimal experience on your organization ' s website . Users have little patience for sites that are glitchy or slow , and they are often quick to go to a rival ' s site if they perceive it as offering them a better experience . Marie Drake , principal test automation engineer at News UK , explains why and how organizations need to do a combination of back-end and front-end tests to ensure optimal website performance . 

4 . 27 JavaScript experts to follow on Twitter
Developers of JavaScript applications have a variety of resources they can tap for information and for staying abreast of the latest developments in the field . Some examples include books , technical articles , podcasts and YouTube videos . Freelance writer Mitchell " Moe " Long says another essential resource is Twitter , because expert developers often use the platform to share insights , tips and tricks , and to spark discussions . Here he offers a curated list of 27 JavaScript experts to follow on Twitter . 

5 . 30 test automation leaders you should follow on Twitter
Following the right people on Twitter is a great way to stay updated on current trends and state-of-the-art techniques in almost any field . Software test automation is no exception . The field is crowded with experts on various topics including the using the right developer tools , the latest technologies and techniques and the use of AI and machine learning in test automation . The key is knowing whom to follow on Twitter and elsewhere . Freelance writer Mitchell " Moe " Long ' s list of 30 automation leaders to follow on Twitter covers experts on a wide spectrum of areas within the field . 

6 . 5 ways to empower your developers with low-code / no-code
Low-code / no-code platforms are transforming application development by allowing developers to essentially assemble web and mobile applications with minimal or no code creation needed . These platforms give enterprise developers and even those with little or no development skills a way to simply drag and drop different application components into the development environment and connect them to create an application . Gartner expects that low-code will account for nearly two-thirds ( 65% ) of applications by 2024 . Jayne Groll , CEO at the DevOps Institute , offers five tips for empowering developers with low-code / no-code platforms . 

7 . How DevOps teams are using—and abusing—DORA metrics
DevOps teams routinely use DORA ( DevOps Research and Assessment ) metrics to evaluate how well they are performing against goals and established best practices . The metrics measure four key outcomes around application development : deployment frequency , lead time for changes , change fail percentage , and mean time to repair / recovery . While the metrics are a useful indicator of how DevOps efforts are progress in an organization , they can be a double-edged sword , says Bryan Finster , distinguished engineer and value stream architect at Defense Unicorns . Here he explains why that ' s the case and what DevOps teams can do about it . 

8 . Scaling agile : What framework to use—and when
Selecting the appropriate method for scaling an agile project can be somewhat challenging because of the different things people mean when they talk about having a " scaling problem " or a having a project that " doesn ' t scale ,  " says Matthew Heusser , managing consultant at Excelon Development . Often what they mean is either finding a way to coordinate large groups to deliver products efficiently or being able to direct those groups in a more hands-on manner . In this article , Heusser offers tips on how to make an informed choice between methods like Scrum , Disciplined Agile Delivery ( DaD ) and Scaled Agile Framework ( SAFe )  . 

9 . The best agile and lean development conferences of 2021
The global coronavirus epidemic dampened IT conference attendance worldwide last year , as it did in 2020 . Still , there were several in-person and online events where developers had opportunities to learn from some of the best practitioners in lean and agile development practices . Freelance writer / editor Linda Rosencrance ' s roundup of the best agile and lean development conferences of 2021 included OOP 2021 , DeveloperWeek , Agile Manchester Virtual , DevOps Enterprise Summit , and ACE 2021 . 

10 . The future of software testing : Machine learning to the rescue
End-to-end software delivery pipelines and containers have helped forward-leaning organizations significantly improve software delivery times in recent years . Yet many others continue to struggle finding the right balance between speed and quality , and often it ' s the end users that become the testers of new software in these environments . Harpreet Singh , founder and co-CEO at Launchable , and Kohsuke Kawaguchi , co-CEO at Launchable , say that for these organizations the key focus in 2021 was on delivering right value at the right quality level , fast . Here , the two DevOps experts highlight five trends to watch , including test automation , data-driven ops , and the use of machine learning and predictive test selection . 

11 . Why it ' s ( still ) so difficult for testers to learn test automation
Many software testers get up to speed on test automation practices quickly and can grow from novices to seasoned veterans in a relatively short period . Others , though , can find test automation a struggle . Root causes for this include inadequate software development skills , experience with just one tool or language and a lack of adequate learning materials , says Bas Dijkstra , test automation speaker and writer . Here he offers advice on how to navigate these challenges and make a smooth transition to test automation specialist . 

12 . Computer science degrees : Still relevant but not required
College degrees are considered essential to gainful employment in many fields , but somewhat less so in IT . According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics , about 25% of IT workers in the country don ' t have a bachelor ' s degree . And many organizations seeking to fill roles in areas such as software engineering , DevOps , and test automation do not specify what type of degree is required for a specific role . So are computer science degrees still relevant ? Freelance journalist Christopher Null spoke with several hiring managers and team leaders to find out . 