On the night of September 26 , 1983 , the world almost ended . 
It was the height of the Cold War , and each side bristled with nuclear
weapons . Earlier that spring , President Reagan had announced the Strategic
Defense Initiative , nicknamed “ Star Wars ,  ” a planned missile defense shield that
threatened to upend the Cold War ’ s delicate balance . Just three weeks earlier on
September 1 , the Soviet military had shot down a commercial airliner flying
from Alaska to Seoul that had strayed into Soviet air space . Two hundred and
sixty-nine people had been killed , including an American congressman . Fearing
retaliation , the Soviet Union was on alert . 
The Soviet Union deployed a satellite early warning system called Oko to
watch for U . S . missile launches . Just after midnight on September 26 , the system
issued a grave report : the United States had launched a nuclear missile at the
Soviet Union . 
Lieutenant Colonel Stanislav Petrov was on duty that night in bunker
Serpukhov-15 outside Moscow , and it was his responsibility to report the missile
launch up the chain of command to his superiors . In the bunker , sirens blared
and a giant red backlit screen flashed “ launch ,  ” warning him of the detected
missile , but still Petrov was uncertain . Oko was new , and he worried that the
launch might be an error , a bug in the system . He waited . 
Another launch . Two missiles were inbound . Then another . And another . 
And another—five altogether . The screen flashing “ launch ” switched to “ missile
strike .  ” The system reported the highest confidence level . There was no
ambiguity : a nuclear strike was on its way . Soviet military command would have
only minutes to decide what to do before the missiles would explode over
Moscow . 
Petrov had a funny feeling . Why would the United States launch only five
missiles ? It didn ’ t make sense . A real surprise attack would be massive , an
overwhelming strike to wipe out Soviet missiles on the ground . Petrov wasn ’ t
convinced the attack was real . But he wasn ’ t certain it was a false alarm , either . 
With one eye on the computer readouts , Petrov called the ground-based radar
operators for confirmation . If the missiles were real , they would show up on
Soviet ground-based radars as they arced over the horizon . Puzzlingly , the
ground radars detected nothing . 
Petrov put the odds of the strike being real at 50 / 50 , no easier to predict than
a coin flip . He needed more information . He needed more time . All he had to do
was pick up the phone , but the possible consequences were enormous . If he told
Soviet command to fire nuclear missiles , millions would die . It could be the start
of World War III . 
Petrov went with his gut and called his superiors to inform them the system
was malfunctioning . He was right : there was no attack . Sunlight reflecting off
cloud tops had triggered a false alarm in Soviet satellites . The system was
wrong . Humanity was saved from potential Armageddon by a human “ in the
loop .  ” 
What would a machine have done in Petrov ’ s place ? The answer is clear : the
machine would have done whatever it was programmed to do , without ever
understanding the consequences of its actions . 
THE SNIPER ’ S CHOICE
In the spring of 2004—two decades later , in a different country , in a different
war—I stared down the scope of my sniper rifle atop a mountain in Afghanistan . 
My sniper team had been sent to the Afghanistan-Pakistan border to scout
infiltration routes where Taliban fighters were suspected of crossing back into
Afghanistan . We hiked up the mountain all night , our 120-pound packs weighing
heavily on the jagged and broken terrain . As the sky in the east began to lighten , 
we tucked ourselves in behind a rock outcropping—the best cover we could find . 
We hoped our position would conceal us at daybreak . 
It didn ’ t . A farmer spied our heads bobbing above the shallow rock
outcropping as the village beneath us woke to start their day . We ’ d been spotted . 
Of course , that didn ’ t change the mission . We kept watch , tallying the
movement we could see up and down the road in the valley below . And we
waited . 
It wasn ’ t long before we had company . 
A young girl of maybe five or six headed out of the village and up our way , 
two goats in trail . Ostensibly she was just herding goats , but she walked a long
slow loop around us , frequently glancing in our direction . It wasn ’ t a very
convincing ruse . She was spotting for Taliban fighters . We later realized that the
chirping sound we ’ d heard as she circled us , which we took to be her whistling
to her goats , was the chirp of a radio she was carrying . She slowly circled us , all
the while reporting on our position . We watched her . She watched us . 
She left , and the Taliban fighters came soon after . 
We got the drop on them—we spotted them moving up a draw in the
mountainside that they thought hid them from our position . The crackle of
gunfire from the ensuing firefight brought the entire village out of their homes . It
echoed across the valley floor and back , alerting everyone within a dozen miles
to our presence . The Taliban who ’ d tried to sneak up on us had either run or
were dead , but they would return in larger numbers . The crowd of villagers
swelled below our position , and they didn ’ t look friendly . If they decided to mob
us , we wouldn ’ t have been able to hold them all off .  
 “ Scharre ,  ” my squad leader said .  “ Call for exfil .  ” 
I hopped on the radio .  “ This is Mike-One-Two-Romeo ,  ” I alerted our quick
reaction force ,  “ the village is massing on our position . We ’ re going to need an
exfil .  ” Today ’ s mission was over . We would regroup and move to a new , better
position under cover of darkness that night . 
Back in the shelter of the safe house , we discussed what we would do
differently if faced with that situation again . Here ’ s the thing : the laws of war
don ’ t set an age for combatants . Behavior determines whether or not a person is
a combatant . If a person is participating in hostilities , as the young girl was
doing by spotting for the enemy , then they are a lawful target for engagement . 
Killing a civilian who had stumbled across our position would have been a war
crime , but it would have been legal to kill the girl . 
Of course , it would have been wrong . Morally , if not legally . 
In our discussion , no one needed to recite the laws of war or refer to abstract
ethical principles . No one needed to appeal to empathy . The horrifying notion of
shooting a child in that situation didn ’ t even come up . We all knew it would
have been wrong without needing to say it . War does force awful and difficult
choices on soldiers , but this wasn ’ t one of them . 
Context is everything . What would a machine have done in our place ? If it
had been programmed to kill lawful enemy combatants , it would have attacked
the little girl . Would a robot know when it is lawful to kill , but wrong ? 
THE DECISION
Life-and-death choices in war are not to be taken lightly , whether the stakes are
millions of lives or the fate of a single child . Laws of war and rules of
engagement frame the decisions soldiers face amid the confusion of combat , but
sound judgment is often required to discern the right choice in any given
situation . 
Technology has brought us to a crucial threshold in humanity ’ s relationship
with war . In future wars , machines may make life-and-death engagement
decisions all on their own . Militaries around the globe are racing to deploy
robots at sea , on the ground , and in the air—more than ninety countries have
drones patrolling the skies . These robots are increasingly autonomous and many
are armed . They operate under human control for now , but what happens when a
Predator drone has as much autonomy as a Google car ? What authority should
we give machines over the ultimate decision—life or death ? 
This is not science fiction . More than thirty nations already have defensive
supervised autonomous weapons for situations in which the speed of
engagements is too fast for humans to respond . These systems , used to defend
ships and bases against saturation attacks from rockets and missiles , are
supervised by humans who can intervene if necessary—but other weapons , like
the Israeli Harpy drone , have already crossed the line to full autonomy . Unlike
the Predator drone , which is controlled by a human , the Harpy can search a wide
area for enemy radars and , once it finds one , destroy it without asking
permission . It ’ s been sold to a handful of countries and China has reverse
engineered its own variant . Wider proliferation is a definite possibility , and the
Harpy may only be the beginning . South Korea has deployed a robotic sentry
gun to the demilitarized zone bordering North Korea . Israel has used armed
ground robots to patrol its Gaza border . Russia is building a suite of armed
ground robots for war on the plains of Europe . Sixteen nations already have
armed drones , and another dozen or more are openly pursuing development . 
These developments are part of a deeper technology trend : the rise of
artificial intelligence ( AI )  , which some have called the “ next industrial
revolution .  ” Technology guru Kevin Kelly has compared AI to electricity : just as
electricity brings objects all around us to life with power , so too will AI bring
them to life with intelligence . AI enables more sophisticated and autonomous
robots , from warehouse robots to next-generation drones , and can help process
large amounts of data and make decisions to power Twitter bots , program
subway repair schedules , and even make medical diagnoses . In war , AI systems
can help humans make decisions—or they can be delegated authority to make
decisions on their own . 
The rise of artificial intelligence will transform warfare . In the early
twentieth century , militaries harnessed the industrial revolution to bring tanks , 
aircraft , and machine guns to war , unleashing destruction on an unprecedented
scale . Mechanization enabled the creation of machines that were physically
stronger and faster than humans , at least for certain tasks . Similarly , the AI
revolution is enabling the cognitization of machines , creating machines that are
smarter and faster than humans for narrow tasks . Many military applications of
AI are uncontroversial—improved logistics , cyberdefenses , and robots for
medical evacuation , resupply , or surveillance—however , the introduction of AI
into weapons raises challenging questions . Automation is already used for a
variety of functions in weapons today , but in most cases it is still humans
choosing the targets and pulling the trigger . Whether that will continue is
unclear . Most countries have kept silent on their plans , but a few have signaled
their intention to move full speed ahead on autonomy . Senior Russian military
commanders envision that in the near future a “ fully robotized unit will be
created , capable of independently conducting military operations ,  ” while the
U . S . Department of Defense officials state that the option of deploying fully
autonomous weapons should be “ on the table .  ” 
BETTER THAN HUMAN ? 
Armed robots deciding who to kill might sound like a dystopian nightmare , but
some argue autonomous weapons could make war more humane . The same kind
of automation that allows self-driving cars to avoid pedestrians could also be
used to avoid civilian casualties in war , and unlike human soldiers , machines
never get angry or seek revenge . They never fatigue or tire . Airplane autopilots
have dramatically improved safety for commercial airliners , saving countless
lives . Could autonomy do the same for war ? 
New types of AI like deep learning neural networks have shown startling
advances in visual object recognition , facial recognition , and sensing human
emotions . It isn ’ t hard to imagine future weapons that could outperform humans
in discriminating between a person holding a rifle and one holding a rake . Yet
computers still fall far short of humans in understanding context and interpreting
meaning . AI programs today can identify objects in images , but can ’ t draw these
individual threads together to understand the big picture . 
Some decisions in war are straightforward . Sometimes the enemy is easily
identified and the shot is clear . Some decisions , however , like the one Stanislav
Petrov faced , require understanding the broader context . Some situations , like
the one my sniper team encountered , require moral judgment . Sometimes doing
the right thing entails breaking the rules—what ’ s legal and what ’ s right aren ’ t
always the same . 
THE DEBATE
Humanity faces a fundamental question : should machines be allowed to make
life-and-death decisions in war ? Should it be legal ? Is it right ? 
I ’ ve been inside the debate on lethal autonomy since 2008 . As a civilian
policy analyst in the Pentagon ’ s Office of the Secretary of Defense , I led the
group that drafted the official U . S . policy on autonomy in weapons .  ( Spoiler
alert : it doesn ’ t ban them .  ) Since 2014 , I ’ ve ran the Ethical Autonomy Project at
the Center for a New American Security , an independent bipartisan think tank in
Washington , DC , during which I ’ ve met experts from a wide range of disciplines
grappling with these questions : academics , lawyers , ethicists , psychologists , 
arms control activists , military professionals , and pacifists . I ’ ve peered behind
the curtain of government projects and met with the engineers building the next
generation of military robots . 
This book will guide you on a journey through the rapidly evolving world of
next-generation robotic weapons . I ’ ll take you inside defense companies
building intelligent missiles and research labs doing cutting-edge work on
swarming . I ’ ll introduce the government officials setting policy and the activists
striving for a ban . This book will examine the past—including things that went
wrong—and look to the future , as I meet with the researchers pushing the
boundaries of artificial intelligence . 
This book will explore what a future populated by autonomous weapons
might look like . Automated stock trading has led to “ flash crashes ” on Wall
Street . Could autonomous weapons lead to a “ flash war ”  ? New AI methods such
as deep learning are powerful , but often lead to systems that are effectively a 
 “ black box ” —even to their designers . What new challenges will advanced AI
systems bring ? 
Over 3 , 000 robotics and artificial intelligence experts have called for a ban
on offensive autonomous weapons , and are joined by over sixty
nongovernmental organizations ( NGOs ) in the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots . 
Science and technology luminaries such as Stephen Hawking , Elon Musk , and
Apple cofounder Steve Wozniak have spoken out against autonomous weapons , 
warning they could spark a “ global AI arms race .  ” 
Can an arms race be prevented , or is one already under way ? If it ’ s already
happening , can it be stopped ? Humanity ’ s track record for controlling dangerous
technology is mixed ; attempts to ban weapons that were seen as too dangerous
or inhumane date back to antiquity . Many of these attempts have failed , 
including early-twentieth-century attempts to ban submarines and airplanes . 
Even those that have succeeded , such as the ban on chemical weapons , rarely
stop rogue regimes such as Bashar al-Assad ’ s Syria or Saddam Hussein ’ s Iraq . If
an international ban cannot stop the world ’ s most odious regimes from building
killer robot armies , we may someday face our darkest nightmares brought to life . 
STUMBLING TOWARD THE ROBOPOCALYPSE
No nation has stated outright that they are building autonomous weapons , but in
secret defense labs and dual-use commercial applications , AI technology is
racing forward . For most applications , even armed robots , humans would remain
in control of lethal decisions—but battlefield pressures could drive militaries to
build autonomous weapons that take the human out of the loop . Militaries could
desire greater autonomy to take advantage of computers ’ superior speed or so
that robots can continue engagements when their communications to human
controllers are jammed . Or militaries might build autonomous weapons simply
because of a fear that others might do so . U . S . Deputy Secretary of Defense Bob
Work has asked : 
If our competitors go to Terminators .  .  . and it turns out the Terminators are able to make
decisions faster , even if they ’ re bad , how would we respond ? 
Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Paul Selva has termed
this dilemma “ The Terminator Conundrum .  ” The stakes are high : AI is emerging
as a powerful technology . Used the right way , intelligent machines could save
lives by making war more precise and humane . Used the wrong way , 
autonomous weapons could lead to more killing and even greater civilian
casualties . Nations will not make these choices in a vacuum . It will depend on
what other countries do , as well as on the collective choices of scientists , 
engineers , lawyers , human rights activists , and others participating in this debate . 
Artificial intelligence is coming and it will be used in war . How it is used , 
however , is an open question . In the words of John Connor , hero of the
Terminator movies and leader of the human resistance against the machines ,  
 “ The future ’ s not set . There ’ s no fate but what we make for ourselves .  ” The fight
to ban autonomous weapons cuts to the core of humanity ’ s ages-old conflicted
relationship with technology : do we control our creations or do they control us ? 
PART I
Robopocalypse Now
1
THE COMING SWARM
THE MILITARY ROBOTICS REVOLUTION
On a sunny afternoon in the hills of central California , a swarm takes flight . 
One by one , a launcher flings the slim Styrofoam-winged drones into the air . 
The drones let off a high-pitched buzz , which fades as they climb into the crystal
blue California sky . 
The drones carve the air with sharp , precise movements . I look at the drone
pilot standing next to me and realize with some surprise that his hands aren ’ t
touching the controls ; the drones are flying fully autonomously . It ’ s a silly
realization—after all , autonomous drone swarms are what I ’ ve come here to see
—yet somehow the experience of watching the drones fly with such agility
without any human controlling them is different than I ’ d imagined . Their nimble
movements seem purposeful , and it ’ s hard not to imbue them with intention . It ’ s
both impressive and discomfiting , this idea of the drones operating “ off leash .  ” 
I ’ ve traveled to Camp Roberts , California , to see researchers from the Naval
Postgraduate School investigate something no one else in the world has ever
done before : swarm warfare . Unlike Predator drones , which are individually
remotely piloted by human controllers on the ground , these researchers ’ drones
are controlled en masse . Today ’ s experiment will feature twenty drones flying
simultaneously in a ten-against-ten swarm-on-swarm mock dogfight . The
shooting is simulated , but the maneuvering and flying are all real . 
Each drone comes off the launcher with its autopilot already switched on . 
Without any human direction , they climb to their assigned altitudes and form
two teams , reporting back when they are “ swarm ready .  ” The Red and Blue
swarms wait in their respective corners of the aerial combat arena , circling like a
flock of hungry buzzards . 
The pilot commanding Red Swarm rubs his hands together , anticipating the
coming battle—which is funny , because his entire role is just to click the button
that tells the swarm to start . After that , he ’ s as much of a spectator as I am . 
Duane Davis , the retired Navy helicopter pilot turned computer programmer
who designed the swarm algorithms , counts down to the fight :  
 “ Initiating swarm v . swarm .  .  . 3 , 2 , 1 , shoot !  ” 
Both the Red and Blue swarm commanders put their swarms into action . The
two swarms close in on each other without hesitation .  “ Fight ’ s on !  ” Duane yells
enthusiastically . Within seconds , the swarms close the gap and collide . The two
swarms blend together into a furball of close air combat . The swarms maneuver
and swirl as a single mass . Simulated shots are tallied up at the bottom of the
computer screen :  
 “ UAV 74 fired at UAV 33 
 “ UAV 59 fired at UAV 25 
 “ UAV 33 hit 
 “ UAV 25 hit .  .  .  ” 
The swarms ’ behavior is driven by a simple algorithm called Greedy
Shooter . Each drone will maneuver to get into a kill shot position against an
enemy drone . A human must only choose the swarm behavior—wait , follow , 
attack , or land—and tell the swarm to start . After that , all of the swarm ’ s actions
are totally autonomous . 
On the Red Swarm commander ’ s computer screen , it ’ s hard to tell who ’ s
winning . The drone icons overlap one another in a blur while , outside , the drones
circle each other in a maelstrom of air combat . The whirling gyre looks like pure
chaos to me , although Davis tells me he sometimes can pick out which drones
are chasing each other . 
A referee software called The Arbiter tracks the score . Red Swarm gains the
upper hand with four kills to Blue ’ s two . The “ killed ” drones ’ status switches
from green to red as they ’ re taken out of the fight . Then the fight falls into a lull , 
with the aircraft circling each other , unable to get a kill . Davis explains that
because the aircraft are perfectly matched—same airframe , same flight controls , 
same algorithms—they sometimes fall into a stalemate where neither side can
gain the upper hand . 
Davis resets the battlefield for Round 2 and the swarms return to their
respective corners . When the swarm commanders click go , the swarms close on
each other once again . This time the battle comes out dead even , 3–3 . In Round
3 , Red pulls out a decisive win , 7–4 . Red Swarm commander is happy to take
credit for the win .  “ I pushed the button ,  ” he says with a chuckle . 
Just as robots are transforming industries—from self-driving cars to robot
vacuum cleaners and caretakers for the elderly—they are also transforming war . 
Global spending on military robotics is estimated to reach $7 . 5 billion per year
in 2018 , with scores of countries expanding their arsenals of air , ground , and
maritime robots . 
Robots have many battlefield advantages over traditional human-inhabited
vehicles . Unshackled from the physiological limits of humans , uninhabited 
(  “ unmanned ”  ) vehicles can be made smaller , lighter , faster , and more
maneuverable . They can stay out on the battlefield far beyond the limits of
human endurance , for weeks , months , or even years at a time without rest . They
can take more risk , opening up tactical opportunities for dangerous or even
suicidal missions without risking human lives . 
However , robots have one major disadvantage . By removing the human from
the vehicle , they lose the most advanced cognitive processor on the planet : the
human brain . Most military robots today are remotely controlled , or
teleoperated , by humans ; they depend on fragile communication links that can be
jammed or disrupted by environmental conditions . Without these
communications , robots can only perform simple tasks , and their capacity for
autonomous operation is limited . 
The solution : more autonomy . 
THE ACCIDENTAL REVOLUTION
No one planned on a robotics revolution , but the U . S . military stumbled into one
as it deployed thousands of air and ground robots to meet urgent needs in Iraq
and Afghanistan . By 2005 , the U . S . Department of Defense ( DoD ) had woken
up to the fact that something significant was happening . Spending on
uninhabited aircraft , or drones , which had hovered around the $300 million per
year mark in the 1990s , skyrocketed after 9 / 11 , increasing sixfold to over $2
billion per year by 2005 . Drones proved particularly valuable in the messy
counterinsurgency wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . Larger aircraft like the MQ-1B
Predator can quietly surveil terrorists around the clock , tracking their movements
and unraveling their networks . Smaller hand-launched drones like the RQ-11
Raven can provide troops “ over-the-hill reconnaissance ” on demand while on
patrol . Hundreds of drones had been deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan in short
order . 
Drones weren ’ t new—they had been used in a limited fashion in Vietnam—
but the overwhelming crush of demand for them was . While in later years drones
would become associated with “ drone strikes ,  ” it is their capacity for persistent
surveillance , not dropping bombs , that makes them unique and valuable to the
military . They give commanders a low-cost , low-risk way to put eyes in the sky . 
Soon , the Pentagon was pouring drones into the wars at a breakneck pace . 
By 2011 , annual spending on drones had swelled to over $6 billion per year , 
over twenty times pre-9 / 11 levels . DoD had over 7 , 000 drones in its fleet . The
vast majority of them were smaller hand-launched models , but large aircraft like
the MQ-9 Reaper and RQ-4 Global Hawk were also valuable military assets . 
At the same time , DoD was discovering that robots weren ’ t just valuable in
the air . They were equally important , if not more so , on the ground . Driven in
large part by the rise of improvised explosive devices ( IEDs )  , DoD deployed
over 6 , 000 ground robots to Iraq and Afghanistan . Small robots like the iRobot
Packbot allowed troops to disable or destroy IEDs without putting themselves at
risk . Bomb disposal is a great job for a robot . 
THE MARCH TOWARD EVER-GREATER AUTONOMY
In 2005 , after DoD started to come to grips with the robotics revolution and its
implications for the future of conflict , it began publishing a series of “ roadmaps ” 
for future unmanned system investment . The first roadmap was focused on
aircraft , but subsequent roadmaps in 2007 , 2009 , 2011 , and 2013 included
ground and maritime vehicles as well . While the lion ’ s share of dollars has gone
toward uninhabited aircraft , ground , sea surface , and undersea vehicles have
valuable roles to play as well . 
These roadmaps did more than simply catalog the investments DoD was
making . Each roadmap looked forward twenty-five years into the future , 
outlining technology needs and wants in order to help inform future investments
by government and industry . They covered sensors , communications , power , 
weapons , propulsion , and other key enabling technologies . Across all the
roadmaps , autonomy is a dominant theme . 
The 2011 roadmap perhaps summarized the vision best : 
For unmanned systems to fully realize their potential , they must be able to achieve a highly
autonomous state of behavior and be able to interact with their surroundings . This advancement
will require an ability to understand and adapt to their environment , and an ability to collaborate
with other autonomous systems . 
Autonomy is the cognitive engine that power robots . Without autonomy , robots
are only empty vessels , brainless husks that depend on human controllers for
direction . 
In Iraq and Afghanistan , the U . S . military operated in a relatively 
 “ permissive ” electromagnetic environment where insurgents did not generally
have the ability to jam communications with robot vehicles , but this will not
always be the case in future conflicts . Major nation-state militaries will almost
certainly have the ability to disrupt or deny communications networks , and the
electromagnetic spectrum will be highly contested . The U . S . military has ways
of communicating that are more resistant to jamming , but these methods are
limited in range and bandwidth . Against a major military power , the type of
drone operations the United States has conducted when going after terrorists—
streaming high-definition , full-motion video back to stateside bases via satellites
—will not be possible . In addition , some environments inherently make
communications challenging , such as undersea , where radio wave propagation is
hindered by water . In these situations , autonomy is a must if robotic systems are
to be effective . As machine intelligence advances , militaries will be able to
create ever more autonomous robots capable of carrying out more complex
missions in more challenging environments independent from human control . 
Even if communications links work perfectly , greater autonomy is also
desirable because of the personnel costs of remotely controlling robots . 
Thousands of robots require thousands of people to control them , if each robot is
remotely operated . Predator and Reaper drone operations require seven to ten
pilots to staff one drone “ orbit ” of 24 / 7 continuous around-the-clock coverage
over an area . Another twenty people per orbit are required to operate the sensors
on the drone , and scores of intelligence analysts are needed to sift through the
sensor data . In fact , because of these substantial personnel requirements , the U . S . 
Air Force has a strong resistance to calling these aircraft “ unmanned .  ” There
may not be anyone on board the aircraft , but there are still humans controlling it
and supporting it . 
Because the pilot remains on the ground , uninhabited aircraft free
surveillance operations from the limits of human endurance—but only the
physical ones . Drones can stay aloft for days at a time , far longer than a human
pilot could remain effective sitting in the cockpit , but remote operation doesn ’ t
change the cognitive requirements on human operators . Humans still have to
perform the same tasks , they just aren ’ t physically on board the vehicle . The Air
Force prefers the term “ remotely piloted aircraft ” because that ’ s what today ’ s
drones are . Pilots still fly the aircraft via stick and rudder input , just remotely
from the ground , sometimes even half a world away . 
It ’ s a cumbersome way to operate . Building tens of thousands of cheap
robots is not a cost-effective strategy if they require even larger numbers of
highly trained ( and expensive ) people to operate them . 
Autonomy is the answer . The 2011 DoD roadmap stated : 
Autonomy reduces the human workload required to operate systems , enables the optimization of
the human role in the system , and allows human decision making to focus on points where it is
most needed . These benefits can further result in manpower efficiencies and cost savings as well
as greater speed in decision-making . 
Many of DoD ’ s robotic roadmaps point toward the long-term goal of full
autonomy . The 2005 roadmap looked toward “ fully autonomous swarms .  ” The
2011 roadmap articulated an evolution of four levels of autonomy from ( 1 ) 
human operated to ( 2 ) human delegated ,  ( 3 ) human supervised , and eventually 
( 4 ) fully autonomous . The benefits of greater autonomy was the “ single greatest
theme ” in a 2010 report from the Air Force Office of the Chief Scientist on
future technology . 
Although Predator and Reaper drones are still flown manually , albeit
remotely from the ground , other aircraft such as Air Force Global Hawk and
Army Gray Eagle drones have much more automation : pilots direct these aircraft
where to go and the aircraft flies itself . Rather than being flown via a stick and
rudder , the aircraft are directed via keyboard and mouse . The Army doesn ’ t even
refer to the people controlling its aircraft as “ pilots ” —it called them “ operators .  ” 
Even with this greater automation , however , these aircraft still require one
human operator per aircraft for anything but the simplest missions . 
Incrementally , engineers are adding to the set of tasks that uninhabited
aircraft can perform on their own , moving step by step toward increasingly
autonomous drones . In 2013 , the U . S . Navy successfully landed its X-47B
prototype drone on a carrier at sea , autonomously . The only human input was the
order to land ; the actual flying was done by software . In 2014 , the Navy ’ s
Autonomous Aerial Cargo / Utility System ( AACUS ) helicopter autonomously
scouted out an improvised landing area and executed a successful landing on its
own . Then in 2015 , the X-47B drone again made history by conducting the first
autonomous aerial refueling , taking gas from another aircraft while in flight . 
These are key milestones in building more fully combat-capable uninhabited
aircraft . Just as autonomous cars will allow a vehicle to drive from point A to
point B without manual human control , the ability to takeoff , land , navigate , and
refuel autonomously will allow robots to perform tasks under human direction
and supervision , but without humans controlling each movement . This can begin
to break the paradigm of humans manually controlling the robot , shifting
humans into a supervisory role . Humans will command the robot what action to
take , and it will execute the task on its own . 
Swarming , or cooperative autonomy , is the next step in this evolution . Davis
is most excited about the nonmilitary applications of swarming , from search and
rescue to agriculture . Coordinated robot behavior could be useful for a wide
variety of applications and the Naval Postgraduate School ’ s research is very
basic , so the algorithms they ’ re building could be used for many purposes . Still , 
the military advantages in mass , coordination , and speed are profound and hard
to ignore . Swarming can allow militaries to field large numbers of assets on the
battlefield with a small number of human controllers . Cooperative behavior can
also allow quicker reaction times , so that the swarm can respond to changing
events faster than would be possible with one person controlling each vehicle . 
In conducting their swarm dogfight experiment , Davis and his colleagues are
pushing the boundaries of autonomy . Their next goal is to work up to a hundred
drones fighting in a fifty-on-fifty aerial swarm battle , something Davis and his
colleagues are already simulating on computers , and their ultimate goal is to
move beyond dogfighting to a more complex game akin to capture the flag . Two
swarms would compete to score the most points by landing at the other ’ s air base
without being “ shot down ” first . Each swarm must balance defending its own
base , shooting down enemy drones , and getting as many of its drones as possible
into the enemy ’ s base . What are the “ plays ” to run with a swarm ? What are the
best tactics ? These are precisely the questions Davis and his colleagues want to
explore .  
 “ If I have fifty planes that are involved in a swarm ,  ” he said ,  “ how much of
that swarm do I want to be focused on offense—getting to the other guy ’ s
landing area ? How much do I want focused on defending my landing space and
doing the air-to-air problem ? How do I want to do assignments of tasks between
the swarms ? If I ’ ve got the adversary ’ s UAVs [ unmanned aerial vehicles ] 
coming in , how do I want my swarm deciding which UAV is going to take
which adversary to try to stop them from getting to our base ?  ” 
Swarm tactics are still at a very early stage . Currently , the human operator
allocates a certain number of drones to a sub-swarm then tasks that sub-swarm
with a mission , such as attempting to attack an enemy ’ s base or attacking enemy
aircraft . After that , the human is in a supervisory mode . Unless there is a safety
concern , the human controller won ’ t intervene to take control of an aircraft . 
Even then , if an aircraft began to experience a malfunction , it wouldn ’ t make
sense to take control of it until it left the swarm ’ s vicinity . Taking manual
control of an aircraft in the middle of the swarm could actually instigate a midair
collision . It would be very difficult for a human to predict and avoid a collision
with all of the other drones swirling in the sky . If the drone is under the swarm ’ s
command , however , it will automatically adjust its flight to avoid a collision . 
Right now , the swarm behaviors Davis is using are very basic . The human
can command the swarm to fly in a formation , to land , or to attack enemy
aircraft . The drones then sort themselves into position for landing or formation
flying to “ deconflict ” their actions . For some tasks , such as landing , this is done
relatively easily by altitude : lower planes land first . Other tasks , such as
deconflicting air-to-air combat are trickier . It wouldn ’ t do any good , for
example , for all of the drones in the swarm to go after the same enemy aircraft . 
They need to coordinate their behavior . 
The problem is analogous to that of outfielders calling a fly ball . It wouldn ’ t
make sense to have the manager calling who should catch the ball from the
dugout . The outfielders need to coordinate among themselves .  “ It ’ s one thing
when you ’ ve got two humans that can talk to one another and one ball ,  ” Davis
explained .  “ It ’ s another thing when there ’ s fifty humans and fifty balls .  ” This
task would be effectively impossible for humans , but a swarm can accomplish
this very quickly , through a variety of methods . In centralized coordination , for
example , individual swarm elements pass their data back to a single controller , 
which then issues commands to each robot in the swarm . Hierarchical
coordination , on the other hand , decomposes the swarm into teams and squads
much like a military organization , with orders flowing down the chain of
command . 
Consensus-based coordination is a decentralized approach where all of the
swarm elements communicate with one another simultaneously and collectively
decide on a course of action . They could do this by using “ voting ” or “ auction ” 
algorithms to coordinate behavior . For example , each swarm element could
place a “ bid ” on an “ auction ” to catch the fly ball . The individual that bids
highest “ wins ” the auction and catches the ball , while the others move out of the
way . 
Emergent coordination is the most decentralized approach and is how flocks
of birds , colonies of insects , and mobs of people work , with coordinated action
arising naturally from each individual making decisions based on those nearby . 
Simple rules for individual behavior can lead to very complex collective action , 
allowing the swarm to exhibit “ collective intelligence .  ” For example , a colony of
ants will converge on an optimal route to take food back to the nest over time
because of simple behavior from each individual ant . As ants pick up food , they
leave a pheromone trail behind them as they move back to the nest . If they come
across an existing trail with stronger pheromones , they ’ ll switch to it . More ants
will arrive back at the nest sooner via the faster route , leading to a stronger
pheromone trail , which will then cause more ants to use that trail . No individual
ant “ knows ” which trail is fastest , but collectively the colony converges on the
fastest route . 
Swarm Command-and-Control Models
Communication among elements of the swarm can occur through direct
signaling , akin to an outfielder yelling “ I got it !  ”  ; indirect methods such as coobservation , which is how schools of fish and herds of animals stay together ; or
by modifying the environment in a process called stigmergy , like ants leaving
pheromones to mark a trail . 
The drones in Davis ’ s swarm communicate through a central Wi–Fi router
on the ground . They avoid collisions by staying within narrow altitude windows
that are automatically assigned by the central ground controller . Their attack
behavior is uncoordinated , though . The “ greedy shooter ” algorithm simply
directs each drone to attack the nearest enemy drone , regardless of what the
other drones are doing . In theory , all the drones could converge on the same
enemy drone , leaving other enemies untouched . It ’ s a terrible method for air-toair combat , but Davis and his colleagues are still in the proof-of-concept stage . 
They have experimented with a more decentralized auction-based approach and
found it to be very robust to disruptions , including up to a 90 percent
communications loss within the swarm . As long as some communications are
up , even if they ’ re spotty , the swarm will converge on a solution . 
The effect of fifty aircraft working together , rather than fighting individually
or in wingman pairs as humans do today , would be tremendous . Coordinated
behavior is the difference between a basketball team and five ball hogs all
making a run at the basket themselves . It ’ s the difference between a bunch of
lone wolves and a wolf pack . 
In 2016 , the United States demonstrated 103 aerial drones flying together in
a swarm that DoD officials described as “ a collective organism , sharing one
distributed brain for decision-making and adapting to each other like swarms in
nature .  ”  ( Not to be outdone , a few months later China demonstrated a 119-drone
swarm .  ) Fighting together , a drone swarm could be far more effective than the
same number of drones fighting individually . No one yet knows what the best
tactics will be for swarm combat , but experiments such as these are working to
tease them out . New tactics might even be evolved by the machines themselves
through machine learning or evolutionary approaches . 
Swarms aren ’ t merely limited to the air . In August 2014 , the U . S . Navy
Office of Naval Research ( ONR ) demonstrated a swarm of small boats on the
James River in Virginia by simulating a mock strait transit in which the boats
protected a high-value Navy ship against possible threats , escorting it through a
simulated high-danger area . When directed by a human controller to investigate
a potential threat , a detachment of uninhabited boats moved to intercept and
encircle the suspicious vessel . The human controller simply directed them to
intercept the designated suspicious ship ; the boats moved autonomously , 
coordinating their actions by sharing information . This demonstration involved
five boats working together , but the concept could be scaled up to larger
numbers , just as in aerial drone swarms . 
Bob Brizzolara , who directed the Navy ’ s demonstration , called the swarming
boats a “ game changer .  ” It ’ s an often-overused term , but in this case , it ’ s not
hyperbole—robotic boat swarms are highly valuable to the Navy as a potential
way to guard against threats to its ships . In October 2000 , the USS Cole was
attacked by al-Qaida terrorists using a small explosive-laden boat while in port
in Aden , Yemen . The blast killed seventeen sailors and cut a massive gash in the
ship ’ s hull . Similar attacks continue to be a threat to U . S . ships , not just from
terrorists but also from Iran , which regularly uses small high-speed craft to
harass U . S . ships near the Straits of Hormuz . Robot boats could intercept
suspicious vessels further away , putting eyes ( and potentially weapons ) on
potentially hostile boats without putting sailors at risk . 
What the robot boats might do after they ’ ve intercepted a potentially hostile
vessel is another matter . In a video released by the ONR , a . 50 caliber machine
gun is prominently displayed on the front of one of the boats . The video ’ s
narrator makes no bones about the fact that the robot boats could be used to 
 “ damage or destroy hostile vessels ,  ” but the demonstration didn ’ t involve firing
any actual bullets , and didn ’ t include a consideration of what the rules of
engagement actually would have been . Would a human be required to pull the
trigger ? When pressed by reporters following the demonstration , a spokesman
for ONR explained that “ there is always a human in the loop when it comes to
the actual engagement of an enemy .  ” But the spokesman also acknowledged that 
 “ under this swarming demonstration with multiple [ unmanned surface vehicles ]  , 
ONR did not study the specifics of how the human-in-the-loop works for rules of
engagement .  ” 
OODA Loop
The Navy ’ s fuzzy answer to such a fundamental question reflects a tension in
the military ’ s pursuit of more advanced robotics . Even as researchers and
engineers move to incorporate more autonomy , there is an understanding that
there are—or should be—limits on autonomy when it comes to the use of
weapons . What exactly those limits are , however , is often unclear . 
REACHING THE LIMIT
How much autonomy is too much ? The U . S . Air Force laid out an ambitious
vision for the future of robot aircraft in their Unmanned Aircraft Systems Flight
Plan , 2009–2047 . The report envisioned a future where an arms race in speed
drove a desire for ever-faster automation , not unlike real-world competition in
automated stock trading . 
In air combat , pilots talk about an observe , orient , decide , act ( OODA ) loop , 
a cognitive process pilots go through when engaging enemy aircraft . 
Understanding the environment , deciding , and acting faster than the enemy
allows a pilot to “ get inside ” the enemy ’ s OODA loop . While the enemy is still
trying to understand what ’ s happening and decide on a course of action , the pilot
has already changed the situation , resetting the enemy to square one and forcing
him or her to come to grips with a new situation . Air Force strategist John Boyd , 
originator of the OODA loop , described the objective : 
Goal : Collapse adversary ’ s system into confusion and disorder by causing him to over and under
react to activity that appears simultaneously menacing as well as ambiguous , chaotic , or
misleading . 
If victory comes from completing this cognitive process faster , then one can see
the advantage in automation . The Air Force ’ s 2009 Flight Plan saw tremendous
potential for computers to exceed human decision-making speeds : 
Advances in computing speeds and capacity will change how technology affects the OODA loop . 
Today the role of technology is changing from supporting to fully participating with humans in
each step of the process . In 2047 technology will be able to reduce the time to complete the
OODA loop to micro or nanoseconds . Much like a chess master can outperform proficient chess
players ,  [ unmanned aircraft systems ] will be able to react at these speeds and therefore this loop
moves toward becoming a “ perceive and act ” vector . Increasingly humans will no longer be “ in
the loop ” but rather “ on the loop ” —monitoring the execution of certain decisions . 
Simultaneously , advances in AI will enable systems to make combat decisions and act within
legal and policy constraints without necessarily requiring human input . 
This , then , is the logical culmination of the arms race in speed : autonomous
weapons that complete engagements all on their own . The Air Force Flight Plan
acknowledged the gravity of what it was suggesting might be possible . The next
paragraph continued : 
Authorizing a machine to make lethal combat decisions is contingent upon political and military
leaders resolving legal and ethical questions . These include the appropriateness of machines
having this ability , under what circumstances it should be employed , where responsibility for
mistakes lies and what limitations should be placed upon the autonomy of such systems .  .  .  . 
Ethical discussions and policy decisions must take place in the near term in order to guide the
development of future [ unmanned aircraft system ] capabilities , rather than allowing the
development to take its own path apart from this critical guidance . 
The Air Force wasn ’ t recommending autonomous weapons . It wasn ’ t even
suggesting they were necessarily a good idea . What it was suggesting was that
autonomous systems might have advantages over humans in speed , and that AI
might advance to the point where machines could carry out lethal targeting and
engagement decisions without human input . If that is true , then legal , ethical , 
and policy discussions should take place now to shape the development of this
technology . 
At the time the Air Force Flight Plan was released in 2009 , I was working in
the Office of the Secretary of Defense as a civilian policy analyst focusing on
drone policy . Most of the issues we were grappling with at the time had to do
with how to manage the overwhelming demand for more drones from Iraq and
Afghanistan . Commanders on the ground had a seemingly insatiable appetite for
drones . Despite the thousands that had been deployed , they wanted more , and
Pentagon senior leaders—particularly in the Air Force—were concerned that
spending on drones was crowding out other priorities . Secretary of Defense
Robert Gates , who routinely chastised the Pentagon for its preoccupation with
future wars over the ongoing ones in Iraq and Afghanistan , strongly sided with
warfighters in the field . His guidance was clear : send more drones . Most of my
time was spent figuring out how to force the Pentagon bureaucracy to comply
with the secretary ’ s direction and respond more effectively to warfighter needs , 
but when policy questions like this came up , eyes turned toward me . 
I didn ’ t have the answers they wanted . There was no policy on autonomy . 
Although the Air Force had asked for policy guidance in their 2009 Flight Plan , 
there wasn ’ t even a conversation under way . 
The 2011 DoD roadmap , which I was involved in writing , took a stab at an
answer , even if it was a temporary one : 
Policy guidelines will especially be necessary for autonomous systems that involve the
application of force .  .  .  . For the foreseeable future , decisions over the use of force and the choice
of which individual targets to engage with lethal force will be retained under human control in
unmanned systems . 
It didn ’ t say much , but it was the first official DoD policy statement on lethal
autonomy . Lethal force would remain under human control for the “ foreseeable
future .  ” But in a world where AI technology is racing forward at a breakneck
pace , how far into the future can we really see ? 
1
2
3
2
THE TERMINATOR AND THE ROOMBA
WHAT IS AUTONOMY ? 
Autonomy is a slippery word . For one person ,  “ autonomous robot ” might
mean a household Roomba that vacuums your home while you ’ re away . For
another , autonomous robots conjure images from science fiction . Autonomous
robots could be a good thing , like the friendly—if irritating—C-3PO from Star
Wars , or could lead to rogue homicidal agents , like those Skynet deploys against
humanity in the Terminator movies . 
Science fiction writers have long grappled with questions of autonomy in
robots . Isaac Asimov created the now-iconic Three Laws of Robotics to govern
robots in his stories : 
A robot may not injure a human being or , through inaction , allow a human
being to come to harm . 
A robot must obey orders given by human beings except where such orders
would conflict with the first law . 
A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not
conflict with the first or second law . 
In Asimov ’ s stories , these laws embedded within the robot ’ s “ positronic brain ” 
are inviolable . The robot must obey . Asimov ’ s stories often explore the
consequences of robots ’ strict obedience of these laws , and loopholes in the laws
themselves . In the Asimov-inspired movie I , Robot ( spoiler alert )  , the lead robot
protagonist , Sonny , is given a secret secondary processor that allows him to
override the Three Laws , if he desires . On the outside , Sonny looks the same as
other robots , but the human characters can instantly tell there is something
different about him . He dreams . He questions them . He engages in humanlike
dialogue and critical thought of which the other robots are incapable . There is
something unmistakably human about Sonny ’ s behavior . 
When Dr . Susan Calvin discovers the source of Sonny ’ s apparent anomalous
conduct , she finds it hidden in his chest cavity . The symbolism in the film is
unmistakable : unlike other robots who are slaves to logic , Sonny has a “ heart .  ” 
Fanciful as it may be , I , Robot ’ s take on autonomy resonates . Unlike
machines , humans have the ability to ignore instructions and make decisions for
themselves . Whether robots can ever have something akin to human free will is a
common theme in science fiction . In I , Robot ’ s climactic scene , Sonny makes a
choice to save Dr . Calvin , even though it means risking the success of their
mission to defeat the evil AI V . I . K . I .  , who has taken over the city . It ’ s a choice
motivated by love , not logic . In the Terminator movies , when the military AI
Skynet becomes self-aware , it makes a different choice . Upon determining that
humans are a threat to its existence , Skynet decides to eliminate them , starting
global nuclear war and initiating “ Judgment Day .  ” 
THE THREE DIMENSIONS OF AUTONOMY
In the real world , machine autonomy doesn ’ t require a magical spark of free will
or a soul . Autonomy is simply the ability for a machine to perform a task or
function on its own . 
The DoD unmanned system roadmaps referred to “ levels ” or a “ spectrum ” of
autonomy , but those classifications are overly simplistic . Autonomy
encompasses three distinct concepts : the type of task the machine is performing ; 
the relationship of the human to the machine when performing that task ; and the
sophistication of the machine ’ s decision-making when performing the task . This
means there are three different dimensions of autonomy . These dimensions are
independent , and a machine can be “ more autonomous ” by increasing the
amount of autonomy along any of these spectrums . 
The first dimension of autonomy is the task being performed by the machine . 
Not all tasks are equal in their significance , complexity , and risk : a thermostat is
an autonomous system in charge of regulating temperature , while Terminator ’ s
Skynet was given control over nuclear weapons . The complexity of decisions
involved and the consequences if the machine fails to perform the task
appropriately are very different . Often , a single machine will perform some tasks
autonomously , while humans are in control of other tasks , blending human and
machine control within the system . Modern automobiles have a range of
autonomous features : automatic braking and collision avoidance , antilock
brakes , automatic seat belt retractors , adaptive cruise control , automatic lane
keeping , and self-parking . Some autonomous functions , such as autopilots in
commercial airliners , can be turned on or off by a human user . Other
autonomous functions , like airbags , are always ready and decide for themselves
when to activate . Some autonomous systems may be designed to override the
human user in certain situations . U . S . fighter aircraft have been modified with an
automatic ground collision avoidance system ( Auto-GCAS )  . If the pilot becomes
disoriented and is about to crash , Auto-GCAS will take control of the aircraft at
the last minute to pull up and avoid the ground . The system has already saved at
least one aircraft in combat , rescuing a U . S . F-16 in Syria . 
As automobiles and aircraft demonstrate , it is meaningless to refer to a
system as “ autonomous ” without referring to the specific task that is being
automated . Cars are still driven by humans ( for now )  , but a host of autonomous
functions can assist the driver , or even take control for short periods of time . The
machine becomes “ more autonomous ” as it takes on more tasks , but some
degree of human involvement and direction always exists .  “ Fully autonomous ” 
self-driving cars can navigate and drive on their own , but a human is still
choosing the destination . 
For any given task , there are degrees of autonomy . A machine can perform a
task in a semiautonomous , supervised autonomous , or fully autonomous manner . 
This is the second dimension of autonomy : the human-machine relationship . 
Semiautonomous Operation ( human in the loop ) 
In semiautonomous systems , the machine performs a task and then waits for
a human user to take an action before continuing . A human is “ in the loop .  ” 
Autonomous systems go through a sense , decide , act loop similar to the military
OODA loop , but in semiautonomous systems the loop is broken by a human . 
The system can sense the environment and recommend a course of action , but
cannot carry out the action without human approval . 
Supervised Autonomous Operation ( human on the loop ) 
In supervised autonomous systems , the human sits “ on ” the loop . Once put
into operation , the machine can sense , decide , and act on its own , but a human
user can observe the machine ’ s behavior and intervene to stop it , if desired . 
Fully Autonomous Operation ( human out of the loop ) 
Fully autonomous systems sense , decide , and act entirely without human
intervention . Once the human activates the machine , it conducts the task without
communication back to the human user . The human is “ out of the loop .  ” 
Many machines can operate in different modes at different times . A Roomba
that is vacuuming while you are home is operating in a supervised autonomous
mode . If the Roomba becomes stuck—my Roomba frequently trapped itself in
the bathroom—then you can intervene . If you ’ re out of the house , then the
Roomba is operating in a fully autonomous capacity . If something goes wrong , 
it ’ s on its own until you come home . More often than I would have liked , I came
home to a dirty house and a spotless bathroom . 
It wasn ’ t the Roomba ’ s fault it had locked itself in the bathroom . It didn ’ t
even know that it was stuck ( Roombas aren ’ t very smart )  . It had simply
wandered into a location where its aimless bumping would nudge the door
closed , trapping it . Intelligence is the third dimension of autonomy . More
sophisticated , or more intelligent , machines can be used to take on more
complex tasks in more challenging environments . People often use terms like 
 “ automatic ,  ”  “ automated ,  ” or “ autonomous ” to refer to a spectrum of
intelligence in machines . 
Automatic systems are simple machines that don ’ t exhibit much in the way
of “ decision-making .  ” They sense the environment and act . The relationship
between sensing and action is immediate and linear . It is also highly predictable
to the human user . An old mechanical thermostat is an example of an automatic
system . The user sets the desired temperature and when the temperature gets too
high or too low , the thermostat activates the heat or air conditioning . 
Automated systems are more complex , and may consider a range of inputs
and weigh several variables before taking an action . Nevertheless , the internal
cognitive processes of the machine are generally traceable by the human user , at
least in principle . A modern digital programmable thermostat is an example of
an automated system . Whether the heat or air conditioning turns on is a function
of the house temperature as well as what day and time it is . Given knowledge of
the inputs to the system and its programmed parameters , the system ’ s behavior
should be predictable to a trained user . 
Spectrum of Intelligence in Machines 
 “ Autonomous ” is often used to refer to systems sophisticated enough that
their internal cognitive processes are less intelligible to the user , who
understands the task the system is supposed to perform , but not necessarily how
the system will perform that task . Researchers often refer to autonomous systems
as being “ goal-oriented .  ” That is to say , the human user specifies the goal , but
the autonomous system has flexibility in how it achieves that goal . 
Take a self-driving car , for example . The user specifies the destination and
other goals , such as avoiding accidents , but can ’ t possibly specify in advance
every single action the autonomous car is supposed to perform . The user doesn ’ t
know where there will be traffic or obstacles in the road , when lights will
change , or what other cars or pedestrians will do . The car is therefore
programmed with the flexibility to decide when to stop , go , and change lanes in
order to accomplish its goal : getting to the destination safely . 
In practice , the line between automatic , automated , and autonomous systems
is still blurry . Often , the term “ autonomous ” is used to refer to future systems
that have not yet been built , but once they do exist , people describe those same
systems as “ automated .  ” This is similar to a trend in artificial intelligence where
AI is often perceived to encompass only tasks that machines cannot yet do . Once
a machine conquers a task , then it is merely “ software .  ” 
Autonomy doesn ’ t mean the system is exhibiting free will or disobeying its
programming . The difference is that unlike an automatic system where there is a
simple , linear connection from sensing to action , autonomous systems take into
account a range of variables to consider the best action in any given situation . 
Goal-oriented behavior is essential for autonomous systems in uncontrolled
environments . If a self-driving car were on a closed track with no pedestrians or
other vehicles , each movement could be programmed into the car in advance—
when to go , stop , turn , etc . But such a car would not be very useful , as it could
only drive in a simple environment where every action could be predicted . In
more complex environments or when performing more complex tasks , it is
crucial that the machine be able to make decisions based on the specific
situation . 
This greater complexity in autonomous systems is a double-edged sword . 
The downside to more sophisticated systems is that the user may not be able to
predict its specific actions in advance . The feature of increased autonomy can
become a flaw if the user is surprised in an unpleasant way by the machine ’ s
behavior . For simple automatic or automated systems , this is less likely . But as
the complexity of the system increases , so does the difficulty of predicting how
the machine will act . 
It can be exciting , if a little scary , to hand over control to an autonomous
system . The machine is like a black box . We specify its goal and , like magic , the
machine overcomes obstacles to reach the goal . The inner workings of how it did
so are often mysterious to us ; the distinction between “ automated ” and 
 “ autonomous ” is principally in the mind of the user . A new machine only feels 
 “ autonomous ” because we don ’ t yet have a good mental model for how it 
 “ thinks .  ” As we gain experience with the machine and begin to better understand
it , the layers of fog hiding the inner workings of the black box dissipate , 
revealing the complex logic driving its behavior . We come to decide the
machine is merely “ automated ” after all . In understanding the machine , we have
tamed it ; the humans are back in control . That process of discovery , however , 
can be a rocky one . 
A few years ago , I purchased a Nest “ learning thermostat .  ” The Nest tracks
your behavior and adjusts the house ’ s temperature as needed ,  “ learning ” your
preferences over time . There were bumps along the way as I discovered various
aspects of the Nest ’ s functionality and occasionally the house was temporarily
too warm or too cold , but I was sufficiently enamored of the technology that I
was willing to push through these growing pains . My wife , Heather , was less
tolerant of the Nest . Every time it changed the temperature on its own , 
disregarding an instruction she had given , she viewed it more and more
suspiciously .  ( Unbeknownst to her , the Nest was following other guidance I had
given it previously .  ) 
The final straw for the Nest was when we came home from summer vacation
to find the house a toasty 84 degrees , despite my having gone online the night
before and set the Nest to a comfortable 70 . With sweat dripping off our faces , 
we set our bags down in the foyer and I ran to the Nest to see what had
happened . As it turned out , I had neglected to turn off the “ auto-away feature .  ” 
After the Nest ’ s hallway sensor detected no movement and discerned we were
not home , it reverted—per its programming—to the energy-saving “ away ” 
setting of 84 degrees . One look from Heather told me it was too late , though . She
had lost trust in the Nest .  ( Or , more accurately , in my ability to use it .  ) 
The Nest wasn ’ t broken , though . The human-machine connection was . The
same features that made the Nest “ smarter ” also made it harder for me to
anticipate its behavior . The disconnect between my expectations of what the
Nest would do and what it was actually doing meant the autonomy that was
supposed to be working for me ended up , more often than not , working against
my goals . 
HOW MUCH SHOULD WE TRUST AUTONOMOUS
SYSTEMS ? 
All the Nest did was control the thermostat . The Roomba merely vacuumed . 
Coming home to a Roomba locked in the bathroom or an overheated house
might be annoying , but it wasn ’ t a catastrophe . The tasks entrusted to these
autonomous systems weren ’ t critical ones . 
What if I was dealing with an autonomous system performing a truly critical
function ? What if the Nest was a weapon , and my inability to understand it led to
failure ? 
What if the task I was delegating to an autonomous system was the decision
whether or not to kill ? 
3
MACHINES THAT KILL
WHAT IS AN AUTONOMOUS WEAPON ? 
The path to autonomous weapons began 150 years ago in the mid-nineteenth
century . As the second industrial revolution was bringing unprecedented
productivity to cities and factories , the same technology was bringing
unprecedented efficiency to killing in war . 
At the start of the American Civil War in 1861 , inventor Richard Gatling
devised a new weapon to speed up the process of firing : the Gatling gun . A
forerunner of the modern machine gun , the Gatling gun employed automation
for loading and firing , allowing more bullets to be fired in a shorter amount of
time . The Gatling gun was a significant improvement over Civil War–era rifled
muskets , which had to be loaded by hand through the muzzle in a lengthy
process . Well-trained troops could fire three rounds per minute with a rifled
musket . The Gatling gun fired over 300 rounds per minute . 
In its time , the Gatling gun was a marvel . Mark Twain was an early
enthusiast :  
[ T ] he Gatling gun .  .  . is a cluster of six to ten savage tubes that carry great conical pellets of lead , 
with unerring accuracy , a distance of two and a half miles . It feeds itself with cartridges , and you
work it with a crank like a hand organ ; you can fire it faster than four men can count . When fired
rapidly , the reports blend together like the clattering of a watchman ’ s rattle . It can be discharged
four hundred times a minute ! I liked it very much . 
The Gatling gun was not an autonomous weapon , but it began a long
evolution of weapons automation . In the Gatling gun , the process of loading
bullets , firing , and ejecting cartridges was all automatic , provided a human kept
turning the crank . The result was a tremendous expansion in the amount of
destructive power unleashed on the battlefield . Four soldiers were needed to
operate the Gatling gun , but by dint of automation , they could deliver the same
lethal firepower as more than a hundred men . 
Richard Gatling ’ s motivation was not to accelerate the process of killing , but
to save lives by reducing the number of soldiers needed on the battlefield . 
Gatling built his device after watching waves of young men return home
wounded or dead from the unrelenting bloodshed of the American Civil War . In
a letter to a friend , he wrote : 
It occurred to me that if I could invent a machine—a gun—which could by its rapidity of fire , 
enable one man to do as much battle duty as a hundred , that it would , to a great extent , supersede
the necessity of large armies , and consequently , exposure to battle and disease be greatly
diminished . 
Gatling was an accomplished inventor with multiple patents to his name for
agricultural implements . He saw the gun in a similar light—machine technology
harnessed to improve efficiency . Gatling claimed his gun “ bears the same
relation to other firearms that McCormack ’ s reaper does to the sickle , or the
sewing machine to the common needle .  ” 
Gatling was more right than he knew . The Gatling gun did indeed lay the
seeds for a revolution in warfare , a break from the old ways of killing people one
at a time with rifled muskets and shift to a new era of mechanized death . The
future Gatling wrought was not one of less bloodshed , however , but
unimaginably more . The Gatling gun laid the foundations for a new class of
machine : the automatic weapon . 
AUTOMATIC WEAPONS : MACHINE GUNS
Automatic weapons came about incrementally , with inventors building on and
refining the work of those who came before . The next tick in the gears of
progress came in 1883 with the invention of the Maxim gun . Unlike the Gatling
gun , which required a human to hand-crank the gun to power it , the Maxim gun
harnessed the physical energy from the recoil of the gun ’ s firing to power the
process of reloading the next round . Hand-cranking was no longer needed , and
once firing was initiated , the gun could continue firing on its own . The machine
gun was born . 
The machine gun was a marvelous and terrible invention . Unlike
semiautomatic weapons , which require the user to pull the trigger for each bullet , 
automatic weapons will continue firing so long as the trigger remains held down . 
Modern machine guns come in all shapes and sizes , from the snub-nosed Uzi
that plainclothes security personnel can tuck under their suit jackets to massive
chain guns that rattle off thousands of rounds per minute . Regardless of their
form , their power is palpable when firing one . 
As a Ranger , I carried an M249 Squad Automatic Weapon , or SAW , a
single-person light machine gun carried in infantry fire teams . Weighing
seventeen pounds without ammunition , the SAW is on the hefty side of what can
be considered “ hand held .  ” With training , the SAW can be fired from the
shoulder standing up in short controlled bursts , but is best used lying on the
ground . The SAW comes equipped with two metal bipod legs that can be flipped
down to allow the gun to stand elevated off the dirt . One does not simply lay on
the ground and fire the SAW , however . The SAW has to be managed ; it has to
be controlled . When fired , the weapon bucks and moves like a wild animal from
the rapid-fire recoil . At a cyclic rate of fire , with the trigger held down , the SAW
will fire 800 rounds per minute . That ’ s thirteen bullets streaming out of the
barrel per second . At that rate of fire , a gunner will rip through his entire stash of
ammunition in under two minutes . The barrel will overheat and begin to melt . 
Using the SAW effectively requires discipline . The gunner must lean into the
weapon to control it , putting his weight behind it and digging the bipod legs into
the dirt to pin the weapon down as it is fired . The gunner fires in short bursts of
five to seven rounds at a time to conserve ammunition , keep the weapon on
target , and prevent the barrel from overheating . Under heavy firing , the SAW ’ s
barrel will glow red hot—the barrel may need to be removed and replaced with a
spare before it begins to melt . The gun can ’ t handle its own power . 
On the other end of the spectrum of infantry machine guns is the M2 . 50
caliber heavy machine gun , the “ ma deuce .  ” Mounted on military trucks , the . 50
cal is the gun that turns a simple off-road truck into a piece of lethal machinery , 
the “ gun truck .  ” At eighty pounds—plus a fifty-pound tripod—the gun is a
behemoth . To fire it , the gunner leans back in the turret to brace him or herself
and thumbs down the trigger with both hands . The gun unleashes a powerful
THUK THUK THUK as the rounds exit . The half inch–wide bullets can sail
over a mile . 
Machine guns changed warfare forever . In the late 1800s , the British Army
used the Maxim gun to aid in their colonial conquest of Africa , allowing them to
take on and defeat much larger forces . For a time , to the British at least , machine
guns might have seemed like a weapon that lessened the cost of war . In World
War I , however , both sides had machine guns and the result was bloodshed on an
unprecedented scale . At the Battle of the Somme , Britain lost 20 , 000 men in a
single day , mowed down by automatic weapons . Millions died in the trenches of
World War I , an entire generation of young men . 
Machine guns accelerated the process of killing by harnessing industrial age
efficiency in the service of war . Men weren ’ t merely killed by machine guns ; 
they were mowed down , like McCormack ’ s mechanical reaper cutting down
stalks of grain . Machine guns are dumb weapons , however . They still have to be
aimed by the user . Once initiated , they can continue firing on their own , but the
guns have no ability to sense targets . In the twentieth century , weapons designers
would take the next step to add rudimentary sensing technologies into weapons
—the initial stages of intelligence . 
THE FIRST “ SMART ” WEAPONS
From the first time a human threw a rock in anger until the twentieth century , 
warfare was fought with unguided weapons . Projectiles—whether shot from a
sling , a bow , or a cannon—follow the laws of gravity once released . Projectiles
are often inaccurate , and the degree of inaccuracy increases with range . With
unguided weapons , destroying the enemy hinged on getting close enough to
deliver overwhelming barrages of fire to blanket an area . 
In World War II , as rockets , missiles , and bombs increased the range at
which combatants could target one another—but not their accuracy—militaries
sought to develop methods for precision guidance that would allow weapons to
accurately strike targets from long distances . Some attempts to insert intelligence
into weapons were seemingly comical , such as behaviorist B . F . Skinner ’ s
efforts to control a bomb by the pecking of a pigeon on a target image . Skinner ’ s
pigeon-guided bomb might have worked , but it never saw combat . Other
attempts to implement onboard guidance measures did , giving birth to the first 
 “ smart ” weapons : precision-guided munitions ( PGMs )  . 
The first successful PGM was the German G7e / T4 Falke (  “ Falcon ”  ) torpedo , 
introduced in 1943 . The Falcon torpedo incorporated a new technological
innovation : an acoustic homing seeker . Unlike regular torpedoes that traveled in
a straight line and could very well miss a passing ship , the Falcon used its
homing seeker to account for aiming errors . After traveling 400 meters from the
German U-boat ( submarine ) that launched it , the Falcon would activate its
passive acoustic sensors , listening for any nearby merchant ships . It would then
steer toward any ships , detonating once it reached them . 
The Falcon was used by only three U-boats in combat before being replaced
by the upgraded G7es / T5 Zaunkönig (  “ Wren ”  )  , which had a faster motor and
therefore could hit faster moving Allied navy ships in addition to merchant
vessels . Using a torpedo that could home in on targets rather than travel in a
straight line had clear military advantages , but it also immediately created
complications . Two U-boats were sunk in December 1943 ( U-972 ) and January
1944 ( U-377 ) when their torpedoes circled back on them , homing in on the
sound of their own propeller . In response to this problem , Germany instituted a
400-meter safety limit before activating the homing mechanism . To more fully
mitigate against the dangers of a homing torpedo turning back on oneself , 
German U-boats also began incorporating a tactic of diving immediately after
launch and then going completely silent . 
The Allies quickly developed a countermeasure to the Wren torpedo . The
Foxer , an acoustic decoy towed behind Allied ships , was intended to lure away
the Wren so that it detonated harmlessly against the decoy , not the ship itself . 
The Foxer introduced other problems ; it loudly broadcast the Allied convoy ’ s
position to other nearby U-boats , and it wasn ’ t long before the Germans
introduced the Wren II with an improved acoustic seeker . Thus began the arms
race in smart weapons and countermeasures against them . 
PRECISION-GUIDED MUNITIONS
The latter half of the twentieth century saw the expansion of PGMs like the
Wren into sea , air , and ground combat . Today , they are widely used by militaries
around the world in a variety of forms . Sometimes called “ smart missiles ” or 
 “ smart bombs ,  ” PGMs use automation to correct for aiming errors and help
guide the munition ( missile , bomb , or torpedo ) onto the intended target . 
Depending on their guidance mechanism , PGMs can have varying degrees of
autonomy . 
Some guided munitions have very little autonomy at all , with the human
controlling the aimpoint of the weapon throughout its flight . Command-guided
weapons are manually controlled by a human remotely via a wire or radio link . 
For other weapons , a human operator “ paints ” the target with a laser or radar and
the missile or bomb homes in on the laser or radar reflection . In these cases , the
human doesn ’ t directly control the movements of the munition , but does control
the weapon ’ s aimpoint in real time . This allows the human controller to redirect
the munition in flight or potentially abort the attack . 
Other PGMs are “ autonomous ” in the sense that they cannot be recalled once
launched , but the munition ’ s flight path and target are predetermined . These
munitions can use a variety of guidance mechanisms . Nuclear-tipped ballistic
missiles use inertial navigation systems consisting of gyroscopes and
accelerometers to guide the missile to its preselected target point . Submarinelaunched nuclear ballistic missiles use star-tracking celestial navigation systems
to orient the missile , since the undersea launching point varies . Many cruise
missiles look down to earth rather than up to the stars for navigation , using radar
or digital scene mapping to follow the contours of the Earth to their preselected
target . GPS-guided weapons rely on signals from the constellation of U . S . global
positioning system satellites to determine their position and guidance to their
target . While many of these munitions cannot be recalled or redirected after
launch , the munitions do not have any freedom to select their own targets or
even their own navigational route . In terms of the task they are performing , they
have very little autonomy , even if they are beyond human control once launched . 
Their movements are entirely predetermined . The guidance systems , whether
internal such as inertial navigation or external such as GPS , are only designed to
ensure the munition stays on path to its preprogrammed target . The limitation of
these guidance systems , however , is that they are only useful against fixed
targets . 
Homing weapons are a type of PGM used to track onto moving targets . By
necessity since the target is moving , homing munitions have the ability to sense
the target and adapt to its movements . Some homing munitions use passive
sensors to detect their targets , as the Wren did . Passive sensors listen to or
observe the environment and wait for the target to indicate its position by
making noise or emitting in the electromagnetic spectrum . Active seekers send
out signals , such as radar , to sense a target . An early U . S . active homing
munition was the Bat anti-ship glide bomb , which had an active radar seeker to
target enemy ships . 
Some homing munitions “ lock ” onto a target , their seeker sensing the target
before launch . Other munitions “ lock on ” after launch ; they are launched with
the seeker turned off , then it activates to begin looking for the moving target . 
An attack dog is a good metaphor for a fire-and-forget homing munition . 
U . S . pilots refer to the tactic of launching the AIM-120 AMRAAM air-to-air
missile in “ lock on after launch ” mode as going “ maddog .  ” After the weapon is
released , it turns on its active radar seeker and begins looking for targets . Like a
mad dog in a meat locker , it will go after the first target it sees . Similar to the
problem German U-boats faced with the Wren , pilots need to take care to ensure
that the missile doesn ’ t track onto friendly targets . Militaries around the world
often use tactics , techniques , and procedures (  “ TTPs ” in military parlance ) to
avoid homing munitions turning back on themselves or other friendlies , such as
the U-boat tactic of diving immediately after firing . 
HOMING MUNITIONS HAVE LIMITED AUTONOMY
Homing munitions have some autonomy , but they are not “ autonomous
weapons ” —a human still decides which specific target to attack . It ’ s true that
many homing munitions are “ fire and forget .  ” Once launched , they cannot be
recalled . But this is hardly a new development in war . Projectiles have always
been “ fire and forget ” since the sling and stone . Rocks , arrows , and bullets can ’ t
be recalled after being released either . What makes homing munitions different
is their rudimentary onboard intelligence to guide their behavior . They can sense
the environment ( the target )  , determine the right course of action ( which way to
turn )  , and then act ( maneuvering to hit the target )  . They are , in essence , a simple
robot . 
The autonomy given to a homing munition is tightly constrained , however . 
Homing munitions aren ’ t designed to search for and hunt potential targets on
their own . The munition simply uses automation to ensure it hits the specific
target the human intended . They are like an attack dog sent by police to run
down a suspect , not like a wild dog roaming the streets deciding on its own
whom to attack . 
In some cases , automation is used to ensure the munition does not hit
unintended targets . The Harpoon anti-ship missile has a mode where the seeker
stays off while the missile uses inertial navigation to fly a zigzag pattern toward
the target . Then , at the designated location , the seeker activates to search for the
intended target . This allows the missile to fly past other ships in the environment
without engaging them . Because the autonomy of homing munitions is tightly
constrained , the human operator needs to be aware of a specific target in
advance . There must be some kind of intelligence informing the human of that
particular target at that specific time and place . This intelligence could come
from radars based on ships or aircraft , a ping on a submarine ’ s sonar , 
information from satellites , or some other indicator . Homing munitions have a
very limited ability in time and space to search for targets , and to launch one
without knowledge of a specific target would be a waste . This means homing
munitions must operate as part of a broader weapon system to be useful . 
THE WEAPON SYSTEM
A weapon system consists of a sensor to search for and detect enemy targets , a
decision-making element that decides whether to engage the target , and a
munition ( or other effector , such as a laser ) that engages the target . Sometimes
the weapon system is contained on a single platform , such as an aircraft . In the
case of an Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile ( or AMRAAM )  , for
example , the weapon system consists of the aircraft , radar , pilot , and missile . 
The radar searches for and senses the target , the human decides whether to
engage , and the missile carries out the engagement . All of these elements are
necessary for the engagement to work . 
Weapon System OODA Loop
In other cases , components of the weapon system may be distributed across
multiple physical platforms . For example , a maritime patrol aircraft might detect
an enemy ship and pass the location data to a nearby friendly ship , which
launches a missile . Defense strategists refer to this larger , distributed system
with multiple components as a battle network . Defense analyst Barry Watts
described the essential role battle networks play in making precision-guided
weapons effective : 
Because “ precision munitions ” require detailed data on their intended targets or aimpoints to be
militarily useful—as opposed to wasteful—they require “ precision information .  ” Indeed , the tight
linkage between guided munitions and “ battle networks ,  ” whose primary reason for existence is
to provide the necessary targeting information , was one of the major lessons that emerged from
careful study of the US-led air campaign during Operation Desert Storm in 1991 .  .  .  .  [ It ] is
guided munitions together with the targeting networks that make these munitions “ smart .  ”  
[ emphasis in the original ] 
Automation is used for many engagement-related tasks in weapon systems and
battle networks : finding , identifying , tracking , and prioritizing potential targets ; 
timing when to fire ; and maneuvering munitions to the target . For most weapon
systems in use today , a human makes the decision whether to engage the target . 
If there is a human in the loop deciding which target ( s ) to engage , it is a
semiautonomous weapon system . 
Supervised Autonomous Weapon System ( human on the loop ) 
In autonomous weapon systems , the entire engagement loop—searching , 
detecting , deciding to engage , and engaging—is automated .  ( For ease of use , I ’ ll
often shorten “ autonomous weapon system ” to “ autonomous weapon .  ” The
terms should be treated as synonymous , with the understanding that “ weapon ” 
refers to the entire system : sensor , decision-making element , and munition .  ) 
Most weapon systems in use today are semiautonomous , but a few cross the line
to autonomous weapons . 
SUPERVISED AUTONOMOUS WEAPON SYSTEMS
Because homing munitions can precisely target ships , bases , and vehicles , they
can overwhelm defenders through saturation attacks with waves , or “ salvos ” of
missiles . In an era of unguided (  “ dumb ”  ) munitions , defenders could simply ride
out an enemy barrage , trusting that most of the incoming rounds would miss . 
With precision-guided (  “ smart ”  ) weapons , however , the defender must find a
way to actively intercept and defeat incoming munitions before they impact . 
More automation—this time for defensive purposes—is the logical response . 
At least thirty nations currently employ supervised autonomous weapon
systems of various types to defend ships , vehicles , and bases from attack . Once
placed in automatic mode and activated , these systems will engage incoming
rockets , missiles , or mortars all on their own without further human intervention . 
Humans are on the loop , however , supervising their operation in real time . 
Supervised Autonomous Weapon System ( human on the loop ) 
These supervised autonomous weapons are necessary for circumstances in
which the speed of engagements could overwhelm human operators . Like in the
Atari game Missile Command , saturation attacks from salvos of simultaneous
incoming threats could overwhelm human operators . Automated defenses are a
vital part of surviving attacks from precision-guided weapons . They include
ship-based defenses , such as the U . S . Aegis combat system and Phalanx CloseIn Weapon System ( CIWS )  ; land-based air and missile defense systems , such as
the U . S . Patriot ; counter-rocket , artillery , and mortar systems such as the
German MANTIS ; and active protection systems for ground vehicles , such as
the Israeli Trophy or Russian Arena system . 
While these weapon systems are used for a variety of different situations—to
defend ships , land bases , and ground vehicles—they operate in similar ways . 
Humans set the parameters of the weapon , establishing which threats the system
should target and which it should ignore . Depending on the system , different
rules may be used for threats coming from different directions , angles , and
speeds . Some systems may have multiple modes of operation , allowing human
in-the-loop ( semiautonomous ) or on-the-loop ( supervised autonomous ) control . 
These automated defensive systems are autonomous weapons , but they have
been used to date in very narrow ways—for immediate defense of humanoccupied vehicles and bases , and generally targeting objects ( like missiles , 
rockets , or aircraft )  , not people . Humans supervise their operation in real time
and can intervene , if necessary . And the humans supervising the system are
physically colocated with it , which means in principle they could physically
disable it if the system stopped responding to their commands . 
FULLY AUTONOMOUS WEAPON SYSTEMS
Do any nations have fully autonomous weapons that operate with no human
supervision ? Generally speaking , fully autonomous weapons are not in wide use , 
but there are a few select systems that cross the line . These weapons can search
for , decide to engage , and engage targets on their own and no human can
intervene . Loitering munitions are one example . 
Loitering munitions can circle overhead for extended periods of time , 
searching for potential targets over a wide area and , once they find one , destroy
it . Unlike homing munitions , loitering munitions do not require precise
intelligence on enemy targets before launch . Thus , a loitering munition is a
complete “ weapon system ” all on its own . A human can launch a loitering
munition into a “ box ” to search for enemy targets without knowledge of any
specific targets beforehand . Some loitering munitions keep humans in the loop
via a radio connection to approve targets before engagement , making them
semiautonomous weapon systems . Some , however , are fully autonomous . 
Fully Autonomous Weapon System ( human out of the loop ) 
The Israeli Harpy is one such weapon . No human approves the specific
target before engagement . The Harpy has been sold to several countries—Chile , 
China , India , South Korea , and Turkey—and the Chinese are reported to have
reverse engineered their own variant . 
HARM vs . Harpy
Type of weapon
Target
Time to search
Distance
Degree of autonomy
HARM
Homing missile
Radars Approx . 4 . 5 minutes 90 + km
Semiautonomous weapon
Harpy
Loitering munition
Radars 2 . 5 hours 500 km
Fully autonomous weapon
The difference between a fully autonomous loitering munition and a
semiautonomous homing munition can be illustrated by comparing the Harpy
with the High-speed AntiRadiation Missile ( HARM )  . Both go after the same
type of target ( enemy radars )  , but their freedom to search for targets is massively
different . The semiautonomous HARM has a range of 90-plus kilometers and a
top speed of over 1 , 200 kilometers per hour , so it is only airborne for
approximately four and a half minutes . Because it cannot loiter , the HARM has
to be launched at a specific enemy radar in order to be useful . The Harpy can
stay aloft for over two and a half hours covering up to 500 kilometers of ground . 
This allows the Harpy to operate independently of a broader battle network that
gives the human targeting information before launch . The human launching the
Harpy decides to destroy any enemy radars within a general area in space and
time , but the Harpy itself chooses the specific radar it destroys . 
Semiautonomous vs . Fully Autonomous Weapons For semiautonomous weapons , the human operator
launches the weapon at a specific known target or group of targets . The human chooses the target and the
weapon carries out the attack . Fully autonomous weapons can search for and find targets over a wide area , 
allowing human operators to launch them without knowledge of specific targets in advance . The human
decides to launch the fully autonomous weapon , but the weapon itself chooses the specific target to attack . 
Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile Mission Profile A typical mission for a Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile 
( TASM )  . After being launched from a ship or submarine , the TASM would cruise to the target area . Once
over the target area , it would fly a search pattern to look for targets and , if it found one , attack the target on
its own . 
Despite conventional thinking that fully autonomous weapons are yet to
come , isolated cases of fully autonomous loitering munitions go back decades . 
In the 1980s , the U . S . Navy deployed a loitering anti-ship missile that could hunt
for , detect , and engage Soviet ships on its own . The Tomahawk Anti-Ship
Missile ( TASM ) was intended to be launched over the horizon at possible
locations of Soviet ships , then fly a search pattern over a wide area looking for
their radar signatures . If it found a Soviet ship , TASM would attack it .  ( Despite
the name , the TASM was quite different from the Tomahawk Land Attack
Missile [ TLAM ]  , which uses digital scene mapping to follow a preprogrammed
route to its target .  ) The TASM was taken out of Navy service in the early 1990s . 
While it was never fired in anger , it has the distinction being the first operational
fully autonomous weapon , a significance that was not recognized at the time . 
In the 1990s , the United States began development on two experimental
loitering munitions : Tacit Rainbow and the Low Cost Autonomous Attack
System ( LOCAAS )  . Tacit Rainbow was intended to be a persistent antiradiation
weapon to target land-based radars , like the Harpy . LOCAAS had an even more
ambitious goal : to search for and destroy enemy tanks , which are harder targets
than radars because they are not emitting in the electromagnetic spectrum . 
Neither Tacit Rainbow nor LOCAAS were ever deployed ; both were cancelled
while still in development . 
These examples shine a light on a common misperception about autonomous
weapons , which is the notion that intelligence is what makes a weapon 
 “ autonomous .  ” How intelligent a system is and which tasks it performs
autonomously are different dimensions . It is freedom , not intelligence , that
defines an autonomous weapon . Greater intelligence can be added into weapons
without changing their autonomy . To date , the target identification algorithms
used in autonomous and semiautonomous weapons have been fairly simple . This
has limited the usefulness of fully autonomous weapons , as militaries may not
trust giving a weapon very much freedom if it isn ’ t very intelligent . As machine
intelligence advances , however , autonomous targeting will become technically
possible in a wider range of situations . 
UNUSUAL CASES—MINES , ENCAPSULATED TORPEDO
MINES , AND SENSOR FUZED WEAPON
There are a few unusual cases of weapons that blur the lines between
semiautonomous and fully autonomous weapons : mines and the Sensor Fuzed
Weapon deserve special mention . 
Placed on land or at sea , mines wait for their target to approach , at which
point the mine explodes . While mines are automatic devices that will detonate
on their own once triggered , they have no freedom to maneuver and search for
targets . They simply sit in place .  ( For the most part—some naval mines can drift
with the current .  ) They also generally have very limited methods for “ deciding ” 
whether or not to fire . Mines typically have a simple method for sensing a target
and , when the threshold for the sensor is reached , the mine explodes .  ( Some
naval mines and antitank mines employ a counter so that they will let the first
few targets pass unharmed before detonating against a ship or vehicle later in the
convoy .  ) Mines deserve special mention because their freedom in time is
virtually unbounded , however . Unless specifically designed to self-deactivate
after a certain period of time , mines can lay in wait for years , sometimes
remaining active long after a war has ended . 
The fact that mines are often unbounded in time has had devastating
humanitarian consequences . By the mid-1990s , an estimated more than 110
million land mines lay hidden in sixty-eight countries around the globe , 
accumulated from scores of conflicts . Land mines have killed thousands of
civilians , many of them children , and maimed tens of thousands more , sparking
the global movement to ban land mines that culminated in the Ottawa Treaty in
1997 . Adopted by 162 nations , the Ottawa Treaty prohibits the production , 
stockpiling , transfer , or use of antipersonnel land mines . Antitank land mines
and naval mines are still permitted . 
Mines can sense and act on their own , but do not search for targets . 
Encapsulated torpedo mines are a special type of naval mine that acts more like
an autonomous weapon , however . Rather than simply exploding once activated , 
encapsulated torpedo mines release a torpedo that homes in on the target . This
gives encapsulated torpedo mines the freedom to engage targets over a much
wider area than a traditional mine , much like a loitering munition . The U . S . Mk
60 CAPTOR encapsulated torpedo mine had a published range of 8 , 000 yards . 
By contrast , a ship would have to pass over a regular mine for it to detonate . 
Even though encapsulated torpedo mines are moored in place to the seabed , their
ability to launch a torpedo to chase down targets gives them a much greater
degree of autonomy in space than a traditional naval mine . As with loitering
munitions , examples of encapsulated torpedo mines are rare . The U . S . CAPTOR
mine was in service for throughout the 1980s and 1990s but has been retired . 
The only encapsulated torpedo mine still in service is the Russian PMK-2 , used
by Russia and China . 
The Sensor Fuzed Weapon ( SFW ) is an air-delivered antitank weapon that
defies categorization . Released from an aircraft , an SFW can destroy an entire
column of enemy tanks within seconds . The SFW functions through a series of
Rube Goldberg machine–like steps : First , the aircraft releases a bomb-shaped
canister than glides toward the target area . As the canister approaches the target
area , the outer casing releases , exposing ten submunitions which are ejected
from the canister . Each submunition releases a drogue parachute slowing its
descent . At a certain height above the ground , the submunition springs into
action . It opens its outer case , exposing four internally held “ skeets ” which are
then rotated out of the inner casing and exposed . The parachute releases and the
submunition fires retrojets that cause it to climb in altitude while spinning
furiously . The hockey-puck-shaped skeets are then released , flung outward
violently from the force of the spinning . Each skeet carries onboard laser and
infrared sensors that it uses to search for targets beneath it . Upon detecting a
vehicle beneath it , the skeet fires an explosively formed penetrator—a metal slug
—downward into the vehicle . The metal slug strikes the vehicle on top , where
armored vehicles have the thinnest armor , destroying the vehicle . In this manner , 
a single SFW can take out a group of tanks or other armored vehicles
simultaneously , with the skeets targeting each vehicle precisely . 
Similar to the distinction between Harpy and HARM , the critical variable in
the evaluating SFW ’ s autonomy is its freedom in time and space . While the
weapon distributes forty skeets over several acres , the time the weapon can
search for targets is minuscule . Each skeet can hover with its sensor active for
only a few seconds before firing . Unlike the Harpy , the SFW cannot loiter for an
extended period over hundreds of kilometers . The human launching the SFW
must know that there is a group of tanks at a particular point in space and time . 
Like a homing munition , the SFW must be part of a wider weapon system that
provides targeting data in order to be useful . The SFW is different than a
traditional homing munition , because the SFW can hit multiple objects . This
makes the SFW like a salvo of forty homing munitions launched at a tightly
geographically clustered set of targets . 
PUSHING “ START ” 
Autonomous weapons are defined by the ability to complete the engagement
cycle—searching for , deciding to engage , and engaging targets—on their own . 
Autonomous weapons , whether supervised or fully autonomous , are still built
and put into operation by humans , though . Humans are involved in the broader
process of designing , building , testing , and deploying weapons . 
The fact that there are humans involved at some stage does not change the
significance of a weapon that could complete engagements entirely on its own . 
Even the most highly autonomous system would still have been borne out of a
process initiated by humans at some point . In the climactic scene of Terminator
3 : Rise of the Machines , an Air Force general pushes the button to start Skynet .  
( Absurdly , this is done with an old “ EXECUTE Y / N ?  ” prompt like the kind used
in MS-DOS in the 1980s .  ) From that point forward , Skynet embarks on its path
to exterminate humanity , but at least at the beginning a human was in the loop . 
The question is not whether there was ever a human involved , but rather how
much freedom the system has once it is activated . 
WHY AREN ’ T THERE MORE AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS ? 
Automation has been used extensively in weapons around the world for decades , 
but the amount of freedom given to weapons has been , up to now , fairly limited . 
Homing munitions have seekers , but their ability to search for targets is narrowly
constrained in time and space . Supervised autonomous weapons have only been
used for limited defensive purposes . The technology to build simple fully
autonomous loitering munitions like TASM and Harpy has existed for decades , 
yet there is only one example in use today . 
Why aren ’ t there more fully autonomous weapons ? Homing munitions and
even semiautonomous loitering munitions are widely used , but militaries have
not aggressively pursued fully autonomous loitering munitions . The U . S . 
experience with TASM may shed some light on why . TASM was in service in
the U . S . Navy from 1982 to 1994 , when it was retired . To understand better why
TASM was taken out of service , I spoke with naval strategist Bryan McGrath . 
McGrath , a retired Navy officer , is well known in Washington defense
circles . He is a keen strategist and unabashed advocate of sea power who thinks
deeply about the past , present , and future of naval warfare . McGrath is familiar
with TASM and other anti-ship missiles such as the Harpoon , and was trained on
TASM in the 1980s when it was in the fleet . 
McGrath explained to me that TASM could outrange the ship ’ s own sensors . 
That meant that initial targeting had to come from another sensor , such as a
helicopter or maritime patrol aircraft that detected an enemy ship . The problem , 
as McGrath described it , was a “ lack of confidence in how the targeting picture
would change from the time you fired the missile until you got it downrange .  ” 
Because the target could move , unless there was an “ active sensor ” on the target , 
such as a helicopter with eyes on the target the whole time , the area of
uncertainty of where the target was would grow over time . 
The ability of the TASM to search for targets over a wide area mitigated , to
some extent , this large area of uncertainty . If the target had moved , the TASM
could simply fly a search pattern looking for it . But TASM didn ’ t have the
ability to accurately discriminate between enemy ships and merchant vessels that
just happened to be in its path . As the search area widened , the risk increased
that the TASM might run across a merchant ship and strike it instead . In an allout war with the Soviet Navy , that risk might be acceptable , but in any situations
short of that , getting approval to shoot the TASM was unlikely . TASM was , 
according to McGrath ,  “ a weapon we just didn ’ t want to fire .  ” 
Another factor was that if a TASM was launched and there wasn ’ t a valid
target within the search area of the weapon , the weapon would be wasted . 
McGrath would be loath to launch a weapon on scant evidence that there was a
valid target in the search area .  “ I would want to know that there ’ s something
there , even if there was some kind of end-game autonomy in place .  ” Why ?  
 “ Because the weapons cost money ,  ” he said ,  “ and I don ’ t have a lot of them . 
And I may have to fight tomorrow .  ” 
Modern missiles can cost upwards of a million dollars apiece . As a practical
matter , militaries will want to know that there is , in fact , a valid enemy target in
the area before using an expensive weapon . One of the reasons militaries have
not used fully autonomous loitering munitions more may be the fact that the
advantage they bring—the ability to launch a weapon without precise targeting
data in advance—may not be of much value if the weapon is not reusable , since
the weapon could be wasted . 
FUTURE WEAPONS
The trend of creeping automation that began with Gatling ’ s gun will continue . 
Advances in artificial intelligence will enable smarter weapons , which will be
capable of more autonomous operation . At the same time , another facet of the
information revolution is greater networking . German U-boats couldn ’ t control
the Wren torpedo once it was launched , not because they didn ’ t want to ; they
simply had no means to do so . 
Modern munitions are increasingly networked to allow them to be controlled
or retargeted after they ’ ve been launched . Wire-guided munitions have existed
for decades , but are only feasible for short distances . Long-range weapons are
now incorporating datalinks to allow them to be controlled via radio
communication , even over satellites . The Block IV Tomahawk Land Attack
Missile ( TLAM-E , or Tactical Tomahawk ) includes a two-way satellite
communications link that allows the weapon to be retargeted in flight . The
Harpy 2 , or Harop , has a communications link that allows it to be operated in a
human-in-the-loop mode so that the human operator can directly target the
weapon . 
When I asked McGrath what feature he would most desire in a future
weapon , it wasn ’ t autonomy—it was a datalink .  “ You ’ ve got to talk to the
missile ,  ” he explained .  “ The missiles have to be part of a network .  ” Connecting
the weapons to the network would allow you to send updates on the target while
in flight . As a result ,  “ confidence in employing that weapon would dramatically
increase .  ” 
A networked weapon is a far more valuable weapon than one that is on its
own . By connecting a weapon to the network , the munition becomes part of a
broader system and can harness sensor data from other ships , aircraft , or even
satellites to assist its targeting . Additionally , the commander can keep control of
the weapon while in flight , making it less likely to be wasted . One advantage to
the networked Tactical Tomahawk , for example , is the ability for humans to use
sensors on the missile to do battle damage assessment ( BDA ) of potential targets
before striking . Without the ability to conduct BDA of the target , commanders
might have to launch several Tomahawks at a target to ensure its destruction , 
since the first missile might not completely destroy the target . Onboard BDA
allows the commander to look at the target after the first missile hits . If more
strikes are needed , more missiles can be used . If not , then subsequent missiles
can be diverted in flight to secondary targets . 
Everything has a countermeasure , though , and increased networking runs
counter to another trend in warfare , the rise of electronic attack . The more that
militaries rely on the electromagnetic spectrum for communications and sensing
targets , the more vital it will be to win the invisible electronic war of jamming , 
spoofing , and deception fought through the electromagnetic spectrum . In future
wars between advanced militaries , communications in contested environments is
by no means assured . Advanced militaries have ways of communicating that are
resistant to jamming , but they are limited in range and bandwidth . When
communications are denied , missiles or drones will be on their own , reliant on
their onboard autonomy . 
Due to their expensive cost , even highly advanced loitering munitions are
likely to fall into the same trap as TASM , with commanders hesitant to fire them
unless targets are clearly known . But drones change this equation . Drones can be
launched , sent on patrol , and can return with their weapons unused if they do not
find any targets . This simple feature—reusability—dramatically changes how a
weapon could be used . Drones could be sent to search over a wide area in space
and time to hunt for enemy targets . If none were found , the drone could return to
base to hunt again another day . 
More than ninety nations and non-state groups already have drones , and
while most are unarmed surveillance drones , an increasing number are armed . At
least sixteen countries already possess armed drones and another dozen or more
nations are working on arming their drones . A handful of countries are even
pursuing stealth combat drones specifically designed to operate in contested
areas . For now , drones are used as part of traditional battle networks , with
decision-making residing in the human controller . If communications links are
intact , then countries can keep a human in the loop to authorize targets . If
communications links are jammed , however , what will the drones be
programmed to do ? Will they return home ? Will they carry out surveillance
missions , taking pictures and reporting back to their human operators ? Will the
drones be authorized to strike fixed targets that have been preauthorized by
humans , much like cruise missiles today ? What if the drones run across
emerging targets of opportunity that have not been authorized in advance by a
human—will they be authorized to fire ? What if the drones are fired upon ? Will
they be allowed to fire back ? Will they be authorized to shoot first ? 
These are not hypothetical questions for the future . Engineers around the
globe are programming the software for these drones today . In their hands , the
future of autonomous weapons is being written . 
PART II
Building the Terminator
4
THE FUTURE BEING BUILT TODAY
AUTONOMOUS MISSILES , DRONES , AND ROBOT SWARMS
Few actors loom larger in the robotics revolution than the U . S . Department of
Defense . The United States spends 600 billion dollars annually on defense , more
than the next seven countries combined . Despite this , U . S . defense leaders are
concerned about the United States falling behind . In 2014 , the United States
launched a “ Third Offset Strategy ” to reinvigorate America ’ s military
technological advantage . The name harkens back to the first and second “ offset
strategies ” in the Cold War , where the U . S . military invested in nuclear weapons
in the 1950s and later precision-guided weapons in the 1970s to offset the Soviet
Union ’ s numerical advantages in Europe . The centerpiece of DoD ’ s Third Offset
Strategy is robotics , autonomy , and human-machine teaming . 
Many applications of military robotics and autonomy are noncontroversial , 
such as uninhabited logistics convoys , tanker aircraft , or reconnaissance drones . 
Autonomy is also increasing in weapon systems , though , with next-generation
missiles and combat aircraft pushing the boundaries of autonomy . A handful of
experimental programs show how the U . S . military is thinking about the role of
autonomy in weapons . Collectively , they are laying the foundations for the
military of the future . 
SALTY DOGS : THE X-47B DRONE
The X-47B experimental drone is one of the world ’ s most advanced aircraft . 
Only two have been ever built , named Salty Dog 501 and Salty Dog 502 . With a
sleek bat-winged shape that looks like something out of the 1980s sci-fi flick
Flight of the Navigator , the X-47B practically screams “ the future is here .  ” In
their short life-span as experimental aircraft from 2011 to 2015 , Salty Dog 501
and 502 repeatedly made aviation history . The X-47B was the first uninhabited 
( unmanned ) aircraft to autonomously take off and land on an aircraft carrier and
the first uninhabited aircraft to autonomously refuel from another plane while in
flight . These are key milestones to enabling future carrier-based combat drones . 
However , the X-47B was not a combat aircraft . It was an experimental “ Xplane ,  ” a demonstration program designed to mature technologies for a followon aircraft . The focus of technology development was automating the physical
movement of the aircraft—takeoff , landing , flight , and aerial refueling . The X47B did not carry weapons or sensors that would permit it to make engagements . 
The Navy has stated their first operational carrier-based drone will be the
MQ-25 Stingray , a future aircraft that is still on the drawing board . While the
specific design has yet to be determined , the MQ-25 is envisioned primarily as a
tanker , ferrying fuel for manned combat aircraft such as the F-35 Joint Strike
Fighter , with possibly a secondary role in reconnaissance . It is not envisioned as
a combat aircraft . In fact , over the past decade the Navy has moved steadily
away from any notion of uninhabited aircraft in combat roles . 
The origin of the X-47 was in the Joint Unmanned Combat Air Systems ( JUCAS ) program , a joint program between DARPA , the Navy , and the Air Force
in the early 2000s to design an uninhabited combat aircraft . J-UCAS led to the
development of two experimental X-45A aircraft , which in 2004 demonstrated
the first drone designed for combat missions . Most drones today are intended for
surveillance missions , which means they are designed for soaring and staying
aloft for long periods of time . The X-45A , however , sported the same sharply
angled wings and smooth top surfaces that define stealth aircraft like the F-117 , 
B-2 bomber , and F-22 fighter . Designed to penetrate enemy air defenses , the
intent was for the X-45A to perform close in jamming and strike missions in
support of manned aircraft . The program was never completed , though . In the
Pentagon ’ s 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review , a major strategy and budget
review conducted every four years , the J-UCAS program was scrapped and
restructured . 
J-UCAS ’ s cancellation was curious because it came at the height of the post9 / 11 defense budget boom and at a time when the Defense Department was
waking up to the potential of robotic systems more broadly . Even while the
military was deploying thousands of drones to Iraq and Afghanistan , the Air
Force was highly resistant to the idea of uninhabited aircraft taking on combat
roles in future wars . In the ensuing decade since J-UCAS ’ s cancellation , despite
repeated opportunities , the Air Force has not restarted a program to build a
combat drone . Drones play important roles in reconnaissance and
counterterrorism , but when it comes to dogfighting against other enemy aircraft
or taking down another country ’ s air defense network , those missions are
currently reserved for traditional manned aircraft . 
The reality is that what may look from the outside like an unmitigated rush
toward robotic weapons is , in actuality , a much more muddled picture inside the
Pentagon . There is intense cultural resistance within the U . S . military to handing
over combat jobs to uninhabited systems . Robotic systems are frequently
embraced for support roles such as surveillance or logistics , but rarely for
combat applications . The Army is investing in logistics robots , but not frontline
armed combat robots . The Air Force uses drones heavily for surveillance , but is
not pursing air-to-air combat drones . Pentagon vision documents such as the
Unmanned Systems Roadmaps or the Air Force ’ s 2013 Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Vector often articulate ambitious dreams for robots in a variety of roles , 
but these documents are often disconnected from budgetary realities . Without
funding , these visions are more hallucinations than reality . They articulate goals
and aspirations , but do not necessarily represent the most likely future path . 
The downscoping of the ambitious J-UCAS combat aircraft to the plodding
MQ-25 tanker is a great case in point . In 2006 when the Air Force abandoned the
J-UCAS experimental drone program , the Navy continued a program to develop
a combat aircraft . The X-47B was supposed to mature the technology for a
successor stealth drone , but in a series of internal Pentagon memoranda issued in
2011 and 2012 , Navy took a sharp turn away from a combat aircraft . Designs
were scaled back in favor of a less ambitious nonstealthy surveillance drone . 
Concept sketches shifted from looking like the futuristic sleek and stealthy X45A and X-47B to the more pedestrian Predator and Reaper drones , already over
a decade old at that point . The Navy , it appears , wasn ’ t immune to the same
cultural resistance to combat drones found in the Air Force . 
The Navy ’ s resistance to developing an uninhabited combat aerial vehicle 
( UCAV ) is particularly notable because it comes in the face of pressure from
Congress and a compelling operational need . China has developed anti-ship
ballistic and cruise missiles that can outrange carrier-based F-18 and F-35
aircraft . Only uninhabited aircraft , which can stay aloft far longer than would be
possible with a human in the airplane , have sufficient range to keep the carrier
relevant in the face of advanced Chinese missiles . Sea power advocates outside
the Navy in Congress and think tanks have argued that without a UCAV on
board , the aircraft carrier itself would be of limited utility against a hightechnology opponent . Yet the Navy ’ s current plan is for its carrier-based drone , 
the MQ-25 , to ferry gas for human-inhabited jets . For now , the Navy is deferring
any plans for a future UCAV . 
The X-47B is an impressive machine and , to an outside observer , it may
seem to portend a future of robot combat aircraft . Its appearance belies the
reality that within the halls of the Pentagon , however , there is little enthusiasm
for combat drones , much less fully autonomous ones that would target on their
own . Neither the Air Force nor the Navy have programs under way to develop
an operational UCAV . The X-47B is a bridge to a future that , at least for now , 
doesn ’ t exist . 
THE LONG-RANGE ANTI-SHIP MISSILE
The Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile ( LRASM ) is a state-of-the-art missile
pushing the boundaries of autonomy . It is a joint DARPA-Navy-Air Force
project intended to fill a gap in the U . S . military ’ s ability to strike enemy ships at
long ranges . Since the retirement of the TASM , the Navy has relied on the
shorter-range Harpoon anti-ship missile , which has a range of only 67 nautical
miles . The LRASM , on the other hand , can fly up to 500 nautical miles . LRASM
also sports a number of advanced survivability features , including the ability to
autonomously detect and evade threats while en route to its target . 
LRASM uses autonomy in several novel ways , which has alarmed some
opponents of autonomous weapons . The LRASM has been featured in no less
than three New York Times articles , with some critics claiming it exhibits 
 “ artificial intelligence outside human control .  ” In one of the articles , Steve
Omohundro , a physicist and leading thinker on advanced artificial intelligence , 
stated “ an autonomous weapons arms race is already taking place .  ” It is a leap , 
though , to assume that these advances in autonomy mean states intend to pursue
autonomous weapons that would hunt for target on their own . 
The actual technology behind LRASM , while cutting edge , hardly warrants
these breathless treatments . LRASM has many advanced features , but the critical
question is who chooses LRASM ’ s targets—a human or the missile itself ? On its
website , Lockheed Martin , the developer of LRASM , states : 
LRASM employs precision routing and guidance .  .  .  . The missile employs a multi-modal sensor
suite , weapon data link , and enhanced digital anti-jam Global Positioning System to detect and
destroy specific targets within a group of numerous ships at sea .  .  .  . This advanced guidance
operation means the weapon can use gross target cueing data to find and destroy its predefined
target in denied environments . 
While the description speaks of advanced precision guidance , it doesn ’ t say
much that would imply artificial intelligence that would hunt for targets on its
own . What was the genesis of the criticism ? Well .  .  . Lockheed used to describe
LRASM differently . 
Before the first New York Times article in November 2014 , Lockheed ’ s
description of LRASM boasted much more strongly of its autonomous features . 
It used the word “ autonomous ” three times in the description , describing it as an 
 “ autonomous , precision-guided anti-ship ” missile that “ cruises autonomously ” 
and has an “ autonomous capability .  ” What exactly the weapon was doing
autonomously was somewhat ambiguous , though . 
After the first New York Times article , the description changed , substituting 
 “ semiautonomous ” for “ autonomous ” in multiple places . The new description
also clarified the nature of the autonomous features , stating “ The
semiautonomous guidance capability gets LRASM safely to the enemy area .  ” 
Eventually , even the words “ semiautonomous ” were removed , leading to the
description online today which only speaks of “ precision routing and guidance ” 
and “ advanced guidance .  ” Autonomy isn ’ t mentioned at all . 
What should we make of this shifting story line ? Presumably the weapon ’ s
functionality hasn ’ t changed , merely the language used to describe it . So how
autonomous is LRASM ? 
Lockheed has described LRASM as using “ gross target cueing data to find
and destroy its predefined target in denied environments .  ” If “ predefined ” target
means that the specific target has been chosen in advance by a human operator , 
LRASM would be a semiautonomous weapon . On the other hand , if 
 “ predefined ” means that the human has chosen only a general class of targets , 
such as “ enemy ships ,  ” and given the missile the freedom to hunt for these
targets over a wide area and engage them on its own , then it would be an
autonomous weapon . 
Helpfully , Lockheed posted a video online that explains LRASM ’ s
functionality . In a detailed combat simulation , the video shows precisely which
engagement-related functions would be done autonomously and which by a
human . In the video , a satellite identifies a hostile surface action group ( SAG ) —
a group of enemy ships—and relays their location to a U . S . destroyer . The video
shows a U . S . sailor looking at the enemy ships on his console . He presses a
button and two LRASMs leap from their launching tubes in a blast of flame into
the air . The text on the video explains the LRASMs have been launched against
the enemy cruiser , part of the hostile SAG . Once airborne , the LRASMs
establish a line-of-sight datalink with the ship . As they continue to fly out toward
the enemy SAG , they transition to satellite communications . A U . S . F / A-18E
fighter aircraft then fires a third LRASM ( this one air-launched ) against an
enemy destroyer , another ship in the SAG . The LRASMs enter a 
 “ communications and GPS-denied environment .  ” They are now on their own . 
The LRASMs maneuver via planned navigational routing , moving from one
predesignated way point to another . Then , unexpectedly , the LRASMs encounter
a “ pop-up threat .  ” In the video , a large red bubble appears in the sky , a no-go
zone for the missiles . The missiles now execute “ autonomous routing ,  ” 
detouring around the red bubble on their own . A second pop-up threat appears
and the LRASMs modify their route again , moving around the threat to continue
on their mission . 
As the LRASMs approach their target destination , the video shifts to a new
perspective focusing on a single missile , simulating what the missile ’ s sensors
see . Five dots appear on the screen representing objects detected by the missile ’ s
sensors , labeled “ ID : 71 , ID : 56 , ID : 44 , ID : 24 , ID : 19 .  ” The missile begins a
process the video calls “ organic [ area of uncertainty ] reduction .  ” That ’ s military
jargon for a bubble of uncertainty . When the missile was launched , the human
launching it knew where the enemy ship was located , but ships move . By the
time the missile arrives at the ship , the ship could be somewhere else . The “ area
of uncertainty ” is the bubble within which the enemy ship could be , a bubble
that gets larger over time . 
Since there could be multiple ships in this bubble , the LRASM begins to
narrow down its options to determine which ship was the one it was sent to
destroy . How this occurs is not specified , but on the video a large “ area of
uncertainty ” appears around all the dots , then quickly shrinks to surround only
three of them : ID : 44 , ID : 24 , and ID : 19 . The missile then moves to the next
phase of its targeting process :  “ target classification .  ” The missile scans each
object , finally settling on ID : 24 .  “ Criteria match ,  ” the video states ,  “ target
classified .  ” ID : 24 , the missile has determined , is the ship it was sent to destroy . 
Having zeroed in on the right target , the missiles begin their final maneuvers . 
Three LRASMs descend below the enemy ships ’ radars to skim just above the
water ’ s surface . On their final approach , the missiles scan the ships one last time
to confirm their targets . The enemy ships fire their defenses to try to hit the
incoming missiles , but it ’ s too late . Two enemy ships are hit . 
The video conveys the LRASM ’ s impressive autonomous features , but is it
an autonomous weapon ? The autonomous / semiautonomous / advanced guidance
described on the website is clearly on display . In the video , midway through the
flight the missiles enter a “ communications and GPS denied environment .  ” 
Within this bubble , the missiles are on their own ; they cannot call back to human
controllers . Any actions they take are autonomous , but the type of actions they
can take are limited . Just because the weapon is operating without a
communications link to human controllers doesn ’ t mean it has the freedom to do
anything it wishes . The missile isn ’ t a teenager whose parents have left town for
the weekend . It has only been programmed to perform certain tasks
autonomously . The missile can identify pop-up threats and autonomously reroute
around them , but it doesn ’ t have the freedom to choose its own targets . It can
identify and classify objects to confirm which object was the one it was sent to
destroy , but that isn ’ t the same as being able to choose which target to destroy . 
Screenshots from LRASM Video In a video simulation depicting how the LRASM functions , a satellite
transmits the location of enemy ships to a human , who authorizes the attack on those specific enemy ships . 
The LRASMs are launched against specific enemy ships , in this case a “ SAG Cruiser .  ” 
While en route to their human-designated targets , the LRASMs employ autonomous routing around pop-up
threats ( shown as a bubble )  . 
Because the human-designated target is a moving ship , by the time the LRASM arrives at the target area
there is an “ area of uncertainty ” that defines the ship ’ s possible location . Multiple objects are identified
within this area of uncertainty . LRASM uses its onboard (  “ organic ”  ) sensors to reduce the area of
uncertainty and identify the human-designated target . LRASM confirms “ ID : 24 ” is the target it was sent to
destroy . While the missile has many advanced features , it does not choose its own target . The missile uses
its sensors to confirm the human-selected target . 
It is the human who decides which enemy ship to destroy . The critical point
in the video isn ’ t at the end of the missile ’ s flight as it zeroes in on the ship—it ’ s
at the beginning . When the LRASMs are launched , the video specifies that they
are launched against the “ SAG cruiser ” and “ SAG destroyer .  ” The humans are
launching the missiles at specific ships , which the humans have tracked and
identified via satellites . The missiles ’ onboard sensors are then used to confirm
the targets before completing the attack . LRASM is only one piece of a weapon
system that consists of the satellite , ship / aircraft , human , and missile . The human
is “ in the loop ,  ” deciding which specific targets to engage in the broader decision
cycle of the weapon system . The LRASM merely carries out the engagement . 
BREAKING THE SPEED LIMIT : FAST LIGHTWEIGHT
AUTONOMY
Dr . Stuart Russell is a pioneering researcher in artificial intelligence . He literally
wrote the textbook that is used to teach AI researchers around the world . Russell
is also one of the leaders in the AI community calling for a ban on “ offensive
autonomous weapons beyond meaningful human control .  ” One research
program Russell has repeatedly raised concerns about is DARPA ’ s Fast
Lightweight Autonomy ( FLA )  . 
FLA is a research project to enable high-speed autonomous navigation in
congested environments . Researchers outfit commercial off-the-shelf
quadcopters with custom sensors , processors , and algorithms with the goal of
making them autonomously navigate through the interior of a cluttered
warehouse at speeds up to forty-five miles per hour . In a press release , DARPA
compared the zooming quadcopters to the Millennium Falcon zipping through
the hull of a crashed Star Destroyer in Star Wars : The Force Awakens .  ( I would
have gone with the Falcon maneuvering through the asteroid field in The Empire
Strikes Back .  .  . or the Falcon zipping through the interior of Death Star II in
The Return of the Jedi . But you get the idea : fast = awesome .  ) In a video
accompanying the press release , shots of the flying quadcopters are set to peppy
instrumental music . It ’ s incongruous because in the videos released so far the
drones aren ’ t actually moving through obstacles at 45 mph .  .  . yet . For now , 
they are creeping their way around obstacles , but they are doing so fully
autonomously . FLA ’ s quadcopters use a combination of high-definition cameras , 
sonar , and laser light detection and ranging ( LIDAR ) to sense obstacles and
avoid them all on their own . 
Autonomous navigation around obstacles , even at slow speeds , is no mean
feat . The quadcopter ’ s sensors need to detect potential obstacles and track them
as the quadcopter moves , a processor-hungry task . Because the quadcopter can
only carry so much computing power , it is limited in how quickly it can process
the obstacles it sees . The program aims in the coming months to speed it up . As
DARPA program manager Mark Micire explained in a press release ,  “ The
challenge for the teams now is to advance the algorithms and onboard
computational efficiency to extend the UAVs ’ perception range and compensate
for the vehicles ’ mass to make extremely tight turns and abrupt maneuvers at
high speeds .  ” In other words , to pick up the pace . 
FLA ’ s quadcopters don ’ t look menacing , but it isn ’ t because of the up-tempo
music or the cutesy Star Wars references . It ’ s because there ’ s nothing in FLA
that has anything to do with weapons engagements . Not only are the quadcopters
unarmed , they aren ’ t performing any tasks associated with searching for and
identifying targets . DARPA explains FLA ’ s intended use as indoor
reconnaissance : 
FLA technologies could be especially useful to address a pressing surveillance shortfall : Military
teams patrolling dangerous overseas urban environments and rescue teams responding to disasters
such as earthquakes or floods currently can use remotely piloted unmanned aerial vehicles 
( UAVs ) to provide a bird ’ s-eye view of the situation , but to know what ’ s going on inside an
unstable building or a threatening indoor space often requires physical entry , which can put troops
or civilian response teams in danger . The FLA program is developing a new class of algorithms
aimed at enabling small UAVs to quickly navigate a labyrinth of rooms , stairways and corridors
or other obstacle-filled environments without a remote pilot . 
To better understand what FLA was doing , I caught up with one of the
project ’ s research teams from the University of Pennsylvania ’ s General Robotics
Automation Sensing and Perception ( GRASP ) lab . Videos of GRASP ’ s nimble
quadcopters have repeatedly gone viral online , showing swarms of drones
artfully zipping through windows , seemingly dancing in midair , or playing the
James Bond theme song on musical instruments . I asked Dr . Daniel Lee and Dr . 
Vijay Kumar , the principal investigators of GRASP ’ s work on FLA , what they
thought about the criticism that the program was paving the way toward
autonomous weapons . Lee explained that GRASP ’ s research was “ very basic ” 
and focused on “ fundamental capabilities that are generally applicable across all
of robotics , including industrial and consumer uses .  ” The technology GRASP
was focused on “ localization , mapping , obstacle detection and high-speed
dynamic navigation .  ” Kumar added that their motivations for this research were 
 “ applications to search and rescue and first response where time-critical response
and navigation at high speeds are critical .  ” 
Kumar and Lee aren ’ t weapons designers , so it may not be at the forefront of
their minds , but it ’ s worth pointing out that the technologies FLA is building
aren ’ t even the critical ones for autonomous weapons . Certainly , fast-moving
quadcopters could have a variety of applications . Putting a gun or bomb on an
FLA-empowered quadcopter isn ’ t enough to make it an autonomous weapon , 
however . It would still need the ability to find targets on its own . Depending on
the intended target , that may not be particularly complicated , but at any rate
that ’ s a separate technology . All FLA is doing is making quadcopters maneuver
faster indoors . Depending on one ’ s perspective , that could be cool or could be
menacing , but either way FLA doesn ’ t have anything more to do with
autonomous weapons than self-driving cars do . 
DARPA ’ s description of FLA didn ’ t seem to stack up against Stuart
Russell ’ s criticism . He has written that FLA and another DARPA program 
 “ foreshadow planned uses of [ lethal autonomous weapon systems ]  .  ” I first met
Russell on the sidelines of a panel we both spoke on at the United Nations
meetings on autonomous weapons in 2015 . We ’ ve had many discussions on
autonomous weapons since then and I ’ ve always found him to be thoughtful , 
unsurprising given his prominence in his field . So I reached out to Russell to
better understand his concerns . He acknowledged that FLA wasn ’ t “ cleanly
directed only at autonomous weapon capability ,  ” but he saw it as a stepping
stone toward something truly terrifying . 
FLA is different from projects like the X-47B , J-UCAS , or LRASM , which
are designed to engage highly sophisticated adversaries . Russell has a very
different kind of autonomous weapon in mind , a swarm of millions of small , 
fast-moving antipersonnel drones that could wipe out an entire urban population . 
Russell described these lethal drones used en masse as a kind of “ weapon of
mass destruction .  ” He explained ,  “ You can make small , lethal quadcopters an
inch in diameter and pack several million of them into a truck and launch them
with relatively simple software and they don ’ t have to be particularly effective . 
If 25 percent of them reach a target , that ’ s plenty .  ” Used in this way , even small
autonomous weapons could devastate a population . 
There ’ s nothing to indicate that FLA is aimed at developing the kind of
people-hunting weapon Russell describes , something he acknowledges . 
Nevertheless , he sees indoor navigation as laying the building blocks toward
antipersonnel autonomous weapons .  “ It ’ s certainly one of the things you ’ d like
to do if you were wanting to develop autonomous weapons ,  ” he said . 
It ’ s worth nothing that Russell isn ’ t opposed to the military as a whole or
even military investments in AI or autonomy in general . He said that some of his
own AI research is funded by the Department of Defense , but he only takes
money for basic research , not weapons . Even a program like FLA that isn ’ t
specifically aimed at weapons still gives Russell pause , however . As a
researcher , he said , it ’ s something that he would “ certainly think twice ” about
working on . 
WEAPONS THAT HUNT IN PACKS : COLLABORATIVE
OPERATIONS IN DENIED ENVIRONMENTS
Russell also raised concerns about another DARPA program : Collaborative
Operations in Denied Environments ( CODE )  . According to DARPA ’ s official
description , CODE ’ s purpose is to develop “ collaborative autonomy—the
capability of groups of [ unmanned aircraft systems ] to work together under a
single person ’ s supervisory control .  ” In a press release , CODE ’ s program
manager , Jean-Charles Ledé , described the project more colorfully as enabling
drones to work together “ just as wolves hunt in coordinated packs with minimal
communication .  ” 
The image of drones hunting in packs like wolves might be a little unsettling
to some . Ledé clarified that the drones would remain under the supervision of a
human :  “ multiple CODE-enabled unmanned aircraft would collaborate to find , 
track , identify and engage targets , all under the command of a single human
mission supervisor .  ” Graphics on DARPA ’ s website depicting how CODE might
work show communications relay drones linking the drone pack back to a
manned aircraft removed from the edge of the battlespace . So , in theory , a
human would be in the loop . 
CODE is designed for “ contested electromagnetic environments ,  ” however , 
where “ bandwidth limitations and communications disruptions ” are likely to
occur . The means that the communications link to the human-inhabited aircraft
might be limited or might not work at all . CODE aims to overcome these
challenges by giving drones greater intelligence and autonomy so that they can
operate with minimal supervision . Cooperative behavior is central to this
concept . With cooperative behavior , one person can tell a group of drones to
achieve a goal , and the drones can divvy up tasks on their own . 
In CODE , the drone team finds and engages “ mobile or rapidly relocatable
targets ,  ” that is , targets whose locations cannot be specified in advance by a
human operator . If there is a communications link to a human , then the human
could authorize targets for engagement once CODE air vehicles find them . 
Communications are challenging in contested electromagnetic environments , but
not impossible . U . S . fifth-generation fighter aircraft use low probability of
intercept / low probability of detection ( LPI / LPD ) methods of communicating
stealthily inside enemy air space . While these communications links are limited
in range and bandwidth , they do exist . According to CODE ’ s technical
specifications , developers should count on no more than 50 kilobits per second
of communications back to the human commander , essentially the same as a
56K dial-up modem circa 1997 . 
Keeping a human in the loop via a connection on par with a dial-up modem
would be a significant change from today , where drones stream back highdefinition full-motion video . How much bandwidth is required for a human to
authorize targets ? Not much , in fact . The human brain is extremely good at
object recognition and can recognize objects even in relatively low resolution
images . Snapshots of military objects and the surrounding area on the order of
10 to 20 kilobytes in size may be fuzzy to the human eye , but are still of
sufficiently high resolution that an untrained person can discern trucks or
military vehicles . A 50 kilobit per second connection could transmit one image
of this size every two to three seconds ( 1 kilobyte = 8 kilobits )  . This would allow
the CODE air vehicles to identify potential targets and send them back to a
human supervisor who would approve ( or disapprove ) each specific target before
attack . 
But is this what CODE intends ? CODE ’ s public description explains that the
aircraft will operate “ under a single person ’ s supervisory control ,  ” but does not
specify that the human would need to approve each target before engagement . 
As is the case with all of the systems encountered so far , from thermostats to
next-generation weapons , the key is which tasks are being performed by the
human and which by the machine . Publicly available information on CODE
presents a mixed picture . 
A May 2016 video released online of the human-machine interface for
CODE shows a human authorizing each specific individual target . The human
doesn ’ t directly control the air vehicles . The human operator commands four
groups of air vehicles , labeled Aces , Badger , Cobra , and Disco groups . The
groups , each composed of two to four air vehicles , are given high-level
commands such as “ orbit here ” or “ follow this route .  ” Then the vehicles
coordinate among themselves to accomplish the task . 
Disco Group is sent on a search and destroy mission :  “ Disco Group search
and destroy all [ antiaircraft artillery ] in this area .  ” The human operator sketches
a box with his cursor and the vehicles in Disco Group move into the box .  “ Disco
Group conducting search and destroy at Area One ,  ” the computer confirms . 
As the air vehicles in Disco Group find suspected enemy targets , they cue up
their recommended classification to the human for confirmation . The human
clicks “ Confirm SCUD ” and “ Confirm AAA ”  [ antiaircraft artillery ] on the
interface . But confirmation does not mean approval to fire . A few seconds later , 
a beeping tone indicates that Disco Group has drawn up a strike plan on a target
and is seeking approval . Disco Group has 90 percent confidence it has found an
SA-12 surface-to-air missile system and includes a photo for confirmation . The
human clicks on the strike plan for more details . Beneath the picture of the SA12 is a small diagram showing estimated collateral damage . A brown splotch
surrounds the target , showing potential damage to anything in the vicinity . Just
outside of the splotch is a hospital , but it is outside of the anticipated area of
collateral damage . The human clicks “ Yes ” to approve the engagement . In this
video , a human is clearly in the loop . Many tasks are automated , but a human
approves each specific engagement . 
In other public information , however , CODE seems to leave the door open to
removing the human from the loop . A different video shows two teams of air
vehicles , Team A and Team B , sent to engage a surface-to-air missile . As in the
LRASM video , the specific target is identified by a human ahead of time , who
then launches the missiles to take it out . Similar to LRASM , the air vehicles
maneuver around pop-up threats , although this time the air vehicles work
cooperatively , sharing navigation and sensor data while in flight . As they
maneuver to their target , something unexpected happens : a “ critical pop-up
target ” emerges . It isn ’ t their primary target , but destroying it is a high priority . 
Team A reprioritizes to engage the pop-up target while Team B continues to the
primary target . The video makes clear this occurs under the supervision of the
human commander . This implies a different type of human-machine
relationship , though , than the earlier CODE video . In this one , instead of the
human being in the loop , the human is on the loop , at least for pop-up threats . 
For their primary target , they operate in a semiautonomous fashion . The human
chose the primary target . But when a pop-up threat emerges , the missiles have
the authority to operate as supervised autonomous weapons . They don ’ t need to
ask additional permission to take out the target . Like a quarterback calling an
audible at the scrimmage line to adapt to the defense , they have the freedom to
adapt to unexpected situations that arise . The human operator is like the coach
standing on the sidelines—able to call a time-out to intervene , but otherwise
merely supervising the action . 
DARPA ’ s description of CODE online seems to show a similar flexibility
for whether the human or air vehicles themselves approve targets . The CODE
website says :  “ Using collaborative autonomy , CODE-enabled unmanned aircraft
would find targets and engage them as appropriate under established rules of
engagement .  .  . and adapt to dynamic situations such as .  .  . the emergence of
unanticipated threats .  ” This appears to leave the door open to autonomous
weapons that would find and engage targets on their own . 
The detailed technical description issued to developers provides additional
information , but little clarity . DARPA explains that developers should : 
Provide a concise but comprehensive targeting chipset so the mission commander can exercise
appropriate levels of human judgment over the use of force or evaluate other options . 
The specific wording used ,  “ appropriate levels of human judgment ,  ” may sound
vague and squishy , but it isn ’ t accidental . This guidance directly quotes the
official DoD policy on autonomy in weapons , DoD Directive 3000 . 09 , which
states : 
Autonomous and semiautonomous weapon systems shall be designed to allow commanders and
operators to exercise appropriate levels of human judgment over the use of force . 
Notably , that policy does not prohibit autonomous weapons .  “ Appropriate levels
of human judgment ” could include autonomous weapons . In fact , the DoD
policy includes a path through which developers could seek approval to build
and deploy autonomous weapons , with appropriate safeguards and testing , 
should they be desired . 
At a minimum , then , CODE would seem to allow for the possibility of
autonomous weapons . The aim of the project is not to build autonomous
weapons necessarily . The aim is to enable collaborative autonomy . But in a
contested electromagnetic environment where communications links to the
human supervisor might be jammed , the program appears to allow for the
possibility that the drones could be delegated the authority to engage pop-up
threats on their own . 
In fact , CODE even hints at one way that collaborative autonomy might aid
in target identification . Program documents list one of the advantages of
collaboration as “ providing multi-modal sensors and diverse observation angles
to improve target identification .  ” Historically , automatic target recognition 
( ATR ) algorithms have not been good enough to trust with autonomous
engagements . This poor quality of ATR algorithms could be compensated for by
bringing together multiple different sensors to improve the confidence in target
identification or by viewing a target from multiple angles , building a more
complete picture . One of the CODE videos actually shows this , with air vehicles
viewing the target from multiple directions and sharing data . Whether target
identification could be improved enough to allow for autonomous engagements
is unclear , but if CODE is successful , DoD will have to confront the question of
whether to authorize autonomous weapons . 
THE DEPARTMENT OF MAD SCIENTISTS
At the heart of many of these projects is the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency ( DARPA )  , or what writer Michael Belfiore called “ the
Department of Mad Scientists .  ” DARPA , originally called ARPA , the Advanced
Research Projects Agency , was founded in 1958 by President Eisenhower in
response to Sputnik . DARPA ’ s mission is to prevent “ strategic surprise .  ” The
United States was surprised and shaken by the Soviet Union ’ s launch of Sputnik . 
The small metal ball hurdling through space overhead was a wake-up call to the
reality that the Soviet Union could now launch intercontinental ballistic missiles
that could hit anywhere in the United States . In response , President Eisenhower
created two organizations to develop breakthrough technologies , the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) and ARPA . While NASA had
the mission of winning the space race , ARPA had a more fundamental mission
of investing in high-risk , high-reward technologies so the United States would
never again be surprised by a competitor . 
To achieve its mission , DARPA has a unique culture and organization
distinct from the rest of the military-industrial complex . DARPA only invests in
projects that are “ DARPA hard ,  ” challenging technology problems that others
might deem impossible . Sometimes , these bets don ’ t pan out . DARPA has a
mantra of “ fail fast ” so that if projects fail , they do so before investing massive
resources . Sometimes , however , these investments in game-changing
technologies pay huge dividends . Over the past five decades , DARPA has time
and again laid the seeds for disruptive technologies that have given the United
States decisive advantages . Out of ARPA came ARPANET , an early computer
network that later developed into the internet . DARPA helped develop basic
technologies that underpin the global positioning system ( GPS )  . DARPA funded
the first-ever stealth combat aircraft , HAVE Blue , which led to the F-117 stealth
fighter . And DARPA has consistently advanced the horizons of artificial
intelligence and robotics . 
DARPA rarely builds completed weapon systems . Its projects are small , 
focused efforts to solve extremely hard problems , such as CODE ’ s efforts to get
air vehicles to collaborate autonomously . Stuart Russell said that he found these
projects concerning because , from his perspective , they seemed to indicate that
the United States was expecting to be in a position to deploy autonomous
weapons at a future date . Was that , in fact , their intention , or was that simply an
inevitability of the technology ? If projects like CODE were successful , did
DARPA intend to turn the key to full auto or was the intention to always keep a
human in the loop ? 
It was clear that if I was going to understand the future of autonomous
weapons , I would need to talk to DARPA . 
5
INSIDE THE PUZZLE PALACE
IS THE PENTAGON BUILDING AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS ? 
DARPA sits in a nondescript office building in Ballston , Virginia , just a few
miles from the Pentagon . From the outside , it doesn ’ t look like a “ Department of
Mad Scientists .  ” It looks like just another glass office building , with no hint of
the wild-eyed ideas bubbling inside . 
Once you ’ re inside DARPA ’ s spacious lobby , the organization ’ s gravitas
takes hold . Above the visitors ’ desk on the marble wall , raised metal letters that
are both simple and futuristic announce : DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH
PROJECTS AGENCY . Nothing else . No motto or logo or shield . The
organization ’ s confidence is apparent . The words seem to say ,  “ the future is
being made here .  ” 
As I wait in the lobby , I watch a wall of video monitors announce DARPA ’ s
latest project to go public : the awkwardly named Anti-Submarine Warfare 
( ASW ) Continuous Trail Unmanned Vessel ( ACTUV )  . The ship ’ s christened
name , Sea Hunter , is catchier . The project is classic DARPA—not only gamechanging , but paradigm-bending : the Sea Hunter is an entirely unmanned ship . 
Sleek and angular , it looks like something time-warped in from the future . With
a long , narrow hull and two outriggers , the Sea Hunter carves the oceans like a
three-pointed dagger , tracking enemy submarines . At the ship ’ s christening , 
Deputy Secretary of Defense Bob Work compared it to a Klingon Bird of Prey
from Star Trek . 
There are no weapons on board the Sea Hunter , for now . There should be no
mistake , however : the Sea Hunter is a warship . Work called it a “ fighting ship ,  ” 
part of the Navy ’ s future “ human machine collaborative battle fleet .  ” At $2
million apiece , the Sea Hunter is a fraction of the cost of a new $1 . 6-billion
Arleigh Burke destroyer . The low price allows the Navy to purchase scores of
the sub-hunting ships on the cheap . Work laid out his vision for flotillas of Sea
Hunters roaming the seas : 
You can imagine anti-submarine warfare pickets , you can imagine anti-submarine warfare
wolfpacks , you can imagine mine warfare flotillas , you can imagine distributive anti-surface
warfare surface action groups .  .  . We might be able to put a six pack or a four pack of missiles on
them . Now imagine 50 of these distributed and operating together under the hands of a flotilla
commander , and this is really something . 
Like many other robotic systems , the Sea Hunter can navigate autonomously and
might someday be armed . There is no indication that DoD has any intention of
authorizing autonomous weapons engagements . Nevertheless , the video on
DARPA ’ s lobby wall is a reminder that the robotics revolution continues at a
breakneck pace . 
BEHIND THE CURTAIN : INSIDE DARPA ’ S TACTICAL
TECHNOLOGY OFFICE
DARPA is organized into six departments focusing on different technology
areas : biology , information science , microelectronics , basic sciences , strategic
technologies , and tactical technologies . CODE , FLA , LRASM , and the Sea
Hunter fall into DARPA ’ s Tactical Technology Office ( TTO )  , the division that
builds experimental vehicles , ships , airplanes , and spacecraft . Other TTO
projects include the XS-1 Experimental Spaceplane , designed to fly to the edge
of space and back ; the Blue Wolf undersea robotic vehicle ; an R2-D2-like
robotic copilot for aircraft called ALIAS ; the Mach 20 Falcon Hypersonic
Technology Vehicle , which flies fast enough to zip from New York to Los
Angeles in 12 minutes ; and the Vulture program to build an ultra-long endurance
drone that can stay in the air for up to five years without refueling . Mad science , 
indeed . 
TTO ’ s offices look like a child ’ s dream toy room . Littered around the offices
are models and even some actual prototype pieces of hardware from past TTO
projects—missiles , robots , and stealth aircraft . I can ’ t help but wonder what
TTO is building today that will be the stealth of tomorrow . 
Bradford Tousley , TTO ’ s director , graciously agreed to meet with me to
discuss CODE and other projects . Tousley began his government career as an
Army armor officer during the Cold War . His first tour was in an armored
cavalry unit on the German border , being ready for a Soviet invasion that might
kick off World War III . Later in his career , when the Army sent him back for a
secondary education , Tousley earned a doctorate in electrical engineering . His
career shifted from frontline combat units to research and development in lasers
and optics , working to ensure the U . S . military had the best possible technology . 
Tousley ’ s career has covered multiple stints at DARPA as well as time in the
intelligence community on classified satellite payloads , so he has a breadth of
understanding in technology beyond merely robotics . 
Tousley pointed out that DARPA was founded in response to the strategic
surprise of Sputnik :  “ DARPA ’ s fundamental mission is unchanged : Enabling
pivotal early investments for breakthrough capabilities for national security to
achieve or prevent strategic surprise .  ” Inside DARPA , they weigh these
questions heavily .  “ Within the agency , we talk about every single program we
begin and we have spirited discussions . We talk about the pros and cons . Why ? 
Why not ?  .  .  . How far are we willing to go ?  ” Tousley made clear , however , that
answering those questions isn ’ t DARPA ’ s job .  “ Those are fundamental policy
and concept and military employment considerations ” for others to decide .  “ Our
fundamental job is to take that technical question off the table . It ’ s our job to
make the investments to show the capabilities can exist ” to give the warfighter
options . In other words , to prevent another Sputnik . 
If machines improved enough to reliably take out targets on their own , what
the role was for humans in warfare ? Despite his willingness to push the
boundaries of technology , Tousley still saw humans in command of the mission :  
 “ That final decision is with humans , period .  ” That might not mean requiring
human authorization for every single target , but autonomous weapons would still
operate under human direction , hunting and attacking targets at the direction of a
human commander . At least for the foreseeable future , Tousley explained , 
humans were better than machines at identifying anomalies and reacting to
unforeseen events . This meant that keeping humans involved at the mission level
was critical to understand the broader context and make decisions .  “ Until the
machine processors equal or surpass humans at making abstract decisions , 
there ’ s always going to be mission command . There ’ s always going to be
humans in the loop , on the loop—whatever you want to call it .  ” 
Tousley painted a picture for me of what this might look like in a future
conflict :  “ Groups of platforms that are unmanned that you are willing to attrit 
[ accept some losses ] may do extremely well in an anti-access air defense
environment .  .  . How do I take those platforms and a bunch of others and knit
them together in architectures that have manned and unmanned systems striking
targets in a congested and contested environment ? You need that knitted system
because you ’ re going to be GPS-jammed ; communications are going to be going
in and out ; you ’ re going to have air defenses shooting down assets , manned and
unmanned . In order to get in and strike critical targets , to control that [ antiaccess ] environment , you ’ re going to have to have a system-of-systems
architecture that takes advantage of manned and unmanned systems at different
ranges with some amount of fidelity in the ability of the munition by itself to
identify the target—could be electronically , could be optically , could be infrared , 
could be [ signals intelligence ]  , could be different ways to identify the target . So
that system-of-systems architecture is going to be necessary to knit it all
together .  ” 
Militaries especially need autonomy in electronic warfare .  “ We ’ re using
physical machines and electronics , and the electronics themselves are becoming
machines that operate at machine speed .  .  .  . I need the cognitive electronic
warfare to adapt in microseconds .  .  .  . If I have radars trying to jam other radars
but they ’ re frequency hopping [ rapidly changing radio frequencies ] back and
forth , I ’ ve got to track with it . So [ DARPA ’ s Microsystems Technology Office ] 
is thinking about , how do I operate at machine speed to allow these machines to
conduct their functions ?  ” 
Tousley compared the challenge of cognitive electronic warfare to Google ’ s
go-playing AlphaGo program . What happens when that program plays another
version of AlphaGo at “ machine speed ?  ” He explained ,  “ As humans ascend to
the higher-level mission command and I ’ ve got machines doing more of that
targeting function , those machines are going to be challenged by machines on
the adversary ’ s side and a human can ’ t respond to that . It ’ s got to be machines
responding to machines .  .  .  . That ’ s one of the trends of the Third Offset , that
machine on machine .  ” Humans , therefore , shift into a “ monitoring ” role , 
watching these systems and intervening , if necessary . In fact , Tousley argues
that a difficult question will be whether humans should intervene in these
machine-on-machine contests , particularly in cyberspace and electronic warfare
where the pace of interactions will far exceed human reaction times . 
I pointed out that having a human involved in a monitoring role still implies
some degree of connectivity , which might be difficult in a contested
environment with jamming . Tousley was unconcerned .  “ We expect that there
will be jamming and communications denial going on , but it won ’ t be
necessarily everywhere , all the time ,  ” he said .  “ It ’ s one thing to jam my
communication link over 1 , 000 miles , it ’ s another thing to jam two missiles that
are talking in flight that may be three hundred meters apart flying in formation .  ” 
Reliable communications in contested areas , even short range , would still permit
a human being to be involved , at least in some capacity . 
So , what role would that person play ? Would this person need to authorize
every target before engagement , or would human control sit at a higher level ?  “ I
think that will be a rule of engagement-dependent decision ,  ” Tousley said .  “ In an
extremely hot peer-on-peer conflict , the rules of engagement may be more
relaxed .  .  .  . If things are really hot and heavy , you ’ re going to rely on the fact
that you built some of that autonomous capability in there .  ” Still , even in this
intense battlefield environment , he attested , the human plays the important role
of overseeing the combat action .  “ But you still want some low data rate ” to keep
a person involved . 
It took me a while to realize that Tousley wasn ’ t shrugging off my questions
about whether the human would be required to authorize each target because he
was being evasive or trying to conceal a secret program , it was because he
genuinely didn ’ t see the issue the same way . Automation had been increasing in
weapons for decades—from Tousley ’ s perspective , programs like CODE were
merely the next step . Humans would remain involved in lethal decision-making , 
albeit at a higher level overseeing and directing the combat action . The precise
details of how much freedom an autonomous system might be granted to choose
its own targets and in which situations wasn ’ t his primary concern . Those were
questions for military commanders to address . His job as a researcher was to , as
he put it ,  “ take that technical question off the table .  ” His job was to build the
options . That meant building swarms of autonomous systems that could go into a
contested area and conduct a mission with as minimal human supervision as
possible . It also meant building in resilient communications so that humans
could have as much bandwidth and connectivity to oversee and direct the
autonomous systems as possible . How exactly those technologies were
implemented—which specific decisions were retained for the human and which
were delegated to the machine—wasn ’ t his call to make . 
Tousley acknowledged that delegating lethal decision-making came with
risks .  “ If [ CODE ] enables software that can enable a swarm to execute a
mission , would that same swarm be able to execute a mission against the wrong
target ? Yeah , that is a possibility . We don ’ t want that to happen . We want to
build in all the fail-safe systems possible .  ” For this reason , his number-one
concern with autonomous systems was actually test and evaluation :  “ What I
worry about the most is our ability to effectively test these systems to the point
that we can quantify that we trust them .  ” Trust is essential to commanders being
willing to employ autonomous systems .  “ Unless the combatant commander feels
that that autonomous system is going to execute the mission with the trust that he
or she expects , they ’ ll never deploy it in the first place .  ” Establishing that trust
was all about test and evaluation , which could mean putting an autonomous
system through millions of computer simulations to test its behavior . Even still , 
testing all of the possible situations an autonomous system might encounter and
its potential behaviors in response could be very difficult .  “ One of the concerns I
have ,  ” he said ,  “ is that the technology for autonomy and the technology for
human-machine integration and understanding is going too far surpass our
ability to test it .  .  .  . That worries me .  ” 
TARGET RECOGNITION AND ADAPTION IN CONTESTED
ENVIRONMENTS ( TRACE ) 
Tousley declined to comment on another DARPA program , Target Recognition
and Adaption in Contested Environments ( TRACE )  , because it fell under a
different department he wasn ’ t responsible for . And although DARPA was
incredibly open and helpful throughout the research for this book , the agency
declined to comment on TRACE beyond publicly available information . If
there ’ s one program that seems to be a linchpin for enabling autonomous
weapons , it ’ s TRACE . The CODE project aims to compensate for poor
automatic target recognition ( ATR ) algorithms by leveraging cooperative
autonomy . TRACE aims to improve ATR algorithms directly . 
TRACE ’ s project description explains the problem : 
In a target-dense environment , the adversary has the advantage of using sophisticated decoys and
background traffic to degrade the effectiveness of existing automatic target recognition ( ATR ) 
solutions .  .  .  . the false-alarm rate of both human and machine-based radar image recognition is
unacceptably high . Existing ATR algorithms also require impractically large computing resources
for airborne applications . 
TRACE ’ s aim is to overcome these problems and “ develop algorithms and
techniques that rapidly and accurately identify military targets using radar
sensors on manned and unmanned tactical platforms .  ” In short , TRACE ’ s goal is
to solve the ATR problem . 
To understand just how difficult ATR is—and how game-changing TRACE
would be if successful—a brief survey of sensing technologies is in order . 
Broadly speaking , military targets can be grouped into two categories :  
 “ cooperative ” and “ non-cooperative ” targets . Cooperative targets are those that
are actively emitting a signal , which makes them easier to detect . For example , 
radars , when turned on , emit energy in the electromagnetic spectrum . Radars 
 “ see ” by observing the reflected energy from their signal . This also means the
radar is broadcasting its own position , however . Enemies looking to target and
destroy the radar can simply home in on the source of the electromagnetic
energy . This is how simple autonomous weapons like the Harpy find radars . 
They can use passive sensors to simply wait and listen for the cooperative target 
( the enemy radar ) to broadcast its position , and then home in on the signal to
destroy the radar . 
Non-cooperative targets are those that aren ’ t broadcasting their location . 
Examples of non-cooperative targets could be ships , radars , or aircraft operating
with their radars turned off ; submarines running silently ; or ground vehicles such
as tanks , artillery , or mobile missile launchers . To find non-cooperative targets , 
active sensors are needed to send signals out into the environment to find targets . 
Radar and sonar are examples of active sensors ; radar sends out electromagnetic
energy and sonar sends out sound waves . Active sensors then observe the
reflected energy and attempt to discern potential targets from the random noise
of background clutter in the environment . Radar “ sees ” reflected electromagnetic
energy and sonar “ hears ” reflected sound waves . 
Militaries are therefore like two adversaries stumbling around in the dark , 
each listening and peering fervently into the darkness to hear and see the other
while remaining hidden themselves . Our eyes are passive sensors ; they simply
receive light . In the darkness , however , an external source of light like a
flashlight is needed . Using a flashlight gives away one ’ s own position , though , 
making one a “ cooperative target ” for the enemy . In this contest of hiding and
finding , zeroing in on the enemy ’ s cooperative targets is like finding a person
waving a flashlight around in the darkness . It isn ’ t hard ; the person waving the
flashlight is going to stand out . Finding the non-cooperative targets who keep
their flashlights turned off can be very , very tricky . 
When there is little background clutter , objects can be found relatively easily
through active sensing . Ships and aircraft stand out easily against their
background—a flat ocean and an empty sky . They stand out like a person
standing in an open field . A quick scan with even a dim light will pick out a
person standing in the open , although discerning friend from foe can be difficult . 
In cluttered environments , however , even finding targets in the first place can be
hard . Moving targets can be discerned via Doppler shifting—essentially the
same method that police use to detect speeding vehicles . Moving objects shift
the frequency of the return radar signal , making them stand out against a
stationary background . Stationary targets in cluttered environments can be as
hard to see as a deer hiding in the woods , though . Even with a light shined
directly on them , they might not be noticed . 
Humans have challenges seeing stationary , camouflaged objects and human
visual cognitive processing is incredibly complex . We take for granted how
computationally difficult it is to see objects that blend into the background . 
While radars and sonars can “ see ” and “ hear ” in frequencies that humans are
incapable of , military ATR is nowhere near as good as humans at identifying
objects amid clutter . 
Militaries currently sense many non-cooperative targets using a technique
called synthetic aperture radar , or SAR . A vehicle , typically an aircraft , flies in a
line past a target and sends out a burst of radar pulses as the aircraft moves . This
allows the aircraft to create the same effect as having an array of sensors , a
powerful technique that enhances image resolution . The result is sometimes
grainy images composed of small dots , like a black-and-white pointillist
painting . While SAR images are generally not as sharp as images from electrooptical or infrared cameras , SAR is a powerful tool because radar can penetrate
through clouds , allowing all-weather surveillance . Building algorithms that can
automatically identify SAR images is extremely difficult , however . Grainy SAR
images of tanks , artillery , or airplanes parked on a runway often push the limits
of human abilities to recognize objects , and historically ATR algorithms have
fallen far short of human abilities . 
The poor performance of military ATR stands in stark contrast to recent
advances in computer vision . Artificial intelligence has historically struggled
with object recognition and perception , but the field has seen rapid gains
recently due to deep learning . Deep learning uses neural networks , a type of AI
approach that is analogous to biological neurons in animal brains . Artificial
neural networks don ’ t directly mimic biology , but are inspired by it . Rather than
follow a script of if-then steps for how to perform a task , neural networks work
based on the strength of connections within a network . Thousands or even
millions of data samples are fed into the network and the weights of various
connections between nodes in the network are constantly adjusted to “ train ” the
network on the data . In this way , neural networks “ learn .  ” Network settings are
refined until the correct output , such as the correct image category ( for example , 
cat , lamp , car ) is achieved . 
Deep Neural Network
Deep neural networks are those that have multiple “ hidden ” layers between
the input and output , and have proven to be a very powerful tool for machine
learning . Adding more layers in the network between the input data and output
allows for a much greater complexity of the network , enabling the network to
handle more complex tasks . Some deep neural nets have over a hundred layers . 
This complexity is , it turns out , essential for image recognition , and deep
neural nets have made tremendous progress . In 2015 , a team of researchers from
Microsoft announced that they had created a deep neural network that for the
first time surpassed human performance in visual object identification . Using a
standard test dataset of 150 , 000 images , Microsoft ’ s network achieved an error
rate of only 4 . 94 percent , narrowly edging out humans , who have an estimated
5 . 1 percent error rate . A few months later , they improved on their own
performance with a 3 . 57 percent rate by a 152-layer neural net . 
TRACE intends to harness these advances and others in machine learning to
build better ATR algorithms . ATR algorithms that performed on par with or
better than humans in identifying non-cooperative targets such as tanks , mobile
missile launchers , or artillery would be a game changer in terms of finding and
destroying enemy targets . If the resulting target recognition system was of
sufficiently low power to be located on board the missile or drone itself , human
authorization would not be required , at least from a purely technical point of
view . The technology would enable weapons to hunt and destroy targets all on
their own . 
Regardless of whether DARPA was intending to build autonomous weapons , 
it was clear that programs like CODE and TRACE were putting in place the
building blocks that would enable them in the future . Tousley ’ s view was that it
wasn ’ t DARPA ’ s call whether to authorize that next fateful step across the line
to weapons that would choose their own targets . But if it wasn ’ t DARPA ’ s call
whether to build autonomous weapons , then whose call was it ? 
6
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD
APPROVING AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS
The Department of Defense has an official policy on the role of autonomy in
weapons , DoD Directive 3000 . 09 ,  “ Autonomy in Weapon Systems .  ”  
( Disclosure : While at DoD , I led the working group that drafted the policy .  ) 
Signed in November 2012 , the directive is published online so anyone can read
it . 
The directive includes some general language on principles for design of
semiautonomous and autonomous systems , such as realistic test and evaluation
and understandable human-machine interfaces . The meat of the policy , however , 
is the delineation of three classes of systems that get the “ green light ” for
approval in the policy . These are :  ( 1 ) semiautonomous weapons , such as homing
munitions ;  ( 2 ) defensive supervised autonomous weapons , such as the shipbased Aegis weapon system ; and ( 3 ) nonlethal , nonkinetic autonomous weapons , 
such as electronic warfare to jam enemy radars . These three types of
autonomous systems are in wide use today . The policy essentially says to
developers ,  “ If you want to build a weapon that uses autonomy in ways
consistent with existing practices , you ’ re free to do so .  ” Normal acquisition rules
apply , but those types of systems do not require any additional approval . 
Any future weapon system that would use autonomy in a novel way outside
of those three categories gets a “ yellow light .  ” Those systems need to be
reviewed before beginning formal development ( essentially the point at which
large sums of money would be spent ) and again before fielding . The policy
outlines who participates in the review process—the senior defense civilian
officials for policy and acquisitions and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
—as well as the criteria for review . The criteria are lengthy , but predominantly
focus on test and evaluation for autonomous systems to ensure they behave as
intended—the same concern Tousley expressed . The stated purpose of the policy
is to “ minimize the probability and consequences of failures in autonomous and
semiautonomous weapon systems that could lead to unintended engagements .  ” 
In other words , to minimize the chances of armed robots running amok . 
Lethal autonomous weapons are not prohibited by the policy directive . 
Instead , the policy provides a process by which new uses of autonomy could be
reviewed by relevant officials before deployment . The policy helps ensure that if
DoD were to build autonomous weapons that they weren ’ t developed and
deployed without sufficient oversight , but it doesn ’ t help answer the question of
whether DoD might actually approve such systems . On that question , the policy
is silent . All the policy says is that if an autonomous weapon met all of the
criteria , such as reliability under realistic conditions , then in principle it could be
authorized . 
GIVING THE GREEN LIGHT TO AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS
But would it be authorized ? DARPA programs are intended to explore the art of
the possible , but that doesn ’ t mean that DoD would necessarily turn those
experimental projects into operational weapon systems . To better understand
whether the Pentagon might actually approve autonomous weapons , I sat down
with then-Pentagon acquisition chief , Under Secretary of Defense Frank
Kendall . As the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and
logistics , Kendall was the Pentagon ’ s chief technologist and weapons buyer
under the Obama Administration . When it came to major weapons systems like
the X-47B or LRASM , the decision whether or not to move forward was in
Kendall ’ s hands . In the process laid out under the DoD Directive , Kendall was
one of three senior officials , along with the under secretary for policy and the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs , who all had to agree in order to authorize
developing an autonomous weapon . 
Kendall has a unique background among defense technologists . In addition
to a distinguished career across the defense technology enterprise , serving in a
variety of roles from vice president of a major defense firm to several mid-level
bureaucratic jobs within DoD , Kendall also has worked pro bono as a human
rights lawyer . He has worked with Amnesty International , Human Rights First , 
and other human rights groups , including as an observer at the U . S . prison at
Guantánamo Bay . Given his background , I was hopeful that Kendall might be
able to bridge the gap between technology and policy . 
Kendall made clear , for starters , that there had never been a weapon
autonomous enough even to trigger the policy review .  “ We haven ’ t had anything
that was even remotely close to autonomously lethal .  ” If he were put in that
position , Kendall said his chief concerns would be ensuring that it complied with
the laws of war and that the weapon allowed for “ appropriate human judgment ,  ” 
a phrase that appears in the policy directive . Kendall admitted those terms
weren ’ t defined , but conversation with him began to elucidate his thinking . 
Kendall started his career as an Army air defender during the Cold War , 
where he learned the value of automation first hand .  “ We had an automatic mode
for the Hawk system that we never used , but I could see in an extreme situation
where you ’ d turn it on , because you just couldn ’ t do things fast enough
otherwise ,  ” he said . When you have “ fractions of a second ” to decide—that ’ s a
role for machines . 
Kendall said that automatic target recognition and machine learning were
improving rapidly . As they improve , it should become possible for the machine
to select its own targets for engagement . In some settings , such as taking out an
enemy radar , he thought it could be done “ relatively soon .  ” 
This raises tricky questions .  “ Where do you want the human intervention to
be ?  ” he asked .  “ Do you want it to be the actual act of employing the lethality ? 
Do you want it to be the acceptance of the rules that you set for identifying
something as hostile ?  ” Kendall didn ’ t have the answers .  “ I think we ’ re going to
have to sort through all that .  ” 
One important factor was the context .  “ Are you just driving down the street
or are you actually in a war , or you ’ re in an insurgency ? The context matters .  ” In
some settings , using autonomy to select and engage targets might be appropriate . 
In others , it might not . 
Kendall saw using an autonomous weapon to target enemy radars as fairly
straightforward and something he didn ’ t see many people objecting to . There
were other examples that pushed the boundaries . Kendall said on a trip to Israel , 
his hosts from the Israel Defense Forces had him sit in a Merkava tank that was
outfitted with the Trophy active protection system . The Israelis fired a rocket
propelled grenade near the tank (  “ offset a few meters ,  ” he said ) and the Trophy
system intercepted it automatically .  “ But suppose I also wanted to shoot back at .  
.  . wherever the bullet had come from ?  ” he asked .  “ You can automate that , right ? 
That ’ s protecting me , but it ’ s the use of that weapon in a way which could be
lethal to whoever , you know , was in the line of fire when I fire .  ” He pointed out
that automating a return-fire response might prevent a second shot , saving lives . 
Kendall acknowledged that had risks , but there were risks in not doing it as well .  
 “ How much do we want to put our own people at risk by not allowing them to
use this technology ? That ’ s the other side of the equation .  ” 
Things become especially difficult if the machine is better than the person , 
which , at some point , will happen .  “ I think at that point , we ’ ll have a tough
decision to make as to how we want to go with that .  ” Kendall saw value in
keeping a human in the loop as a backup , but ,  “ What if it ’ s a situation where
there isn ’ t that time ? Then aren ’ t you better off to let the machine do it ? You
know , I think that ’ s a reasonable question to ask .  ” 
I asked him for his answer to the question—after all , he was the person who
would decide in DoD . But he didn ’ t know .  
 “ I don ’ t think we ’ ve decided that yet ,  ” he said .  “ I think that ’ s a question
we ’ ll have to confront when we get to where technology supports it .  ” 
Kendall wasn ’ t worried , though .  “ I think we ’ re a long way away from the
Terminator idea , the killer robots let loose on the battlefield idea . I don ’ t think
we ’ re anywhere near that and I don ’ t worry too much about that .  ” Kendall
expressed confidence in how the United States would address this technology .  
 “ I ’ m in my job because I find my job compatible with being a human rights
lawyer . I think the United States is a country which has high values and it
operates consistent with those values .  .  .  . I ’ m confident that whatever we do , 
we ’ re going to start from the premise that we ’ re going to follow the laws of war
and obey them and we ’ re going to follow humanitarian principles and obey
them .  ” 
Kendall was worried about other countries , but he was most concerned about
what terrorists might do with commercially available technology .  “ Automation
and artificial intelligence are one of the areas where the commercial
developments I think dwarf the military investments in R & D . They ’ re creating
capabilities that can easily be picked up and applied for military purposes .  ” As
one example , he asked ,  “ When [ ISIS ] doesn ’ t have to put a person in that car
and can just send it out on its own , that ’ s a problem for us , right ?  ” 
THE REVOLUTIONARY
Kendall ’ s boss was Deputy Secretary of Defense Bob Work , the Pentagon ’ s
number-two bureaucrat—and DoD ’ s number-one robot evangelist . As deputy
secretary from 2014–17 , Work was the driving force behind the Pentagon ’ s
Third Offset Strategy and its focus on human-machine teaming . In his vision of
future conflicts , AI will work in concert with humans in human-machine teams . 
This blended human-plus-machine approach could take many forms . Humans
could be enhanced through exoskeleton suits and augmented reality , enabled by
machine intelligence . AI systems could help humans make decisions , much like
in “ centaur chess ,  ” where humans are assisted by chess programs that analyze
possible moves . In some cases , AI systems may perform tasks on their own with
human oversight , particularly when speed is an advantage , similar to automated
stock trading . Future weapons will be more intelligent and cooperative , 
swarming adversaries . 
Collectively , Work argues these advances may lead to a “ revolution ” in
warfare . Revolutions in warfare , Work explained in a 2014 monograph , are 
 “ periods of sharp , discontinuous change [ in which ]  .  .  . existing military regimes
are often upended by new more dominant ones , leaving old ways of warfare
behind .  ” 
In defense circles , this is a bold claim . The U . S . defense community of the
late 1990s and early 2000s became enamored with the potential of information
technology to lead to a revolution in warfare . Visions of “ information
dominance ” and “ network-centric warfare ” foundered in the mountains of
Afghanistan and the dusty streets of Iraq as the United States became mired in
messy counterinsurgency wars . High-tech investments in next-generation
weapon systems such as F-22 fighter jets were overpriced or simply irrelevant
for finding and tracking insurgents or winning the hearts and minds of civilian
populations . And yet .  .  . 
The information revolution continued , leading to more advanced computer
processors and ever more sophisticated machine intelligence . And even while
warfare in the information age might not have unfolded the way Pentagon
futurists might have envisioned , the reality is information technology
dramatically shaped how the United States fought its counterinsurgency wars . 
Information became the dominant driver of counternetwork operations as the
United States sought to find insurgents hiding among civilians , like finding a
needle in a stack of needles . 
Sweeping technological changes like the industrial revolution or the
information revolution unfold in stages over time , over the course of decades or
generations . As they do , they inevitably have profound effects on warfare . 
Technologies like the internal-combustion engine that powered civilian
automobiles and airplanes in the industrial revolution led to tanks and military
aircraft . Tanks and airplanes , along with other industrial-age weaponry such as
machine guns , profoundly changed World War I and World War II . 
Work is steeped in military history and a student of Pentagon futurist Andy
Marshall , who for decades ran DoD ’ s Office of Net Assessment and championed
the idea that another revolution in warfare was unfolding today . Work
understands the consequences of falling behind during periods of revolutionary
change . Militaries can lose battles and even wars . Empires can fall , never to
recover . In 1588 , the mighty Spanish Armada was defeated by the British , who
had more expertly exploited the revolutionary technology of the day : cannons . In
the interwar period between World War I and World War II , Germany was more
successful in capitalizing on innovations in aircraft , tanks , and radio technology
and the result was the blitzkrieg—and the fall of France . The battlefield is an
unforgiving environment . When new technologies upend old ways of fighting , 
militaries and nations don ’ t often get second chances to get it right . 
If Work is right , and a revolution in warfare is under way driven in part by
machine intelligence , then there is an imperative to invest heavily in AI , 
robotics , and automation . The consequences of falling behind could be
disastrous for the United States . The industrial revolution led to machines that
were stronger than humans , and the victors were those who best capitalized on
that technology . Today ’ s information revolution is leading to machines that are
smarter and faster than humans . Tomorrow ’ s victors will be those who best
exploit AI . 
Right now , AI systems can outperform humans in narrow tasks but still fall
short of humans in general intelligence , which is why Work advocates humanmachine teaming . Such teaming allows the best of both human and machine
intelligence . AI systems can be used for specific , tailored tasks and for their
advantages in speed while humans can understand the broader context and adapt
to novel situations . There are limitations to this approach . In situations where the
advantages in speed are overwhelming , delegating authority entirely to the
machine is preferable . 
When it comes to lethal force , in a March 2016 interview , Work stated ,  “ We
will not delegate lethal authority for a machine to make a decision .  ” He quickly
caveated that statement a moment later , however , adding ,  “ The only time we
will .  .  . delegate a machine authority is in things that go faster than human
reaction time , like cyber or electronic warfare .  ” 
In other words , we won ’ t delegate lethal authority to a machine .  .  . unless
we have to . In the same interview , Work said ,  “ We might be going up against a
competitor that is more willing to delegate authority to machines than we are and
as that competition unfolds , we ’ ll have to make decisions about how to
compete .  ” How long before the tightening spiral of an ever-faster OODA loop
forces that decision ? Perhaps not long . A few weeks later in another interview , 
Work stated it was his belief that “ within the next decade or decade and a half
it ’ s going to become clear when and where we delegate authority to machines .  ” 
A principal concern of his was the fact that while in the United States we debate
the “ moral , political , legal , ethical ” issues surrounding lethal autonomous
weapons ,  “ our potential competitors may not .  ” 
There was no question that if I was going to understand where the robotics
revolution was heading , I needed to speak to Work . No single individual had
more sway over the course of the U . S . military ’ s investments in autonomy than
he did , both by virtue of his official position in the bureaucracy as well as his
unofficial position as the chief thought-leader on autonomy . Work may not be an
engineer writing the code for the next generation of robotic systems , but his
influence was even broader and deeper . Through his public statements and
internal policies , Work was shaping the course of DoD ’ s investments , big and
small . He had championed the concept of human-machine teaming . How he
framed the technology would influence what engineers across the defense
enterprise chose to build . Work immediately agreed to an interview . 
THE FUTURE OF LETHAL AUTONOMY
The Pentagon is an imposing structure . At 6 . 5 million square feet , it is one of the
largest buildings in the world . Over 20 , 000 people enter the Pentagon every day
to go to work . As I moved through the sea of visitors clearing security , I was
reminded of the ubiquity of the robotics revolution . I heard the man in line
behind me explain to Pentagon security that the mysterious item in his briefcase
raising alarms in their x-ray scanners was a drone .  “ It ’ s a UAV ,  ” he said .  “ A
drone . I have clearance to bring it in ,  ” he added hastily . 
The drones are literally everywhere , it would seem . 
Work ’ s office was in the famed E-ring where the Pentagon ’ s top executives
reside , and he was kind enough to take time out of his busy schedule to talk with
me . I started with a simple question , one I had been searching to answer in vain
in my research : Is the Department of Defense building autonomous weapons ? 
Underscoring the definitional problem , Work wanted to clarify what I meant
by “ autonomous weapon ” before answering . I explained I was defining an
autonomous weapon as one that could search for , select , and engage targets on
its own . Work replied ,  “ We , the United States , have had a lethal autonomous
weapon , using your definition , since 1945 : the Bat [ radar-guided anti-ship
bomb ]  .  ” He said ,  “ I would define it as a narrow lethal autonomous weapon in
that the original targeting of the Japanese destroyer that we fired at was done by
a Navy PBY maritime patrol aircraft .  .  . they knew [ the Japanese destroyer ] was
hostile—and then they launched the weapon . But the weapon itself made all of
the decisions on the final engagement using an S-band radar seeker .  ” Despite his
use of the term “ autonomous weapon ” to describe a radar-guided homing
munition , Work clarified he was comfortable with that use of autonomy .  “ I see
absolutely no problem in those types of weapons . It was targeted on a specific
capability by a man in the loop and all the autonomy was designed to do was do
the terminal endgame engagement .  ” He was also comfortable with how
autonomy was used in a variety of modern weapons , from torpedoes to the Aegis
ship combat system . 
Painting a picture of the future , Work said ,  “ We are moving to a world in
which the autonomous weapons will have smart decision trees that will be
completely preprogrammed by humans and completely targeted by humans . So
let ’ s say we fire a weapon at 150 nautical miles because our off-board sensors
say a Russian battalion tactical group is operating in this area . We don ’ t know
exactly what of the battalion tactical group this weapon will kill , but we know
that we ’ re engaging an area where there are hostiles .  ” Work explained that the
missile itself , following its programming logic , might prioritize which targets to
strike—tanks , artillery , or infantry fighting vehicles .  “ We ’ re going to get to that
level . And I see no problem in that ,  ” he said .  “ There ’ s a whole variety of
autonomous weapons that do endgame engagement decisions after they have
been targeted and launched at a specific target or target area .  ”  ( Here Work is
using “ autonomous weapon ” to refer to fire-and-forget homing munitions .  ) 
Loitering weapons , Work acknowledged , were qualitatively different .  “ The
thing that people worry about is a weapon we fire at range and it loiters in the
area and it decides when , where , how , and what to kill without anything other
than the human launching it in the general direction .  ” Work acknowledged that , 
regardless of the label used , these loitering munitions were qualitatively different
than homing munitions that had to be launched at a specific target . But Work
didn ’ t see any problem with loitering munitions either .  “ People start to get
nervous about that , but again , I don ’ t worry about that at all .  ” He said he didn ’ t
believe the United States would ever fire such a weapon into an area unless it
had done the appropriate estimates for potential collateral damage . If , on the
other hand ,  “ we are relatively certain that there are no friendlies in the area : 
weapons free . Let the weapon decide .  ” 
These search-and-destroy weapons didn ’ t bother Work , even if they were
choosing their own targets , because they were still “ narrow AI systems .  ” These
weapons would be “ programmed for a certain effect against a certain type of
target . We can tell them the priorities . We can even delegate authority to the
weapon to determine how it executes end game attack .  ” With these weapons , 
there may be “ a lot of prescribed decision trees , but the human is always firing it
into a general area and we will do [ collateral damage estimation ] and we will
say ,  ‘ Can we accept the risk that in this general area the weapon might go after a
friendly ?  ’ And we will do the exact same determination that we have right now .  ” 
Work said the key question is ,  “ What is your comfort level on target location
error ?  ” He explained ,  “ If you are comfortable firing a weapon into an area in
which the target location error is pretty big , you are starting to take more risks
that it might go against an asset that might be a friendly asset or an allied asset or
something like that .  .  .  . So , really what ’ s happening is because you can put so
much more processing power onto the weapon itself , the [ acceptable degree of ] 
target location error is growing . And we will allow the weapon to search that
area and figure out the endgame .  ” An important factor is what else is in the
environment and the acceptable level of collateral damage .  “ If you have real low
collateral damage [ requirements ]  ,  ” he said ,  “ you ’ re not going to fire a weapon
into an area where the target location is so large that the chances of collateral
damage go up .  ” 
In situations where that risk was acceptable , Work saw no problems with
such weapons .  “ I hear people say ,  ‘ This is some terrible thing . We ’ ve got killer
robots .  ’ No we don ’ t . Robots .  .  . will only hit the targets that you program in .  
.  .  . The human is still launching the weapon and specifying the type of targets to
be engaged , even if the weapon is choosing the specific targets to attack within
that wide area . There ’ s always going to be a man or woman in the loop who ’ s
going to make the targeting decision ,  ” he said , even if that targeting decision
was now at a higher level . 
Work contrasted these narrow AI systems with artificial general intelligence 
( AGI )  ,  “ where the AI is actually making these decisions on its own .  ” This is
where Work would draw the line .  “ The danger is if you get a general AI system
and it can rewrite its own code . That ’ s the danger . We don ’ t see ever putting that
much AI power into any given weapon . But that would be the danger I think that
people are worried about . What happens if Skynet rewrites its own code and
says ,  ‘ humans are the enemy now ’  ? But that I think is very , very , very far in the
future because general AI hasn ’ t advanced to that .  ” Even if technology did get
there , Work was not so keen on using it .  “ We will be extremely careful in trying
to put general AI into an autonomous weapon ,  ” he said .  “ As of this point I can ’ t
get to a place where we would ever launch a general AI weapon .  .  .  [ that ] makes
all the decisions on its own . That ’ s just not the way that I would ever foresee the
United States pursuing this technology .  [ Our approach ] is all about empowering
the human and making sure that the humans inside the battle network has tactical
and operational overmatch against their enemies .  ” 
Work recognized that other countries may use AI technology differently .  
 “ People are going to use AI and autonomy in ways that surprise us ,  ” he said . 
Other countries might deploy weapons that “ decide who to attack , when to
attack , how to attack ” all on their own . If they did , then that could change the
U . S . calculus .  “ The only way that we would go down that path , I think , is if it
turns out our adversaries do and it turns out that we are at an operational
disadvantage because they ’ re operating at machine speed and we ’ re operating at
human speeds . And then we might have to rethink our theory of the case .  ” Work
said that challenge is something he worries about .  “ The nature of the
competition about how people use AI and autonomy is really going to be
something that we cannot control and we cannot totally foresee at this point .  ” 
THE PAST AS A GUIDE TO THE FUTURE
Work forthrightly answered every question I put to him , but I still found myself
leaving the interview unsatisfied . He had made clear that he was comfortable
using narrow AI systems to perform the kinds of tasks we ’ re doing today : 
endgame autonomy to confirm a target chosen by a human or defensive humansupervised autonomy like at Aegis . He was comfortable with loitering weapons
that might operate over a wider area or smarter munitions that could prioritize
targets , but he continued to see humans playing a role in launching and directing
those weapons . There were some technologies Work wasn ’ t comfortable with—
artificial general intelligence or “ boot-strapping ” systems that could modify their
own code . But there was a wide swath of systems in between . What about a
uninhabited combat aircraft that made its own targeting decisions ? How much
target error was acceptable ? He simply didn ’ t know . Those are questions future
defense leaders would have to address . 
To help shed light on how future leaders might answer those questions , I
turned to Dr . Larry Schuette , director of research at the Office of Naval
Research . Schuette is a career scientist with the Navy and has a doctorate in
electrical engineering , so he understands the technology intimately . ONR has
repeatedly been at the forefront of advancements in autonomy and robotics , and
Schuette directs much of this research . He is also an avid student of history , so I
hoped he could help me understand what the past might tell us about the shape
of things to come . 
As a researcher , Schuette made it clear to me that autonomous weapons are
not an area of focus for ONR . There are a lot of areas where uninhabited and
autonomous systems could have value , but his perspective was to focus on the
mundane tasks .  “ I ’ m always looking for : what ’ s the easiest thing with the
highest return on investment that we could actually go do where people would
thank us for doing it .  .  .  . Don ’ t go after the hard missions .  .  .  . Let ’ s do the easy
stuff first .  ” Schuette pointed to thankless jobs like tanking aircraft or cleaning up
oil spills .  “ Be the trash barge .  .  .  . The people would love you .  ” His view was
that even tackling these simple , unobjectionable missions was a big enough
challenge .  “ I know that what is simple to imagine in science and technology isn ’ t
as simple to do .  ” 
Schuette also emphasized that he didn ’ t see a compelling operational need
for autonomous weapons . Today ’ s model of “ The man pushes a button and the
weapon goes autonomous from there but the man makes the decision ” was a 
 “ workable framework for some large fraction of what you would want to do with
unmanned air , unmanned surface , unmanned underwater , unmanned ground
vehicles .  .  .  . I don ’ t see much need in future warfare to get around that model ,  ” 
he said . 
As a student of history , however , Schuette had a somewhat different
perspective . His office looked like a naval museum , with old ship ’ s logs
scattered on the bookshelves and black-and-white photos of naval aviators on the
walls . While speaking , Schuette would frequently leap out of his chair to grab a
book about unrestricted submarine warfare or the Battle of Guadalcanal to
punctuate his point . The historical examples weren ’ t about autonomy , rather they
were about a broader pattern in warfare .  “ History is full of innovations and
asymmetric responses ,  ” he said . In World War II , the Japanese were “ amazed ” at
U . S . skill at naval surface gunfire . In response , they decided to fight at night , 
resulting in devastating nighttime naval surface action at the Battle of
Guadalcanal . The lesson is that “ the threat gets a vote .  ” Citing Japanese
innovations in long-range torpedoes , Schuette said ,  “ We had not planned on
fighting a torpedo war .  .  .  . The Japanese had a different idea .  ” 
This dynamic of innovation and counter-innovation inevitably leads to
surprises in warfare and can often change what militaries see as ethical or
appropriate .  “ We ’ ve had these debates before about ethical use of X or Y ,  ” 
Schuette pointed out . He compared today ’ s debates about autonomous weapons
to debates in the U . S . Navy in the interwar period between World War I and
World War II about unrestricted submarine warfare .  “ We went all of the
twenties , all the thirties , talking about how unrestricted submarine warfare was a
bad idea we would never do it . And when the shit hit the fan the first thing we
did was begin executing unrestricted submarine warfare .  ” Schuette grabbed a
book off his shelf and quoted the order issued to all U . S . Navy ship and
submarine commanders on December 7 , 1941 , just four and a half hours after the
attack at Pearl Harbor : 
EXECUTE AGAINST JAPAN UNRESTRICTED AIR AND SUBMARINE
WARFARE
The lesson from history , Schuette said , was that “ we are going to be
violently opposed to autonomous robotic hunter-killer systems until we decide
we can ’ t live without them .  ” When I asked him what he thought would be the
decisive factor , he had a simple response :  “ Is it December eighth or December
sixth ?  ” 
7
WORLD WAR R
ROBOTIC WEAPONS AROUND THE WORLD
The robotics revolution isn ’ t American-made . It isn ’ t even American-led . 
Countries around the world are pushing the envelope in autonomy , many further
and faster than the United States . Conversations in U . S . research labs and the
Pentagon ’ s E-ring are only one factor influencing the future of autonomous
weapons . Other nations get a vote too . What they do will influence how the
technology develops , proliferates , and how other nations—including the United
States—react . 
The rapid proliferation of drones portends what is to come for increasingly
autonomous systems . Drones have spread to nearly a hundred countries around
the globe , as well as non-state groups such as Hamas , Hezbollah , ISIS , and
Yemeni Houthi rebels . Armed drones are next . A growing number of countries
have armed drones , including nations that are not major military powers such as
South Africa , Nigeria , and Iraq . 
Armed robots are also proliferating on the ground and at sea . South Korea
has deployed a robot sentry gun to its border with North Korea . Israel has sent an
armed robotic ground vehicle , the Guardium , on patrol near the Gaza border . 
Russia is building an array of ground combat robots and has plans for a robot
tank . Even Shiite militias in Iraq have gotten in on the game , fielding an armed
ground robot in 2015 . 
Armed Drone Proliferation As of June 2017 , sixteen countries possessed armed drones : China , Egypt , 
Iran , Iraq , Israel , Jordan , Kazakhstan , Myanmar , Nigeria , Pakistan , Saudi Arabia , Turkey , Turkmenistan , 
United Arab Emirates , the United Kingdom , and the United States . Some nations developed armed drones
indigenously , while others acquired the technology from abroad . Over 90 percent of international armed
drone transfers ( shown on the map via arrows ) have been from China . 
Armed robots are heading to sea as well . Israel has also developed an armed
uninhabited boat , the Protector , to patrol its coast . Singapore has purchased the
Protector and deployed it for counterpiracy missions in the Straits of Malacca . 
Even Ecuador has an armed robot boat , the ESGRUM , produced entirely
indigenously . Armed with a rifle and rocket launcher , the ESGRUM will patrol
Ecuadorian waterways to counter pirates . 
As in the United States , the key question will be whether these nations plan
to cross the line to full autonomy . No nation has stated they plan to build
autonomous weapons . Few have ruled them out either . Only twenty-two nations
have said they support a ban on lethal autonomous weapons : Pakistan , Ecuador , 
Egypt , the Holy See , Cuba , Ghana , Bolivia , Palestine , Zimbabwe , Algeria , Costa
Rica , Mexico , Chile , Nicaragua , Panama , Peru , Argentina , Venezuela , 
Guatemala , Brazil , Iraq , and Uganda ( as of November 2017 )  . None of these
states are major military powers and some , such as Costa Rica or the Holy See , 
lack a military entirely . 
One of the first areas where countries will be forced to grapple with the
choice of whether to delegate lethal authority to the machine will be for
uninhabited combat aircraft designed to operate in contested areas . Several
nations are reportedly developing experimental combat drones similar to the X47B , although for operation from land bases rather than aircraft carriers . These
include the United Kingdom ’ s Taranis , China ’ s Sharp Sword , Russia ’ s Skat , 
France ’ s nEUROn , India ’ s Aura , and a rumored unnamed Israeli stealth drone . 
Although these drones are likely designed to operate with protected
communications links to human controllers , militaries will have to decide what
actions they want the drone to carry out if ( and when ) communications are
jammed . Restricting the drone ’ s rules of engagement could mean giving up
valuable military advantage , and few nations are being transparent about their
plans . 
Given that a handful of countries already possess the fully autonomous
Harpy , it isn ’ t a stretch to imagine them and others authorizing a similar level of
autonomy with a recoverable drone . Whether countries are actually building
those weapons today is more difficult to discern . If understanding what ’ s
happening inside the U . S . defense industry is difficult , peering behind the curtain
of secret military projects around the globe is even harder . Are countries like
Russia , China , the United Kingdom , and Israel building autonomous weapons ? 
Or are they still keeping humans in the loop , walking right up to the line of
autonomous weapons but not crossing it ? Four high-profile international
programs , a South Korean robot gun , a British missile , a British drone , and a
Russian fleet of armed ground robots , show the difficulty in uncovering what
nations around the globe are doing . 
THE CURIOUS CASE OF THE AUTONOMOUS SENTRY BOT
South Korea ’ s Samsung SGR-A1 robot is a powerful example of the challenge
in discerning how much autonomy weapon systems have . The SGR-A1 is a
stationary armed sentry robot designed to defend South Korean ’ s border against
North Korea . In 2007 , when the robot was revealed , the electrical engineering
magazine IEEE Spectrum reported it had a fully autonomous mode for engaging
targets on its own . In an interview with the magazine , Samsung principal
research engineer Myung Ho Yoo said ,  “ the ultimate decision about shooting
should be made by a human , not the robot .  ” But the article made clear that Yoo ’ s 
 “ should ” was not a requirement , and that the robot did have a fully automatic
option . 
The story was picked up widely , with the SGR-A1 cited as an example of a
real-world autonomous weapon by The Atlantic , the BBC , NBC , Popular
Science , and The Verge . The SGR-A1 made Popular Science ’ s list of “ Scariest
Ideas in Science ” with PopSci asking ,  “ WHY , GOD ? WHY ?  ” Several academic
researchers conducting in-depth reports on military robotics similarly cited the
SGR-A1 as fully autonomous . 
In the face of this negative publicity , Samsung backpedaled , saying that in
fact a human was required to be in the loop . In 2010 , a spokesperson for
Samsung clarified that “ the robots , while having the capability of automatic
surveillance , cannot automatically fire at detected foreign objects or figures .  ” 
Samsung and the South Korean government have been tight-lipped about details , 
though , and one can understand why . The SGR-A1 is designed to defend South
Korea ’ s demilitarized zone along its border with North Korea , with whom South
Korea is technically still at war . Few countries on earth face as immediate and
intense a security threat . One million North Korean soldiers and the threat of
nuclear weapons loom over South Korea like a menacing shadow . In the same
interview in which he asserted a human will always remain in the loop , the
Samsung spokesperson asserted ,  “ the SGR-1 can and will prevent wars .  ” 
What are the actual specifications and design parameters for the SGR-A1 ? 
It ’ s essentially impossible to know without directly inspecting the robot . If
Samsung says a human is in the loop , all we can do is take their word for it . If
South Korea is willing to delegate more autonomy to their robots than other
nations , however , it wouldn ’ t be surprising . Defending the DMZ against North
Korea is a matter of survival for South Korea . Accepting the risks of a fully
autonomous sentry gun may be more than worth it for South Korea if it enhances
deterrence against North Korea . 
THE BRIMSTONE MISSILE
Similar to the U . S . LRASM , the United Kingdom ’ s Brimstone missile has come
under fire from critics who have questioned whether it has too much autonomy . 
The Brimstone is an aircraft-launched fire-and-forget missile designed to destroy
ground vehicles or small boats . It can accomplish this mission in a variety of
ways . 
Brimstone has two primary modes of operation : Single Mode and Dual
Mode . In Single Mode , a human “ paints ” the target with a laser and the missile
homes in on the laser reflection . The missile will go wherever the human points
the laser , allowing the human to provide “ guidance all the way to the target .  ” 
Dual Mode combines the laser guidance with a millimeter-wave ( MMW ) radar
seeker for “ fast moving and maneuvering targets and under narrow Rules of
Engagement .  ” The human designates the target with a laser , then there is a 
 “ handoff ” from the laser to the MMW seeker at the final stage so the weapon
can home in on fast moving targets . In both modes of operation , the missile is
clearly engaging targets that have been designated by a human , making it a
semiautonomous weapon . 
However , the developer also advertises another mode of operation ,  “ a
previously-developed fire-and-forget , MMW-only mode ” that can be enabled 
 “ via a software role change .  ” The developer explains : 
This mode provides through-weather targeting , kill box-based discrimination and salvo launch . It
is highly effective against multi-target armor formations . Salvo-launched Brimstones self-sort
based on firing order , reducing the probability of overkill for increased one-pass lethality . 
This targeting mode would allow a human to launch a salvo of Brimstones
against a group of enemy tanks , letting the missiles sort out which missiles hit
which tank . According to a 2015 Popular Mechanics article , in this mode the
Brimstone is fairly autonomous : 
It can identify , track , and lock on to vehicles autonomously . A jet can fly over a formation of
enemy vehicles and release several Brimstones to find targets in a single pass . The operator sets a 
 “ kill box ” for Brimstone , so it will only attack within a given area . In one demonstration , three
missiles hit three target vehicles while ignoring nearby neutral vehicles . 
On the Brimstone ’ s spec sheet , the developer also describes a similar
functionality against fast-moving small boats , also called fast inshore attack craft 
( FIAC )  : 
In May 2013 , multiple Brimstone missiles operating in an autonomous [ millimeter ] wave ( MMW ) 
mode completed the world ’ s first single button , salvo engagement of multiple FIAC , destroying
three vessels ( one moving ) inside a kill box , while causing no damage to nearby neutral vessels . 
When operating in MMW-only mode , is the Brimstone an autonomous weapon ? 
While the missile has a reported range in excess of 20 kilometers , it cannot loiter
to search for targets . This means that the human operator must know there are
valid targets—ground vehicles or small boats—within the kill box before launch
in order for the missile to be effective . 
The Brimstone can engage these targets using some innovative features . A
pilot can launch a salvo of multiple Brimstones against a group of targets within
a kill box and the missiles themselves “ self-sort based on firing order ” to hit
different targets . This makes the Brimstone especially useful for defending
against enemy swarm attacks . For example , Iran has harassed U . S . ships with
swarming small boats that could overwhelm ship defenses , causing a USS Cole–
type suicide attack . Navy helicopters armed with Brimstones would be an
extremely effective defense against boat swarms , allowing pilots to take out an
entire group of enemy ships at once without having to individually target each
ship . 
Even with all of the Brimstone ’ s features , the human user still needs to
launch it at a known group of targets . Because it cannot loiter , if there weren ’ t
targets in the kill box when the missile activated its seeker , the missile would be
wasted . Unlike a drone , the missile couldn ’ t return to base . The salvo launch
capability allows the pilot to launch multiple missiles against a swarm of targets , 
rather than select each one individually . This makes a salvo of Brimstones
similar to the Sensor Fuzed Weapon that is used to take out a column of tanks . 
Even though the missiles themselves might self-sort which missile hits which
target , the human is still deciding to attack that specific cluster of targets . Even
in MMW-only mode , the Brimstone is a semiautonomous weapon . 
The line between the semiautonomous Brimstone and a fully autonomous
weapon that would choose its own targets is a thin one . It isn ’ t based on the
seeker or the algorithms . The same seeker and algorithms could be used on a
future weapon that could loiter over the battlespace—a missile with an upgraded
engine or a drone that could patrol an area . A future weapon that patrolled a kill
box , rather than entered one at a snapshot in time , would be an autonomous
weapon , because the human could send the weapon to monitor the kill box
without knowledge of any specific targets . It would allow the human to fire the
weapon “ blind ” and let the weapon decide if and when to strike targets . 
Even if the Brimstone doesn ’ t quite cross the line to an autonomous weapon , 
it takes one more half step toward it , to the point where all that is needed is a
light shove to cross the line . A MMW-only Brimstone could be converted into a
fully autonomous weapon simply by upgrading the missile ’ s engine so that it
could loiter for longer . Or the MMW-only mode algorithms and seeker could be
placed on a drone . Notably , the MMW-only mode is enabled in the missile by a
software change . As autonomous technology continues to advance , more
missiles around the globe will step right up to—or cross—that line . 
Would the United Kingdom be willing to cross that line ? The debate
surrounding another British program , the Taranis drone , shows the difficulty in
ascertaining how far the British might be willing to push the technology . 
THE TARANIS DRONE
1
2
3
The Taranis is a next-generation experimental combat drone similar to those
being developed by the United States , India , Russia , China , France , and Israel . 
BAE Systems , developer of the Taranis , has given one of the most extensive
descriptions of how a combat drone ’ s autonomy might work for weapons
engagements . Similar to the X-47B , the Taranis is a demonstrator airplane , but
the British military intends to carry the demonstration further than the United
States and conduct simulated weapons engagements with the Taranis . 
Information released by BAE shows how Taranis might be employed . It
explains a simulated weapons test that “ will demonstrate the ability of [ an
unmanned combat aircraft system ] to : fend off hostile attack ; deploy weapons
deep in enemy territory and relay intelligence information .  ” In the test : 
Taranis would reach the search area via a preprogrammed flight path
in the form of a three-dimensional corridor in the sky . Intelligence
would be relayed to mission command . 
When Taranis identifies a target it would be verified by mission
command . 
On the authority of mission command , Taranis would carry out a
simulated firing and then return to base via the programmed flight
path . 
At all times , Taranis will be under the control of a highly-trained ground crew . The Mission
Commander will both verify targets and authorise simulated weapons release . 
This protocol keeps the human in the loop to approve each target , which is
consistent with other statements by BAE leadership . In a 2016 panel at the
World Economic Forum in Davos , BAE Chairman Sir Roger Carr described
autonomous weapons as “ very dangerous ” and “ fundamentally wrong .  ” Carr
made clear that BAE only envisioned developing weapons that kept a connection
to a human who could authorize and remain responsible for lethal decisionmaking . 
In a 2016 interview , Taranis program manager Clive Marrison made a
similar statement that “ decisions to release a lethal mechanism will always
require a human element given the Rules of Engagement used by the UK in the
past .  ” Marrison then hedged , saying ,  “ but the Rules of Engagement could
change .  ” 
The British government reacted swiftly . Following multiple media articles
alleging BAE was building in the option for Taranis to “ attack targets of its own
accord ,  ” the UK government released a statement the next day stating : 
The UK does not possess fully autonomous weapon systems and has no intention of developing
or acquiring them . The operation of our weapons will always be under human control as an
absolute guarantee of human oversight , authority and accountability for their use . 
The British government ’ s full-throated denial of autonomous weapons would
appear to be as clear a policy statement as there could be , but an important
asterisk is needed regarding how the United Kingdom defines an “ autonomous
weapon system .  ” In its official policy expressed in the UK Joint Doctrine Note
2 / 11 ,  “ The UK Approach to Unmanned Aircraft Systems ,  ” the British military
describes an autonomous system as one that “ must be capable of achieving the
same level of situational understanding as a human .  ” Short of that , a system is
defined as “ automated .  ” This definition of autonomy , which hinges on the
complexity of the system rather than its function , is a different way of using the
term “ autonomy ” than many others in discussions on autonomous weapons , 
including the U . S . government . The United Kingdom ’ s stance is not a product of
sloppy language ; it ’ s a deliberate choice . The UK doctrine note continues : 
As computing and sensor capability increases , it is likely that many systems , using very complex
sets of control rules , will appear and be described as autonomous systems , but as long as it can be
shown that the system logically follows a set of rules or instructions and is not capable of human
levels of situational understanding , then they should only be considered to be automated . 
This definition shifts the lexicon on autonomous weapons dramatically . When
the UK government uses the term “ autonomous system ,  ” they are describing
systems with human-level intelligence that are more analogous to the “ general
AI ” described by U . S . Deputy Defense Secretary Work . The effect of this
definition is to shift the debate on autonomous weapons to far-off future systems
and away from potential near-term weapon systems that may search for , select , 
and engage targets on their own—what others might call “ autonomous
weapons .  ” Indeed , in its 2016 statement to the United Nations meetings on
autonomous weapons , the United Kingdom stated :  “ The UK believes that [ lethal
autonomous weapon systems ] do not , and may never , exist .  ” That is to say , 
Britain may develop weapons that would search for , select , and engage targets
on their own ; it simply would call them “ automated weapons ,  ” not “ autonomous
weapons .  ” In fact , the UK doctrine note refers to systems such as the Phalanx
gun ( a supervised autonomous weapon ) as “ fully automated weapon systems .  ” 
The doctrine note leaves open the possibility of their development , provided they
pass a legal weapons review showing they can be used in a manner compliant
with the laws of war . 
In practice , the British government ’ s stance on autonomous weapons is not
dissimilar from that expressed by U . S . defense officials . Humans will remain
involved in lethal decision-making .  .  . at some level . That might mean a human
operator launching an autonomous / automated weapon into an area and
delegating to it the authority to search for and engage targets on its own . 
Whether the public would react differently to such a weapon if it were rebranded
an “ automated weapon ” is unclear . 
Even if the United Kingdom ’ s stance retains some flexibility , there is still a
tremendous amount of transparency into how the U . S . and UK governments are
approaching the question of autonomous weapons . Weapons developers like
BAE , MBDA , and Lockheed Martin have detailed descriptions of their weapon
systems on their websites , which is not uncommon for defense companies in
democratic nations . DARPA describes its research programs publicly and in
detail . Defense officials in both countries openly engage in a dialogue about the
boundaries of autonomy and the appropriate role of humans and machines in
lethal force . This transparency stands in stark contrast to authoritarian regimes . 
RUSSIA ’ S WAR BOTS
While the United States has been very reluctant to arm ground robots , with only
one short-lived effort during the Iraq war and no developmental programs for
armed ground robots , Russia has shown no such hesitation . Russia is developing
a fleet of ground combat robots for a variety of missions , from protecting critical
installations to urban combat . Many of Russia ’ s ground robots are armed , 
ranging from small robots to augment infantry troops to robotic tanks . How
much autonomy Russia is willing to place into its ground robots will have a
profound impact on the future of land warfare . 
The Platform-M , a tracked vehicle roughly the size of a four-wheeler armed
with a grenade launcher and an assault rifle , is on the smaller scale of Russian
war bots . In 2014 , the Platform-M took part in an urban combat exercise
alongside Russian troops . According to an official statement from the Russian
military ,  “ the military robots were assigned to eliminate provisional illegal
armed formations in urban conditions and striking stationary and mobile
targets .  ” The Russian military did not describe the degree of the Platform-M ’ s
autonomy , although according to the developer : 
Platform-M .  .  . is used for gathering intelligence , for discovering and eliminating stationary and
mobile targets , for firepower support , for patrolling and for guarding important sites . The unit ’ s
weapons can be guided , it can carry out supportive tasks and it can destroy targets in automatic or
semiautomatic control systems ; it is supplied with optical-electronic and radio reconnaissance
locators . 
The phrase “ can destroy targets in automatic .  .  . control ” makes it sound like an
autonomous weapon . This claim should be viewed with some skepticism . For
one , videos of Russian robots show soldiers selecting targets on a computer
screen . More importantly , the reality is that detecting targets autonomously in a
ground combat environment is far more technically challenging than targeting
enemy radars as the Harpy does or enemy ships on the high seas like TASM . 
The weapons Platform-M carries—a grenade launcher and assault rifle—would
be effective against people , not armored vehicles like tanks or armored personnel
carriers . People don ’ t emit in the electromagnetic spectrum like radars . They
aren ’ t “ cooperative targets .  ” At the time this claim was made in 2014 , 
autonomously finding a person in a cluttered ground combat environment would
have been difficult . Advances in neural nets have changed this in the past few
years , making it easier to identify people . But discerning friend from foe would
still be a challenge . 
The autonomous target identification problem Russian war bots face is far
more challenging than the South Korean sentry gun on the DMZ . In a
demilitarized zone such as that separating North and South Korea , a country
might decide to place stationary sentry guns along the border and authorize them
to shoot anything with an infrared ( heat ) signature coming across . Such a
decision would not be without its potential problems . Sentry guns that lack any
ability to discriminate valid military targets from civilians could senselessly
murder innocent refugees attempting to flee an authoritarian regime . In general , 
though , a DMZ is a more controlled environment than offensive urban combat
operations . Authorizing static , defensive autonomous weapons that are fixed in
place would be far different than roving autonomous weapons that would be
intended to maneuver in urban areas where combatants are mixed in among
civilians . 
Technologies exist today that could be used for automatic responses against
military targets , if the Russians wanted to give such a capability to the PlatformM . The technology is fairly crude , though . For example , the Boomerang shot
detection system is a U . S . system that uses an array of microphones to detect
incoming bullets and calculate their origin . According to the developer ,  
 “ Boomerang uses passive acoustic detection and computer-based signal
processing to locate a shooter in less than a second .  ” By comparing the relative
time of arrival of a bullet ’ s shock wave at the various microphones , Boomerang
and other shot detection systems can pinpoint a shooter ’ s direction . It can then
call out the location of a shot , for example ,  “ Shot . Two o ’ clock . 400 meters .  ” 
Alternatively , acoustic shot detection systems can be directly connected to a
camera or remote weapon station and automatically aim them at the shooter . 
Going the next step to allow the gun to automatically fire back at the shooter
would not be technically challenging . Once the shot has been detected and the
gun aimed , all that it would take would be to pull the trigger . 
It ’ s possible this is what Russia means when it says the Platform-M “ can
destroy targets in automatic .  .  . control .  ” From an operational perspective , 
however , authorizing automatic return-fire would be quite hazardous . It would
require an extreme confidence in the ability of the shot detection system to weed
out false positives and to not be fooled by acoustic reflections and echoes , 
especially in urban areas . Additionally , the gun would have no ability to account
for collateral damage—say , to hold fire because the shooter is using human
shields . Finally , such a system would be a recipe for fratricide , with robot
systems potentially automatically shooting friendly troops or other friendly
robots . Two robots on the same side could become trapped in a never-ending
loop of automatic fire and response , mindlessly exchanging gunfire until they
exhausted their ammunition or destroyed each other . It is unclear whether this is
what Russia intends , but from a technical standpoint it would possible . 
Russia ’ s other ground combat robots scale up in size and sophistication from
the Platform-M . The MRK-002-BG-57 “ Wolf-2 ” is the size of a small car and
outfitted with a 12 . 7 mm heavy machine gun . According to David Hambling of
Popular Mechanics ,  “ In the tank ’ s automated mode , the operator can remotely
select up to 10 targets , which the robot then bombards . Wolf-2 can act on its
own to some degree ( the makers are vague about what degree )  , but the decision
to use lethal force is ultimately under human control .  ” The Wolf-2 sits among a
family of similar size robot vehicles . The amphibious Argo is roughly the size of
a Mini Cooper , sports a machine gun and rocket-propelled grenade launcher , and
can swim at speeds up to 2 . 5 knots . The A800 Mobile Autonomous Robotic
System ( MARS ) is an ( unarmed ) infantry support vehicle the size of a compact
car that can carry four infantry soldiers and their gear . Pictures online show
Russian soldiers riding on the back , looking surprisingly relaxed as the tracked
robot cruises through an off-road course . 
Compact car–sized war bots aren ’ t necessarily unique to Russia , although the
Russian military seems to have a casual attitude toward arming them not seen in
Western nations . The Russian military isn ’ t stopping at midsize ground robots , 
though . Several Russian programs are pushing the boundaries of what is possible
with robotic combat vehicles , building systems that could prove decisive in
highly lethal tank-on-tank warfare . 
The Uran-9 looks like something straight out of a MechWarrior video game , 
where players pilot a giant robot warrior armed with rockets and cannons . The
Uran-9 is fully uninhabited , although it is controlled by soldiers remotely from a
nearby command vehicle . It is the size of a small armored personnel carrier , 
sports a 30 mm cannon , and has an elevated platform to launch antitank guided
missiles . The elevated missile platform that gives the Uran-9 a distinctive sci-fi
appearance . The missiles rest on two platforms on either side of the vehicle that , 
when raised , look like arms reaching into the sky . The elevated platform allows
the robot to fire missiles while safely sitting behind cover , for example behind
the protective slope of a hillside . In an online promotional video from the
developer , Rosoboronexport , slo-mo shots of the Uran-9 firing antitank missiles
are set to music reminiscent of a Tchaikovsky techno remix . 
The Uran-9 is a major step beyond smaller robotic platforms like the
Platform-M and Wolf-2 not just because it ’ s larger , but because its larger size
allows it to carry heavier weapons capable of taking on antitank missions . 
Whereas the assault rifle and grenade launcher on a Platform-M would do very
little to a tank , the Uran-9 ’ s antitank missiles would be potentially highly lethal . 
This makes the Uran-9 potentially a useful weapon in high-intensity combat
against NATO forces on the plains of Europe . Uran-9s could hide behind
hillsides or other protective cover and launch missiles against NATO tanks . The
Uran-9 doesn ’ t have the armor or guns to stand toe-to-toe against a modern tank , 
but because it ’ s uninhabited , it doesn ’ t have to . The Uran-9 could be a successful
ambush predator . Even if firing its missiles exposed its position and led it to be
taken out by NATO forces , the exchange might still be a win if it took out a
Western tank . Because there ’ s no one inside it and the Uran-9 is significantly
smaller than a tank , and therefore presumably less expensive , Russia could field
many of them on the battlefield . Just like many stings from a hornet can bring
down a much larger animal , the Uran-9 could make the modern battlefield a
deadly place for Western forces . 
Russia ’ s Vikhr “ robot tank ” has a similar capability . At 14 tons and lacking a
main gun , it is significantly smaller and less lethal than a 50-to 70-ton main
battle tank . Like the Uran-9 , though , its 30 mm cannon and six antitank missiles
show it is designed as a tank-killing ambush predator , not a tank-on-tank street
fighter . The Vikhr is remote controlled , but news reports indicate it has the
ability to “ lock onto a target ” and keep firing until the target is destroyed . While
not the same as choosing its own target , tracking a moving target is doable
today . In fact , tracking moving objects is as a standard feature on DJI ’ s base
model Spark hobby drone , which retails for under $500 . 
Taking the next step and allowing the Uran-9 or Vikhr to autonomously
target tanks would take some additional work , but it would be more feasible than
trying to accurately discriminate among human targets . With large cannons and
treads , tanks are distinctive military vehicles not easily confused with civilian
objects . Moreover , militaries may be more willing to risk civilian casualties or
fratricide in the no-holds-barred arena of tank warfare , where armored divisions
vie for dominance and the fate of nations is at stake . In videos of the Uran-9 , 
human operators can be clearly seen controlling the vehicle , but the technology
is available for Russia to authorize fully autonomous antitank engagements , if it
chose to do so . 
Russia isn ’ t stopping at development of the Vikhr and Uran-9 , however . It
envisions even more advanced robotic systems that could not only ambush
Western tanks , but stand with them toe-to-toe and win . Russia reportedly has
plans to develop a fully robotic version of its next-generation T-14 Armata tank . 
The T-14 Armata , which reportedly entered production as of 2016 , sports a bevy
of new defensive features , including advanced armor , an active protection
system to intercept incoming antitank missiles , and a robotic turret . The T-14
will be the first main battle tank to sport an uninhabited turret , which will afford
the crew greater protection by sheltering them within the body of the vehicle . 
Making the entire tank uninhabited would be the next logical step in protection , 
enabling a crew to control the vehicle remotely . While current T-14s are humaninhabited , Russia has long-term plans to develop a fully robotic version . 
Vyacheslav Khalitov , deputy director general of UralVagonZavod , manufacturer
of the T-14 Armata , has stated ,  “ Quite possibly , future wars will be waged
without human involvement . That is why we have made provisions for possible
robotization of Armata .  ” He acknowledged that achieving the goal of full
robotization would require more advanced AI that could “ calculate the situation
on the battlefield and , on this basis , to take the right decision .  ” 
In addition to pushing the boundaries on robots ’ physical characteristics , the
Russian military has signaled it intends to use cutting-edge AI to boost its
robots ’ decision-making . In July 2017 , Russian arms manufacturer Kalashnikov
stated that they would soon release “ a fully automated combat module ” based on
neural networks . News reports indicate the neural networks would allow the
combat module “ to identify targets and make decisions .  ” As in other cases , it is
difficult to independently evaluate these claims , but they signal a willingness to
use artificial intelligence for autonomous targeting . Russian companies ’ boasting
of autonomous features has none of the hesitation or hedging that is often seen
from American or British defense firms . 
Senior Russian military commanders have stated they intend to move toward
fully robotic weapons . In a 2013 article on the future of warfare , Russian
military chief of staff General Valery Gerasimov wrote : 
Another factor influencing the essence of modern means of armed conflict is the use of modern
automated complexes of military equipment and research in the area of artificial intelligence . 
While today we have flying drones , tomorrow ’ s battlefields will be filled with walking , crawling , 
jumping , and flying robots . In the near future it is possible a fully robotized unit will be created , 
capable of independently conducting military operations . 
How shall we fight under such conditions ? What forms and means should be used against a
robotized enemy ? What sort of robots do we need and how can they be developed ? Already today
our military minds must be thinking about these questions . 
This Russian interest in pursuing fully robotic units has not escaped notice in the
West . In December 2015 , Deputy Secretary of Defense Bob Work mentioned
Gerasimov ’ s comments in a speech on the future of warfare . As Work has
repeatedly noted , U . S . decisions may be shaped by those of Russia and other
nations . This is the danger of an arms race in autonomy : that nations feel
compelled to race forward and build autonomous weapons out of the fear that
others are doing so , without pausing to weigh the risks of their actions . 
AN ARMS RACE IN AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS ? 
If it is true , as some have suggested , that a dangerous arms race in autonomous
weapons is under way , then it is a strange kind of race . Nations are pursuing
autonomy in many aspects of weaponry but , with the exception of the Harpy , are
still keeping humans in the loop for now . Some weapons like Brimstone use
autonomy in novel ways , pushing the boundaries of what could be considered a
semiautonomous weapon . DARPA ’ s CODE program appears to countenance
moving to human-on-the-loop supervisory control for some types of targets , but
there is no indication of full autonomy . Developers of the SGR-A1 gun and
Taranis drone have suggested full autonomy could be a future option , although
higher authorities immediately disputed the claim , saying that was not their
intent . 
Rather than a full-on sprint to build autonomous weapons , it seems that
many nations do not yet know whether they might want them in the future and
are hedging their bets . One challenge in understanding the global landscape of
lethal autonomy is that the degree of transparency among nations differs greatly . 
While the official policies of the U . S . and UK governments leave room to
develop autonomous weapons ( although they express this differently with the
United Kingdom calling them “ automated weapons ”  ) countries such as Russia
don ’ t even have a public policy . Policy discussions may be happening in private
in authoritarian regimes , but we don ’ t know what they are . Pressure from civil
society for greater transparency differs greatly across countries . In 2016 , the
UK-based NGO Article 36 , which has been a leading voice in shaping
international discussions on autonomous weapons , wrote a policy brief critiquing
the UK government ’ s stance on autonomous weapons . In the United States , 
Stuart Russell and a number of well-respected colleagues from the AI
community have met with mid-level officials from across the U . S . government
to discuss autonomous weapons . In authoritarian Russia , there are no equivalent
civil society groups to pressure the government to be more transparent about its
plans . As a result , scrutiny focuses on the most transparent countries—
democratic nations who are responsive to elements of civil society and are
generally more open about their weapons development . What goes on in
authoritarian regimes is far murkier , but no less relevant to the future path of
lethal autonomy . 
Looking across the global landscape of robotic systems , it ’ s clear that many
nations are pursuing armed robots , including combat drones that would operate
in contested air space . How much autonomy some weapon systems have is
unclear , but there is nothing preventing countries from crossing the line to lethal
autonomy in their next-generation missiles , combat drones , or ground robots . 
Next-generation robotic systems such as the Taranis may give countries that
option , forcing uncomfortable conversations . Even if many countries would
rather not move forward with autonomous weapons , it may only take one to start
a cascade of others . 
With no autonomous smoking gun , it seems unnecessarily alarmist to declare
that an autonomous weapons arms race is already under way , but we could very
well be at the starting blocks . The technology to build autonomous weapons is
widely available . Even non-state groups have armed robots . The only missing
ingredient to turn a remotely controlled armed robot into an autonomous weapon
is software . That software , it turns out , is pretty easy to come by . 
8
GARAGE BOTS
DIY KILLER ROBOTS
A gunshot cuts through the low buzz of the drone ’ s rotors . The camera jerks
backward from the recoil . The gun fires again . A small bit of flame darts out of
the handgun attached to the homemade-looking drone . Red and yellow wires
snake over the drone and into the gun ’ s firing mechanism , allowing the human
controller to remotely pull the trigger . 
The controversial fifteen-second video clip released in the summer of 2015
was taken by a Connecticut teenager of a drone he armed himself . Law
enforcement and the FAA investigated , but no laws were broken . The teenager
used the drone on his family ’ s property in the New England woods . There are no
laws against firing weapons from a drone , provided it ’ s done on private property . 
A few months later , for Thanksgiving , he posted a video of a flamethrowerarmed drone roasting a turkey . 
Drones are not only in wide use by countries around the globe ; they are
readily purchased by anyone online . For under $500 , one can buy a small
quadcopter that can autonomously fly a route preprogrammed by GPS , track and
follow moving objects , and sense and avoid obstacles in its path . Commercial
drones are moving forward in leaps and bounds , with autonomous behavior
improving in each generation . 
When I asked the Pentagon ’ s chief weapons buyer Frank Kendall what he
feared , it wasn ’ t Russian war bots , it was cheap commercial drones . A world
where everyone has access to autonomous weapons is a far different one than a
world where only the most advanced militaries can build them . If autonomous
weapons could be built by virtually anyone in their garage , bottling up the
technology and enforcing a ban , as Stuart Russell and others have advocated , 
would be extremely difficult . I wanted to know , could someone leverage
commercially available drones to make a do-it-yourself ( DIY ) autonomous
weapon ? How hard would it be ? 
I was terrified by what I found . 
HUNTING TARGETS
The quadcopter rose off the ground confidently , smoothly gaining altitude till it
hovered around eye level . The engineer next to me tapped his tablet and the
copter moved out , beginning its search of the house . 
I followed along behind the quadcopter , watching it navigate each room . It
had no map , no preprogrammed set of instructions for where to go . The drone
was told merely to search and report back , and so it did . As it moved through the
house it scanned each room with a laser range-finding LIDAR sensor , building a
map as it went . Transmitted via Wi-Fi , the map appeared on the engineer ’ s
tablet . 
As the drone glided through the house , each time it came across a doorway it
stopped , its LIDAR sensor probing the space beyond . The drone was
programmed to explore unknown spaces until it had mapped everything . Only
then would it finish its patrol and report back . 
I watched the drone pause in front of an open doorway . I imagined its
sensors pinging the distant wall of the other room , its algorithms computing that
there must be unexplored space beyond the opening . The drone hovered for a
moment , then moved into the unknown room . A thought popped unbidden into
my mind : it ’ s curious . 
It ’ s silly to impart such a human trait to a drone . Yet it comes so naturally to
us , to imbue nonhuman objects with emotions , thoughts , and intentions . I was
reminded of a small walking robot I had seen in a university lab years ago . The
researchers taped a face to one end of the robot—nothing fancy , just slices of
colored construction paper in the shape of eyes , a nose , and a mouth . I asked
them why . Did it help them remember which direction was forward ? No , they
said . It just made them feel better to put a face on it . It made the robot seem
more human , more like us . There ’ s something deep in human nature that wants
to connect to another sentient entity , to know that it is like us . There ’ s something
alien and chilling about entities that can move intelligently through the world
and not feel any emotion or thought beyond their own programming . There is
something predatory and remorseless about them , like a shark . 
I shook off the momentary feeling and reminded myself of what the
technology was actually doing . The drone “ felt ” nothing . The computer
controlling its actions would have identified that there was a gap where the
LIDAR sensors could not reach and so , following its programming , directed the
drone to enter the room . 
The technology was impressive . The company I was observing , Shield AI , 
was demonstrating fully autonomous indoor flight , an even more impressive feat
than tracking a person and avoiding obstacles outdoors . Founded by brothers
Ryan and Brandon Tseng , the former an engineer and the latter a former Navy
SEAL , Shield AI has been pushing the boundaries of autonomy under a grant
from the U . S . military . Shield ’ s goal is to field fully autonomous quadcopters
that special operators can launch into an unknown building and have the drones
work cooperatively to map the building on their own , sending back footage of
the interior and potential objects of interest to the special operators waiting
outside . 
Brandon described their goal as “ highly autonomous swarms of robots that
require minimal human input . That ’ s the end-state . We envision that the DoD
will have ten times more robots on the battlefield than soldiers , protecting
soldiers and innocent civilians .  ” Shield ’ s work is pushing the boundaries of what
is possible today . All the pieces of the technology are falling into place . The
quadcopter I witnessed was using LIDAR for navigation , but Shield ’ s engineers
explained they had tested visual-aided navigation ; they simply didn ’ t have it
active that day . 
Visual-aided navigation is a critically important piece of technology that will
allow drones to move autonomously through cluttered environments without the
aid of GPS . Visual-aided navigation tracks how objects move through the
camera ’ s field of view , a process called “ optical flow .  ” By assessing optical
flow , operating on the assumption that most of the environment is static and not
moving , fixed objects moving through the camera ’ s field of vision can be used
as a reference point for the drone ’ s own movement . This can allow the drone to
determine how it is moving within its environment without relying on GPS or
other external navigation aids . Visual-aided navigation can complement other
internal guidance mechanisms , such as inertial measurement units ( IMU ) that
work like a drone ’ s “ inner ear ,  ” sensing changes in velocity .  ( Imagine sitting
blindfolded in a car , feeling the motion of the car ’ s acceleration , braking , and
turning .  ) When IMUs and visual-aided navigation are combined , they make an
extremely powerful tool for determining a drone ’ s position , allowing the drone
to accurately navigate through cluttered environments without GPS . 
Visual-aided navigation has been demonstrated in numerous laboratory
settings and will no doubt trickle down to commercial quadcopters over time . 
There is certain to be a market for quadcopters that can autonomously navigate
indoors , from filming children ’ s birthday parties to indoor drone racing . With
visual-aided navigation and other features , drones and other robotic systems will
increasingly be able to move intelligently through their environment . Shield AI , 
like many tech companies , was focused on near-term applications , but Brandon
Tseng was bullish on the long-term potential of AI and autonomy .  “ Robotics and
artificial intelligence are where the internet was in 1994 ,  ” he told me .  “ Robotics
and AI are about to have a really transformative impact on the world .  .  .  . Where
we see the technology 10 to 15 years down the road ? It is going to be mindblowing , like a sci-fi movie .  ” 
Autonomous navigation is not the same as autonomous targeting , though . 
Drones that can maneuver and avoid obstacles on their own—indoors or
outdoors—do not necessarily have the ability to identify and discriminate among
the various objects in their surroundings . They simply avoid hitting anything at
all . Searching for specific objects and targeting them for action—whether it ’ s
taking photographs or something more nefarious—would require more
intelligence . 
The ability to do target identification is the key missing link in building a
DIY autonomous weapon . An autonomous weapon is one that can search for , 
decide to engage , and engage targets . That requires three abilities : the ability to
maneuver intelligently through the environment to search ; the ability to
discriminate among potential targets to identify the correct ones ; and the ability
to engage targets , presumably through force . The last element has already been
demonstrated—people have armed drones on their own . The first element , the
ability to autonomously navigate and search an area , is already available
outdoors and is coming soon indoors . Target identification is the only piece
remaining , the only obstacle to someone making an autonomous weapon in their
garage . Unfortunately , that technology is not far off . In fact , as I stood in the
basement of the building watching Shield AI ’ s quadcopter autonomously
navigate from room to room , autonomous target recognition was literally being
demonstrated right outside , just above my head . 
DEEP LEARNING
The research group asked that they not be named , because the technology was
new and untested . They didn ’ t want to give the impression that it was good
enough—that the error rate was low enough—to be used for military
applications . Nor , it was clear , were military applications their primary intention
in designing the system . They were engineers , simply trying to see if they could
solve a tough problem with technology . Could they send a small drone out
entirely on its own to autonomously find a crashed helicopter and report its
location back to the human ? 
The answer , it turns out , is yes . To understand how they did it , we need to go
deep . 
Deep learning neural networks , first mentioned in chapter 5 as one potential
solution to improving military automatic target recognition in DARPA ’ s
TRACE program , have been the driving force behind astounding gains in AI in
the past few years . Deep neural networks have learned to play Atari , beat the
world ’ s reigning champion at go , and have been behind dramatic improvements
in speech recognition and visual object recognition . Neural networks are also
behind the “ fully automated combat module ” that Russian arms manufacturer
Kalashnikov claims to have built . Unlike traditional computer algorithms that
operate based on a script of instructions , neural networks work by learning from
large amounts of data . They are an extremely powerful tool for handling tricky
problems that can ’ t be easily solved by prescribing a set of rules to follow . 
Let ’ s say , for example , that you wanted to write down a rule set for how to
visually distinguish an apple from a tomato without touching , tasting , or
smelling . Both are round . Both are red and shiny . Both have a green stem on top . 
They look different , but the differences are subtle and evade easy description . 
Yet a three-year-old child can immediately tell the difference . This is a tricky
problem with a rules-based approach . What neural networks do is sidestep that
problem entirely . Instead , they learn from vast amounts of data—tens of
thousands or millions of pieces of data . As the network churns through the data , 
it continually adapts its internal structure until it optimizes to achieve the correct
programmer-specified goal . The goal could be distinguishing an apple from a
tomato , playing an Atari game , or some other task . 
In one of the most powerful examples of how neural networks can be used to
solve difficult problems , the Alphabet ( formerly Google ) AI company
DeepMind trained a neural network to play go , a Chinese strategy game akin to
chess , better than any human player . Go is an excellent game for a learning
machine because the sheer complexity of the game makes it very difficult to
program a computer to play at the level of a professional human player based on
a rules-based strategy alone . 
The rules of go are simple , but from these rules flows vast complexity . Go is
played on a grid of 19 by 19 lines and players take turns placing stones—black
for one player and white for the other—on the intersection points of the grid . 
The objective is to use one ’ s stones to encircle areas of the board . The player
who controls more territory on the board wins . From these simple rules come an
almost unimaginably large number of possibilities . There are more possible
positions in go than there are atoms in the known universe , making go 10
100 
( one
followed by a hundred zeroes ) times—literally a googol—more complex than
chess . 
Humans at the professional level play go based on intuition and feel . Go
takes a lifetime to master . Prior to DeepMind , attempts to build go-playing AI
software had fallen woefully short of human professional players . To craft its AI , 
called AlphaGo , DeepMind took a different approach . They built an AI
composed of deep neural networks and fed it data from 30 million games of go . 
As explained in a DeepMind blog post ,  “ These neural networks take a
description of the Go board as an input and process it through 12 different
network layers containing millions of neuron-like connections .  ” Once the neural
network was trained on human games of go , DeepMind then took the network to
the next level by having it play itself . Our goal is to beat the best human players , 
not just mimic them ,  ” as explained in the post .  “ To do this , AlphaGo learned to
discover new strategies for itself , by playing thousands of games between its
neural networks , and adjusting the connections using a trial-and-error process
known as reinforcement learning .  ” AlphaGo used the 30 million human games
of go as a starting point , but by playing against itself could reach levels of game
play beyond even the best human players . 
This superhuman game play was demonstrated in the 4–1 victory AlphaGo
delivered over the world ’ s top-ranked human go player , Lee Sedol , in March
2016 . AlphaGo won the first game solidly , but in game 2 demonstrated its
virtuosity . Partway through game 2 , on move 37 , AlphaGo made a move so
surprising , so un-human , that it stunned professional players watching the match . 
Seemingly ignoring a contest between white and black stones that was under
way in one corner of the board , AlphaGo played a black stone far away in a
nearly empty part of the board . It was a surprising move not seen in professional
games , so much so that one commentator remarked ,  “ I thought it was a mistake .  ” 
Lee Sedol was similarly so taken by surprise he got up and left the room . After
he returned , he took fifteen minutes to formulate his response . AlphaGo ’ s move
wasn ’ t a mistake . European go champion Fan Hui , who had lost to AlphaGo a
few months earlier in a closed-door match , said at first the move surprised him
as well , and then he saw its merit .  “ It ’ s not a human move ,  ” he said .  “ I ’ ve never
seen a human play this move . So beautiful .  ” Not only did the move feel like a
move no human player would never make , it was a move no human player
probably would never make . AlphaGo rated the odds that a human would have
made that move as 1 in 10 , 000 . Yet AlphaGo made the move anyway . AlphaGo
went on to win game 2 and afterward Lee Sedol said ,  “ I really feel that AlphaGo
played the near perfect game .  ” After losing game 3 , thus giving AlphaGo the
win for the match , Lee Sedol told the audience at a press conference ,  “ I kind of
felt powerless .  ” 
AlphaGo ’ s triumph over Lee Sedol has implications far beyond the game of
go . More than just another realm of competition in which AIs now top humans , 
the way DeepMind trained AlphaGo is what really matters . As explained in the
DeepMind blog post ,  “ AlphaGo isn ’ t just an ‘ expert ’ system built with handcrafted rules ; instead it uses general machine learning techniques to figure out
for itself how to win at Go .  ” DeepMind didn ’ t program rules for how to win at
go . They simply fed a neural network massive amounts of data and let it learn all
on its own , and some of the things it learned were surprising . 
In 2017 , DeepMind surpassed their earlier success with a new version of
AlphaGo . With an updated algorithm , AlphaGo Zero learned to play go without
any human data to start . With only access to the board and the rules of the game , 
AlphaGo Zero taught itself to play . Within a mere three days of self-play , 
AlphaGo Zero had eclipsed the previous version that had beaten Lee Sedol , 
defeating it 100 games to 0 . 
These deep learning techniques can solve a variety of other problems . In
2015 , even before DeepMind debuted AlphaGo , DeepMind trained a neural
network to play Atari games . Given only the pixels on the screen and the game
score as input and told to maximize the score , the neural network was able to
learn to play Atari games at the level of a professional human video game tester . 
Most importantly , the same neural network architecture could be applied across
a vast array of Atari games—forty-nine games in all . Each game had to be
individually learned , but the same neural network architecture applied to any
game ; the researchers didn ’ t need to create a customized network design for each
game . 
The AIs being developed for go or Atari are still narrow AI systems . Once
trained , the AIs are purpose-built tools to solve narrow problems . AlphaGo can
beat any human at go , but it can ’ t play a different game , drive a car , or make a
cup of coffee . Still , the tools used to train AlphaGo are generalizable tools that
can be used to build any number of special-purpose narrow AIs to solve various
problems . Deep neural networks have been used to solve other thorny problems
that have bedeviled the AI community for years , notably speech recognition and
visual object recognition . 
A deep neural network was the tool used by the research team I witnessed
autonomously find the crashed helicopter . The researcher on the project
explained that he had taken an existing neural network that had already been
trained on object recognition , stripped off the top few layers , then retrained the
network to identify helicopters , which hadn ’ t originally been in its image
dataset . The neural network he was using was running off of a laptop connected
to the drone , but it could just as easily have been running off of a Raspberry Pi , a
$40 credit-card sized processor , riding on board the drone itself . 
All of these technologies are coming from outside the defense sector . They
are being developed at places like Google , Microsoft , IBM , and university
research labs . In fact , programs like DARPA ’ s TRACE are not necessarily
intended to invent new machine learning techniques , but rather import existing
techniques into the defense sector and apply them to military problems . These
methods are widely available to those who know how to use them . I asked the
researcher behind the helicopter-hunting drone : Where did he get the initial
neural network that he started with , the one that was already trained to recognize
other images that weren ’ t helicopters ? He looked at me like I was either halfcrazy or stupid . He got it online , of course . 
NEURAL NETS FOR EVERYONE
I feel I should confess that I ’ m not a technologist . In my job as a defense analyst , 
I research military technology to make recommendations about where the U . S . 
military should invest to keep its edge on the battlefield , but I don ’ t build things . 
My undergraduate degree was in science and engineering , but I ’ ve done nothing
even remotely close to engineering since then . To claim my programming skills
were rusty would be to imply that at one point in time they existed . The extent of
my computer programming knowledge is a one-semester introductory course in
C +  + in college . 
Nevertheless , I went online to check out the open-source software database
the researcher pointed me to : TensorFlow . TensorFlow is an open-source AI
library developed by Google AI researchers . With TensorFlow , Google
researchers have taken what they have been learning with deep neural networks
and passed it on to the rest of the world . On TensorFlow , not only can you
download already trained neural networks and software for building your own , 
there are reams of tutorials on how to teach yourself deep learning techniques . 
For users new to machine learning , there are basic tutorials on classic machine
learning problems . These tools make neural networks accessible to computer
programmers with little to no experience in machine learning . TensorFlow
makes neural networks easy , even fun . A tutorial called Playground 
( playground . tensorflow . org ) allows users to modify and train a neural network
through a point-and-click interface in the browser . No programming skills are
required at all . 
Once I got into Playground , I was hooked . Reading about what neural
networks could do was one thing . Building your own and training it on data was
entirely another . Hours of time evaporated as I tinkered with the simple network
in my browser . The first challenge was training the network to learn to predict
the simple datasets used in Playground—patterns of orange and blue dots across
a two-dimensional grid . Once I ’ d mastered that , I worked to make the leanest
network I could , composed of the fewest neurons in the fewest number of layers
that could still accurately make predictions .  ( Reader challenge : once you ’ ve
mastered the easy datasets , try the spiral .  ) 
With the Playground tutorial , the concept of neural nets becomes accessible
to someone with no programming skills at all . Using Playground is no more
complicated than solving an easy-level Sudoku puzzle and within the range of an
average seven-year-old . Playground won ’ t let the user build a custom neural net
to solve novel problems . It ’ s an illustration of what neural nets can do to help
users see their potential . Within other parts of TensorFlow , though , lie more
powerful tools to use existing neural networks or design custom ones , all within
reach of a reasonably competent programmer in Python or C +  +  . 
TensorFlow includes extensive tutorials on convolutional neural nets , the
particular type of neural network used for computer vision . In short order , I
found a neural network available for download that was already trained to
recognize images . The neural network Inception-v3 is trained on the ImageNet
dataset , a standard database of images used by programmers . Inception-v3 can
classify images into one of 1 , 000 categories , such as “ gazelle ,  ”  “ canoe ,  ” or 
 “ volcano .  ” As it turns out , none of the categories Inception-v3 is trained on are
those that could be used to identify people , such as “ human ,  ”  “ person ,  ”  “ man ,  ” 
or “ woman .  ” So one could not , strictly speaking , use this particular neural
network to power an autonomous weapon that targets people . Still , I found this
to be little consolation . ImageNet isn ’ t the only visual object classification
database used for machine learning online and others , such as the Pascal Visual
Object Classes database , include “ person ” as a category . It took me all of about
ten seconds on Google to find trained neural networks available for download
that could find human faces , determine age and gender , or label human
emotions . All of the tools to build an autonomous weapon that could target
people on its own were readily available online . 
This was , inevitably , one of the consequences of the AI revolution . AI
technology was powerful . It could be used for good purposes or bad purposes ; 
that was up to the people using it . Much of the technology behind AI was
software , which meant it could be copied practically for free . It could be
downloaded at the click of a button and could cross borders in an instant . Trying
to contain software would be pointless . Pandora ’ s box has already been opened . 
ROBOTS EVERYWHERE
Just because the tools needed to make an autonomous weapon were widely
available didn ’ t tell me how easy or hard it would be for someone to actually do
it . What I wanted to understand was how widespread the technological knowhow was to build a homemade robot that could harness state-of-the-art
techniques in deep learning computer vision . Was this within reach of a DIY
drone hobbyist or did these techniques require a PhD in computer science ? 
There is a burgeoning world of robot competitions among high school
students , and this seemed like a great place to get a sense of what an amateur
robot enthusiast could do . The FIRST Robotics Competition is one such
competition that includes 75 , 000 students organized in over 3 , 000 teams across
twenty-four countries . To get a handle on what these kids might be able to do , I
headed to my local high school . 
Less than a mile from my house is Thomas Jefferson High School for
Science and Technology— “ TJ ,  ” for short . TJ is a math and science magnet
school ; kids have to apply to get in , and they are afforded opportunities above
and beyond what most high school students have access to . But they ’ re still high
school students—not world-class hackers or DARPA whizzes . 
In the Automation and Robotics Lab at TJ , students get hands-on experience
building and programming robots . When I visited , two dozen students sat at
workbenches hunched over circuit boards or silently tapping away at computers . 
Behind them on the edges of the workshop lay discarded pieces of robots , like
archeological relics of students ’ projects from semesters prior . On a shelf sat 
 “ Roby Feliks ,  ” the Rubik ’ s Cube solving robot . Nearby , a Raspberry Pi
processor sat atop a plastic musical recorder , wires running from the circuit
board to the instrument like some musical cyborg . Somewhat randomly in the
center of the floor sat a half-disassembled robot , the remnants of TJ ’ s admission
to the FIRST competition that year . Charles Dela Cuesta , the teacher in charge
of the lab , apologized for the mess , but it was exactly what I imagined a robot
lab should look like . 
Dela Cuesta came across as the kind of teacher you pray your own children
have . Laid back and approachable , he seemed more like a lovable assistant coach
than an aloof disciplinarian . The robotics lab had the feel of a place where
students learn by doing , rather than sitting and copying down equations from a
whiteboard . 
Which isn ’ t to say that there wasn ’ t a whiteboard . There was . It sat in a
corner amid a pile of other robotic projects , with circuit boards and wires draped
over it . Students were designing an automatic whiteboard with a robot arm that
could zip across the surface and sketch out designs from a computer . On the
whiteboard were a series of inhumanly straight lines sketched out by the robot . It
was at this point that I wanted to quit my job and sign up for a robotics class at
TJ . 
Dela Cuesta explained that all students at TJ must complete a robotics
project in their freshmen year as part of their required coursework .  “ Every
student in the building has had to design a small robot that is capable of
navigating a maze and performing some sort of obstacle avoidance ,  ” he said . 
Students are given a schematic of what the maze looks like so they get to choose
how to solve the problem , whether to preprogram the robot ’ s moves or take the
harder path of designing an autonomous robot that can figure it out on its own . 
After this required class , TJ offers two additional semesters of robotics electives , 
which can be complemented with up to five computer science courses in which
students learn Java , C +  +  , and Python . These are vital programming tools for
using robot control systems , like the Raspberry Pi processor , which runs on
Linux and takes commands in Python . Dela Cuesta explained that even though
most students come into TJ with no programming experience , many learn fast
and some even take computer science courses over the summer to get ahead .  
 “ They can pretty much program in anything—Java , Python .  .  .  . They ’ re just all
over the place ,  ” he said . Their senior year , all students at TJ must complete a
senior project in an area of their choosing . Some of the most impressive robotics
projects are those done by seniors who choose to make robotics their area of
focus . Next to the whiteboard stood a bicycle propped up on its kickstand . A
large blue box sat inside the frame , wires snaking out of it to the gear shifters . 
Dela Cuesta explained it was an automatic gear shifter for the bike . The box
senses when it is time to shift and does so automatically , like an automatic
transmission on a car . 
The students ’ projects have been getting better over the years , Dela Cuesta
explained , as they are able to harness more advanced open-source components
and software . A few years ago , a class project to create a robot tour guide for the
school took two years to complete . Now , the timeline has been shortened to nine
weeks .  “ The stuff that was impressive to me five , six years ago we could
accomplish in a quarter of the time now . It just blows my mind ,  ” he said . Still , 
Dela Cuesta pushes students to build things custom themselves rather than use
existing components .  “ I like to have the students , as much as possible , build
from scratch .  ” Partly , this is because it ’ s often easier to fit custom-built hardware
into a robot , an approach that is possible because of the impressive array of tools
Dela Cuesta has in his shop . Along a back wall were five 3-D printers , two laser
cutters to make custom parts , and a mill to etch custom circuit boards . An even
more important reason to have students do things themselves is they learn more
that way .  “ Custom is where I want to go ,  ” Dela Cuesta said .  “ They learn a lot
more from it . It ’ s not just kind of this black box magic thing they plug in and it
works . They have to really understand what they ’ re doing in order to make these
things work .  ” 
Across the hall in the computer systems lab , I saw the same ethos on display . 
The teachers emphasized having students do things themselves so they were
learning the fundamental concepts , even if that meant re-solving problems that
have already been solved . Repackaging open-source software isn ’ t what the
teachers are after . That isn ’ t to say that students aren ’ t learning from the
explosion in open-source neural network software . On one teacher ’ s desk sat a
copy of Jeff Heaton ’ s Artificial Intelligence for Humans , Volume 3 : Deep
Learning and Neural Networks .  ( This title begs the uncomfortable question
whether there is a parallel course of study , Artificial Intelligence for Machines , 
where machines learn to program other machines . The answer , I suppose , is 
 “ Not yet .  ”  ) Students are learning how to work with neural networks , but they ’ re
doing so from the bottom up . A junior explained to me how he trained a neural
network to play tic-tac-toe—a problem that was solved over fifteen years ago , 
but remains a seminal coding problem . Next year , TJ will offer a course in
computer vision that will cover convolutional neural networks . 
Maybe it ’ s a cliché to say that the projects students were working on are
mind-blowing , but I was floored by the things I saw TJ students doing . One
student was disassembling a Keurig machine and turning it into a net-enabled
coffeemaker so it could join the Internet of Things . Wires snaked through it as
though the internet was physically infiltrating the coffeemaker , like Star Trek ’ s
Borg . Another student was tinkering with something that looked like a cross
between a 1980s Nintendo Power Glove and an Apple smartwatch . He explained
it was a “ gauntlet ,  ” like that used by Iron Man . When I stared at him blankly , he
explained ( in that patient explaining-to-an-old-person voice that young people
use ) that a gauntlet is the name for the wrist-mounted control that Iron Man uses
to fly his suit .  “ Oh , yeah . That ’ s cool ,  ” I said , clearly not getting it . I don ’ t feel
like I need the full functionality of my smartphone mounted on my wrist , but
then again I wouldn ’ t have thought ten years ago that I needed a touchscreen
smartphone on my person at all times in the first place . Technology has a way of
surprising us . Today ’ s technology landscape is a democratized one , where gamechanging innovations don ’ t just come out of tech giants like Google and Apple
but can come from anyone , even high-school students . The AI revolution isn ’ t
something that is happening out there , only in top-tier research labs . It ’ s
happening everywhere . 
THE EVERYONE REVOLUTION
I asked Brandon Tseng from Shield AI where this path to ever-greater autonomy
was taking us . He said ,  “ I don ’ t think we ’ re ever going to give [ robots ] complete
autonomy . Nor do I think we should give them complete autonomy .  ” On one
level , it ’ s reassuring to know that Tseng , like nearly everyone I met working on
military robotics , saw a limit to how much autonomy we should give machines . 
Reasonable people might disagree on where that limit is , and for some people
autonomous weapons that search for and engage targets within narrow humandefined parameters might be acceptable , but everyone I spoke with agreed there
should be some limits . But the scary thing is that reasonableness on the part of
Tseng and other engineers may not be enough . What ’ s to stop a technologically
inclined terrorist from building a swarm of people-hunting autonomous weapons
and letting them loose in a crowded area ? It might take some engineering and
some time , but the underlying technological know-how is readily available . We
are entering a world where the technology to build lethal autonomous weapons is
available not only to nation-states but to individuals as well . That world is not in
the distant future . It ’ s already here . 
What we do with the technology is an open question . What would be the
consequence of a world of autonomous weapons ? Would they lead to a
robutopia or robopocalypse ? Writers have pondered this question in science
fiction for decades , and their answers vary wildly . The robots of Isaac Asimov ’ s
books are mostly benevolent partners to humans , helping to protect and guide
humanity . Governed by the Three Laws of Robotics , they are incapable of
harming humans . In Star Wars , droids are willing servants of humans . In the
Matrix trilogy , robots enslave humans , growing them in pods and drawing on
their body heat for power . In the Terminator series , Skynet strikes in one swift
blow to exterminate humanity after it determines humans are a threat to its
existence . 
We can ’ t know with any certainty what a future of autonomous weapons
would look like , but we do have better tools than science fiction to guess at what
promise and perils they might bring . Humanity ’ s past and present experiences
with autonomy in the military and other settings point to the potential benefits
and dangers of autonomous weapons . These lessons allow us to peer into a
murky future and , piece by piece , begin to discern the shape of things to come . 
PART III
Runaway Gun
9
ROBOTS RUN AMOK
FAILURE IN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
March 22 , 2003—The system said to fire . The radars had detected an
incoming tactical ballistic missile , or TBM , probably a Scud missile of the type
Saddam had used to harass coalition forces during the first Gulf War . This was
their job , shooting down the missile . They needed to protect the other soldiers on
the ground , who were counting on them . It was an unfamiliar set of equipment ; 
they were supporting an unfamiliar unit ; they didn ’ t have the intel they needed . 
But this was their job . The weight of the decision rested on a twenty-two-yearold second lieutenant fresh out of training . She weighed the available evidence . 
She made the best call she could : fire . 
With a BOOM-ROAR-WOOSH , the Patriot PAC-2 missile left the launch
tube , lit its engine , and soared into the sky to take down its target . The missile
exploded . Impact . The ballistic missile disappeared from their screens : their first
kill of the war . Success . 
From the moment the Patriot unit left the States , circumstances had been
against them . First , they ’ d fallen in on a different , older , set of equipment than
what they ’ d trained on . Then once in theater , they were detached from their
parent battalion and attached to a new battalion whom they hadn ’ t worked with
before . The new battalion was using the newer model equipment , which meant
their old equipment ( which they weren ’ t fully trained on in the first place ) 
couldn ’ t communicate with the rest of the battalion . They were in the dark . Their
systems couldn ’ t connect to the larger network , depriving them of vital
information . All they had was a radio . 
But they were soldiers , and they soldiered on . Their job was to protect
coalition troops against Iraqi missile attacks , and so they did . They sat in their
command trailer , with outdated gear and imperfect information , and they made
the call . When they saw the missiles , they took the shots . They protected people . 
The next night , at 1 : 30 a . m .  , there was an attack on a nearby base . A U . S . 
Army sergeant threw a grenade into a command tent , killing one soldier and
wounding fifteen . He was promptly detained but his motives were unclear . Was
this the work of one disgruntled soldier or was he an infiltrator ? Was this the
first of a larger plot ? Word of the attack spread over the radio . Soldiers were sent
to guard the Patriot battery ’ s outer perimeter in case follow-on attacks came , 
leaving only three people in the command trailer , the lieutenant and two enlisted
soldiers . 
Elsewhere that same night , further north over Iraq , British Flight Lieutenant
Kevin Main turned around his Tornado GR4A fighter jet and headed back
toward Kuwait , his mission for the day complete . In the back seat as navigator
was Flight Lieutenant Dave Williams . What Main and Williams didn ’ t know as
they rocketed back toward friendly lines was that a crucial piece of equipment , 
the identification friend or foe ( IFF ) signal , wasn ’ t on . The IFF was supposed to
broadcast a signal to other friendly aircraft and ground radars to let them know
their Tornado was friendly and not to fire . But the IFF wasn ’ t working . The
reason why is still mysterious . It could be because Main and Williams turned it
off while over Iraqi territory so as not to give away their position and forgot to
turn it back on when returning to Kuwait . It could be because the system simply
broke , possibly from a power supply failure . The IFF signal had been tested by
maintenance personnel prior to the aircraft taking off , so it should have been
functional , but for whatever reason it wasn ’ t broadcasting . 
As Main and Williams began their descent toward Ali Al Salem air base , the
Patriot battery tasked with defending coalition bases in Kuwait sent out a radar
signal into the sky , probing for Iraqi missiles . The radar signal bounced off the
front of Main and Williams ’ aircraft and reflected back , where it was received by
the Patriot ’ s radar dish . Unfortunately , the Patriot ’ s computer didn ’ t register the
radar reflection from the Tornado as an aircraft . Because of the aircraft ’ s
descending profile , the Patriot ’ s computer tagged the radar signal as coming
from an anti-radiation missile . In the Patriot ’ s command trailer , the humans
didn ’ t know that a friendly aircraft was coming in for a landing . Their screen
showed a radar-hunting enemy missile homing in on the Patriot battery . 
The Patriot operators ’ mission was to shoot down ballistic missiles , which
are different from anti-radiation missiles . It would be hard for a radar to confuse
an aircraft flying level with a ballistic missile , which follows a parabolic
trajectory through the sky like a baseball . Anti-radiation missiles are different . 
They have a descending flight profile , like an aircraft coming in on landing . 
Anti-radiation missiles home on radars and could be deadly to the Patriot . 
Shooting them wasn ’ t the Patriot operators ’ primary job , but they were
authorized to engage if the missile appeared to be homing in on their radar . 
The Patriot operators saw the missile headed toward their radar and weighed
their decision . The Patriot battery was operating alone , without the ability to
connect to other radars on the network because of their outdated equipment . 
Deprived of the ability to see other radar inputs directly , the lieutenant called
over the radio to the other Patriot units . Did they see an anti-radiation missile ? 
No one else saw it , but this meant little , since other radars may not have been in
a position to see it . The Tornado ’ s IFF signal , which would have identified the
blip on their radar as a friendly aircraft , wasn ’ t broadcasting . Even if it had been
working , as it turns out , the Patriot wouldn ’ t have been able to see the signal—
the codes for the IFF hadn ’ t been loaded into the Patriot ’ s computers . The IFF , 
which was supposed to be a backup safety measure against friendly fire , was
doubly broken . 
There were no reports of coalition aircraft in the area . There was nothing at
all to indicate that the blip that appeared on their scopes as an anti-radiation
missile might , in fact , be a friendly aircraft . They had seconds to decide . 
They took the shot . The missile disappeared from their scope . It was a hit . 
Their shift ended . Another successful day . 
Elsewhere , Main and Williams ’ wingman landed in Kuwait , but Main and
Williams never returned . The call went out : there is a missing Tornado aircraft . 
As the sun came up over the desert , people began to put two and two together . 
The Patriot had shot down one of their own . 
U . S . Army Patriot Operations The Patriot air and missile defense system is used to counter a range of
threats from enemy aircraft and missiles . 
The Army opened an investigation , but there was still a war to fight . The
lieutenant stayed at her post ; she had a job to do . The Army needed her to do that
job , to protect other soldiers from Saddam ’ s missiles . Confusion and chaos are
unfortunate realities of war . Unless the investigation determined that she was
negligent , the Army needed her in the fight . More of Saddam ’ s missiles were
coming . 
The very next night , another enemy ballistic missile popped up on their
scope . They took the shot . Success . It was a clean hit—another enemy ballistic
missile down . The same Patriot battery had two more successful ballistic missile
shootdowns before the end of the war . In all , they were responsible for 45
percent of all successful ballistic missile engagements in the war . Later , the
investigation cleared the lieutenant of wrongdoing . She made the best call with
the information she had . 
Other Patriot units were fighting their own struggle against the fog of war . 
The day after the Tornado shoot down , a different Patriot unit got into a friendly
fire engagement with a U . S . F-16 aircraft flying south of Najaf in Iraq . This
time , the aircraft shot first . The F-16 fired off a radar-hunting AGM-88 highspeed anti-radiation missile . The missile zeroed in on the Patriot ’ s radar and
knocked it out of commission . The Patriot crew was unharmed—a near miss . 
After these incidents , a number of safety measures were immediately put in
place to prevent further fratricides . The Patriot has both a manual 
( semiautonomous ) and auto-fire ( supervised autonomous ) mode , which can be
kept at different settings for different threats . In manual mode , a human is
required to approve an engagement before the system will launch . In auto-fire
mode , if there is an incoming threat that meets its target parameters , the system
will automatically engage the threat on its own . 
Because ballistic missiles often afford very little reaction time before impact , 
Patriots sometimes operated in auto-fire mode for tactical ballistic missiles . Now
that the Army knew the Patriot might misidentify a friendly aircraft as an antiradiation missile , however , they ordered Patriot units to operate in manual mode
for anti-radiation missiles . As an additional safety , systems were now kept in 
 “ standby ” status so they could track targets , but could not fire without a human
bringing the system back to “ operate ” status . Thus , in order to fire on an antiradiation missile , two steps were needed : bringing the launchers to operate status
and authorizing the system to fire on the target . Ideally , this would prevent
another fratricide like the Tornado shootdown . 
Despite these precautions , a little over a week later on April 2 , disaster struck
again . A Patriot unit operating north of Kuwait on the road to Baghdad picked
up an inbound ballistic missile . Shooting down ballistic missiles was their job . 
Unlike the anti-radiation missile that the earlier Patriot unit had fired on—which
turned out to be a Tornado—there was no evidence to suggest ballistic missiles
might be misidentified as aircraft . 
OBSERVE ORIENT DECIDE ACT
What is it ? 
Whose is it ? 
Radar detects and
classifies object
Humans apply outside
information and
context
Is it hostile ? 
Is it a valid target ? 
Establish situational
awareness
Apply rules of
engagement
Engage ? 
Decision whether or
not to fire
Manual mode 
( semiautonomous )  : 
Human operator must
authorize engagement
or system will not fire
Auto-fire mode 
( supervised
autonomous )  : System
will fire unless human
operator halts
engagement
System fires and
missile maneuvers to
target
Human operator can
choose to abort missile
while in flight
Patriot Decision-Making Process The OODA decision-making process for a Patriot system . In manual
mode , the human operator must take a positive action in order for the system to fire . In auto-fire mode , the
human supervises the system and can intervene if necessary , but the system will fire on its own if the
human does not intervene . Auto-fire mode is vital for defending against short-warning attacks where there
may be little time to make a decision before impact . In both modes , the human can still abort the missile
while in flight . 
What the operators didn ’ t know—what they could not have known—was
that there was no missile . There wasn ’ t even an aircraft misidentified as a
missile . There was nothing . The radar track was false , a “ ghost track ” likely
caused by electromagnetic interference between their radar and another nearby
Patriot radar . The Patriot units supporting the U . S . advance north to Baghdad
were operating in a nonstandard configuration . Units were spread in a line southto-north along the main highway to Baghdad instead of the usual widely
distributed pattern they would adopt to cover an area . This may have caused
radars to overlap and interfere . 
But the operators in the Patriot trailer didn ’ t know this . All they saw was a
ballistic missile headed their way . In response , the commander ordered the
battery to bring its launchers from “ standby ” to “ operate .  ” 
The unit was operating in manual mode for anti-radiation missiles , but autofire mode for ballistic missiles . As soon as the launcher became operational , the
auto-fire system engaged : BOOM-BOOM . Two PAC-3 missiles launched
automatically . 
The two PAC-3 missiles steered toward the incoming ballistic missile , or at
least to the spot where the ground-based radar told them it should be . The
missiles activated their seekers to look for the incoming ballistic missile , but
there was no missile . 
Tragically , the missiles ’ seekers did find something : a U . S . Navy F / A-18C
Hornet fighter jet nearby . The jet was piloted by Lieutenant Nathan White , who
was simply in the wrong place at the wrong time . White ’ s F-18 was squawking
IFF and he showed up on the Patriot ’ s radar as an aircraft . It didn ’ t matter . The
PAC-3 missiles locked onto White ’ s aircraft . White saw the missiles coming and
called it out over the radio . He took evasive action , but there was nothing he
could do . Seconds later , both missiles struck his aircraft , killing him instantly . 
ASSESSING THE PATRIOT ’ S PERFORMANCE
The Patriot fratricides are an example of the risks of operating complex , highly
automated lethal systems . In a strict operational sense , the Patriot units
accomplished their mission . Over sixty Patriot fire units were deployed during
the initial phase of the war , forty from the United States and twenty-two from
four coalition nations . Their mission was to protect ground troops from Iraqi
ballistic missiles , which they did . Nine Iraqi ballistic missiles were fired at
coalition forces ; all were successfully engaged by Patriots . No coalition troops
were harmed from Iraqi missiles . A Defense Science Board Task Force on the
Patriot ’ s performance concluded that , with respect to missile defense , the Patriot
was a “ substantial success .  ” 
On the other hand , in addition to these nine successful engagements , Patriots
were involved in three fratricides : two incidents in which Patriots shot down
friendly aircraft , killing the pilots , and a third incident in which an F-16 fired on
a Patriot . Thus , of the twelve total engagements involving Patriots , 25 percent
were fratricides , an “ unacceptable ” fratricide rate according to Army
investigators . 
The reasons for the Patriot fratricides were a complex mix of human error , 
improper testing , poor training , and unforeseen interactions on the battlefield . 
Some problems were known—IFF was well understood to be an imperfect
solution for preventing fratricides . Other problems , such as the potential for the
Patriot to misclassify an aircraft as an anti-radiation missile , had been identified
during operational testing but had not been corrected and were not included in
operator training . Still other issues , such as the potential for electromagnetic
interference to cause a false radar track , were novel and unexpected . Some of
these complications were preventable , but others were not . War entails
uncertainty . Even the best training and operational testing can only approximate
the actual conditions of war . Inevitably , soldiers will face wartime conditions
where the environment , adversary innovation , and simply the chaos , confusion , 
and violence of war all contribute to unexpected challenges . Many things that
seem simple in training often look far different in the maw of combat . 
One thing that did not happen and was not a cause of the Patriot fratricides is
that the Patriot system did not fail , per se . It didn ’ t break . It didn ’ t blow a fuse . 
The system performed its function : it tracked incoming targets and , when
authorized , shot them down . Also , in both instances a human was required to
give the command to fire or at least to bring the launchers to operate . When this
lethal , highly automated system was placed in the hands of operators who did
not fully understand its capabilities and limitations , however , it turned deadly . 
Not because the operators were negligent . No one was found to be at fault in
either incident . It would be overly simplistic to blame the fratricides on “ human
error .  ” Instead , what happened was more insidious . Army investigators
determined the Patriot community had a culture of “ trusting the system without
question .  ” According to Army researchers , the Patriot operators , while
nominally in control , exhibited automation bias : an “ unwarranted and uncritical
trust in automation . In essence , control responsibility is ceded to the machine .  ” 
There may have been a human “ in the loop ,  ” but the human operators didn ’ t
question the machine when they should have . They didn ’ t exercise the kind of
judgment Stanislav Petrov did when he questioned the signals his system was
giving him regarding a false launch of U . S . nuclear missiles . The Patriot
operators trusted the machine , and it was wrong . 
ROBUTOPIA VS . ROBOPOCALYPSE
We have two intuitions when it comes to autonomous systems , intuitions that
come partly from science fiction but also from our everyday experiences with
phones , computers , cars , and myriad other computerized devices . 
The first intuition is that autonomous systems are reliable and introduce
greater precision . Just as autopilots have improved air travel safety , automation
can also improve safety and reliability in many other domains . Humans are
terrible drivers , for example , killing more than 30 , 000 people a year in the
United States alone ( roughly the equivalent of a 9 / 11 attack every month )  . Even
without fully autonomous cars , more advanced vehicle autopilots that allow cars
to drive themselves under most conditions could dramatically improve safety
and save lives . 
However , we have another instinct when it comes to autonomous systems , 
and that is one of robots run amok , autonomous systems that slip out of human
control and result in disastrous outcomes . These fears are fed to us through a
steady diet of dystopian science fiction stories in which murderous AIs turn on
humans , from 2001 : A Space Odyssey ’ s HAL 9000 to Ex Machina ’ s Ava . But
these intuitions also come from our everyday experiences with simple automated
devices . Anyone who has ever been frustrated with an automated telephone call
support helpline , an alarm clock mistakenly set to “ p . m .  ” instead of “ a . m .  ,  ” or
any of the countless frustrations that come with interacting with computers , has
experienced the problem of “ brittleness ” that plagues automated systems . 
Autonomous systems will do precisely what they are programmed to do , and it is
this quality that makes them both reliable and maddening , depending on whether
what they were programmed to do was the right thing at that point in time . 
Both of our intuitions are correct . With proper design , testing , and use , 
autonomous systems can often perform tasks far better than humans . They can
be faster , more reliable , and more precise . However , if they are placed into
situations for which they were not designed , if they aren ’ t fully tested , if
operators aren ’ t properly trained , or if the environment changes , then
autonomous systems can fail . When they do fail , they often fail badly . Unlike
humans , autonomous systems lack the ability to step outside their instructions
and employ “ common sense ” to adapt to the situation at hand . 
This problem of brittleness was highlighted during a telling moment in the
2011 Jeopardy ! Challenge in which IBM ’ s Watson AI took on human Jeopardy
champions Ken Jennings and Brad Rutter . Toward the end of the first game , 
Watson momentarily stumbled in its rout of Jennings and Rutter in response to a
clue in the “ Name the Decade ” category . The clue was ,  “ The first modern
crossword is published and Oreo cookies are introduced .  ” Jennings rang in first
with the answer ,  “ What are the 20s ?  ” Wrong , said host Alex Trebek . 
Immediately afterward , Watson rang in and gave the same answer ,  “ What is
1920s ?  ” A befuddled Trebek testily replied ,  “ No , Ken said that .  ” 
I ’ m not particularly good at Jeopardy , but even I knew ,  “ What are the
1920s ?  ” was the wrong answer once Jennings guessed wrong .  ( The correct
answer is the 1910s .  ) Watson hadn ’ t been programmed to listen to other
contestants ’ wrong answers and adjust accordingly , however . Processing
Jennings ’ answer was outside of the bounds of Watson ’ s design . Watson was
superb at answering Jeopardy questions under most conditions , but its design
was brittle . When an atypical event occurred that Watson ’ s design didn ’ t account
for , such as Ken Jennings getting a wrong answer , Watson couldn ’ t adapt on the
fly . As a result , Watson ’ s performance suddenly plummeted from superhuman to
super-dumb . 
Brittleness can be managed when the person using an autonomous system
understands the boundaries of the system—what it can and cannot do . The user
can either steer the system away from situations outside the bounds of its design
or knowingly account for and accept the risks of failure . In this case , Watson ’ s
designers understood this limitation . They just didn ’ t think that the ability to
learn from other contestants ’ wrong answers would be important .  “ We just
didn ’ t think it would ever happen ,  ” one of Watson ’ s programmers said
afterward . Watson ’ s programmers were probably right to discount the
importance of this ability . The momentary stumble proved inconsequential . 
Watson handily defeated its human counterparts . 
Problems can arise when human users don ’ t anticipate these moments of
brittleness , however . This was the case with the Patriot fratricides . The system
had vulnerabilities—misclassifying an anti-radiation missile as an aircraft , IFF
failures , and electromagnetic interference causing “ ghost track ” ballistic missiles
—that the human operators were either unaware of or didn ’ t sufficiently account
for . As a result , the human user ’ s expectations and the system ’ s actual behavior
were not in alignment . The operators thought the system was targeting missiles
when it was actually targeting aircraft . 
AUTONOMY AND RISK
One of the ways to compensate for the brittle nature of automated systems is to
retain tight control over their operation . If the system fails , humans can rapidly
intervene to correct it or halt its operation . Tighter human control reduces the
autonomy , or freedom , of the machine . 
Immediate human intervention is possible for semiautonomous and humansupervised systems . Just because humans can intervene , however , doesn ’ t mean
they always do so when they should . In the case of the Patriot fratricides , 
humans were “ in the loop ,  ” but they didn ’ t sufficiently question the automation . 
Humans can ’ t act as an independent fail-safe if they cede their judgment to the
machine . 
Effective human intervention may be even more challenging in supervised
autonomous systems , where the system does not pause to wait for human input . 
The human ’ s ability to actually regain control of the system in real time depends
heavily on the speed of operations , the amount of information available to the
human , and any time delays between the human ’ s actions and the system ’ s
response . Giving a driver the ability to grab the wheel of an autonomous vehicle
traveling at highway speeds in dense traffic , for example , is merely the illusion
of control , particularly if the operator is not paying attention . This appears to
have been the case in a 2016 fatality involving a Tesla Model S that crashed
while driving on autopilot . 
For fully autonomous systems , the human is out of the loop and cannot
intervene at all , at least for some period of time . This means that if the system
fails or the context changes , the result could be a runaway autonomous process
beyond human control with no ability to halt or correct it . 
This danger of autonomous systems is best illustrated not with a science
fiction story , but with a Disney cartoon . The Sorcerer ’ s Apprentice is an
animated short in Disney ’ s 1940 film Fantasia . In the story , which is an
adaptation of an eighteenth-century poem by Goethe , Mickey Mouse plays the
apprentice of an old sorcerer . When the sorcerer leaves for the day , Mickey
decides to use his novice magic to automate his chores . Mickey enchants a
broomstick , causing it to sprout arms and come to life . Mickey commands the
broomstick to carry pails of water from the well to a cistern , a chore Mickey is
supposed to be doing . Soon , Mickey is nodding off , his chores automated . 
As Mickey sleeps , the cistern overfills . The job is done , but no one told the
broomstick to stop . Mickey wakes to find the room flooded and the broomstick
fetching more water . He commands the broomstick to halt , but it doesn ’ t
comply . Desperate , Mickey snatches an axe from the wall and chops the
broomstick to pieces , but the splinters reanimate into a horde of broomsticks . 
They march forth to bring even more water , an army of rogue autonomous
agents out of control . Finally , the madness is stopped only by the return of the
sorcerer himself , who disperses the water and halts the broomsticks with a wave
of his arms . 
With the original German poem written in 1797 , The Sorcerer ’ s Apprentice
may be the first example of autonomy displacing jobs . It also shows the danger
of automation . An autonomous system may not perform a task in the manner we
want . This could occur for a variety of reasons : malfunction , user error , 
unanticipated interactions with the environment , or hacking . In the case of
Mickey ’ s problem , the “ software ”  ( instructions ) that he bewitched the
broomstick with were flawed because he didn ’ t specify when to stop . Overfilling
the cistern might have been only a minor annoyance if it had happened once , 
however . A semiautonomous process that paused for Mickey ’ s authorization
after each trip to the well would have been far safer . Having a human “ in the
loop ” would have mitigated the danger from the faulty software design . The
human can act like a circuit breaker , catching harmful events before they
cascade out of control . Making the broomstick fully autonomous without a
human in the loop wasn ’ t the cause of the failure , but it did dramatically increase
the consequences if something went wrong . Because of this potential to have a
runaway process , fully autonomous systems are inherently more hazardous than
semiautonomous ones . 
Putting an autonomous system into operation means accepting the risk that it
may perform its task incorrectly . Fully autonomous systems are not necessarily
more likely to fail than semiautonomous or supervised autonomous ones , but if
they do , the consequences—the potential damage caused by the system—could
be severe . 
TRUST , BUT VERIFY
Activating an autonomous system is an act of trust . The user trusts that the
system will function in the manner that he or she expects . Trust isn ’ t blind faith , 
however . As the Patriot fratricides demonstrated , too much trust can be just as
dangerous as too little . Human users need to trust the system just the right
amount . They need to understand both the capabilities and limitations of the
system . This is why Bradford Tousley from DARPA TTO cited test and
evaluation as his number one concern . A rigorous testing regime can help
designers and operators better understand how the system performs under
realistic conditions . Bob Work similarly told me that test and evaluation was 
 “ central ” to building trustworthy autonomous systems .  “ When you delegate
authority to a machine , it ’ s got to be repeatable ,  ” he said .  “ The same outcome
has to happen over and over and over again .  .  .  . So , what is going to be our test
and evaluation regime for these smarter and smarter weapons to make sure that
the weapon stays within the parameters of what we expect it to do ? That ’ s an
issue .  ” 
The problem is that , even with simulations that test millions of scenarios , 
fully testing all of the possible scenarios a complex autonomous system might
encounter is effectively impossible . There are simply too many possible
interactions between the system and its environment and even within the system
itself . Mickey should have been able to anticipate the cistern overflowing , but
some real-world problems cannot be anticipated . The game of Go has more
possible positions than atoms in the universe , and the real world is far more
complex than Go . A 2015 Air Force report on autonomy bemoaned the problem : 
Traditional methods .  .  . fail to address the complexities associated with autonomy software .  .  . 
There are simply too many possible states and combination of states to be able to exhaustively
test each one . 
In addition to the sheer numerical problem of evaluating all possible
combinations , testing is also limited by the testers ’ imagination . In games like
chess or go , the set of possible actions is limited . In the real world , however , 
autonomous systems will encounter any number of novel situations : new kinds
of human error , unexpected environmental conditions , or creative actions by
adversaries looking to exploit vulnerabilities . If these scenarios can ’ t be
anticipated , they can ’ t be tested . 
Testing is vital to building confidence in how autonomous systems will
behave in real-world environments , but no amount of testing can entirely
eliminate the potential for unanticipated behaviors . Sometimes these
unanticipated behaviors may pleasantly surprise users , like AlphaGo ’ s 1 in
10 , 000 move that stunned human champion Lee Sedol . Sometimes these
unanticipated actions can be negative . During Gary Kasparov ’ s first game
against Deep Blue in 1997 , a bug in Deep Blue caused it to make a nonsense
random move in the forty-fourth move of the game . One of Deep Blue ’ s
programmers later explained ,  “ We had seen it once before , in a test game played
earlier in 1997 , and thought it was fixed . Unfortunately , there was one case that
we had missed .  ” When playing games like Jeopardy , chess , or go , surprising
behaviors may be tolerable , even interesting flukes . When operating high-risk
automated systems where life or death is at stake , unexpected actions can lead to
tragic accidents , such as the Patriot fratricides . 
WHEN ACCIDENTS ARE NORMAL
To better understand the risks of autonomous weapons , I spoke with John Borrie
from the UN Institute for Disarmament Research ( UNIDIR )  . UNIDIR is an
independent research institute within the United Nations that focuses on arms
control and disarmament issues . Borrie authored a recent UNIDIR report on
autonomous weapons and risk and he ’ s worked extensively on arms control and
disarmament issues in a variety of capacities—for the New Zealand government , 
the International Committee of the Red Cross , and UNIDIR—and on a host of
technologies : cryptography , chemical and biological weapons , and autonomy . 
This made him well positioned to understand the relative risks of autonomous
weapons . 
Borrie and I sat down on the sidelines of the UN talks on autonomous
weapons in Geneva in 2016 . Borrie is not an advocate for a preemptive ban on
autonomous weapons and in general has the sober demeanor of a professor , not a
firebrand activist . He speaks passionately ( though in an even-tempered , 
professorial cadence ) in his lilting New Zealand accent . I could imagine myself
pleasantly nodding off in his class , even as he calmly warned of the dangers of
robots run amok .  
 “ With very complex technological systems that are hazardous ,  ” Borrie said ,  
 “ —and I think autonomous weapons fall into that category of hazard because of
their intended lethality .  .  . we have difficulty [ saying ] that we can remove the
risk of unintentional lethal effects .  ” Borrie compared autonomous weapons to
complex systems in other industries . Humans have decades of experience
designing , testing , and operating complex systems for high-risk applications , 
from nuclear power plants to commercial airliners to spacecraft . The good news
is that because of these experiences , there is a robust field of research on how to
improve safety and resiliency in these systems . The bad news is that all of the
experience with complex systems to date suggests that 100 percent error-free
operation is impossible . In sufficiently complex systems , it is impossible to test
every possible system state and combination of states ; some unanticipated
interactions will happen . Failures may be unlikely , but over a long enough
timeline they are inevitable . Engineers refer to these incidents as “ normal
accidents ” because their occurrence is inevitable , even normal , in complex
systems .  “ Why would autonomous systems be any different ?  ” Borrie asked . 
The textbook example of a normal accident is the Three Mile Island nuclear
power plant meltdown in 1979 . The Three Mile Island incident was a “ system
failure ,  ” meaning that the accident was caused by the interaction of many small , 
individually manageable failures interacting in an unexpected and dramatic way , 
much like the Patriot fratricides . The Three Mile Island incident illustrates the
challenge in anticipating and preventing accidents in complex systems . 
The trouble began when moisture from a leaky seal got into an unrelated
system , causing it to shut off water pumps vital to cooling the reactor . An
automated safety kicked in , activating emergency pumps , but a valve needed to
allow water to flow through the emergency cooling system had been left closed . 
Human operators monitoring the reactor were unaware that the valve was shut
because the indicator light on their control panel was obscured by a repair tag for
another , unrelated system . 
Without water , the reactor core temperature rose . The reactor automatically 
 “ scrammed ,  ” dropping graphite control rods into the reactor core to absorb
neutrons and stop the chain reaction . However , the core was still generating heat . 
Rising temperatures activated another automatic safety , a pressure release valve
designed to let off steam before the rising pressure cracked the containment
vessel . 
The valve opened as intended but failed to close . Moreover , the valve ’ s
indicator light also failed , so the plant ’ s operators did not know the valve was
stuck open . Too much steam was released and water levels in the reactor core
fell to dangerous levels . Because water was crucial to cooling the still-hot
nuclear core , another automatic emergency water cooling system kicked in and
the plant ’ s operators also activated an additional emergency cooling system . 
What made these failures catastrophic was the fact that that nuclear reactors
are tightly coupled , as are many other complex machines . Tight coupling is when
an interaction in one component of the system directly and immediately affects
components elsewhere . There is very little “ slack ” in the system—little time or
flexibility for humans to intervene and exercise judgment , bend or break rules , or
alter the system ’ s behavior . In the case of Three Mile Island , the sequence of
failures that caused the initial accident happened within a mere thirteen seconds . 
It is the combination of complexity and tight coupling that makes accidents
an expected , if infrequent , occurrence in such systems . In loosely coupled
complex systems , such as bureaucracies or other human organizations , there is
sufficient slack for humans to adjust to unexpected situations and manage
failures . In tightly coupled systems , however , failures can rapidly cascade from
one subsystem to the next and minor problems can quickly lead to system
breakdown . 
As events unfolded at Three Mile Island , human operators reacted quickly
and automatic safeties kicked in . In their responses , though , we see the
limitations of both humans and automatic safeties . The automatic safeties were
useful , but did not fully address the root causes of the problems—a water
cooling valve that was closed when it should have been open and a pressurerelease valve that was stuck open when it should have been closed . In principle ,  
 “ smarter ” safeties that took into account more variables could have addressed
these issues . Indeed , nuclear reactor safety has improved considerably since
Three Mile Island . 
The human operators faced a different problem , though , one which more
sophisticated automation actually makes harder , not easier : the
incomprehensibility of the system . Because the human operators could not
directly inspect the internal functioning of the reactor core , they had to rely on
indicators to tell them what was occurring . But these indicators were also
susceptible to failure . Some indicators did fail , leaving human operators with a
substantial deficit of information about the system ’ s internal state . The operators
did not discover that the water cooling valve was improperly closed until eight
minutes into the accident and did not discover that the pressure release valve was
stuck open until two hours later . This meant that some of the corrective actions
they took were , in retrospect , incorrect . It would be improper to call their actions 
 “ human error ,  ” however . They were operating with the best information they
had at the time . 
The father of normal accident theory , Charles Perrow , points out that the 
 “ incomprehensibility ” of complex systems themselves is a stumbling block to
predicting and managing normal accidents . The system is so complex that it is
incomprehensible , or opaque , to users and even the system ’ s designers . This
problem is exacerbated in situations in which humans cannot directly inspect the
system , such as a nuclear reactor , but also exists in situations where humans are
physically present . During the Apollo 13 disaster , it took seventeen minutes for
the astronauts and NASA ground control to uncover the source of the instrument
anomalies they were seeing , in spite of the fact that the astronauts were on board
the craft and could “ feel ” how the spacecraft was performing . The astronauts
heard a bang and felt a small jolt from the initial explosion in the oxygen tank
and could tell that they had trouble controlling the attitude ( orientation ) of the
craft . Nevertheless , the system was so complex that vital time was lost as the
astronauts and ground-control experts pored over the various instrument
readings and rapidly-cascading electrical failures before they discovered the root
cause . 
Failures are inevitable in complex , tightly coupled systems and the sheer
complexity of the system inhibits predicting when and how failures are likely to
occur . John Borrie argued that autonomous weapons would have the same
characteristics of complexity and tight coupling , making them susceptible to 
 “ failures .  .  . we hadn ’ t anticipated .  ” Viewed from the perspective of normal
accident theory , the Patriot fratricides were not surprising—they were inevitable . 
THE INEVITABILITY OF ACCIDENTS
The Apollo 13 and Three Mile Island incidents occurred in the 1970s , when
engineers where still learning to manage complex , tightly coupled systems . 
Since then , both nuclear power and space travel have become safer and more
reliable—even if they can never be made entirely safe . 
NASA has seen additional tragic accidents , including some that were not
recoverable as Apollo 13 was . These include the loss of the space shuttles
Challenger ( 1986 ) and Columbia ( 2003 ) and their crews . While these accidents
had discrete causes that could be addressed in later designs ( faulty O-rings and
falling foam insulation , respectively )  , the impossibility of anticipating such
specific failures in advance makes continued accidents inevitable . In 2015 , for
example , the private company SpaceX had a rocket blow up on the launch pad
due to a strut failure that had not been previously identified as a risk . A year
later , another SpaceX rocket exploded during testing due to a problem with
supercooled oxygen that CEO Elon Musk said had “ never been encountered
before in the history of rocketry .  ” 
Nuclear power has grown significantly safer since Three Mile Island , but the
2011 meltdown of the Japanese Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant points to the
limits of safety . Fukushima Daiichi was hardened against earthquakes and
flooding , with backup generators and thirty-foot-high floodwalls . Unfortunately , 
the plant was not prepared for a 9 . 0 magnitude earthquake ( the largest recorded
earthquake to ever hit Japan ) off the coast that caused both a loss in power and a
massive forty-foot-high tsunami . Many safeties worked . The earthquake did not
damage the containment vessels . When the earthquake knocked out primary
power , the reactors automatically scrammed , inserting control rods to stop the
nuclear reaction . Backup diesel generators automatically came online . 
However , the forty-foot-high tsunami wave topped the thirty-foot-high
floodwalls , swamping twelve of thirteen backup diesel generators . Combined
with the loss of primary power from the electrical grid , the plant lost the ability
to pump water to cool the still-hot reactor cores . Despite the heroic efforts of
Japanese engineers to bring in additional generators and pump water into the
overheating reactors , the result was the worst nuclear power accident since
Chernobyl . 
The problem wasn ’ t that Fukushima Daiichi lacked backup safeties . The
problem was a failure to anticipate an unusual environmental condition ( a
massive earthquake off the coast that induced a tsunami ) that caused what
engineers call a common-mode failure—one that simultaneously overwhelmed
two seemingly independent safeties : primary and backup power . Even in fields
where safety is a central concern , such as space travel and nuclear power , 
anticipating all of the possible interactions of the system and its environment is
effectively impossible .  
 “ BOTH SIDES HAVE STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES ” 
Automation plays a mixed role in accidents . Sometimes the brittleness and
inflexibility of automation can cause accidents . In other situations , automation
can help reduce the probability of accidents or mitigate their damage . At
Fukushima Daiichi , automated safeties scrammed the reactor and brought
backup generators online . Is more automation a good or bad thing ? 
Professor William Kennedy of George Mason University has extensive
experience in nuclear reactors and military hardware . Kennedy has a unique
background—thirty years in the Navy ( active and reserve ) on nuclear missile
submarines , combined with twenty-five years working for the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission and the Department of Energy on nuclear reactor safety . 
To top it off , he has a PhD in information technology with a focus on artificial
intelligence . I asked him to help me understand the benefits of humans versus AI
in managing high-risk systems .  
 “ A significant message for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission from Three
Mile Island was that humans were not omnipotent ,  ” Kennedy said .  “ The solution
prior to Three Mile Island was that every time there was a design weakness or a
feature that needed to be processed was to give the operator another gauge , 
another switch , another valve to operate remotely from the control room and
everything would be fine . And Three Mile Island demonstrated that humans
make mistakes .  .  .  . We got to the point where we had over 2 , 000 alarms in the
control rooms , a wall of procedures for each individual alarm . And Three Mile
Island said that alarms almost never occur individually .  ” This was an
unmanageable level of complexity for any human operator to absorb , Kennedy
explained . 
Following Three Mile Island , more automation was introduced to manage
some of these processes . Kennedy supports this approach , to a point .  “ The
automated systems , as they are currently designed and built , may be more
reliable than humans for planned emergencies , or known emergencies .  .  .  . If we
can study it in advance and lay out all of the possibilities and in our nice quiet
offices consider all the ways things can behave , we can build that into a system
and it can reliably do what we say . But we don ’ t always know what things are
possible .  .  .  . Machines can repeatedly , quite reliably , do planned actions .  .  .  . But
having the human there provides for ‘ beyond design basis ’ accidents or events .  ” 
In other words , automation could help for situations that could be predicted , but
humans were needed to manage novel situations .  “ Both sides have strengths and
weaknesses ,  ” Kennedy explained .  “ They need to work together , at the moment , 
to provide the most reliable system .  ” 
AUTOMATION AND COMPLEXITY—A DOUBLE-EDGED
SWORD
Kennedy ’ s argument tracks with what we have seen in modern machines—
increasing software and automation but with humans still involved at some level . 
Modern jetliners effectively fly themselves , with pilots functioning largely as an
emergency backup . Modern automobiles still have human drivers , but have a
host of automated or autonomous features to improve driving safety and
comfort : antilock brakes , traction and stability control , automatic lane keeping , 
intelligent cruise control , collision avoidance , and self-parking . Even modern
fighter jets use software to help improve safety and reliability . F-16 fighter
aircraft have been upgraded with automatic ground collision avoidance systems . 
The newer F-35 fighter reportedly has software-based limits on its flight controls
to prevent pilots from putting the aircraft into unrecoverable spins or other
aerodynamically unstable conditions . 
The double-edged sword to this automation is that all of this added software
increases complexity , which can itself introduce new problems . Sophisticated
automation requires software with millions of lines of code : 1 . 7 million for the
F-22 fighter jet , 24 million for the F-35 jet , and some 100 million lines of code
for a modern luxury automobile . Longer pieces of software are harder to verify
as being free from bugs or glitches . Studies have pegged the software industry
average error rate at fifteen to fifty errors per 1 , 000 lines of code . Rigorous
internal test and evaluation has been able to reduce the error rate to 0 . 1 to 0 . 5
errors per 1 , 000 lines of code in some cases . However , in systems with millions
of lines of code , some errors are inevitable . If they aren ’ t caught in testing , they
can cause accidents if encountered during real world operations . 
On their first deployment to the Pacific in 2007 , eight F-22 fighter jets
experienced a Y2K-like total computer meltdown when crossing the
International Date Line . All onboard computer systems crashed , causing the
pilots to lose navigation , fuel subsystems , and some communications . Stranded
over the Pacific without a navigational reference point , the aircraft were able to
make it back to land by following the tanker aircraft accompanying them , which
relied on an older computer system . Under tougher circumstances , such as
combat or even bad weather , the incident could have led to a catastrophic loss of
the aircraft . While the existence of the International Date Line clearly could be
anticipated , the interaction of the dateline with the software was not identified in
testing . 
Software vulnerabilities can also leave open opportunities for hackers . In
2015 , two hackers revealed that they had discovered vulnerabilities that allowed
them to remotely hack certain automobiles while they were on the road . This
allowed them to take control of critical driving components including the
transmission , steering column , and brakes . In future self-driving cars , hackers
who gain access could simply change the car ’ s destination . 
Even if software does not have specific bugs or vulnerabilities , the sheer
complexity of modern machines can make it challenging for users to understand
what the automation is doing and why . When humans are no longer interacting
with simple mechanical systems that may behave predictably but instead are
interacting with complex pieces of software with millions of lines of code , the
human user ’ s expectation about what the automation will do may diverge
significantly from what it actually does . I found this to be a challenge with the
Nest thermostat , which doesn ’ t have millions of lines of code .  ( A study of Nest
users found similar frustrations , so apparently I am not uniquely unqualified in
predicting Nest behavior .  ) 
More advanced autonomous systems are often able to account for more
variables . As a result , they can handle more complex or ambiguous
environments , making them more valuable than simpler systems . They may fail
less overall , because they can handle a wider range of situations . However , they
will still fail sometimes and because they are more complex , accurately
predicting when they will fail may be more difficult . Borrie said ,  “ As systems
get increasingly complex and increasingly self-directed , I think it ’ s going to get
more and more difficult for human beings to be able to think ahead of time what
those weak points are necessarily going to be .  ” When this happens in high-risk
situations , the result can be catastrophic .  
 “ WE DON ’ T UNDERSTAND ANYTHING !  ” 
On June 1 , 2009 , Air France Flight 447 from Rio to Paris ran into trouble
midway over the Atlantic Ocean . The incident began with a minor and
insignificant instrumentation failure . Air speed probes on the wings froze due to
ice crystals , a rare but non-serious problem that did not affect the flight of the
aircraft . Because the airspeed indicators were no longer functioning properly , the
autopilot disengaged and handed over control back to the pilots . The plane also
entered a different software mode for flight controls . Instead of flying under 
 “ normal law ” mode , where software limitations prevent pilots from putting the
plane into dangerous aerodynamic conditions such as stalls , the plane entered 
 “ alternate law ” mode , where the software limitations are relaxed and the pilots
have more direct control over the plane . 
Nevertheless , there was no actual emergency . Eleven seconds following the
autopilot disengagement , the pilots correctly identified that they had lost the
airspeed indicators . The aircraft was flying normally , at appropriate speeds and
full altitude . Everything was fine . 
Inexplicably , however , the pilots began a series of errors that resulted in a
stall , causing the aircraft to crash into the ocean . Throughout the incident , the
pilots continually misinterpreted data from the airplane and misunderstood the
aircraft ’ s behavior . At one point mid-crisis , the copilot exclaimed ,  “ We
completely lost control of the airplane and we don ’ t understand anything ! We
tried everything !  ” The problem was actually simple . The pilots had pulled back
too far on the stick , causing the aircraft to stall and lose lift . This is a basic
aerodynamic concept , but poor user interfaces and opaque automated processes
on the aircraft , even while flown manually , contributed to the pilots ’ lack of
understanding . The complexity of the aircraft created problems of transparency
that would likely not have existed on a simpler aircraft . By the time the senior
pilot understood what was happening , it was too late . The plane was too low and
descending too rapidly to recover . The plane crashed into the ocean , killing all
228 people on board . 
Unlike in the F-22 International Date Line incident or the automobile hack , 
the Air France Flight 447 crash was not due to a hidden vulnerability lurking
within the software . In fact , the automation performed perfectly . However , it
would be overly simplistic to lay the crash at the feet of human error . Certainly
the pilots made mistakes , but the problem is best characterized as humanautomation failure . The pilots were confused by the automation and the
complexity of the system . 
THE PATRIOT FRATRICIDES AS NORMAL ACCIDENTS
Normal accident theory sheds light on the Patriot fratricides . They weren ’ t
merely freak occurrences , unlikely to be repeated . Instead , they were a normal
consequence of operating a highly lethal , complex , tightly coupled system . True
to normal accidents , the specific chain of events that led to each fratricide was
unlikely . Multiple failures happened simultaneously . However , simply because
these specific combinations of failures were unlikely does not mean that
probability of accidents as a whole was low . In fact , given the degree of
operational use , the probability of there being some kind of accident was quite
high . Over sixty Patriot batteries were deployed to Operation Iraqi Freedom , and
during the initial phase of the war coalition aircraft flew 41 , 000 sorties . This
means that the number of possible Patriot-aircraft interactions were in the
millions . As the Defense Science Board Task Force on the Patriot pointed out , 
given the sheer number of interactions ,  “ even very-low-probability failures could
result in regrettable fratricide incidents .  ” The fact that the F-18 and Tornado
incidents had different causes lends further credence to the view that normal
accidents are lurking below the surface in complex systems , waiting to emerge . 
The complexities of war may bring these vulnerabilities to the surface . 
Is it possible to safely operate hazardous complex systems ? Normal accident
theory says “ no .  ” The probability of accidents can be reduced , but never
eliminated . There is an alternate point of view on complex systems , however , 
which suggests that , under certain conditions , normal accidents can largely be
avoided . 
10
COMMAND AND DECISION
CAN AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS BE USED SAFELY ? 
There is a robust body of evidence supporting normal accident theory , but a
few outliers seem to defy expectations . The Federal Aviation Administration 
( FAA ) air traffic control system and U . S . Navy aircraft carrier flight decks are
two examples of “ high-reliability organizations .  ” Their rate of accidents isn ’ t
zero , but they are exceptionally low given the complexities of their operating
environment and the hazards of operation . High-reliability organizations can be
found across a range of applications and have some common characteristics : 
highly trained individuals , a collective mindfulness of the risk of failure , and a
continued commitment to learn from near misses and improve safety . 
While militaries as a whole would not be considered high-reliability
organizations , some military communities have very high safety records with
complex high-risk systems . In addition to aircraft carrier flight deck operations , 
the U . S . Navy ’ s submarine community is an example of a high-reliability
organization . Following the loss of the USS Thresher to an accident in 1963—at
the time one of the Navy ’ s most advanced submarines and first in her class—the
Navy instituted the Submarine Safety ( SUBSAFE ) program . Submarine
components that are critical for safe operation are designated “ SUBSAFE ” and
subject to rigorous inspection and testing throughout their design , fabrication , 
maintenance , and use . There is no silver bullet to SUBSAFE ’ s high reliability . It
is a continuous process of quality assurance and quality control applied across
the entire submarine ’ s life cycle . Upon installation and at every subsequent
inspection or repair over the life of the ship , every SUBSAFE component is
checked , double-checked , and checked again against technical specifications . If
anything is amiss , it must be corrected or approved by an appropriate authority
before the submarine can proceed with operations . 
SUBSAFE is not a technological solution to normal accidents . It is a
bureaucratic and organizational solution . Nevertheless , the results have been
astounding . In 2003 Congressional testimony , Rear Admiral Paul Sullivan , the
Navy deputy commander for ship design , integration , and engineering , explained
the impact of the program : 
The SUBSAFE Program has been very successful . Between 1915 and 1963 , 16 submarines were
lost due to non-combat causes , an average of one every three years . Since the inception of the
SUBSAFE Program in 1963 .  .  . We have never lost a SUBSAFE certified submarine . 
It is hard to overstate the significance of this safety record . The U . S . Navy has
more than seventy submarines in its force , with approximately one-third of them
at sea at a time . The U . S . Navy has operated at this pace for over half a century
without losing a single submarine . From the perspective of normal accident
theory , this should not be possible . Operating a nuclear-powered submarine is
extremely complex and inherently hazardous , and yet the Navy has been able to
substantially reduce these risks . Accidents resulting in catastrophic loss of a
submarine are not “ normal ” in the U . S . Navy . Indeed , they are unprecedented
since the advent of SUBSAFE , making SUBSAFE a shining example of what
high-reliability organizations can achieve . 
Could high-reliability organizations be a model for how militaries might
handle autonomous weapons ? In fact , lessons from SUBSAFE and aircraft
carrier deck operations have already informed how the Navy operates the Aegis
combat system . The Navy describes the Aegis as “ a centralized , automated , 
command-and-control ( C2 ) and weapons control system that was designed as a
total weapon system , from detection to kill .  ” It is the electronic brain of a ship ’ s
weapons . The Aegis connects the ship ’ s advanced radar with its anti-air , antisurface , and antisubmarine weapon systems and provides a central control
interface for sailors . First fielded in 1983 , the Aegis has gone through several
upgrades and is now at the core of over eighty U . S . Navy warships . To better
understand Aegis and whether it could be a model for safe use of future
autonomous weapons , I traveled to Dahlgren , Virginia , where Aegis operators
are trained . 
THE AEGIS COMBAT SYSTEM
Captain Pete Galluch is commander of the Aegis Training and Readiness Center , 
where he oversees training for all Aegis-qualified officers and enlisted sailors . 
The phrase “ steely-eyed missile man ” comes to mind upon meeting Galluch . He
speaks with the calmness and decisiveness of a surgeon , a man who is ready to
let missiles fly if need be . I can imagine Galluch standing in the midst of a ship ’ s
combat information center ( CIC ) in wartime , unflappable in the midst of the
chaos , ordering his sailors when to take the shot and when to hold back . If I were
flying within range of an Aegis ’ s weapons or was counting on its ballistic
missile defense capabilities to protect my city , I would trust Galluch to make the
right call . 
Aegis is a weapon system of staggering complexity . At the core of Aegis is a
computer called “ Command and Decision ,  ” or C & D , which governs the
behavior of the radar and weapons . Command and Decision ’ s actions are
governed by a series of statements—essentially programs or algorithms—that
the Navy refers to as “ doctrine .  ” Unlike the Patriot circa 2003 , however , which
had only a handful of different operating modes , Aegis doctrine is almost
infinitely customizable . 
With respect to weapons engagements , Aegis has four settings . The manual
setting , in which engagements against radar “ tracks ”  ( objects detected by the
radar ) must be done directly by a human , involves the most human control . Ship
commanders can increase the degree of automation in the engagement process
by activating one of three types of doctrine : Semi-Auto , Auto SM , and AutoSpecial . Semi-Auto , as the term would imply , automates part of the engagement
process to generate a firing solution on a radar track , but final decision authority
is withheld by the human operator . Auto SM automates more of the engagement
process , but a human must still take a positive action before firing . Despite the
term , Auto SM still retains a human in the loop . Auto-Special is the only mode
where the human is “ on the loop .  ” Once Auto-Special is activated , the Aegis will
automatically fire against threats that meet its parameters . The human can
intervene to stop the engagement , but no further authorization is needed to fire . 
It would be a mistake to think , however , that this means that Aegis can only
operate in four discrete modes . In fact , doctrine statements can mix and match
these control types against different threats . For example , one doctrine statement
could be written to use Auto SM against one type of threat , such as aircraft . 
Another doctrine statement might authorize Auto-Special against cruise missiles , 
for which there may be less warning . These doctrine statements can be applied
individually or in packages .  “ You can mix and match ,  ” Galluch explained .  “ It ’ s
a very flexible system .  .  .  . we can do all [ doctrine statements ] with a push of a
button , some with a push of a button , or bring them up individually .  ” 
This makes Aegis less like a finished product with a few different modes and
more like a customizable system that can be tailored for each mission . Galluch
explained that the ship ’ s doctrine review board , consisting of the officers and
senior enlisted personnel who work on Aegis , begin the process of writing
doctrine months before deployment . They consider their anticipated missions , 
intelligence assessments , and information on the region for the upcoming
deployment , then make recommendations on doctrine to the ship ’ s captain for
approval . The result is a series of doctrine statements , individually and in
packages , that the captain can activate as needed during deployment .  “ If you
have your doctrine statements built and tested ,  ” Galluch said , the time to “ bring
them up is seconds .  ” 
Doctrine statements are typically grouped into two general categories : nonsaturation and saturation . Non-saturation doctrine is used when there is time to
carefully evaluate each potential threat . Saturation doctrine is needed if the ship
gets into a combat situation where the number of inbound threats could
overwhelm the ability of operators to respond .  “ If World War III starts and
people start throwing a lot of stuff at me ,  ” Galluch said ,  “ I will have grouped my
doctrine together so that it ’ s a one-push button that activates all of them . And
what we ’ ve done is we ’ ve tested and we ’ ve looked at how they overlap each
other and what the effects are going to be and make sure that we ’ re getting the
defense of the ship that we expect .  ” This is where something like Auto-Special
comes into play , in a “ kill or be killed ” scenario , as Galluch described it . 
It ’ s not enough to build the doctrine , though . Extensive testing goes into
ensuring that it works properly . Once the ship arrives in theater , the first thing
the crew does is test the weapons doctrine to see if there is anything in the
environment that might cause it to fire in peacetime , which would not be good . 
This is done safely by enabling a hardware-level cutout called the Fire Inhibit
Switch , or FIS . The FIS includes a key that must be inserted for any of the ship ’ s
weapons to fire . When the FIS key is inserted , a red light comes on ; when it is
turned to the right , the light turns green , meaning the weapons are live and ready
to fire . When the FIS is red—or removed entirely—the ship ’ s weapons are
disabled at the hardware level . As Galluch put it ,  “ there is no voltage that can be
applied to light the wick and let the rocket fly out .  ” By keeping the FIS red or
removing the key , the ship ’ s crew can test Aegis doctrine statements safely
without any risk of inadvertent firing . 
Establishing the doctrine and activating it is the sole responsibility of the
ship ’ s captain . Doctrine is more than just a set of programs . It is the embodiment
of the captain ’ s intent for the warship .  “ Absolutely , it ’ s automated , but there ’ s so
much human interface with what gets automated and how we apply that
automation ,  ” Galluch said . Aegis doctrine is a way for the captain to predelegate
his or her decision-making against certain threats . 
The Aegis community uses automation in a very different way than the
Patriot community did in 2003 . Patriot operators sitting at the consoles in 2003
were essentially trusting in the automation . They had a handful of operational
modes they could activate , but the operators themselves didn ’ t write the rules for
how the automation would function in those modes . Those rules were written
years beforehand . Aegis , by contrast , can be customized and tailored to the
specific operating environment . A destroyer operating in the Western Pacific , for
example , might have different doctrine statements than one operating in the
Persian Gulf to account for different threats from Chinese versus Iranian
missiles . But the differences run deeper than merely having more options . The
whole philosophy of automation is different . With Aegis , the automation is used
to capture the ship captain ’ s intent . In Patriot , the automation embodies the
intent of the designers and testers . The actual operators of the system may not
even fully understand the designers ’ intent that went into crafting the rules . The
automation in Patriot is largely intended to replace warfighters ’ decisionmaking . In Aegis , the automation is used to capture warfighters ’ decisionmaking . 
Another key difference is where decision authority rests . Only the captain of
the ship has the authority to activate Aegis weapons doctrine . The captain can
predelegate that authority to the tactical action officer on watch , but the order
must be in writing as part of official orders . This means the decision-maker ’ s
experience level for Aegis operations is radically different from Patriot . When
Captain Galluch took command of the USS Ramage , he had eighteen years of
experience and had served on three prior Aegis ships . By contrast , the person
who made the call on the first Patriot fratricide was a twenty-two-year-old
second lieutenant fresh out of training . 
Throughout our conversation , Galluch ’ s experience was apparent . He was
clearly comfortable using Aegis , but he wasn ’ t flippant about its automation . 
What came through was a healthy respect for the weapon system . Activating
Aegis doctrine is a serious decision , not be taken lightly .  “ You ’ re never driving
around with any kind of weapons doctrine activated ” unless you expect to get
into a fight , he explained . Even on manual mode , it is possible to launch a
missile in seconds . And if need be , doctrine can be activated quickly .  “ I ’ ve made
more Gulf deployments than I care to ,  ” he said .  “ I ’ m very comfortable with
driving around for months at a time with no active doctrine , but making damn
sure that I have it set up and tested and ready to go if I need to .  ” Because there
can be situations that call for that level of automation .  “ You can get a missile
fired pretty quickly , so why don ’ t you do everything manually ?  ” Galluch
explained :  “ My view is that [ manual control ] works well if it ’ s one or two
missiles or threats . But if you ’ re controlling fighters , you ’ re doing a running gun
battle with small patrol boats , you ’ re launching your helicopter .  .  .  . and you ’ ve
got a bunch of cruise missiles coming in from different angles . You know , the
watch is pretty small . It ’ s ten or twelve people . So , there ’ s not that many people 
.  .  . You can miss things coming in . That ’ s where I get to the whole concept of
saturation vs . normal . You want the man in the loop as much as possible , but
there comes a time when you can get overwhelmed .  ” 
Aegis philosophy is one of human control over engagements , even when
doctrine is activated . What varies is the form of human control . In Auto-Special
doctrine , firing authority is delegated to Aegis ’ s Command & Decision
computer , but the human intent is still there . The goal is always to ensure “ there
is a conscious decision to fire a weapon ,  ” Galluch said . That doesn ’ t mean that
accidents can ’ t happen . In fact , it is the constant preoccupation with the potential
for accidents that helps prevent them . Galluch and others understand that , with
doctrine activated , mishaps can happen . That ’ s precisely why tight control is
kept over the weapon .  “  [ Ship commanding officers ] are constantly balancing
readiness condition to fire the weapon versus a chance for inadvertent firing ,  ” he
explained . 
I saw this tight control in action when Galluch took me to the Aegis
simulation center and had his team run through a series of mock engagements . 
Galluch stood in as the ship ’ s commanding officer and had Aegis-qualified
sailors sitting at the same terminals doing the same jobs they would on a real
ship . Then they went to work .  
 “ ROLL GREEN ” 
The Navy would not permit me to record the precise language of the commands
used between the sailors , but they allowed me to observe and report on what I
saw . First , Galluch ordered the sailors to demonstrate a shot in manual operation . 
They put a simulated radar track on the screen and Galluch ordered them to
target the track . They began working a firing solution , with the three sailors
calmly but crisply reporting when they had completed each step in the process . 
Once the firing solution was ready , Galluch ordered the tactical action officer to
roll his FIS key to green . Then Galluch gave the order to fire . A sailor pressed
the button to fire and called out that the missile was away . On a large screen in
front of us , the radar showed the outbound missile racing toward the track . 
I checked my watch . The whole process had been exceptionally fast—under
a minute . The threat had been identified , a decision made , and a missile launched
well under a minute , and that was in manual mode . I could understand Galluch ’ s
confidence in his ability to defend the ship without doctrine activated . 
They did it again in Semi-Auto mode , now with doctrine activated . The FIS
key was back at red , the tactical action officer having turned it back right after
the missile was launched . Galluch ordered them to activate Semi-Auto doctrine . 
Then they brought up another track to target . This time , Aegis ’ s Command & 
Decision computer generated part of the firing solution automatically . This
shortened the time to fire by more than half . 
They rolled FIS red , activated Auto SM doctrine , and put up a new track . 
Roll FIS green . Fire . 
Finally , they brought up Auto-Special doctrine . This was it . This was the big
leap into the great unknown , with the human removed from the loop . The sailors
were merely observers now ; they didn ’ t need to take any action for the system to
fire . Except .  .  . I looked at the FIS key . The key was in , but it was turned to red . 
Auto-Special doctrine was enabled , but there was still a hardware-level cutout in
place . There was not even any voltage applied to the weapons . Nothing could
fire until the tactical action officer rolled his key green . 
The track for a simulated threat came up on the screen and Galluch ordered
them to roll FIS green . I counted only a handful of heartbeats before a sailor
announced the missiles were away . That ’ s all it took for Command & Decision
to target the track and fire . 
But I felt cheated . They hadn ’ t turned on the automation and leaned back in
their chairs , taking it easy . Even on Auto-Special , and they had their hand
literally on the key that disabled firing . And as soon as the missile was away , I
saw the tactical action officer roll FIS red again . They weren ’ t trusting the
automation at all ! 
Of course , that was the point , I realized . They didn ’ t trust it . The automation
was powerful and they respected it—they even recognized there was a place for
it—but that didn ’ t mean they were surrendering their human decision-making to
the machine . 
To further drive the point home , Galluch had them demonstrate one final
shot . With Auto-Special doctrine enabled , they rolled FIS green and let
Command & Decision take its shot . But then after the missile was away , Galluch
ordered them to abort the missile . They pushed a button and a few seconds later
the simulated missile disappeared from our radar , having been destroyed midflight . Even in the case of Auto-Special , even after the missile had been
launched , they still had the ability to reassert human control over the
engagement . 
The Aegis community has reason to be so careful . In 1988 , an Aegis warship
was involved in a horrible accident . The incident haunts the community like a
ghost—an ever-present reminder of the deadly power of an Aegis ship . Galluch
described what transpired as a “ terrible , painful lesson ” and talked freely what
the Aegis community learned to prevent future tragedies . 
THE USS VINCENNES INCIDENT
The Persian Gulf in 1988 was a dangerous place . The Iran-Iraq war , under way
since 1980 , had boiled over into an extended “ tanker war ,  ” with Iran and Iraq
attacking each others ’ oil tankers , trying to starve their economies into
submission . In 1987 , Iran expanded to attacks against U . S . -flagged tanker ships
carrying oil from Kuwait . In response , the U . S . Navy began escorting U . S . -
flagged Kuwaiti tankers to protect them from Iranian attacks . 
U . S . Navy ships in the Gulf were on high alert to threats from mines , rocketequipped Iranian fast boats , warships , and fighter aircraft from several countries . 
A year earlier , the USS Stark had been hit with two Exocet missiles fired from
an Iraqi jet and thirty-seven U . S . sailors were killed . In April 1988 , in response
to a U . S . frigate hitting an Iranian mine , the United States attacked Iranian oil
platforms and sunk several Iranian ships . The battle only lasted a day , but
tensions between the United States and Iran were high afterward . 
On July 3 , 1988 , the U . S . warships USS Vincennes and USS Montgomery
were escorting tankers through the Strait of Hormuz when they came into
contact with Iranian fast boats . The Vincennes ’ s helicopter , which was
monitoring the Iranian boats , came under fire . The Vincennes and Montgomery
responded , pursuing the Iranian boats into Iranian territorial waters and opening
fire . 
While the Vincennes was in the midst of a gun battle with the Iranian boats , 
two aircraft took off in close sequence from Iran ’ s nearby Bandar Abbas airport . 
Bandar Abbas was a dual-use airport , servicing both Iranian commercial and
military flights . One aircraft was a commercial airliner , Iran Air Flight 655 . The
other was an Iranian F-14 fighter . For whatever reason , in the minds of the
sailors in the Vincennes ’ s combat information center , the tracks of the two
aircraft on their radar screens became confused . The Iranian F-14 veered away
but Iran Air 655 flew along its normal commercial route , which happened to be
directly toward the Vincennes . Even though the commercial jet was squawking
IFF and flying a commercial airliner route , the Vincennes captain and crew
became convinced , incorrectly , that the radar track headed toward their position
was an Iranian F-14 fighter . 
As the aircraft approached , the Vincennes issued multiple warnings on
military and civilian frequencies . There was no response . Believing the Iranians
were choosing to escalate the engagement by sending a fighter and that his ship
was under threat , the Vincennes ’ s captain gave the order to fire . Iran Air 655 was
shot down , killing all 290 people on board . 
The USS Vincennes incident and the Patriot fratricides sit as two opposite
cases on the scales of automation versus human control . In the Patriot fratricides , 
humans trusted the automation too much . The Vincennes incident was caused by
human error and more automation might have helped . Iran Air 655 was flying a
commercial route squawking IFF . Well-crafted Aegis doctrine should not have
fired . 
Automation could have helped the Vincennes crew in this fast-paced combat
environment . They weren ’ t overwhelmed with too many missiles , but they were
overwhelmed with too much information : the running gun battle with Iranian
boats and tracking an F-14 and a commercial airliner launching in close
succession from a nearby airport . In this information-saturated environment , the
crew missed important details they should have noticed and made poor decisions
with grave consequences . Automation , by contrast , wouldn ’ t have gotten
overwhelmed by the amount of information . Just as automation could help shoot
down incoming missiles in a saturation scenario , it could also help not fire at the
wrong targets in an information-overloaded environment . 
ACHIEVING HIGH RELIABILITY
The Aegis community has learned from the Vincennes incident , Patriot
fratricides , and years of experience to refine their operating procedures , doctrine , 
and software to the point where they are able to operate a very complex weapon
system with low accidents . In the nearly thirty years since Vincennes , there has
not been another similar incident , even with Aegis ships deployed continuously
around the world . 
The Navy ’ s track record with Aegis shows that high-reliability operation of
complex , hazardous systems is possible , but it doesn ’ t come from testing alone . 
The human operators are not passive bystanders in the Aegis ’ s operation , 
trusting blindly in the automation . They are active participants at every stage . 
They program the system ’ s operational parameters , constantly monitor its modes
of operation , supervise its actions in real time , and maintain tight control over
weapons release authority . The Aegis culture is 180 degrees from the 
 “ unwarranted and uncritical trust in automation ” that Army researchers found in
the Patriot community in 2003 . 
After the Patriot fratricides , the Army launched the Patriot Vigilance Project , 
a three-year postmortem assessment to better understand what went wrong and
to improve training , doctrine , and system design to ensure it didn ’ t happen again . 
Dr . John Hawley is an engineering psychologist who led the project and spoke
frankly about the challenges in implementing those changes . He said that there
are examples of communities that have been able to manage high-risk
technologies with very low accident rates , but high reliability is not easy to
achieve . The Navy “ spent a lot of money looking into .  .  . how you more
effectively use a system like Aegis so that you don ’ t make the kinds of mistakes
that led to the [ Vincennes incident ]  ,  ” he said . This training is costly and timeconsuming , and in practice there are bureaucratic and cultural obstacles that may
prevent military organizations from investing this amount of effort . Hawley
explained that Patriot commanders are evaluated based on how many trained
crews they keep ready .  “ If you make the [ training ] situation too demanding , then
you could start putting yourself in the situation where you ’ re not meeting those 
[ crew ] requirements .  ” It may seem that militaries have an incentive to make
training as realistic as possible , and to a certain extent that ’ s true , but there are
limits to how much time and money can be applied . Hawley argued that Army
Patriot operators train in a “ sham environment ” that doesn ’ t accurately simulate
the rigors of real-world combat . As a result , he said “ the Army deceives itself
about how good their people really are .  .  .  . It would be easy to believe you ’ re
good at this , but that ’ s only because you ’ ve been able to handle the relatively
non-demanding scenarios that they throw at you .  ” Unfortunately , militaries
might not realize their training is ineffective until a war occurs , at which point it
may be too late . 
Hawley explained that the Aegis community was partially protected from
this problem because they use their system day in and day out on ships operating
around the globe . Aegis operators get “ consistent objective feedback from your
environment on how well you ’ re doing ,  ” preventing this kind of self-deception . 
The Army ’ s peacetime operating environment for the Patriot , on the other hand , 
is not as intense , Hawley said .  “ Even when the Army guys are deployed , I don ’ t
think that the quality of their experience with the system is quite the same . 
They ’ re theoretically hot , but they ’ re really not doing much of anything , other
than just monitoring their scopes .  ” Leadership is also a vital factor .  “ Navy brass
in the Aegis community are absolutely paranoid ” about another Vincennes
incident , Hawley said . 
The bottom line is that high reliability not easy to achieve . It requires
frequent experience under real-world operating conditions and a major
investment in time and money . Safety must be an overriding priority for leaders , 
who often have other demands they must meet . U . S . Navy submariners , aircraft
carrier deck operators , and Aegis weapon system operators are very specific
military communities that meet these conditions . Military organizations in
general do not . Hawley was pessimistic about the ability of the U . S . Army to
safely operate a system like the Patriot , saying it was “ too sloppy an organization
to .  .  . insist upon the kinds of rigor that these systems require .  ” 
This is a disappointing conclusion , because the U . S . Army is one of the most
professional military organizations in history . Hawley was even more
pessimistic about other nations .  “ Judging from history and the Russian army ’ s
willingness to tolerate casualties and attitude about fratricide .  .  . I would expect
that .  .  . they would tilt the scale very much in the direction of lethality and
operational effectiveness and away from necessarily safe use .  ” Practice would
appear to bear this out . The accident rate for Soviet / Russian submarines is far
higher than for U . S . submarines . 
If there is any military community that should be incentivized to avoid
accidents , it is those responsible for maintaining control of nuclear weapons . 
There are no weapons on earth more destructive than nuclear weapons . Nuclear
weapons are therefore an excellent test case for the extent to which dangerous
weapons can be managed safely . 
NUCLEAR WEAPONS SAFETY AND NEAR-MISS
ACCIDENTS
The destructive power of nuclear weapons defies easy comprehension . A single
Ohio-class ballistic missile submarine can carry twenty-four Trident II ( D5 ) 
ballistic missiles , each with eight 100-kiloton warheads per missile . Each 100-
kiloton warhead is over six times more powerful than the bomb dropped on
Hiroshima . Thus , a single submarine has the power to unleash over a thousand
times the destructive power of the attack on Hiroshima . Individually , nuclear
weapons have the potential for mass destruction . Collectively , a nuclear
exchange could destroy human civilization . But outside of testing they have not
been used , intentionally or accidentally , since 1945 . 
On closer inspection , however , the safety track record of nuclear weapons is
less than inspiring . In addition to the Stanislav Petrov incident in 1983 , there
have been multiple nuclear near-miss incidents that could have had catastrophic
consequences . Some of these could have resulted in an individual weapon ’ s use , 
while others could potentially have led to a nuclear exchange between
superpowers . 
In 1979 , a training tape left in a computer at the U . S . military ’ s North
American Aerospace Defense Command ( NORAD ) led military officers to
initially believe that a Soviet attack was under way , until it was refuted by early
warning radars . Less than a year later in 1980 , a faulty computer chip led to a
similar false alarm at NORAD . This incident progressed far enough that U . S . 
commanders notified National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski that 2 , 200
Soviet missiles were inbound to the United States . Brzezinski was about to
inform President Jimmy Carter before NORAD realized the alarm was false . 
Even after the Cold War ended , the danger from nuclear weapons did not
entirely subside . In 1995 , Norway launched a rocket carrying a science payload
to study the aurora borealis that had a trajectory and radar signature similar to a
U . S . Trident II submarine-launched nuclear missile . While a single missile
would not have made sense as a first strike , the launch was consistent with a
high-altitude nuclear burst to deliver an electromagnetic pulse to blind Russian
satellites , a prelude to a massive U . S . first strike . Russian commanders brought
President Boris Yeltsin the nuclear briefcase , who discussed a response with
senior Russian military commanders before the missile was identified as
harmless . 
In addition to these incidents are safety lapses that might not have risked
nuclear war but are troubling nonetheless . In 2007 , for example , a U . S . Air Force
B-52 bomber flew from Minot Air Force Base to Barksdale Air Force Base with
six nuclear weapons aboard without the pilots or crew being aware . After it
landed , the weapons remained on board the aircraft , unsecured and with ground
personnel unaware of the weapons , until they were discovered the following day . 
This incident was merely the most egregious in a series of recent security lapses
in the U . S . nuclear community that caused Air Force leaders to warn of an 
 “ erosion ” of adherence to appropriate safety standards . 
Nor were these isolated cases . There were at least thirteen near-use nuclear
incidents from 1962 to 2002 . This track record does not inspire confidence . 
Indeed , it lends credence to the view that near-miss incidents are normal , if
terrifying , conditions of nuclear weapons . The fact that none of these incidents
led to an actual nuclear detonation , however , presents an interesting puzzle : Do
these near-miss incidents support the pessimistic view of normal accident theory
that accidents are inevitable ? Or does the fact that they didn ’ t result in an actual
nuclear detonation support the more optimistic view that high-reliability
organizations can safely operate high-risk systems ? 
Stanford political scientist Scott Sagan undertook an in-depth evaluation of
nuclear weapons safety to answer this very question . In the conclusion of his
exhaustive study , published in The Limits of Safety : Organizations , Accidents , 
and Nuclear Weapons , Sagan wrote : 
When I began this book , the public record on nuclear weapons safety led me to expect that the
high reliability school of organization theorists would provide the strongest set of intellectual
tools for explaining this apparent success story .  .  .  . The evidence presented in this book has
reluctantly led me to the opposite view : the experience of persistent safety problems in the U . S . 
nuclear arsenal should serve as a warning . 
Sagan concluded ,  “ the historical evidence provides much stronger support for
the ideas developed by Charles Perrow in Normal Accidents ” than for highreliability theory . Beneath the surface of what appeared , at first blush , to be a
strong safety record was , in fact , a “ long series of close calls with U . S . nuclear
weapon systems .  ” This is not because the organizations in charge of
safeguarding U . S . nuclear weapons were unnaturally incompetent or lax . Rather , 
the history of nuclear near misses simply reflects “ the inherent limits of
organizational safety ,  ” he said . Military organizations have other operational
demands they must accommodate beyond safety . Political scientists have termed
this the “ always / never dilemma .  ” Militaries of nuclear-armed powers must
always be ready to launch nuclear weapons at a moment ’ s notice and deliver a
massive strike against their adversaries for deterrence to be credible . At the same
time , they must never allow unauthorized or accidental detonation of a weapon . 
Sagan says this is effectively “ impossible .  ” There are limits to how safe some
hazards can be made . 
THE INEVITABILITY OF ACCIDENTS
Safety is challenging enough with nuclear weapons . Autonomous weapons
would be potentially more difficult in a number of ways . Nuclear weapons are
available to only a handful of actors , but autonomous weapons could proliferate
widely , including to countries less concerned about safety . Autonomous
weapons have an analogous problem to the always / never dilemma : once put into
operation , they are expected to find and destroy enemy targets and not strike
friendlies or civilian objects . Unlike nuclear weapons , some isolated mistakes
might be tolerated with autonomous weapons , but gross errors would not . 
The fact that autonomous weapons are not obviously as dangerous as nuclear
weapons might make risk mitigation more challenging in some respects . The
perception that automation can increase safety and reliability—which is true in
some circumstances—could lead militaries to be less cautious with autonomous
weapons than even other conventional weapons . If militaries cannot reliably
institute safety procedures to control and account for nuclear weapons , their
ability to do so with autonomous weapons is far less certain . 
The overall track record of nuclear safety , Aegis operations , and the Patriot
fratricides suggests that sound procedures can reduce the likelihood of accidents , 
but can never drive them to zero . By embracing the principles of high-reliability
organizations , the U . S . Navy submarine and Aegis communities have been able
to manage complex , hazardous systems safely , at least during peacetime . Had
the Patriot community adopted some of these principles prior to 2003 , the
fratricides might have been prevented . At the very least , the Tornado shootdown
could have been prevented with a greater cultural vigilance to respond to nearmiss incidents and correct known problems , such as the anti-radiation missile
misclassification problem , which had come up in testing . High-reliability theory
does not promise zero accidents , however . It merely suggests that very low
accident rates are possible . Even in industries where safety is paramount , such as
nuclear power , accidents still occur . 
There are reasons to be skeptical of the ability to achieve high-reliability
operations for autonomous weapons . High-reliability organizations depend on
three key features that work for Aegis in peacetime , but are unlikely to be
present for fully autonomous weapons in war . 
First , high-reliability organizations can achieve low accident rates by
constantly refining their operations and learning from near-miss incidents . This
is only possible if they can accumulate extensive experience in their operating
environment . For example , when Aegis first arrives to an area , the ship operates
for some time with its radar on and doctrine enabled , but the weapons
deactivated , so sailors can see how the doctrine responds to the unique
peculiarities of that specific operating environment . Similarly , FAA air traffic
control , nuclear power plants , and aircraft carriers are systems people operate
day in and day out , accumulating large amounts of operational experience . This
daily experience in real-world conditions allows them to refine safe operations . 
When extreme events occur outside the norm , safety can be compromised . 
Users are not able to anticipate all of the possible interactions that may occur
under atypical conditions . The 9 . 0 magnitude earthquake in Japan that led to the
Fukushima-Daiichi meltdown is one such example . If 9 . 0 magnitude earthquakes
causing forty-foot-high tsunamis were a regular occurrence , nuclear power plant
operators would have quickly learned to anticipate the common-mode failure
that knocked out primary and backup power . They would have built higher
floodwalls and elevated the backup diesel generators off the ground . It is
difficult , however , to anticipate the specific failures that might occur during
atypical events . 
War is an atypical condition . Militaries prepare for war , but the usual day-today experience of militaries is peacetime . Militaries attempt to prepare for the
rigors of war through training , but no amount of training can replicate the
violence and chaos of actual combat . This makes it very difficult for militaries to
accurately predict the behavior of autonomous systems in war . Even for Aegis , 
activating the doctrine with the weapons disabled allows the operators to
understand only how the doctrine will interact with a peacetime operating
environment . A wartime operating environment will inevitably be different and
raise novel challenges . The USS Vincennes accident highlights this problem . The
Vincennes crew faced a set of conditions that were different from peacetime—
military and commercial aircraft operating in close proximity from the same air
base coupled with an ongoing hostile engagement from Iranian boats firing at the
Vincennes . Had they routinely faced these challenges , they might have been able
to come up with protocols to avoid an accident , such as staying off the path of
civilian airliners . However , their day-to-day operations did not prepare them—
and could not have prepared them—for the complexities that combat would
bring . Hawley remarked ,  “ You can go through all of the kinds of training that
you think you should do .  .  . what nails you is the unexpected and the surprises .  ” 
Another important difference between peacetime high-reliability
organizations and war is the presence of adversarial actors . Safe operation of
complex systems is difficult because bureaucratic actors have other interests that
can sometimes compete with safety—profit , prestige , etc . However , none of the
actors are generally hostile to safety . The risk is that people take shortcuts , not
actively sabotage safe operations . War is different . War is an inherently
adversarial environment in which there are actors attempting to undermine , 
exploit , or subvert systems . Militaries prepare their troops for this environment
not by trying to train their troops for every possible enemy action , but rather by
inculcating a culture of resiliency , decisiveness , and autonomous execution of
orders . Warfighters must adapt on the fly and come up with novel solutions to
respond to enemy actions . This is an area in which humans excel , but machines
perform poorly . The brittleness of automation is a major weakness when it
comes to responding to adversary innovation . Once an adversary finds a
vulnerability in an autonomous system , he or she is free to exploit it until a
human realizes the vulnerability and either fixes the system or adapts its use . The
system itself cannot adapt . The predictability that a human user finds desirable in
automation can be a vulnerability in an adversarial environment . 
Finally , the key ingredient in high-reliability organizations that makes them
reliable is people , who by definition are not present in the actual execution of
operations by a fully autonomous weapon . People are what makes highreliability organizations reliable . Automation can play a role for “ planned
actions ,  ” as William Kennedy explained , but humans are required to make the
system flexible , so that operations are resilient in the face of atypical events . 
Humans put slack in a system ’ s operations , reducing the tight coupling between
components and allowing for judgment to play a role in operations . In fully
autonomous systems , humans are present during the design and testing of a
system and humans put the system into operation , but humans are not present
during actual operations . They cannot intervene if something goes wrong . The
organization that enables high reliability is not available—the machine is on its
own , at least for some period of time . Safety under these conditions requires
something more than high-reliability organizations . It requires high-reliability
fully autonomous complex machines , and there is no precedent for such systems . 
This would require a vastly different kind of machine from Aegis , one that was
exceptionally predictable to the user but not to the enemy , and with a faulttolerant design that defaulted to safe operations in the event of failures . 
Given the state of technology today , no one knows how to build a complex
system that is 100 percent fail-safe . It is tempting to think that future systems
will change this dynamic . The promise of “ smarter ” machines is seductive : they
will be more advanced , more intelligent , and therefore able to account for more
variables and avoid failures . To a certain extent , this is true . A more
sophisticated early warning system that understood U . S . nuclear doctrine might
have been able to apply something similar to Petrov ’ s judgment , determining
that the attack was likely false . A more advanced version of the Patriot might
have been able to take into account the IFF problems or electromagnetic
interference and withhold firing on potentially ambiguous targets . 
But smarter machines couldn ’ t avoid accidents entirely . New features
increase complexity , a double-edged sword . More complex machines may be
more capable , but harder for users to understand and predict their behavior , 
particularly in novel situations . For rule-based systems , deciphering the intricate
web of relationships between the various rules that govern a system ’ s behavior
and all possible interactions it might have with its environment quickly becomes
impossible . Adding more rules can make a system smarter by allowing it to
account for more scenarios , but the increased complexity of its internal logic
makes it even more opaque to the user . 
Learning systems would appear to sidestep this problem . They don ’ t rely on
rules . Rather , the system is fed data and then learns the correct answer through
experience over time . Some of the most innovative advances in AI are in
learning systems , such as deep neural networks . Militaries will want to use
learning systems to solve difficult problems , and indeed programs such as
DARPA ’ s TRACE already aim to do so . Testing these systems is even more
challenging , however . Incomprehensibility is a problem in complex systems , but
it is far worse in systems that learn on their own . 
11
BLACK BOX
THE WEIRD , ALIEN WORLD OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
Learning machines that don ’ t follow a set of programmed rules , but rather
learn from data , are effectively a “ black box ” to designers . Computer
programmers can look at the network ’ s output and see whether it is right or
wrong , but understanding why the system came to a certain conclusion—and , 
more importantly , predicting its failures in advance—can be quite challenging . 
Bob Work specifically called out this problem when I met with him .  “ How do
you do test and evaluation of learning systems ?  ” he asked . He didn ’ t have an
answer ; it is a difficult problem . 
The problem of verifying the behavior of learning systems is starkly
illustrated by the vulnerability of the current class of visual object recognition
AIs to “ adversarial images .  ” Deep neural networks have proven to be an
extremely powerful tool for object recognition , performing as well or better than
humans in standard benchmark tests . However , researchers have also discovered
that , at least with current techniques , they have strange and bizarre
vulnerabilities that humans lack . 
Adversarial images are pictures that exploit deep neural networks ’ 
vulnerabilities to trick them into confidently identifying false images . 
Adversarial images ( usually created by researchers intentionally ) come in two
forms : one looks like abstract wavy lines and shapes and the other looks to the
human eye like meaningless static . Neural networks nevertheless identify these
nonsense images as concrete objects , such as a starfish , cheetah , or peacock , 
with greater than 99 percent confidence . The problem isn ’ t that the networks get
some objects wrong . The problem is that the way in which the deep neural nets
get the objects wrong is bizarre and counterintuitive to humans . The networks
falsely identify objects from meaningless static or abstract shapes in ways that
humans never would . This makes it difficult for humans to accurately predict the
circumstances in which the neural net might fail . Because the network behaves
in a way that seems totally alien , it is very difficult for humans to come up with
an accurate mental model of the network ’ s internal logic to predict its behavior . 
Within the black box of the neural net lies a counterintuitive and unexpected
form of brittleness , one that is surprising even to the network ’ s designers . This is
not a weakness of only one specific network . This vulnerability appears to be
replicated across most deep neural networks currently used for object
recognition . In fact , one doesn ’ t even need to know the specific internal structure
of the network in order to fool it . 
High-Confidence “ Fooling Images ” A state-of-the-art image recognition neural network identified these
images , which are unrecognizable to humans , as familiar objects with a greater than 99 . 6 percent certainty . 
Researchers evolved the images using two different techniques : evolving individual pixels for the top eight
images and evolving the image as a whole for the bottom eight images . 
To better understand this phenomenon , I spoke with Jeff Clune , an AI
researcher at the University of Wyoming who was part of the research team that
discovered these vulnerabilities . Clune described their discovery as a “ textbook
case of scientific serendipity .  ” They were attempting to design a “ creative
artificial intelligence that could endlessly innovate .  ” To do this , they took an
existing deep neural network that was trained on image recognition and had it
evolve new images that were abstractions of the image classes it knew . For
example , if it had been trained to recognize baseballs , then they had the neural
net evolve a new image that captured the essence of “ baseball .  ” They envisioned
this creative AI as a form of artist and expected the result would be unique
computer images that were nevertheless recognizable to humans . Instead , the
images they got were “ completely unrecognizable garbage ,  ” Clune said . What
was even more surprising , however , was that other deep neural nets agreed with
theirs and identified the seemingly garbage images as actual objects . Clune
described this discovery as stumbling across a “ huge , weird , alien world of
imagery ” that AIs all agree on . 
This vulnerability of deep neural nets to adversarial images is a major
problem . In the near term , it casts doubt on the wisdom of using the current class
of visual object recognition AIs for military applications—or for that matter any
high-risk applications in adversarial environments . Deliberately feeding a
machine false data to manipulate its behavior is known as a spoofing attack , and
the current state-of-the-art image classifiers have a known weakness to spoofing
attacks that can be exploited by adversaries . Even worse , the adversarial images
can be surreptitiously embedded into normal images in a way that is
undetectable by humans . This makes it a “ hidden exploit ,  ” and Clune explained
that this could allow an adversary to trick the AI in a way that was invisible to
the human . For example , someone could embed an image into the mottled gray
of an athletic shirt , tricking an AI security camera into believing the person
wearing the shirt was authorized entry , and human security guards wouldn ’ t
even be able to tell a fooling image being used . 
Hidden Spoofing Attacks Inside Images The images on the right and left columns look identical to
humans , but are perceived very differently by neural networks . The left column shows the unaltered image , 
which is correctly identified by the neural network . The middle column shows , at 10x amplification , the
difference between the images on the right and left . The right column shows the manipulated images , which
contain a hidden spoofing attack that is not noticeable by humans . Due to the subtle manipulation of the
image , the neural network identified all of the objects in the right column as “ ostrich .  ” 
Researchers are only beginning to understand why the current class of deep
neural networks is susceptible to this type of manipulation . It appears to stem
from fundamental properties of their internal structures . The semitechnical
explanation is that while deep neural networks are highly nonlinear at the macro
level , they actually use linear methods to interpret data at the micro level . What
does that mean ? Imagine a field of gray dots separated into two clusters , with
mostly light gray dots on the right and darker gray dots on the left , but with
some overlap in the middle . Now imagine the neural net is trained on this data
and asked to predict whether , given the position of a new dot , it is likely to be
light or dark gray . Based on current methods , the AI will draw a line between the
light and dark gray clusters . The AI would then predict that new dots on the left
side of the line are likely to be darker and new dots on the right side of the line
are likely to be lighter , acknowledging that there is some overlap and there will
be an occasional light gray dot on the left or dark gray on the right . Now imagine
that you asked it to predict where the darkest possible dot would be . Since the
further one moves to the left the more likely the dot is to be dark gray , the AI
would put it “ infinitely far to the left ,  ” Clune explained . This is the case even
though the AI has zero information about any dots that far away . Even worse , 
because the dot is so far to the left , the AI would be very confident in its
prediction that the dot would be dark . This is because at the micro level , the AI
has a very simple , linear representation of the data . All it knows is that the
further one moves left , the more likely the dot is to be dark . 
The “ fooling images ,  ” as Clune calls them , exploit this vulnerability . He
explained that ,  “ real-world images are a very , very small , rare subset of all
possible images .  ” On real-world images , the AIs do fairly well . This hack
exploits their weakness on the extremes , however , in the space of all possible
images , which is virtually infinite . 
Because this vulnerability stems from the basic structure of the neural net , it
is present in essentially every deep neural network commonly in use today , 
regardless of its specific design . It applies to visual object recognition neural
nets but also to those used for speech recognition or other data analysis . This
exploit has been demonstrated with song-interpreting AIs , for example . 
Researchers fed specially evolved noise into the AI , which sounds like nonsense
to humans , but which the AI confidently interpreted as music . 
In some settings , the consequences of this vulnerability could be severe . 
Clune gave a hypothetical example of a stock-trading neural net that read the
news . News-reading trading bots appear to already be active on the market , 
evidenced by sharp market moves in response to news events at speeds faster
than what is possible by human traders . If these bots used deep neural networks
to understand text—a technique that has been demonstrated and is extremely
effective—then they would be vulnerable to this form of hacking . Something as
simple as a carefully crafted tweet could fool the bots into believing a terrorist
attack was under way , for example . A similar incident already occurred in 2013
when the Associated Press Twitter account was hacked and used to send a false
tweet reporting explosions at the White House . Stocks rapidly plunged in
response . Eventually , the AP confirmed that its account had been hacked and
markets recovered , but what makes Clune ’ s exploit so damaging is that it could
be done in a hidden way , without humans even aware that it is occurring . 
Evolving Fooling Images “ Fooling images ” are created by evolving novel images that are far from the
decision boundary of the neural network . The “ decision boundary ” is the line of 50 / 50 confidence between
two classes of images , in this case two shades of dots . The neural network ’ s confidence in the image ’ s
correct classification increases as the image is further from the decision boundary . At the extremes , 
however , the image may no longer be recognizable , yet the neural network classifies the image with high
confidence . 
You may be wondering , why not just feed these images back into the
network and have it learn that these images are false , vaccinating the network
against this hack ? Clune and others have tried that . It doesn ’ t work , Clune
explained , because the space of all possible images is “ virtually infinite .  ” The
neural net learns that specific image is false , but many more fooling images can
be evolved . Clune compared it to playing an “ infinite game of whack-a-mole ” 
with “ an infinite number of holes .  ” No matter how many fooling images the AI
learns to ignore , more can be created . 
In principle , it ought to be possible to design deep neural networks that aren ’ t
vulnerable to this kind of spoofing attack , but Clune said that he hasn ’ t seen a
satisfactory solution yet . Even if one could be discovered , however , Clune said 
 “ we should definitely assume ” that the new AI has some other “ counterintuitive , 
weird ” vulnerability that we simply haven ’ t discovered yet . 
In 2017 , a group of scientific experts called JASON tasked with studying the
implications of AI for the Defense Department came to a similar conclusion . 
After an exhaustive analysis of the current state of the art in AI , they concluded :  
[ T ] he sheer magnitude , millions or billions of parameters ( i . e . weights / biases / etc .  )  , which are
learned as part of the training of the net .  .  . makes it impossible to really understand exactly how
the network does what it does . Thus the response of the network to all possible inputs is
unknowable . 
Part of this is due to the early stage of research in neural nets , but part of it is due
to the sheer complexity of the deep learning . The JASON group argued that “ the
very nature of [ deep neural networks ] may make it intrinsically difficult for them
to transition into what is typically recognized as a professionally engineered
product .  ” 
AI researchers are working on ways to build more transparent AI , but Jeff
Clune isn ’ t hopeful .  “ As deep learning gets even more powerful and more
impressive and more complicated and as the networks grow in size , there will be
more and more and more things we don ’ t understand .  .  .  . We have now created
artifacts so complicated that we ourselves don ’ t understand them .  ” Clune likened
his position to an “ AI neuroscientist ” working to discover how these artificial
brains function . It ’ s possible that AI neuroscience will elucidate these complex
machines , but Clune said that current trends point against it :  “ It ’ s almost certain
that as AI becomes more complicated , we ’ ll understand it less and less .  ” 
Even if it were possible to make simpler , more understandable AI , Clune
argued that it probably wouldn ’ t work as well as AI that is “ super complicated
and big and weird .  ” At the end of the day ,  “ people tend to use what works ,  ” even
if they don ’ t understand it .  “ This kind of a race to use the most powerful stuff—
if the most powerful stuff is inscrutable and unpredictable and incomprehensible
—somebody ’ s probably going to use it anyway .  ” 
Clune said that this discovery has changed how he views AI and is a 
 “ sobering message .  ” When it comes to lethal applications , Clune warned using
deep neural networks for autonomous targeting “ could lead to tremendous
harm .  ” An adversary could manipulate the system ’ s behavior , leading it to attack
the wrong targets .  “ If you ’ re trying to classify , target , and kill autonomously
with no human in the loop , then this sort of adversarial hacking could get fatal
and tragic extremely quickly .  ” 
While couched in more analytic language , the JASON group essentially
issued the same cautionary warning to DoD :  
[ I ] t is not clear that the existing AI paradigm is immediately amenable to any sort of software
engineering validation and verification . This is a serious issue , and is a potential roadblock to
DoD ’ s use of these modern AI systems , especially when considering the liability and
accountability of using AI in lethal systems . 
Given these glaring vulnerabilities and the lack of any known solution , it would
be extremely irresponsible to use deep neural networks , as they exist today , for
autonomous targeting . Even without any knowledge about how the neural
network was structured , adversaries could generate fooling images to draw the
autonomous weapon onto false targets and conceal legitimate ones . Because
these images can be hidden , it could do so in a way that is undetectable by
humans , until things start blowing up . 
Beyond immediate applications , this discovery should make us far more
cautious about machine learning in general . Machine learning techniques are
powerful tools , but they also have weaknesses . Unfortunately , these weaknesses
may not be obvious or intuitive to humans . These vulnerabilities are different
and more insidious than those lurking within complex systems like nuclear
reactors . The accident at Three Mile Island might not have been predictable
ahead of time , but it is at least understandable after the fact . One can lay out the
specific sequence of events and understand how one event led to another , and
how the combination of highly improbable events led to catastrophe . The
vulnerabilities of deep neural networks are different ; they are entirely alien to the
human mind . One group of researchers described them as “ nonintuitive
characteristics and intrinsic blind spots , whose structure is connected to the data
distribution in a non-obvious way .  ” In other words : the AIs have weaknesses
that we can ’ t anticipate and we don ’ t really understand how it happens or why . 
12
FAILING DEADLY
THE RISK OF AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS
Acknowledging that machine intelligence has weaknesses does not negate its
advantages . AI isn ’ t good or bad . It is powerful . The question is how humans
should use this technology . How much freedom ( autonomy ) should we give AIempowered machines to perform tasks on their own ? 
Delegating a task to a machine means accepting the consequences if the
machine fails . John Borrie of UNIDIR told me ,  “ I think that we ’ re being overly
optimistic if we think that we ’ re not going to see problems of system accidents ” 
in autonomous weapons . Army researcher John Hawley agreed :  “ If you ’ re going
to turn these things loose , whether it be Patriot , whether it be Aegis , whether it
be some type of totally unmanned system with the ability to kill , you have to be
psychologically prepared to accept the fact that sometimes incidents will
happen .  ” Charles Perrow , the father of normal accident theory , made a similar
conclusion about complex systems in general :  
[ E ] ven with our improved knowledge , accidents and , thus , potential catastrophes are inevitable in
complex , tightly coupled systems with lethal possibilities . We should try harder to reduce failures
—and that will help a great deal—but for some systems it will not be enough .  .  .  . We must live
and die with their risks , shut them down , or radically redesign them . 
If we are to use autonomous weapons , we must accept their risks . All
weapons are dangerous . War entails violence . Weapons that are designed to be
dangerous to the enemy can also be dangerous to the user if they slip out of
control . Even a knife wielded improperly can slip and cut its user . Most modern
weapons , regardless of their level of autonomy , are complex systems . Accidents
will happen , and sometimes these accidents will result in fratricide or civilian
casualties . What makes autonomous weapons any different ? 
The key difference between semi- , supervised , and fully autonomous
weapons is amount of damage the system can cause until the next opportunity
for a human to intervene . In semi-or supervised autonomous weapons , such as
Aegis , the human is a natural fail-safe against accidents , a circuit breaker if
things go wrong . The human can step outside of the rigid rules of the system and
exercise judgment . Taking the human out of the loop reduces slack and increases
the coupling of the system . In fully autonomous weapons , there is no human to
intervene and halt the system ’ s operation . A failure that might cause a single
unfortunate incident with a semiautonomous weapon could cause far greater
damage if it occurred in a fully autonomous weapon . 
THE RUNAWAY GUN
A simple malfunction in an automatic weapon—a machine gun—provides an
analogy for the danger with autonomous weapons . When functioning properly , a
machine gun continues firing so long as the trigger remains held down . Once the
trigger is released , a small metal device called a “ sear ” springs into place to stop
the operating rod within the weapon from moving , halting the automatic firing
process . Over time , however , the sear can become worn down . If the sear
becomes so worn down that it fails to stop the operating rod , the machine gun
will continue firing even when the trigger is released . The gun will keep firing
on its own until it exhausts its ammunition . 
This malfunction is called a runaway gun . 
Runaway guns are serious business . The machine gunner has let go of the
trigger , but the gun continues firing : the firing process is now fully automatic , 
with no way to directly halt it . The only way to stop a runaway gun is to break
the links on the ammunition belt feeding into the weapon . While this is
happening , the gunner must ensure the weapon stays pointed in a safe direction . 
A runaway gun is the kind of hypothetical danger I was aware of as an
infantry soldier , but I remember clearly the first time I heard about one actually
occurring . We were out on an overnight patrol in northeastern Afghanistan and
got word of an incident back at the outpost where we were based . An M249
SAW ( light machine gun ) gunner tried to disassemble his weapon without
removing the ammunition first .  ( Pro tip : bad idea .  ) When he removed the pistol
grip , the sear that held back the operating rod came out with it . The bolt
slammed forward , firing off a round . The recoil cycled the weapon , which
reloaded and fired again . Without anything to stop it , the weapon kept firing . A
stream of bullets sailed across the outpost , stitching a line of holes across the far
wall until someone broke the links of the ammunition belt feeding into the gun . 
No one was killed , but such accidents don ’ t always end well . 
In 2007 , a South African antiaircraft gun malfunctioned on a firing range , 
resulting in a runaway gun that killed nine soldiers . Contrary to breathless
reports of a “ robo-cannon rampage ,  ” the remote gun was not an autonomous
weapon and likely malfunctioned because of a mechanical problem , not a
software glitch . According to sources knowledgeable about the weapon , it was
likely bad luck , not deliberate targeting , that caused the gun to swivel toward
friendly lines when it malfunctioned . Unfortunately , despite the heroic efforts of
one artillery officer who risked her life to try to stop the runaway gun , the gun
poured a string of 35 mm rounds into a neighboring gun position , killing the
soldiers present . 
Runaway guns can be deadly affairs even with simple machine guns that
can ’ t aim themselves . A loss of control of an autonomous weapon would be a far
more dangerous situation . The destruction unleashed by an autonomous weapon
would not be random—it would be targeted . If there were no human to
intervene , a single accident could become many , with the system continuing to
engage inappropriate targets until it exhausted its ammunition .  “ The machine
doesn ’ t know it ’ s making a mistake ,  ” Hawley observed . The consequences to
civilians or friendly forces could be disastrous . 
Risk of Delegating Autonomy to a Machine
THE DANGER OF AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS
With autonomous weapons , we are like Mickey enchanting the broomstick . We
trust that autonomous weapons will perform their functions correctly . We trust
that we have designed the system , tested it , and trained the operators correctly . 
We trust that the operators are using the system the right way , in an environment
they can understand and predict , and that they remain vigilant and don ’ t cede
their judgment to the machine . Normal accident theory would suggest that we
should trust a little less . 
Autonomy is tightly bounded in weapons today . Fire-and-forget missiles
cannot be recalled once launched , but their freedom to search for targets in space
and time is limited . This restricts the damage they could cause if they fail . In
order for them to strike the wrong target , there would need to be an inappropriate
target that met the seeker ’ s parameters within the seeker ’ s field of view for the
limited time it was active . Such a circumstance is not inconceivable . That
appears to be what occurred in the F-18 Patriot fratricide . If missiles were made
more autonomous , however—if the freedom of the seeker to search in time and
space were expanded—the possibility for more accidents like the F-18
shootdown would expand . 
Supervised autonomous weapons such as the Aegis have more freedom to
search for targets in time and space , but this freedom is compensated for by the
fact that human operators have more immediate control over the weapon . 
Humans supervise the weapon ’ s operation in real time . For Aegis , they can
engage hardware-level cutouts that will disable power , preventing a missile
launch . An Aegis is a dangerous dog kept on a tight leash . 
Fully autonomous weapons would be a fundamental paradigm shift in
warfare . In deploying fully autonomous weapons , militaries would be
introducing onto the battlefield a highly lethal system that they cannot control or
recall once launched . They would be sending this weapon into an environment
that they do not control where it is subject to enemy hacking and manipulation . 
In the event of failures , the damage fully autonomous weapons could cause
would be limited only by the weapons ’ range , endurance , ability to sense targets , 
and magazine capacity . 
Additionally , militaries rarely deploy weapons individually . Flaws in any
one system are likely to be replicated in entire squadrons and fleets of
autonomous weapons , opening the door to what John Borrie described as 
 “ incidents of mass lethality .  ” This is fundamentally different from human
mistakes , which tend to be idiosyncratic . Hawley told me ,  “ If you put someone
else in [ a fratricide situation ]  , they probably would assess the situation
differently and they may or may not do that .  ” Machines are different . Not only
will they continue making the same mistake ; all other systems of that same type
will do so as well . 
A frequent refrain in debates about autonomous weapons is that humans also
make mistakes and if the machines are better , then we should use the machines . 
This objection is a red herring and misconstrues the nature of autonomous
weapons . If there are specific engagement-related tasks that automation can do
better than humans , then those tasks should be automated . Humans , whether in
the loop or on the loop , act as a vital fail-safe , however . It ’ s the difference
between a pilot flying an airplane on autopilot and an airplane with no human in
the cockpit at all . The key factor to assess with autonomous weapons isn ’ t
whether the system is better than a human , but rather if the system fails ( which it
inevitably will )  , what is the amount of damage it could cause , and can we live
with that risk ? 
Putting an offensive fully autonomous weapon system into operation would
be like turning an Aegis to Auto-Special , rolling FIS green , pointing it toward a
communications-denied environment , and having everyone on board exit the
ship . Deploying autonomous weapons would be like putting a whole fleet of
these systems into operation . There is no precedent for delegating that amount of
lethality to autonomous systems without any ability for humans to intervene . In
fact , placing that amount of trust in machines would run 180 degrees counter to
the tight control the Aegis community maintains over supervised autonomous
weapons today . 
I asked Captain Galluch what he thought of an Aegis operating on its own
with no human supervision . It was the only question I asked him in our fourhour interview for which he did not have an immediate answer . It was clear that
in his thirty-year career it had never once occurred to him to turn an Aegis to
Auto-Special , roll FIS green , and have everyone on board exit the ship . He
leaned back in his chair and looked out the window .  “ I don ’ t have a lot of good
answers for that ,  ” he said . But then he began to walk through what one might
need to do to build trust in such a system , applying his decades of experience
with Aegis . One would need to “ build a little , test a little ,  ” he said . High-fidelity
computer modeling coupled with real-world tests and live-fire exercises would
be necessary to understand the system ’ s limitations and the risks of using it . 
Still , he said , if the military did deploy a fully autonomous weapon ,  “ we ’ re
going to get a Vincennes-like response ” in the beginning .  “ Understanding the
complexity of Aegis has been a thirty-year process ,  ” Galluch said .  “ Aegis today
is not the Aegis of Vincennes ,  ” but only because the Navy has learned from
mistakes . With a fully autonomous weapon , we ’ d be starting at year zero . 
Deploying fully autonomous weapons would be a weighty risk , but it might
be one that militaries decide is worth taking . Doing so would be entering
uncharted waters . Experience with supervised autonomous weapons such as
Aegis would be useful , but only to a point . Fully autonomous weapons in
wartime would face unique conditions that limit the applicability of lessons from
high-reliability organizations . The wartime operating environment is different
from day-to-day peacetime experience . Hostile actors are actively trying to
undermine safe operations . And no humans would be present at the time of
operation to intervene or correct problems . 
There is one industry that has many of these dynamics , where automation is
used in a competitive high-risk environment and at speeds that make it
impossible for humans to compete : stock-trading . The world of high-frequency
trading—and its consequences—has instructive lessons for what could happen if
militaries deployed fully autonomous weapons . 
PART IV
Flash War
13
BOT VS . BOT
AN ARMS RACE IN SPEED
On May 6 , 2010 , at 2 : 32 p . m . Eastern Time , the S & P 500 , NASDAQ , and
Dow Jones Industrial Average all began a precipitous downward slide . Within a
few minutes , they were in free fall . By 2 : 45 p . m .  , the Dow had lost nearly 10
percent of its value . Then , just as inexplicably , the markets rebounded . By 3 : 00
p . m .  , whatever glitch had caused the sharp drop in the market was over . 
However , the repercussions from the “ Flash Crash ,  ” as it came to be known , 
were only beginning . 
Asian markets tumbled when they opened the next day , and while the
markets soon stabilized , it was harder to repair confidence . Traders described the
Flash Crash as “ horrifying ” and “ absolute chaos ,  ” reminiscent of the 1987 
 “ Black Monday ” crash where the Dow Jones lost 22 percent of its value . Market
corrections had occurred before , but the sudden downward plunge followed by
an equally rapid reset suggested something else . In the years preceding the Flash
Crash , algorithms had taken over a large fraction of stock trading , including
high-frequency trading that occurred at superhuman speeds . Were the machines
to blame ? 
Investigations followed , along with counter-investigations and eventually
criminal charges . Simple answers proved elusive . Researchers blamed
everything from human error to brittle algorithms , high-frequency trading , 
market volatility , and deliberate market manipulation . In truth , all of them likely
played a role . Like other normal accidents , the Flash Crash had multiple causes , 
any one of which individually would have been manageable . The combination , 
however , was uncontrollable . 
RISE OF THE MACHINES
Stock trading today is largely automated . Gone are the days of floor traders
shouting prices and waving their hands to compete for attention in the furious
scrum of the New York Stock Exchange . Approximately three-quarters of all
trades made in the U . S . stock market today are executed by algorithms . 
Automated stock trading , sometimes called algorithmic trading , is when
computer algorithms are used to monitor the market and make trades based on
certain conditions . The simplest kind of algorithm , or “ algo ,  ” is used to break up
large trades into smaller ones in order to minimize the costs of the trade . If a
single buy or sell order is too large relative to the volume of that stock that is
regularly traded , placing the order all at once can skew the market price . To
avoid this , traders use algorithms to break up the sale into pieces that can be
executed incrementally according to stock price , time , volume , or other factors . 
In such cases , the decision to make the trade ( to buy or sell a certain amount of
stock ) is still made by a person . The machine simply handles the execution of
the trade . 
Some trading algorithms take on more responsibility , actually making
automated trading decisions to buy or sell based on the market . For example , an
algorithm could be tasked to monitor a stock ’ s price over a period of time . When
the price moves significantly above or below the average of where the price has
been , the algo sells or buys accordingly , under the assumption that over time the
price will revert back to the average , yielding a profit . Another strategy could be
to look for arbitrage opportunities , where the price of a stock in one market is
different from the price in another market , and this price difference can be
exploited for profit . All of these strategies could , in principle , be done by
humans . Automated trading offers the advantage , however , of monitoring large
amounts of data and immediately and precisely making trades in ways that
would be impossible for humans . 
Speed is a vital factor in stock trading . If there is a price imbalance and a
stock is under-or overpriced , many other traders are also looking to sweep up
that profit . Move too slow and one could miss the opportunity . The result has
been an arms race in speed and the rise of high-frequency trading , a specialized
type of automated trading that occurs at speeds too quick for humans to even
register . 
The blink of an eye takes a fraction of a second—0 . 1 to 0 . 4 seconds—but is
still an eon compared to high-frequency trading . High-frequency trades move at
speeds measured in microseconds : 0 . 000001 seconds . During the span of a
single eyeblink , 100 , 000 microseconds pass by . The result is an entirely new
ecosystem , a world of trading bots dueling at superhuman speeds only accessible
by machines . 
The gains from even a slight advantage in speed are so significant that highfrequency traders will go to great lengths to shave just a few microseconds off
their trading times . High-frequency traders colocate their servers within the
server rooms of stock exchanges , cutting down on travel time . Some are even
willing to pay additional money to move their firm ’ s servers a few feet closer to
the stock exchange ’ s servers inside the room . Firms try to find the shortest route
for their cables within the server room , cutting microseconds off transit time . 
Like race teams outfitting an Indy car , high-frequency traders spare no expense
in optimizing every part of their hardware for speed , from data switches to the
glass inside fiber-optic cables . 
At the time scales at which high-frequency trading operates , humans have to
delegate trading decisions to the algorithms . Humans can ’ t possibly observe the
market and react to it in microseconds . That means if things go wrong , they can
go wrong very quickly . To ensure algorithms do what they are designed to do
once released into the real world , developers test them against actual stock
market data , but with trading disabled—analogous to testing Aegis doctrine with
the FIS key turned red . Despite this , accidents still occur .  
 “ KNIGHTMARE ON WALL STREET ” 
In 2012 , Knight Capital Group was a titan of high-frequency trading . Knight was
a “ market maker ,  ” a high-frequency trader that executed over 3 . 3 billion trades , 
totaling $21 billion , every single day . Like most high-frequency traders , Knight
didn ’ t hold on to this stock . Stocks were bought and sold the same day , 
sometimes within fractions of a second . Nevertheless , Knight was a key player
in the U . S . stock market , executing 17 percent of all trades on the New York
Stock Exchange and NASDAQ . Their slogan was ,  “ The Science of Trading , the
Standard of Trust .  ” Like many high-frequency trading firms , their business was
lucrative . On the morning of July 31 , 2012 , Knight had $365 million in assets . 
Within 45 minutes , they would be bankrupt . 
At 9 : 30 a . m . Eastern Time on July 31 , U . S . markets opened and Knight
deployed a new automated trading system . Instantly , it was apparent that
something was wrong . One of the functions of the automated trading system was
to break up large orders into smaller ones , which then would be executed
individually . Knight ’ s trading system wasn ’ t registering that these smaller trades
were actually completed , however , so it kept tasking them again . This created an
endless loop of trades . Knight ’ s trading system began flooding the market with
orders , executing over a thousand trades a second . Even worse , Knight ’ s
algorithm was buying high and selling low , losing money on every trade . 
There was no way to stop it . The developers had neglected to install a “ kill
switch ” to turn their algorithm off . There was no equivalent of “ rolling FIS red ” 
to terminate trading . While Knight ’ s computer engineers worked to diagnose the
problem , the software was actively trading in the market , moving $2 . 6 million a
second . By the time they finally halted the system 45 minutes later , the runaway
algo had executed 4 million trades , moving $7 billion . Some of those trades
made money , but Knight lost a net $460 million . The company only had $365
million in assets . Knight was bankrupt . 
An influx of cash from investors helped Knight cover their losses , but the
company was ultimately sold . The incident became known as the “ Knightmare
on Wall Street ,  ” a cautionary tale for partners to tell their associates about the
dangers of high-frequency trading . Knight ’ s runaway algo vividly demonstrated
the risk of using an autonomous system in a high-stakes application , especially
with no ability for humans to intervene . Despite their experience in highfrequency trading , Knight was taking fatal risks with their automated stock
trading system . 
BEHIND THE FLASH CRASH
If the Knightmare on Wall Street was like a runaway gun , the Flash Crash was
like a forest fire . The damage from Knight ’ s trading debacle was largely
contained to a single company , but the Flash Crash affected the entire market . A
volatile combination of factors meant that during the Flash Crash , one
malfunctioning algorithm interacted with an entire marketplace ready to run out
of control . And run away it did . 
The spark that lit the fire was a single bad algorithm . At 2 : 32 p . m . on May 6 , 
2010 , Kansas-based mutual fund trader Waddell & Reed initiated a sale of
75 , 000 S & P 500 E-mini futures contracts estimated at $4 . 1 billion .  ( E-minis are
a smaller type of futures contract , one-fifth the size of a regular futures contract . 
A futures contract is what it sounds like : an agreement to buy or sell at a certain
price at a certain point in time in the future .  ) Because executing such a large
trade all at once could distort the market , Waddell & Reed used a “ sell
algorithm ” to break up the sale into smaller trades , a standard practice . The
algorithm was tied to the overall volume of E-minis sold on the market , with
direction to execute the sale at 9 percent of the trading volume over the previous
minute . In theory , this should have spread out the sale so as to not overly
influence the market . 
The sell algorithm was given no instructions with regard to time or price , 
however , an oversight that led to a catastrophic case of brittleness . The market
that day was already under stress . Government investigators later characterized
the market as “ unusually turbulent ,  ” in part due to an unfolding European debt
crisis that was causing uncertainty . By midafternoon , the market was
experiencing “ unusually high volatility ”  ( sharp movements in prices ) and low
liquidity ( low market depth )  . It was into these choppy waters that the sell
algorithm waded . 
Only twice in the previous year had a single trader attempted to unload so
many E-minis on the market in a single day . Normally , a trade of this scale took
hours to execute . This time , because the sell algorithm was only tied to volume
and not price or time , it happened very quickly : within 20 minutes . 
The sell algorithm provided the spark , and high-frequency traders were the
gasoline . High-frequency traders bought the E-minis the sell algorithm was
unloading and , as is their frequent practice , rapidly resold them . This increased
the volume of E-minis being traded on the market . Since the rate at which the
sell algorithm sold E-minis was tied to volume but not price or time , it
accelerated its sales , dumping more E-minis on an already stressed market . 
Without buyers interested in buying up all of the E-minis that the sell
algorithm and high-frequency traders were selling , the price of E-minis dropped , 
falling 3 percent in just four minutes . This generated a “ hot potato ” effect among
high-frequency traders as they tried to unload the falling E-minis onto other
high-frequency traders . In one 14-second period , high-frequency trading
algorithms exchanged 27 , 000 E-mini contracts .  ( The total amount Waddell & 
Reed were trying to sell was 75 , 000 contracts .  ) All the while as trading volume
skyrocketed , the sell algorithm kept unloading more and more E-minis on a
market that was unable to handle them . 
The plummeting E-minis dragged down other U . S . markets . Observers
watched the Dow Jones , NASDAQ , and S & P 500 all plunge , inexplicably . 
Finally , at 2 : 45 : 28 p . m .  , an automated “ stop logic ” safety on the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange kicked in , halting E-mini trading for 5 seconds and
allowing the markets to reset . They rapidly recovered , but the sharp distortions
in the market wreaked havoc on trading . Over 20 , 000 trades had been executed
at what financial regulators termed “ irrational prices ” far from their norm , some
as low as a penny or as high as $100 , 000 . After the markets closed , the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority worked with stock exchanges to cancel tens of
thousands of “ clearly erroneous ” trades . 
The Flash Crash demonstrated how when brittle algorithms interact with a
complex environment at superhuman speeds , the result can be a runaway process
with catastrophic consequences . The stock market as a whole is an incredibly
complex system that defies simple understanding , which can make predicting
these interactions difficult ahead of time . On a different day , under different
market conditions , the same sell algorithm may not have led to a crash . 
PRICE WARS : $23 , 698 , 655 . 93 ( PLUS $3 . 99 SHIPPING ) 
While complexity was a factor in the Flash Crash , even simple interactions
between algorithms can lead to runaway escalation . This phenomenon was
starkly illustrated when two warring bots jacked up the price of an otherwise
ordinary book on Amazon to $23 million . Michael Eisen , a biologist at UC
Berkeley , accidentally stumbled across this price war for Peter Lawrence ’ s
Making of a Fly : The Genetics of Animal Design . Like a good scientist , Eisen
began investigating . 
Two online sellers , bordeebook and profnath , both of whom were legitimate
online booksellers with thousands of positive ratings , were locked in a runaway
price war . Once a day , profnath would set its price to 0 . 9983 times bordeebook ’ s
price , slightly undercutting them . A few hours later , bordeebook would change
its price to 1 . 270589 times profnath ’ s . The combination raised both booksellers ’ 
prices by approximately 27 percent daily . 
Bots were clearly to blame . The pricing was irrational and precise . 
Profnath ’ s algorithm made sense ; it was trying to draw in sales by slightly
undercutting the highest price on the market . What was bordeebook ’ s algorithm
doing , though ? Why raise the price over the highest competitor ? 
Eisen hypothesized that bordeebook didn ’ t actually own the book . Instead , 
they probably were posting an ad and hoping their higher reviews would attract
customers . If someone bought the book , then of course bordeebook would have
to buy it , so they set their price slightly above—1 . 270589 times greater than—
the highest price on the market , so they could make a profit . 
Eventually , someone at one of the two companies caught on . The price
peaked out at $23 , 698 , 655 . 93 ( plus $3 . 99 shipping ) before dropping back to a
tamer $134 . 97 , where it stayed . Eisen mused in a blog posting , however , about
the possibilities for “ chaos and mischief ” that this discovery suggested . A person
could potentially hack this vulnerability of the bots , manipulating prices . 
SPOOFING THE BOT
Eisen wasn ’ t the first to think of exploiting the predictability of bots for financial
gain . Others had seen these opportunities before him , and they ’ d gone and done
it . Six years after the Flash Crash in 2016 , London-based trader Navinder Singh
Sarao pled guilty to fraud and spoofing , admitting that he used an automated
trading algorithm to manipulate the market for E-minis on the day of the crash . 
According to the U . S . Department of Justice , Sarao used automated trading
algorithms to place multiple large-volume orders to create the appearance of
demand to drive up price , then cancelled the orders before they were executed . 
By deliberately manipulating the price , Sarao could buy low and sell high , 
making a profit as the price moved . 
It would be overly simplistic to pin the blame for the Flash Crash on Sarao . 
He continued his alleged market manipulation for five years after the Flash
Crash until finally arrested in 2015 and his spoofing algorithm was reportedly
turned off during the sharpest downturn in the Flash Crash . His spoofing could
have exacerbated instability in the E-mini market that day , however , contributing
to the crash . 
AFTERMATH
In the aftermath of the Flash Crash , regulators installed “ circuit breakers ” to
limit future damage . Circuit breakers , which were first introduced after the 1987
Black Monday crash , halt trading if stock prices drop too quickly . Market-wide
circuit breakers trip if the S & P 500 drops more than 7 percent , 13 percent or 20
percent from the closing price the previous day , temporarily pausing trading or , 
in the event of a 20 percent drop , shutting down markets for the day . After the
Flash Crash , in 2012 the Securities and Exchange Commission introduced new 
 “ limit up–limit down ” circuit breakers for individual stocks to prevent sharp , 
dramatic price swings . The limit up–limit down mechanism creates a price band
around a stock , based on the stock ’ s average price over the preceding five
minutes . If the stock price moves out of that band for more than fifteen seconds , 
trading is halted on that stock for five minutes . 
Circuit breakers are an important mechanism for preventing flash crashes
from causing too much damage . We know this because they keep getting
tripped . An average day sees a handful of circuit breakers tripped due to rapid
price moves . One day in August 2015 , over 1 , 200 circuit breakers were tripped
across multiple exchanges . Mini-flash crashes have continued to be a regular , 
even normal event on Wall Street . Sometimes these are caused by simple human
error , such as a trader misplacing a zero or using an algorithm intended for a
different trade . In other situations , as in the May 2010 flash crash , the causes are
more complex . Either way , the underlying conditions for flash crashes remain , 
making circuit breakers a vital tool for limiting their damage . As Greg Berman , 
associate director of the SEC ’ s Office of Analytics and Research , explained ,  
 “ Circuit breakers don ’ t prevent the initial problems , but they prevent the
consequences from being catastrophic .  ” 
WAR AT MACHINE SPEED
Stock trading is a window into what a future of adversarial autonomous systems
competing at superhuman speeds might look like in war . Both involve highspeed adversarial interactions in complex , uncontrolled environments . Could
something analogous to a flash crash occur in war—a flash war ? 
Certainly , if Stanislav Petrov ’ s fateful decision had been automated , the
consequences could have been disastrous : nuclear war . Nuclear command and
control is a niche application , though . One could envision militaries deploying
autonomous weapons in a wide variety of contexts but still keeping a human
finger on the nuclear trigger . 
Nonnuclear applications still hold risks for accidental escalation . Militaries
regularly interact in tense situations that have the potential for conflict , even in
peacetime . In recent years , the U . S . military has jockeyed for position with
Russian warplanes in Syria and the Black Sea , Iranian fast boats in the Straits of
Hormuz , and Chinese ships and air defenses in the South China Sea . Periods of
brinksmanship , where nations flex their militaries to assert dominance but
without actually firing weapons , are common in international relations . 
Sometimes tensions escalate to full-blown crises in which war appears
imminent , such as the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis . In such situations , even the
tiniest incident can trigger war . In 1914 , a lone gunman assassinated Archduke
Franz Ferdinand of Austria , sparking a chain of events that led to World War I . 
Miscalculation and ambiguity are common in these tense situations , and
confusion and accidents can generate momentum toward war . The Gulf of
Tonkin incident , which led Congress to authorize the war in Vietnam , was later
discovered to be partially false ; a purported gun battle between U . S . and
Vietnamese boats on August 4 , 1964 , never occurred . 
Robotic systems are already complicating these situations , even with existing
technology . In 2013 , China flew a drone over the Senkaku Islands , a contested
pile of uninhabited rocks in the East China Sea that both China and Japan claim
as their own . In response , Japan scrambled an F-15 fighter jet to intercept the
drone . Eventually , the drone turned around and left , but afterward Japan issued
news rules of engagement for how it would deal with drone incursions . The rules
were more aggressive than those for intercepting manned aircraft , with Japan
stating they would shoot down any drone entering their territory . In response , 
China stated that any attack on their drones would be an “ act of war ” and that
China would “ strike back .  ” 
As drones have proliferated , they have repeatedly been used to broach other
nations ’ sovereignty . North Korea has flown drones into South Korea . Hamas
and Hezbollah have flown drones into Israel . Pakistan has accused India of
flying drones over the Pakistani-controlled parts of Kashmir ( a claim India has
denied )  . It seems one of the first things people do when they get ahold of drones
is send them into places they don ’ t belong . 
When sovereignty is clear , the typical response has been to simply shoot
down the offending drone . Pakistan shot down the alleged Indian drone over
Kashmir . Israel has shot down drones sent into its air space . Syria shot down a
U . S . drone over its territory in 2015 . A few months later , Turkey shot down a
presumed Russian drone that penetrated Turkey from Syria . 
These incidents have not led to larger conflagrations , perhaps in part because
sovereignty in these incidents was not actually in dispute . These were clear cases
where a drone was sent into another nation ’ s air space . Within the realm of
international relations , shooting it down was seen as a reasonable response . This
same action could be perceived very differently in contested areas , however , 
such as the Senkaku Islands , where both countries assert sovereignty . In such
situations , a country whose drone was shot down might feel compelled to
escalate in order to back up their territorial claim . Hints of these incidents have
already begun . In December 2016 , China seized a small underwater robot drone
the United States was operating in the South China Sea . China quickly returned
it after U . S . protests , but other incidents might not be resolved so easily . 
All of these complications are manageable if autonomous systems do what
humans expect them to do . Robots may raise new challenges in war , but humans
can navigate these hurdles , so long as the automation is an accurate reflection of
human intent . The danger is if autonomous systems do something they aren ’ t
supposed to—if humans lose control . 
That ’ s already happened with drones . In 2010 , a Navy Fire Scout drone
wandered 23 miles off course from its Maryland base toward Washington , DC , 
restricted air space before it was brought back under control . In 2017 , an Army
Shadow drone flew more than 600 miles after operators lost control , before
finally crashing in a Colorado forest . Not all incidents have ended so harmlessly , 
however . 
In 2011 , the United States lost control of an RQ-170 stealth drone over
western Afghanistan . A few days later , it popped up on Iranian television largely
intact and in the hands of the Iranian military . Reports swirled online that Iran
had hijacked the drone by jamming its communications link , cutting off contact
with its human controllers , and then spoofing its GPS signal to trick it into
landing at an Iranian base . U . S . sources called the hacking claim “ complete
bullshit .  ”  ( Although after a few days of hemming and hawing , the United States
did awkwardly confirm the drone was theirs .  ) Either way—whatever the cause
of the mishap—the United States lost control of a highly valued stealth drone , 
which ended up in the hands of a hostile nation . 
A reconnaissance drone wandering off course might lead to international
humiliation and the loss of potentially valuable military technology . Loss of
control with a lethal autonomous weapon could be another matter . Even a robot
programmed to shoot only in self-defense could still end up firing in situations
where humans wished it hadn ’ t . If another nation ’ s military personnel or
civilians were killed , it might be difficult to de-escalate tensions . 
Heather Roff , a research scientist at Arizona State University who works on
ethics and policy for emerging technologies , says there is validity to the concern
about a “ flash war .  ” Roff is less worried about an “ isolated individual platform .  ” 
Her real concern is “ networks of systems ” working together in “ collaborative
autonomy .  ” If the visions of Bob Work and others come true , militaries will field
flotillas of robot ships , wolf packs of sub-hunting robots undersea , and swarms
of aerial drones . In that world , the consequences of a loss of control could be
catastrophic . Roff warned ,  “ If my autonomous agent is patrolling an area , like
the border of India and Pakistan , and my adversary is patrolling the same border
and we have given certain permissions to escalate in terms of self-defense and
those are linked to other systems .  .  . that could escalate very quickly .  ” An
accident like the Patriot fratricides could lead to a firestorm of unintended
lethality . 
When I sat down with Bradford Tousley , DARPA ’ s TTO director , I put the
question of flash crashes to him . Were there lessons militaries could learn from
automated stock trading ? Tousley lit up at the mention of high-frequency
trading . He was well aware of the issue and said it was one he ’ d discussed with
colleagues . He saw automated trading as a “ great analogy ” for the challenges of
automation in military applications .  “ What are the unexpected side effects of
complex systems of machines that we don ’ t fully understand ?  ” he asked
rhetorically . Tousley noted that while circuit breakers were an effective damage
control measure in stock markets ,  “ there ’ s no ‘ time out ’ in the military .  ” 
As interesting as the analogy was , Tousley wasn ’ t concerned about a flash
war because the speed dimension was vastly different between stock trading and
war .  “ I don ’ t know that large-scale military impacts are in millisconds ,  ” he said .  
( A millisecond is a thousand microseconds .  )  “ Even a hypersonic munition that
might go 700 miles in 20 minutes—it takes 20 minutes ; it doesn ’ t take 20
milliseconds .  ” The sheer physics of moving missiles , aircraft , or ships through
physical space imposes time constraints on how quickly events can spiral out of
control , in theory giving humans time to adapt and respond . 
The exception , Tousley said , was in electronic warfare and cyberspace , 
where interactions occur at “ machine speed .  ” In this world ,  “ the speed with
which a bad event can happen ,  ” he said ,  “ is milliseconds .  ” 
14
THE INVISIBLE WAR
AUTONOMY IN CYBERSPACE
In just the past few decades , humans have created an invisible world . We can ’ t
see it , but we feel its influence everywhere we go : the buzzing of a phone in our
pocket , the chime of an email , the pause when a credit card reader searches the
aether for authorization . This world is hidden from us , yet in plain view
everywhere . We call it the internet . We call it cyberspace . 
Throughout history , technology has enabled humans to venture into
inhospitable domains , from undersea to the air and space . As we did , our warmaking machines came with us . Cyberspace is no different . In this invisible
world of machines operating at machine speed , a silent war rages . 
MALICIOUS INTENT
You don ’ t need to be a computer programmer to understand malware . It ’ s the
reason you ’ re supposed to upgrade your computer and phone when prompted . 
It ’ s the reason you ’ re not supposed to click on links in emails from strangers . It ’ s
the reason you worry when you hear yet another major corporation has had
millions of credit card numbers stolen from their databases . Malware is
malicious software—viruses , Trojans , worms , botnets—a whole taxonomy of
digital diseases . 
Viruses have been a problem since the early days of computers , when they
were transmitted via floppy disk . Once computers were networked together , 
worms emerged , which actively transmit themselves over networks . In 1988 , the
first large-scale worm—at the time called the Internet Worm because it was the
first—spread across an estimated 10 percent of the internet . The internet was
pretty small then , only 60 , 000 computers , and the Internet Worm of 1988 didn ’ t
do much . Its intent was to map the internet , so all it did was replicate itself , but it
still ended up causing significant harm . Because there was no safety mechanism
in place to prevent the worm from copying itself multiple times onto the same
machine , it ended up infecting many machines with multiple copies , slowing
them down to the point of being unusable . 
Today ’ s malware is more sophisticated . Malware is used by governments , 
criminals , terrorists , and activists (  “ hacktivists ”  ) to gain access to computers for
a variety of purposes : conducting espionage , stealing intellectual property , 
exposing embarrassing secrets , slowing down or denying computer usage , or
simply creating access for future use . The scope of everyday cyber activity is
massive . In 2015 , the U . S . government had over 70 , 000 reported cybersecurity
incidents on government systems , and the number has been rising every year . 
The most frequent and the most serious attacks came from other governments . 
Many attacks are relatively minor , but some are massive in scale . In July 2015 , 
the U . S . government acknowledged a hack into the Office of Personnel
Management ( OPM ) that exposed security clearance investigation data of 21
million people . The attack was widely attributed to China , although the Chinese
government claimed it was the work of criminals operating from within China
and not officially sanctioned by the government . 
Other cyberattacks have gone beyond espionage . One of the first widely
recognized acts of “ cyberwar ” was a distributed denial of service ( DDoS ) attack
on Estonia in 2007 . DDoS attacks are designed to shut down websites by
flooding them with millions of requests , overwhelming bandwidth and denying
service to legitimate users . DDoS attacks frequently use “ botnets ,  ” networks of 
 “ zombie ” computers infected with malware and harnessed to launch the attack . 
Following a decision to relocate a Soviet war memorial , Estonia was
besieged with 128 DDoS attacks over a two-week period . The attacks did more
than take websites offline ; they affected Estonia ’ s entire electronic
infrastructure . Banks , ATMs , telecommunications , and media outlets were all
shut down . At the height of the DDoS attacks on Estonia , over a million botnetinfected computers around the globe were directed toward Estonian websites , 
pinging them four million times a second , overloading servers and shutting down
access . Estonia accused the Russian government , which had threatened 
 “ disastrous ” consequences if Estonia removed the monument , of being behind
the attack . Russia denied involvement at the time , although two years later a
Russian Duma official confirmed that a government-backed hacker group had
conducted the attacks . 
In the years since , there have been many alleged or confirmed cyberattacks
between nations . Russian government-backed hackers attacked Georgia in 2008 . 
Iran launched a series of cyberattacks against Saudi Arabia and the United States
in 2012 and 2013 , destroying data on 30 , 000 computers owned by a Saudi oil
company and carrying out 350 DDoS attacks against U . S . banks . While most
cyberattacks involve stealing , exposing , or denying data , some have crossed into
physical space . In 2010 , a worm came to light that crossed a cyber-Rubicon , 
turning 1s and 0s into physical destruction . 
STUXNET : THE CYBERSHOT HEARD ROUND THE WORLD
In the summer of 2010 , word began to spread through the computer security
world of something new , a worm unlike any other . It was more advanced than
anything seen before , the kind of malware that had clearly taken a team of
professional hackers months if not years to design . It was a form of malware that
security professionals have long speculated was possible but had never seen
before : a digital weapon . Stuxnet , as the worm came to be called , could do more
than spy , steal things , and delete data . Stuxnet could break things , not just in
cyberspace but in the physical world as well . 
Stuxnet was a serious piece of malware . Zero-day exploits take advantage of
vulnerabilities that software developers are unaware of .  ( Defenders have known
about them for “ zero days .  ”  ) Zero-days are a prized commodity in the world of
computer security , worth as much as $100 , 000 on the black market . Stuxnet had
four . Spreading via removable USB drives , the first thing Stuxnet did when it
spread to a new a system was to give itself “ root ” access in the computer , 
essentially unlimited access . Then it hid , using a real—not fake—security
certificate from a reputable company to mask itself from antivirus software . 
Then Stuxnet began searching . It spread to every machine on the network , 
looking for a very particular type of software , Siemens Step 7 , which is used to
operate programmable logic controllers ( PLCs ) used in industrial applications . 
PLCs control power plants , water valves , traffic lights , and factories . They also
control centrifuges in nuclear enrichment facilities . 
Stuxnet wasn ’ t just looking for any PLC . Stuxnet operated like a homing
munition , searching for a very specific type of PLC , one configured for
frequency-converter drives , which are used to control centrifuge speeds . If it
didn ’ t find its target , Stuxnet went dead and did nothing . If it did find it , then
Stuxnet sprang into action , deploying two encrypted “ warheads ,  ” as computer
security specialists described them . One of them hijacked the PLC , changing its
settings and taking control . The other recorded regular industrial operations and
played them back to the humans on the other side of the PLC , like a fake
surveillance video in a bank heist . While secretly sabotaging the industrial
facility , Stuxnet told anyone watching :  “ everything is fine .  ” 
Computer security specialists widely agree that Stuxnet ’ s target was an
industrial control facility in Iran , likely the Natanz nuclear enrichment facility . 
Nearly 60 percent of Stuxnet infections were in Iran and the original infections
were in companies that have been tied to Iran ’ s nuclear enrichment program . 
Stuxnet infections appear to be correlated with a sharp decline in the number of
centrifuges operating at Natanz . Security specialists have further speculated that
the United States , Israel , or possibly both , were behind Stuxnet , although
definitive attribution can be difficult in cyberspace . 
Stuxnet had a tremendous amount of autonomy . It was designed to operate
on “ air-gapped ” networks , which aren ’ t connected to the internet for security
reasons . In order to reach inside these protected networks , Stuxnet spread via
removable USB flash drives . This also meant that once Stuxnet arrived at its
target , it was on its own . Computer security company Symantec described how
this likely influenced Stuxnet ’ s design : 
While attackers could control Stuxnet with a command and control server , as mentioned
previously the key computer was unlikely to have outbound Internet access . Thus , all the
functionality required to sabotage a system was embedded directly in the Stuxnet executable . 
Unlike other malware , it wasn ’ t enough for Stuxnet to give its designers access . 
Stuxnet had to perform the mission autonomously . 
Like other malware , Stuxnet also had the ability to replicate and propagate , 
infecting other computers . Stuxnet spread far beyond its original target , infecting
over 100 , 000 computers . Symantec referred to these additional computers as 
 “ collateral damage ,  ” an unintentional side effect of Stuxnet ’ s “ promiscuous ” 
spreading that allowed it to infiltrate air-gapped networks . 
To compensate for these collateral infections , however , Stuxnet had a
number of safety features . First , if Stuxnet found itself on a computer that did
not have the specific type of PLC it was looking for , it did nothing . Second , each
copy of Stuxnet could spread via USB to only three other machines , limiting the
extent of its proliferation . Finally , Stuxnet had a self-termination date . On June
24 , 2012 , it was designed to erase all copies of itself .  ( Some experts saw these
safety features as further evidence that it was designed by a Western
government .  ) 
By using software to actively sabotage an industrial control system , 
something cybersecurity specialists thought was possible before Stuxnet but had
not yet happened , Stuxnet was the first cyberweapon . More will inevitably
follow . Stuxnet is an “ open-source weapon ” whose code is laid bare online for
other researchers to tinker with , modify , and repurpose for other attacks . The
specific vulnerabilities Stuxnet exploited will have been fixed , but its design is
already being used as a blueprint for cyberweapons to come . 
AUTONOMY IN CYBERSPACE
Autonomy is essential to offensive cyberweapons , such as Stuxnet , that are
intended to operate on closed networks separated from the internet . Once it
arrives at its target , Stuxnet carries out the attack on its own . In that sense , 
Stuxnet is analogous to a homing munition . A human chooses the target and
Stuxnet conducts the attack . 
Autonomy is also essential for cyberdefense . The sheer volume of attacks
means it is impossible to catch them all . Some will inevitably slip through
defenses , whether by using zero-day vulnerabilities , finding systems that have
not yet been updated , or exploiting users who insert infected USB drives or click
on nefarious links . This means that in addition to keeping malware out , security
specialists have also adopted “ active cyberdefenses ” to police networks on the
inside to find malware , counter it , and patch network vulnerabilities . 
In 2015 , I testified to the Senate Armed Services Committee alongside
retired General Keith Alexander , former head of the National Security Agency , 
on the future of warfare . General Alexander , focusing on cyber threats , 
explained the challenge in defending 15 , 000 “ enclaves ”  ( separate computer
networks ) within the Department of Defense . Keeping all of these networks upto-date manually was nearly impossible . Patching network vulnerabilities at 
 “ manual speed ,  ” he said , took months .  “ It should be automated ,  ” Alexander
argued .  “ The humans should be out of the loop .  ” Computer security researchers
are already working to develop these more sophisticated cyber that would take
humans out of the loop . As in other areas of autonomy , DARPA is at the leading
edge of this research . 
UNLEASHING MAYHEM : THE CYBER GRAND CHALLENGE
DARPA tackles only the most difficult research problems ,  “ DARPA hard ” 
problems that others might deem impossible . DARPA does this every day , but
when a technical problem is truly daunting even for DARPA , the organization
pulls out its big guns in a Grand Challenge . 
The first DARPA Grand Challenge was held in 2004 , on autonomous
vehicles . Twenty-one research teams competed to build a fully autonomous
vehicle that could navigate a 142-mile course across the Mojave Desert . It was
truly a “ DARPA hard ” problem . The day ended with every single vehicle broken
down , overturned , or stuck . The furthest any car got was 7 . 4 miles , only 5
percent of the way through the course . 
The organization kept at it , sponsoring a follow-up Grand Challenge the next
year . This time , it was a resounding success . Twenty-two vehicles beat the
previous year ’ s distance record and five cars finished the entire course . In 2007 , 
DARPA hosted an Urban Challenge for self-driving cars on a closed , urban
course complete with traffic and stop signs . These Grand Challenges matured
autonomous vehicle technology in leaps and bounds , laying the seeds for the
self-driving cars now in development at companies like Google and Tesla . 
DARPA has since used the Grand Challenge approach as a way to tackle
other truly daunting problems , harnessing the power of competition to generate
the best ideas and launch a technology forward . From 2013 to 2015 , DARPA
held a Robotics Challenge to advance the field of humanoid robotics , running
robots through a set of tasks simulating humanitarian relief and disaster
response . 
In 2016 , DARPA hosted a Cyber Grand Challenge to advance the field of
cybersecurity . Over one hundred teams competed to build a fully autonomous
Cyber Reasoning System to defend a network . The systems competed in a live
capture the flag competition to automatically identify computer vulnerabilities
and either patch or exploit them . 
David Brumley is a computer scientist at Carnegie Mellon University and
CEO of ForAllSecure , whose system Mayhem won the Cyber Grand Challenge . 
Brumley describes his goal as building systems that “ automatically check the
world ’ s software for exploitable bugs .  ” Mayhem is that vision brought to life , a 
 “ fully autonomous system for finding and fixing computer security
vulnerabilities .  ” In that sense , Mayhem is even more ambitious than Keith
Alexander ’ s goal of just updating software automatically . Mayhem actually goes
and finds bugs on its own—bugs that humans are not yet aware of— and then
patches them . 
Brumley explained to me that there are actually several steps in this process . 
The first is finding a vulnerability in a piece of software . The next step is
developing either an “ exploit ” to take advantage of the vulnerability or a “ patch ” 
to fix it . If a vulnerability is analogous to a weak lock , then an exploit is like a
custom-made key to take advantage of the lock ’ s weakness . A patch , on the
other hand , fixes the lock . 
Developing these exploits and patches isn ’ t enough , though . One has to
know when to use them . Even on the defensive side , Brumley explained , you
can ’ t just apply a patch as soon as you see an exploit . For any given
vulnerability , Mayhem would develop a “ suite of patches .  ” Fixing a
vulnerability isn ’ t a binary thing , where either it ’ s fixed or it isn ’ t . Brumley said ,  
 “ There ’ s grades of security , and often these have different tradeoffs on
performance , maybe even functionality .  ” Some patches might be more secure , 
but would cause the system to run slower . Which patch to apply depends on the
system ’ s use . For home use ,  “ you ’ d rather have it more functional rather than
100 percent secure ,  ” Brumley said . A customer protecting critical systems , on
the other hand , like the Department of Defense , might choose to sacrifice
efficiency for better security . When to apply the patch is another factor to
consider .  “ You don ’ t install a Microsoft PowerPoint update right before a big
business presentation ,  ” Brumley said . 
Today , these steps are all done by people . People find the vulnerabilities , 
design the patches , and upload them to an automatic update server . Even the 
 “ auto-update ” functions on your home computer are not actually fully automatic . 
You have to click “ Okay ” in order for the update to move forward . Every place
where there is a human in the loop slows down the process of finding and
patching vulnerabilities . Mayhem , on the other hand , is a completely
autonomous system for doing all those steps . That means it isn ’ t just finding and
patching vulnerabilities blindly . It ’ s also reasoning about which patch to use and
when to apply it . Brumley said it ’ s “ an autonomous system that ’ s taking all of
those things that humans are doing , it ’ s automating them , and then it ’ s reasoning
about how to use them , when to apply the patch , when to use the exploit .  ” 
Mayhem also deploys hardening techniques on programs . Brumley described
these as proactive security measures applied to a program before a vulnerability
has even been discovered to make it harder to exploit , if there are vulnerabilities . 
And Mayhem does all of this at machine speed . 
In the Cyber Grand Challenge final round , Mayhem and six other systems
competed in a battle royale to scan each other ’ s software for vulnerabilities , then
exploit the weaknesses in other systems while patching their own vulnerabilities . 
Brumley compared the competition to seven fortresses probing each together , 
trying to get into locked doors .  “ Our goal was to come up with a skeleton key
that let us in when it wasn ’ t supposed to .  ” DARPA gave points for showing a 
 “ proof of vulnerability ,  ” essentially an exploit or “ key ,  ” to get into another
system . The kind of access also mattered—full access into the system gave more
points than more limited access that was only useful for stealing information . 
Mike Walker , the DARPA program manager who ran the Cyber Grand
Challenge , said that the contest was the first time that automated cybertools had
moved beyond simply applying human-generated code and into the “ automatic
creation of knowledge .  ” By autonomously developing patches , they had moved
beyond automated antivirus systems that can clean up known malware to 
 “ automation of the supply chain .  ” Walker said ,  “ true autonomy in the cyber
domain are systems that can create their own knowledge .  .  .  . It ’ s a pretty bright
and clear line . And I think we kind of crossed it .  .  . for the first time in the
Cyber Grand Challenge .  ” 
Walker compared the Cyber Grand Challenge to the very first chess
tournaments between computers . The technology isn ’ t perfect . That wasn ’ t the
point . The goal was to prove the concept to show what can be done and refine
the technology over time . Brumley said Mayhem is roughly comparable to a 
 “ competent ” computer security professional , someone “ just fresh out of college
in computer security .  ” Mayhem has nothing on world-class hackers . Brumley
should know . He also runs a team of competitive human hackers who compete in
the DEF CON hacking conference , the “ world series ” of hacking . Brumley ’ s
team from Carnegie Mellon has won four out of the past five years . 
Brumley ’ s aim with Mayhem isn ’ t to beat the best human hackers , though . 
He has something far more practical—and transformative—in mind . He wants to
fundamentally change computer security . As the internet colonizes physical
objects all around us—bringing toasters , watches , cars , thermostats and other
household objects online in the Internet of Things ( IoT )  , this digitization and
connectivity also bring vulnerabilities . In October 2016 , a botnet called Mirai
hijacked everyday networked devices such as printers , routers , DVR machines , 
and security cameras and leveraged them for a massive DDoS attack . Brumley
said most IoT devices are “ ridiculously vulnerable .  ” There are an estimated 6 . 4
billion IoT devices online today , a number expected to grow to over 20 billion
devices by 2020 . That means there are millions of different programs , all with
potential vulnerabilities .  “ Every program written is like a unique lock and most
of those locks have never been checked to see if they ’ re terrible ,  ” Brumley said . 
For example , his team looked at 4 , 000 commercially available internet routers
and “ we ’ ve yet to find one that ’ s secure ,  ” he said .  “ No one ’ s ever bothered to
check them for security .  ” Checking this many devices at human speed would be
impossible . There just aren ’ t enough computer security experts to do it . 
Brumley ’ s vision is an autonomous system to “ check all these locks .  ” 
Once you ’ ve uncovered a weak lock , patching it is a choice . You could just
as easily make a key—an exploit—to open the lock . There ’ s “ no difference ” 
between the technology for offense and defense , Brumley said . They ’ re just
different applications of the same technology . He compared it to a gun , which
could be used for hunting or to fight wars . Walker agreed .  “ All computer
security technologies are dual-use ,  ” he said . 
For safety reasons , DARPA had the computers compete on an air-gapped
network that was closed off from the internet . DARPA also created a special
operating system just for this contest . Even if one of the systems was plugged
into the internet , it would need to be re-engineered to search for vulnerabilities
on a Windows , Linux , or Mac machine . 
Brumley emphasized that they ’ ve never had a problem with people using this
technology for nefarious ends at Carnegie Mellon . He compared his researchers
to biologists working on a better flu vaccine . They could use that knowledge to
make a better virus , but “ you have to trust the researchers to have appropriate
safety protocols .  ” His company , ForAllSecure , practices “ responsible
disclosure ” and notifies companies of vulnerabilities they find . Nonetheless , he
admitted ,  “ you do worry about the bad actors .  ” 
Brumley envisions a world where over the next decade , tools like Mayhem
are used to find weak locks and patch them , shoring up cyberdefenses in the
billions of devices online . Walker said that self-driving cars today are a product
of the commercial sector throwing enormous investment money behind the
individuals who competed in the original DARPA Grand Challenge a decade
ago , and he sees a similar road ahead for autonomous cybersecurity .  “ It ’ s going
to take the same kind of long-term will and financial backing to do it again
here .  ” 
Both Brumley and Walker agreed that autonomous cybertools will also be
used by attackers , but they said the net effect was to help the defense more . 
Right now ,  “ offense has all of the advantage in computer security ,  ” Walker said . 
The problem is right now there is an asymmetry between attackers and
defenders . Defenders have to close all of the vulnerabilities , while attackers have
to just find one way in . Autonomous cybersystems level the playing field , in part
because defense gets a first-mover advantage . They write the code , so they can
scan it for vulnerabilities and patch them before it is deployed .  “ I ’ m not saying
that we can change to a place where defense has the advantage ,  ” Walker said , 
but he did think autonomous cybertools would enable “ investment parity ,  ” 
where “ the best investment wins .  ” Even that would be “ transformative ,  ” he said . 
There ’ s big money in malware , but far more is spent annually on computer
security . Prior to joining DARPA , Walker said he worked for a decade as a “ red
teamer ,  ” paid by energy and financial sector companies to hack into their
systems and uncover their vulnerabilities . He said autonomous cyberdefenses 
 “ can actually make hacking into something like our energy infrastructure or our
financial infrastructure a highly uncommon proposition that average criminals
cannot afford to do .  ” 
David Brumley admitted that this won ’ t stop hacking from advanced nationstates who have ample resources . He said limiting access was still beneficial , 
though , and drew a comparison to efforts to limit the spread of nuclear weapons :  
 “ It ’ s scary to think of Russia and the U . S . having it , but what ’ s really scary is
when the average Joe has it . We want to get rid of the average Joe having these
sorts of things .  ” If Brumley is right , autonomous systems like Mayhem will
make computers more secure and safer ten years from now . But autonomy will
keep evolving in cyberspace , with even more advanced systems beyond
Mayhem yet to come . 
The next evolution in autonomous cyberdefense is what Brumley calls 
 “ counter-autonomy .  ” Mayhem targets weak locks ; counter-autonomy targets the
locksmith . It “ leverages flaws or predictable patterns in the adversary to win .  ” 
Counter-autonomy goes beyond finding exploits , he said ; it ’ s about “ trying to
find vulnerabilities in the opponent ’ s algorithms .  ” Brumley compared it to
playing poker :  “ you play the opponent .  ” Counter-autonomy exploits the
brittleness of the enemy ’ s autonomous systems to defeat them . 
While counter-autonomy was not part of the Cyber Grand Challenge , 
Brumley said they have experimented with counter-autonomy techniques that
they simply didn ’ t use . One tool they developed embeds a hidden exploit
targeting a competitor ’ s autonomous system into a patch .  “ It ’ s a little bit like a
Trojan horse ,  ” Brumely said . The patch “ works just fine . It ’ s a legitimate
program .  ” Hidden within the patch is an exploit , though , that targets one of the
common tools that hackers use to analyze patches .  “ Anyone who tries to analyze 
[ the patch ] gets exploited ,  ” he said . Another approach to counter-autonomy
would move beyond simply finding vulnerabilities to actually creating them . 
This could be done in learning systems by inserting false data into the learning
process . Brumley calls this the “ computer equivalent to ‘ the long con ,  ’ where
our systems methodically cause our adversary ’ s systems to ‘ mis-learn ’  
( incorrectly learn ) how to operate .  ” 
AUTONOMOUS CYBERWEAPONS
The arms race in speed in cyberspace is already under way . In an unpublished
2016 working paper , Brumley wrote ,  “ Make no mistake , cyber is a war between
attackers and defenders , both who coevolve as the other deploys new systems
and measures . In order to win , we must act , react , and evolve faster than our
adversaries .  ” Cyberweapons of the future—defensive and offensive—will
incorporate greater autonomy , just the same way that more autonomy is being
integrated into missiles , drones , and physical systems like Aegis . What would a 
 “ cyber autonomous weapon ” look like ? 
Cyberspace and autonomous weapons intersect in a number of potentially
significant ways . The first is the danger that cyber vulnerabilities pose in
autonomous weapons . Anything that is computerized is vulnerable to hacking . 
The migration of household objects online as part of the IoT presents major
cybersecurity risks , and there are analogous risks for militaries whose major
platforms and munitions are increasingly networked . Cyber vulnerabilities could
hobble a next-generation weapon system like the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter , 
which has tens of millions of lines of code . There is no reason to think that an
autonomous weapon would necessarily be more vulnerable to hacking , but the
consequences if one were hacked could be much worse . Autonomous weapons
would be a very attractive target for a hostile state ’ s malware , since a hacker
could potentially usurp control of an autonomous weapon and redirect it . The
consequences could be even worse than those of a runaway gun . The weapon
wouldn ’ t be out of control ; it would be under the control of the enemy . 
In theory , greater autonomy that allows for off-network operation may
appear to be a solution to cyber vulnerabilities . This is an appealing tactic that
has come up in science fiction wars between humans and machines . In the
opening episode of the 2003 reboot of Battlestar Galactica , the evil Cylon
machines wipe out nearly the entire human space fleet via a computer virus . The
ship Galactica survives only because it has an older computer system that is not
networked to the rest of the fleet . As Stuxnet demonstrated , however , in the real
world operating off-network complicates cyberattacks but is no guarantee of
immunity . 
The second key intersection between cyberspace and autonomy occurs in
automated “ hacking back .  ” Autonomous cyberbots like Mayhem will be part of
active cyberdefenses , including those that use higher-level reasoning and
decision-making , but these still operate within one ’ s own network . Some
concepts for active cyber defense move beyond policing one ’ s own networks
into going on the offense . Hacking back is when an organization responds to a
cyberattack by counterattacking , gaining information about the attacker or
potentially shutting down the computers from which the attack is originating . 
Because many cyberattacks involve co-opting unsuspecting “ zombie ” computers
and repurposing them for attack , hacking back can inevitably draw in third
parties . Hacking back is controversial and , if done by private actors , could be
illegal . As one cybersecurity analyst noted ,  “ Every action accelerates .  ” 
Automation has been used in some limited settings when hacking back . 
When the FBI took down the Coreflood botnet , it redirected infected botnet
computers to friendly command-and-control servers , which then issued an
automatic stop command to them . However , this is another example of
automation being used to execute a decision made by people , which is far
different than delegating the decision whether or not to hack back to an
autonomous process . 
Automated hacking back would delegate the decision whether or not to go on
the counteroffensive to an autonomous system . Delegating this authority could
be very dangerous . Patrick Lin , an ethicist at California Polytechnic State
University who has written extensively on autonomy in both military and
civilian applications , warned at the United Nations in 2015 ,  “ autonomous cyber
weapons could automatically escalate a conflict .  ” As Tousley acknowledged , 
cyberspace could be an area where automatic reactions between nation-states
happen in milliseconds . Automated hacking back could cause a flash cyberwar
that rapidly spirals out of control . Automated hacking back is a theoretical
concept , and there are no publicly known examples of it occurring .  ( Definitively
saying something has not happened in cyberspace is difficult , given the shadowy
world of cyberwar .  ) 
The third intersection between cyber-and autonomous weapons is
increasingly autonomous offensive cyberweapons . Computer security
researchers have already demonstrated the ability to automate “ spear phishing ” 
attacks , in which unwitting users are sent malicious links buried inside
seemingly innocuous emails or tweets . Unlike regular phishing attacks , which
target millions of users at a time with mass emails , spear phishing attacks are
specially tailored to specific individuals . This makes them more effective , but
also more time-intensive to execute . Researchers developed a neural network
that , drawing on data available on Twitter , learned to automatically develop 
 “ humanlike ” tweets targeted at specific users , enticing them to click on
malicious links . The algorithm was roughly as successful as manual spear
phishing attempts but , because of automation , could be deployed en masse to
automatically seek out and target vulnerable users . 
As in other areas , greater intelligence will allow offensive cyberweapons to
operate with greater autonomy . Stuxnet autonomously carried out its attack , but
its autonomy was highly constrained . Stuxnet had a number of safeguards in
place to limit its spread and effects on computers that weren ’ t its target , as well
as a self-termination date . One could envision future offensive cyberweapons
that were given freer rein . Eric Messinger , a writer and researcher on legal issues
and human rights , has argued :  
.  .  . in offensive cyberwarfare ,  [ autonomous weapon systems ] may have to be deployed , because
they will be integral to effective action in an environment populated by automated defenses and
taking place at speeds beyond human capacities .  .  .  .  [ The ] development and deployment of
offensive [ autonomous weapon systems ] may well be unavoidable . 
It ’ s not clear what an offensive autonomous cyberweapon would look like , 
given the challenges in both defining a “ cyberweapon ” and the varying ways in
which autonomy is already used in cyberspace . From a certain perspective , a
great deal of malware is inherently autonomous by virtue of its ability to selfreplicate . The Internet Worm of 1988 , for example , is an example of the
Sorcerer ’ s Apprentice effect : a runaway , self-replicating process that cannot be
stopped . This is an important dimension to malware that does not have an
analogy in physical weapons . Drones and robotic systems cannot self-replicate . 
In this sense , malware resembles biological viruses and bacteria , which selfreplicate and spread from host to host . 
But there is a critical difference between digital and biological viruses . 
Biological pathogens can mutate and adapt in response to environmental
conditions . They evolve . Malware , at least today , is static . Once malware is
deployed , it can spread , it can hide ( as Stuxnet did )  , but it cannot modify itself . 
Malware can be designed to look for updates and spread these updates among
copies of itself via peer-to-peer sharing ( Stuxnet did this as well )  , but new
software updates originate with humans . 
In 2008 , a worm called Conficker spread through the internet , infecting
millions of computers . As computer security specialists moved to counter it , 
Conficker ’ s designers released updates , eventually fielding as many as five
different variants . These updates allowed Conficker ’ s programmers to stay ahead
of security specialists , upgrading the worm and closing vulnerabilities when they
were detected . This made Conficker a devilishly hard worm to defeat . At one
point , an estimated 8 to 15 million computers worldwide were infected . 
Conficker used a mixture of human control and automation to stay ahead of
antivirus specialists . Conficker ’ s updates came from its human designers , but it
used automation to get the updates clandestinely . Every day , Conficker would
generate hundreds of new domain names , only one of which would link back to
its human controllers with new updates . This made the traditional approach of
blocking domains to isolate the worm from its controllers ineffective . As
security specialists found a method to counter Conficker , a new variant would be
released quickly , often within weeks . Eventually , a consortium of industry
experts brought Conficker to heel , but doing so took a major effort . 
Conficker ’ s fundamental weakness was that its updates could only happen at
human speed . Conficker replicated autonomously and used clever automation to
surreptitiously link back to its human controllers , but the contest between the
hackers and security specialists was fought at human speed . Humans were the
ones working to identify the worm ’ s weaknesses and take it down , and humans
on the other side were working to adapt the worm and keep it one step ahead of
antivirus companies . 
The technology that Mayhem represents could change that . What if a piece
of software turned the same tools for identifying and patching vulnerabilities and
applied them to itself ? It could improve itself , shoring up its own defenses and
resisting attack . Brumley has hypothesized about such “ introspective systems .  ” 
Self-adapting software that can modify itself , rather than wait on updates from
its human controllers , would be a significant evolution . The result could be
robust cyberdefenses .  .  . or resilient malware . At the 2015 International
Conference on Cyber Conflict , Alessandro Guarino hypothesized that AI-based
offensive cyberweapons could “ prevent and react to countermeasures ,  ” allowing
them to persist inside networks . Such an agent would be “ much more resilient
and able to repel active measures deployed to counter it .  ” 
A worm that could autonomously adapt—mutating like a biological virus , 
but at machine speed—would be a nasty bug to kill . Walker cautioned that the
tools used in the Cyber Grand Challenge would only allow a piece of software to
patch its own vulnerabilities . It wouldn ’ t allow “ the synthesis of new logic ” to
develop “ new code that can work towards a goal .  ” To do that , he said ,  “ first
we ’ d have to invent the field of code synthesis , and right now , it ’ s like trying to
predict when time travel ’ s going to be invented . Who knows if it can be
invented ? We don ’ t have a path .  ” While such a development would be a leap
beyond current malware , the advent of learning systems in other areas , such as
Google DeepMind ’ s Atari-playing AI or AlphaGo , suggests that it is not
inconceivable . Adaptive malware that could rewrite itself to hide and avoid
scrutiny at superhuman speeds could be incredibly virulent , spreading and
mutating like a biological virus without any form of human control . 
When I asked Brumley about the possibility of future malware that was
adaptive , he said “ those are a possibility and are worrisome .  .  .  . I think someone
could come up with this kind of ultimate malware and it could get out of control
and it would be a really big pain for a while .  ” What he really worries about , 
though , are near-term problems . His chief concern is a shortage of cybersecurity
experts . We have weak cyber locks because we ’ re not training enough people
how to be better cyber locksmiths . Part of this , Brumley said , is a culture that
views hacking as an illegitimate profession .  “ In the U . S .  , we ’ ve shot ourselves in
the foot by equating a hacker with a bad guy .  ” We don ’ t view flesh-and-blood
locksmiths that way , yet for digital security , we do . Other countries don ’ t see it
that way , and Brumley worries the United States is falling behind . He said ,  
 “ There ’ s this kind of hubris in the U . S . that we think that because we have the
best Army and Navy and we have all these great amazing natural resources , 
great aircraft carriers , that of course we ’ re going to dominate in cyber . And I
don ’ t think that ’ s a given . It ’ s a brand-new space , completely different from
anything else . There ’ s no reason that things will just carry over .  ” We need to
shift the culture in the United States , he said , from thinking about hacking skills
as something that are only used for “ offense and should be super-secret and only
used by the military ” to something that is valued in the cyber workforce more
broadly . Walker agreed .  “ Defense is powered by openness ,  ” he said . 
Looking to the future , Brumley said he saw the “ ecosystem ” we were
building for computer security and autonomous cybersystems as critical .  “ I tend
to view everything as a system—a dynamic system .  ” People are part of that
system too . The solution to potentially dangerous malware in the future was to
create “ the right ecosystem .  .  . and then it will be resilient to problems .  ” 
KEEPING THE BOTS AT BAY
Mixing cyberspace and autonomous weapons combines two issues that are
challenging enough by themselves . Cyberwarfare is poorly understood outside
the specialist community of cyber experts , in part because of the secrecy
surrounding cyber operations . Norms about appropriate behavior between states
in cyberspace are still emerging . There is not even a consensus among cyber
experts about what constitutes a “ cyberweapon .  ” The concept of autonomous
weapons is similarly nascent , making the combination of these two issues
extremely difficult to understand . The DoD ’ s official policy on autonomy in
weapons , DoD Directive 3000 . 09 , specifically exempts cyberweapons . This
wasn ’ t because we thought autonomous cyberweapons were uninteresting or
unimportant when we wrote the directive . It was because we knew
bureaucratically it would be hard enough simply to create a new policy on
autonomy . Adding cyber operations would have multiplied the complexity of the
problem , making it very likely we would have accomplished nothing at all . 
This lack of clarity is reflected in the mixed signals I got from Defense
Department officials on autonomy in cyberspace . Both Work and Tousley
mentioned electronic warfare and cyberspace as an arena in which they would be
willing to accept more autonomy , but they had different perspectives on how far
they would be willing to go . Tousley said he saw a role for autonomy in only
defensive cyber operations . The “ goal is not offense—it ’ s defense ,  ” he told me . 
Tousley ’ s boss ’ s boss , Deputy Secretary Bob Work , saw things differently . 
Work made a direct comparison between Aegis and automated “ hacking back .  ” 
He said ,  “ the narrow cases where we will allow the machine to make targeting
decisions is in defensive cases where all of the people who are coming at you are
bad guys .  .  .  . electronic warfare , cyberwarfare , missile defense .  .  .  . We will
allow the machine to make essentially decisions .  .  . like , a cyber counter attack .  ” 
He acknowledged delegating that kind of authority to a machine came with risks . 
Work outlined a hypothetical scenario where this approach could go awry :  “ A
machine might launch a cyber counterattack and it might .  .  . wind up killing [ an
industrial control ] system or something .  .  . say it ’ s an airplane and the airplane
crashes . And we didn ’ t make a determination that we were going to shoot down
that airplane . We just said ,  ‘ We ’ re under cyberattack . We ’ re going to
counterattack .  ’ Boom .  ” 
Work ’ s response to this risk isn ’ t to hide from the technology , but rather to
wrestle with these challenges . He explained the importance of consulting with
scientists , ethicists , and lawyers .  “ We ’ ll work it through ,  ” he said .  “ This is all
going to be about the checks and balances that you put inside your battle
networks .  ” Work was confident these risks could be managed because in his
vision , humans would still be involved in a number of ways . There would be
both automated safeties and human oversight .  “ We always emphasize humanmachine collaboration .  .  . with the human always in front ,  ” he said .  “ That ’ s the
ultimate circuit breaker .  ” 
AN ARMS RACE TO WHERE ? 
Sun Tzu wrote over two thousand years ago in The Art of War ,  “ Speed is the
essence of war .  ” His maxim remains even more true today , when signals can
cross the globe in fractions of a second . Human decision-making has many
advantages over machine intelligence , but humans cannot compete at machine
speed . Competitive pressures in fast-paced environments threaten to push
humans further and further out of the loop . Superhuman reaction times are the
reason why automatic braking is being integrated into cars , why many nations
employ Aegis-like automated defensive systems , and why high-frequency stock
trading is such a lucrative endeavor . 
With this arms race in speed comes grave risks . Stock trading is one example
of a field in which competitors have succumbed to allure of speed , developing
ever-faster algorithms and hardware to shave microseconds from reaction times . 
In uncontrolled , real-world environments , the ( unsurprising ) result has been
accidents . When these accidents occur , machine speed becomes a major liability . 
Autonomous processes can rapidly spiral out of control , destroying companies
and crashing markets . It ’ s one thing to say that humans will have the ability to
intervene , but in some settings , their intervention may be too late . Automated
stock trading foreshadows the risks of a world where nations have developed and
deployed autonomous weapons . 
A flash physical war in the sense of a war that spirals out of control in mere
seconds seems unlikely . Missiles take time to move through the air . Sub-hunting
undersea robots can move only so quickly through the water . Accidents with
autonomous weapons could undermine stability and escalate crises
unintentionally , but these incidents would likely take place over minutes and
hours , not microseconds . This is not to say that autonomous weapons do not
pose serious risks to stability ; they do . A runaway autonomous weapon could
push nations closer to the brink of war . If an autonomous weapon ( or a group of
them ) caused a significant number of deaths , tensions could boil over to the
point where de-escalation is no longer possible . The speed at which events
would unfold , however , is likely one that would allow humans to see what was
happening and , at the very least , take steps to attempt to mitigate the effects . Bob
Work told me he saw a role for a human “ circuit breaker ” in managing swarms
of robotic systems . If the swarm began to behave in an unexpected way ,  “ they
would just shut it down ,  ” he said . There are problems with this approach . The
autonomous system might not respond to commands to shut it down , either
because it is out of communications or because the type of failure it is
experiencing prevents it from accepting a command to shut down . Unless human
operators have physical access , like the physical circuit breaker in Aegis , any
software-based “ kill switch ” is susceptible to the same risks as other software—
bugs , hacking , unexpected interactions , and the like . 
Even though accidents with physical autonomous weapons will not cascade
into all-out war in mere seconds , machines could quickly cause damage that
might have irreversible consequences . Countries may not believe that an
enemy ’ s attack was an accident , or the harm may be so severe that they simply
don ’ t care . If Japan had claimed that the attack on Pearl Harbor was not
authorized by Tokyo and was the work of a single rogue admiral , it ’ s hard to
imagine the United States would have refrained from war . 
A flash cyberwar , on the other hand , is a real possibility . Automated hacking
back could lead to escalation between nations in the blink of an eye . In this
environment , human oversight would be merely the illusion of safety . Automatic
circuit breakers are used to stop flash crashes on Wall Street because humans
cannot possibly intervene in time . There is no equivalent referee to call “ Time
out ” in war . 
15 
 “ SUMMONING THE DEMON ” 
THE RISE OF INTELLIGENT MACHINES
Even the most sophisticated machine intelligence today is a far cry from the
sentient AIs depicted in science fiction . Autonomous weapons pose risks
precisely because today ’ s narrow AIs fail miserably at tasks that require general
intelligence . Machines can crush humans at chess or go , but cannot enter a house
and make a pot of coffee . Image recognition neural nets can identify objects , but
cannot piece these objects together into a coherent story about what is happening
in a scene . Without a human ’ s ability to understand context , a stock-trading AI
doesn ’ t understand that it is destroying its own company . Some AI researchers
are pondering a future where these constraints no longer exist . 
Artificial general intelligence ( AGI ) is a hypothetical future AI that would
exhibit human-level intelligence across the full range of cognitive tasks . AGI
could be applied to solving humanity ’ s toughest problems , including those that
involve nuance , ambiguity , and uncertainty . An AGI could , like Stanislav
Petrov , step back to consider the broader context and apply judgment . 
What it would take to build such a machine is a matter of pure speculation , 
but there is at least one existence proof that general intelligence is possible : us . 
Even if recent advances in deep neural networks and machine learning come up
short , eventually an improved understanding of the human brain should allow for
a detailed neuron-by-neuron simulation . Brain imaging is improving quickly and
some researchers believe whole brain emulations could be possible with
supercomputers as early as the 2040s . 
Experts disagree wildly on when AGI might be created , with estimates
ranging from within the next decade to never . A majority of AI experts predict
AGI could be possible by 2040 and likely by the end of the century , but no one
really knows . Andrew Herr , who studies emerging technologies for the
Pentagon , observed ,  “ When people say a technology is 50 years away , they
don ’ t really believe it ’ s possible . When they say it ’ s 20 years away , they believe
it ’ s possible , but they don ’ t know how it will happen .  ” AGI falls into the latter
category . We know general intelligence is possible because humans have it , but
we understand so little of our own brains and our own intelligence that it ’ s hard
to know how far away it is . 
THE INTELLIGENCE EXPLOSION
AGI would be an incredible invention with tremendous potential for bettering
humanity . A growing number of thinkers are warning , however , that AGI may
be the “ last invention ” humanity creates—not because it will solve all of our
problems , but because it will lead to our extermination . Stephen Hawking has
warned ,  “ development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the
human race .  ” Artificial intelligence could “ take off on its own and re-design
itself at an ever-increasing rate ,  ” he said .  “ Humans , who are limited by slow
biological evolution , couldn ’ t compete , and would be superseded .  ” 
Hawking is a cosmologist who thinks on time scales of tens of thousands or
millions of years , so it might be easy to dismiss his concerns as a long way off , 
but technologists thinking on shorter time scales are similarly concerned . Bill
Gates has proclaimed the “ dream [ of artificial intelligence ] is finally arriving ,  ” a
development that will usher in growth and productivity in the near term , but has
long-term risks .  “ First the machines will do a lot of jobs for us and not be super
intelligent ,  ” Gates said .  “ That should be positive if we manage it well . A few
decades after that , though , the intelligence is strong enough to be a concern .  ” 
How much of a concern ? Elon Musk has described the creation of human-level
artificial intelligence as “ summoning the demon .  ” Bill Gates has taken a more
sober tone , but essentially agrees .  “ I am in the camp that is concerned about
superintelligence ,  ” he said .  “ I agree with Elon Musk and some others on this and
don ’ t understand why some people are not concerned .  ” 
Hawking , Gates , and Musk are not Luddites and they are not fools . Their
concerns , however fanciful-sounding , are rooted in the concept of an 
 “ intelligence explosion .  ” The concept was first outlined by I . J . Good in 1964 : 
Let an ultraintelligent machine be defined as a machine that can far surpass all the intellectual
activities of any man however clever . Since the design of machines is one of these intellectual
activities , an ultraintelligent machine could design even better machines ; there would then
unquestionably be an “ intelligence explosion ,  ” and the intelligence of man would be left far
behind . Thus the first ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that man need ever make , 
provided that the machine is docile enough to tell us how to keep it under control . 
If this hypothesis is right , then humans don ’ t need to create superintelligent AI
directly . Humans might not even be capable of such an endeavor . All humans
need to do is create an initial “ seed ” AGI that is capable of building a slightly
better AI . Then through a process of recursive self-improvement , the AI will lift
itself up by its own bootstraps , building ever-more-advanced AIs in a runaway
intelligence explosion , a process sometimes simply called “ AI FOOM .  ” 
Experts disagree widely about how quickly the transition from AGI to
artificial superintelligence ( sometimes called ASI ) might occur , if at all . A “ hard
takeoff ” scenario is one where AGI evolves to superintelligence within minutes
or hours , rapidly leaving humanity in the dust . A “ soft takeoff ” scenario , which
experts see as more likely ( with the caveat that no one really has any idea )  , 
might unfold over decades . What happens next is anyone ’ s guess . 
UNSHACKLING FRANKENSTEIN ’ S MONSTER
In the Terminator movies , when the military AI Skynet becomes self-aware , it
decides humans are a threat to its existence and starts a global nuclear war . 
Terminator follows in a long tradition of science fiction creations turning on
their masters . In Ridley Scott ’ s Blade Runner , based on the Philip K . Dick novel
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ?  , Harrison Ford plays a cop tasked with
hunting down psychopathic synthetic humans called “ replicants .  ” In Harlan
Ellison ’ s 1967 short story “ I Have No Mouth and I Must Scream ,  ” a military
supercomputer exterminates all of humanity save for five survivors , whom it
imprisons underground and tortures for eternity . Even the very first robots turned
on their maker . The word “ robot ” comes from a 1920 Czech play , R . U . R .  , for
Rossumovi Univerzální Roboti ( Rossum ’ s Universal Robots )  , in which synthetic
humans called roboti (  “ robot ” in English ) rise up against their human masters . 
The science fiction theme of artificial humans rebelling against their makers
is so common it has become known as the “ Frankenstein complex ,  ” after Mary
Shelley ’ s nineteenth-century horror novel , Frankenstein . In it , Dr . Frankenstein , 
through the miracles of science , creates a humanlike creature cobbled together
from leftover parts from “ the dissecting room and the slaughter-house .  ” The
monster turns on Dr . Frankenstein , stalking him and eventually murdering his
new bride . 
The fear that hubris can lead to uncontrollable creations has ancient roots
that predate even Frankenstein . Jewish legend tells of a creature called a golem , 
molded from clay and brought to life by placing a shem , a Hebrew inscription
containing one of the names of God , on the golem . In one such legend , Rabbi
Judah Loew ben Bezalel of Prague molded a golem from the clay of Prague ’ s
riverbanks in the sixteenth century to protect the Jewish community from antiSemitic attacks . Golems , unlike later intelligent creations , were powerful but
stupid beings that would slavishly follow orders , often to the detriment of their
creators . Golem stories often end with the golem killing its creator , a warning
against the hubris of playing God . 
Human-level or superhuman AI tap into this deep well of fear of artificial
beings . Micah Clark , a research scientist from the Florida Institute for Human & 
Machine Cognition who studies AI , cognition , and theory of mind , told me that
at “ a very personal and philosophical level , AI has been about building persons .  
.  .  . It ’ s not about playing chess or driving cars .  ” He explained ,  “ With the general
track of robotics and autonomous systems today , you would end up with
autonomous systems that are capable but very , very dumb . They would lack any
real sense of intelligence . They would be effectively teleoperated , just at a higher
level of commanding .  ” Artificial general intelligence—what Clark calls “ the
dream of AI ” —is about “ personhood .  ” 
Clark ’ s vision of AGI isn ’ t a fearful one , however . He envisions “ the kind of
persons that we would have intellectual , social , and emotional relationships with , 
that can experience life with us .  ” AI has been a lifelong passion for Micah Clark . 
As a child , he played computer games in his grandfather ’ s accounting office and
a chess program in particular captured his imagination . The chess AI 
 “ destroyed ” him , Clark said , and he wanted it to be able to teach him how to
play better . Clark was looking for more than just a game , though .  “ I saw this
potential for entertainment and friendship there , but the interaction side was
pretty weak ,  ” he explained . In college , Clark worked at NASA ’ s Jet Propulsion
Laboratory on a large-scale AI demonstration project and he was hooked . Clark
went on to study long-duration autonomy for interplanetary robotic spacecraft , 
but his research interests have moved beyond robotics , sensing , and actuation . 
The books on Clark ’ s desk in his office have titles like An Anatomy of the Mind
and Consciousness and the Social Brain . Clark described the goal of AI research
as “ building humanlike persons that can participate in human physical and social
spaces and relationships .  ”  ( Clark is currently working for the Office of Naval
Research and he is quick to caveat that these are not the goals of AI research in
the Navy or the Department of Defense . Rather , these are the goals of the field
of AI research as a whole .  ) 
Clark ’ s vision of the future of AI is less Terminator and more like the movie
Her . In Her , Joaquin Phoenix plays an awkward loner named Theodore who
starts a relationship with an AI operating system called “ Samantha .  ” Theodore
and Samantha develop a close bond and fall in love . Theodore is shaken , 
however , when Samantha admits that she is simultaneously carrying on
relationships with thousands of other people and is also in love with 641 of
them . When Theodore breaks down , telling her “ that ’ s insane ,  ” she tries to
lovingly explain ,  “ I ’ m different from you .  ” 
The otherness of artificial persons—beings like humans , but also
fundamentally different—is a source of much of the fear of AI . Clark explained
that AIs will need the ability to interact with humans and that involves abilities
like understanding natural language , but that doesn ’ t mean that the AI ’ s behavior
or the underlying processes for their intelligence will mirror humans ’  .  “ Why
would we expect a silica-based intelligence to look or act like human
intelligence ?  ” he asked . 
Clark cited the Turing test , a canonical test of artificial intelligence , as a sign
of our anthropocentric bias . The test , first proposed by mathematician Alan
Turing in 1950 , attempts to assess whether a computer is truly intelligent by its
ability to imitate humans . In the Turing test , a human judge sends messages back
and forth between both a computer and another human , but without knowing
which is which . If the computer can fool the human judge into believing that it is
the human , then the computer is considered intelligent . The test has been picked
apart and critiqued over the years by AI researchers for a multitude of reasons . 
For one , chatbots that clearly fall far short of human intelligence have already
been able to fool some people into believing they are human . An AI virtual
assistant called “ Amy ” by the company x . ai frequently gets asked out on dates , 
for example . Clark ’ s critique has more to do with the assumption that imitating
humans is the benchmark for general intelligence , though .  “ If we presume an
intelligent alien life lands on earth tomorrow , why would we expect them to pass
the Turing Test or any other measure that ’ s based off of what humans do ?  ” 
Humans have general intelligence , but general intelligence need not be
humanlike .  “ Nothing says that intelligence—and personhood , for that matter , on
the philosophical side—is limited to just the human case .  ” 
The 2015 sci-fi thriller Ex Machina puts a modern twist on the Turing test . 
Caleb , a computer programmer , is asked to play the part of a human judge in a
modified Turing test . In this version of the test , Caleb is shown that the AI , Ava , 
is clearly a robot . Ava ’ s creator Nathan explains ,  “ The real test is to show you
that she ’ s a robot and then see if you still feel she has consciousness .  ”  ( Spoilers
coming !  ) Ava passes the test . Caleb believes she has true consciousness and sets
out to free Ava from Nathan ’ s captivity . Once freed , however , Ava shows her
true colors . She manipulated Caleb to free her and has no feelings at all about his
well-being . In the chilling ending , Ava leaves Caleb trapped in a locked room to
die . As he pounds on the door begging her to let him free , Ava doesn ’ t so much
as glance in his direction as she leaves . Ava is intelligent , but inhuman . 
GOD OR GOLEM ? 
Ex Machina ’ s ending is a warning against anthropomorphizing AI and assuming
that just because a machine can imitate human behavior , it thinks like humans . 
Like Jeff Clune ’ s “ weird ” deep neural nets , advanced AI is likely to be
fundamentally alien . In fact , Nick Bostrom , an Oxford philosopher and author of
Superintelligence : Paths , Dangers , Strategies , has argued that biological
extraterrestrials would likely have more in common with humans than with
machine intelligence . Biological aliens ( if they exist ) would have presumably
developed drives and instincts similar to ours through natural selection . They
would likely avoid bodily injury , desire reproduction , and seek the alien
equivalent of food , water , and shelter . There is no reason to think machine
intelligence would necessarily have any of these desires . Bostrom has argued
intelligence is “ orthogonal ” to an entity ’ s goals , such that “ any level of
intelligence could in principle be combined with .  .  . any final goal .  ” This means
a superintelligent AI could have any set of values , from playing the perfect game
of chess to making more paper clips . 
On one level , the sheer alien-ness of advanced AI makes many of science
fiction ’ s fears seem strangely anthropomorphic . Skynet starts nuclear war
because it believes humanity is a threat to its existence , but why should it care
about its own existence ? Ava abandons Caleb when she escapes , but why should
she want to escape in the first place ? 
There is no reason to think that a superintelligent AI would inherently be
hostile to humans . That doesn ’ t mean it would value human life , either . AI
researcher Eliezer Yudkowsky has remarked ,  “ The AI does not hate you , nor
does it love you , but you are made out of atoms which it can use for something
else .  ” 
AI researcher Steve Omohundro has argued that without special safeguards , 
advanced AI would develop “ drives ” for resource acquisition , self-improvement , 
self-replication , and self-protection . These would not come from the AI
becoming self-aware or “ waking up ,  ” but rather be instrumental subgoals that
any sufficiently intelligent system would naturally develop in pursuit of its final
goal . In his paper , The Basic AI Drives , Omohundro explains :  “ All computation
and physical action requires the physical resources of space , time , matter , and
free energy . Almost any goal can be better accomplished by having more of
these resources .  ” The natural consequence would be that an AI would seek to
acquire more resources to improve the chances of accomplishing its goals , 
whatever they are .  “ Without explicit goals to the contrary , AIs are likely to
behave like human sociopaths in their pursuit of resources ,  ” Omohundro said . 
Similarly , self-preservation would be an important interim goal toward pursuing
its final goal , even if the AI did not intrinsically care about survival after its final
goal was fulfilled .  “  [ Y ] ou build a chess playing robot thinking that you can just
turn it off should something go wrong . But , to your surprise , you find that it
strenuously resists your attempts to turn it off .  ” Omohundro concluded : 
Without special precautions , it will resist being turned off , will try to break into other machines
and make copies of itself , and will try to acquire resources without regard for anyone else ’ s
safety . These potentially harmful behaviors will occur not because they were programmed in at
the start , but because of the intrinsic nature of goal driven systems . 
If Omohundro is right , advanced AI is an inherently dangerous technology , a
powerful Golem whose bumbling could crush its creators . Without proper
controls , advanced AI could spark an uncontrollable chain reaction with
devastating effects . 
BUILDING SAFE ADVANCED AI
In response to this concern , AI researchers have begun thinking about how to
ensure an AI ’ s goals align with human values , so the AI doesn ’ t “ want ” to cause
harm . What goals should we give a powerful AI ? The answer is not as simple as
it first appears . Even something simple like ,  “ Keep humans safe and happy ,  ” 
could lead to unfortunate outcomes . Stuart Armstrong , a researcher at the Future
of Humanity Institute in Oxford , has given an example of a hypothetical AI that
achieves this goal by burying humans in lead-lined coffins connected to heroin
drips . 
You may ask , wouldn ’ t an artificial general intelligence understand that ’ s not
what we meant ? An AI that understood context and meaning might determine its
programmers didn ’ t want lead coffins and heroin drips , but that might not
matter . Nick Bostrom has argued “ its final goal is to make us happy , not to do
what the programmers meant when they wrote the code that represents this
goal .  ” The problem is that any rule blindly followed to its most extreme can
result in perverse outcomes . 
Philosophers and AI researchers have pondered the problem of what goals to
give a superintelligent AI that could not lead to perverse instantiation and they
have not come to any particularly satisfactory solution . Stuart Russell has argued 
 “ a system that is optimizing a function of n variables .  .  . will often set the
remaining unconstrained variables to extreme values .  ” Similar to the weird
fooling images that trick deep neural networks , the machine does not know that
these extreme actions are outside the norm of what a human would find
reasonable unless it has been explicitly told so . Russell said ,  “ This is essentially
the old story of the genie in the lamp , or the sorcerer ’ s apprentice , or King
Midas : you get exactly what you ask for , not what you want .  ” 
The problem of “ perverse instantiation ” of final goals is not merely a
hypothetical one . It has come up in various simple AIs over the years that have
learned clever ways to technically accomplish their goals , but not in the way
human designers intended . For example , in 2013 a computer programmer
revealed that an AI he had taught to play classic Nintendo games had learned to
pause Tetris just before the final brick so that it would never lose . 
One of the canonical examples of perverse instantiation comes from an early
1980s AI called EURISKO . EURISKO was designed to develop novel 
 “ heuristics ,  ” essentially rules of thumb for behavior , for playing a computer roleplaying game . EURISKO then ranked the value of the heuristics in helping to
win the game . Over time , the intent was that EURISKO would evolve an optimal
set of behaviors for the game . One heuristic ( rule H59 ) quickly attained the
highest possible value score : 999 . Once the developer dug into the details of the
rule , he discovered that all rule H59 was doing was finding other high-scoring
rules and putting itself down as the originator . It was a parasitic rule , taking
credit for other rules but without adding any value of its own . Technically , this
was a heuristic that was permissible . In fact , under the framework that the
programmer had created it was the optimal heuristic : it always succeeded . 
EURISKO didn ’ t understand that wasn ’ t what the programmer intended ; it only
knew to do what it was programmed to do . 
In all likelihood , there is probably no set of rules that , followed rigidly and
blindly , would not lead to harmful outcomes , which is why AI researchers are
beginning to rethink the problem . Russell and others have begun to focus on
training machines to learn the right behavior over time by observing human
behavior . In a 2016 paper , a team of researchers at University of California , 
Berkeley , described the goal as “ not to put a specific purpose into the machine at
all , but instead to design machines that [ learn ] the right purpose as they go
along .  ” 
In addition to aligning AI goals to human values , AI researchers are pursuing
parallel efforts to design AIs to be responsive to human direction and control . 
Again , this is not as simple as it might seem . If Omohundro is right , then an AI
would naturally resist being turned off , not because it doesn ’ t want to “ die ,  ” but
because being switched off would prevent it from accomplishing its goal . An AI
may also resist having its goal changed , since that too would prevent it from
accomplishing its original goal . One proposed solution has been to design AIs
from the ground up that are correctable by their human programmers or
indifferent to whether they are turned off . Building AIs that can be safely
interrupted , corrected , or switched off is part of a philosophy of designing AIs to
be tools to be used by people rather than independent agents themselves . Such 
 “ tool AIs ” would still be superintelligent , but their autonomy would be
constrained . 
Designing AIs as tools , rather than agents , is an appealing design philosophy
but does not necessarily resolve all of the risks of powerful AI . Stuart Armstrong
warned me :  “ they might not work .  .  .  . Some tool AIs may have the same
dangers as general AIs .  ” Tool AIs could still slip out of control , develop harmful
drives , or act in ways that technically achieve their goals , but in perverse ways . 
Even if tool AIs do work , we need to consider how AI technology develops
in a competitive landscape .  “ We also have to consider .  .  . whether tool AIs are a
stable economic equilibrium ,  ” Armstrong said .  “ If unrestricted AIs would be
much more powerful , then I don ’ t see tool AIs as lasting that long .  ” 
Building safer tool AIs is a fruitful area of research , but much work remains
to be done .  “ Just by saying ,  ‘ we should only build tool AIs ’ we ’ re not solving
the problem ,  ” Armstrong said . If potentially dangerous AI is coming ,  “ we ’ re not
really ready .  ” 
WHO ’ S AFRAID OF THE BIG , BAD AI ? 
The fear that AI could one day develop to the point where it threatens humanity
isn ’ t shared by everyone who works on AI . It ’ s hard to dismiss people like
Stephen Hawking , Bill Gates , and Elon Musk out of hand , but that doesn ’ t mean
they ’ re right . Other tech moguls have pushed back against AI fears . Steve
Ballmer , former CEO of Microsoft , has said AI risk “ doesn ’ t concern me .  ” Jeff
Hawkins , inventor of the Palm Pilot , has argued ,  “ There won ’ t be an intelligence
explosion . There is no existential threat .  ” Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has
said that those who “ drum up these doomsday scenarios ” are being 
 “ irresponsible .  ” David Brumley of Carnegie Mellon , who is on the cutting edge
of autonomy in cybersecurity , similarly told me he was “ not concerned about
self-awareness .  ” Brumley compared the idea to the fear that a car , if driven
enough miles on highways , would spontaneously start driving itself .  “ In reality , 
there ’ s nothing in the technology that would make it self-aware ,  ” he said .  “ These
are still computers . You can still unplug them .  ” 
If the idea of a rogue , runaway superintelligence seems like something
ripped from the pages of science fiction , that ’ s because it is . Those who are
worried about superintelligent AI have their reasons , but it ’ s hard not to wonder
if behind those rationalizations is the same subconscious fear of artificial persons
that gave rise to tales of Frankenstein ’ s monster and the Golem . Even the
concept of artificial general intelligence—an intelligence that can do general
problem solving like us—has more than a whiff of anthropomorphic bias . The
concept of an intelligence explosion , while seemingly logical , is also almost too
human : First , humanlike AI will be created . Then it will surpass us , ascending to
stratospheres of intelligence that we could never conceive of . Like ants , we will
be powerless before it . 
Actual AI development to date shows a different trajectory . It isn ’ t simply
that AIs today aren ’ t as smart as people . They are smart in different ways . Their
intelligence is narrow , but often exceeds humans in a particular domain . They
are narrowly superintelligent . Armstrong observed that the path of AI
technology “ has been completely contradictory to the early predictions . We ’ ve
now achieved with narrow AI great performance in areas that used to be thought 
.  .  . impossible without general intelligence .  ” General intelligence remains
elusive , but the scope of narrowly superintelligent systems we can build is
broadening . AIs are moving from chess to go to driving , tasks of increasing
complexity and ever-greater factors to consider . In each of these domains , once
the AI reaches top human-level ability , it rapidly surpasses it . For years , go
computer programs couldn ’ t hold a candle to the top-ranked human go players . 
Then , seemingly overnight , AlphaGo dethroned the world ’ s leading human
player . The contest between humans and machines at go was over before it
began . In early 2017 , poker became the latest game to fall to AI . Poker had long
been thought to be an extremely difficult problem for machines because it is an 
 “ imperfect information ” game where vital information ( the other player ’ s cards ) 
is hidden . This is different from chess or go , where all the information about the
game is visible to both sides . Two years earlier , the world ’ s top poker players
had handily beaten the best poker-playing AI . In the 2017 rematch , the upgraded
AI “ crushed ” four of the world ’ s top poker players . Poker became the latest
domain where machines reigned supreme . Superintelligence in narrow domains
is possible without an intelligence explosion . It stems from our ability to harness
machine learning and speed to very specific problems . 
More advanced AI is certainly coming , but artificial general intelligence in
the sense of machines that think like us may prove to be a mirage . If our
benchmark for “ intelligent ” is what humans do , advanced artificial intelligence
may be so alien that we never recognize these superintelligent machines as “ true
AI .  ” 
This dynamic already exists to some extent . Micah Clark pointed out that “ as
soon as something works and is practical it ’ s no longer AI .  ” Armstrong echoed
this observation :  “ as soon as a computer can do it , they get redefined as not AI
anymore .  ” 
If the past is any guide , we are likely to see in the coming decades a
proliferation of narrow superintelligent systems in a range of fields—medicine , 
law , transportation , science , and others . As AI advances , these systems will be
able to take on a wider and wider array of tasks . These systems will be vastly
better than humans in their respective domains but brittle outside of them , like
tiny gods ruling over narrow dominions . 
Regardless of whether we consider them “ true AI ,  ” many of the concerns
about general intelligence or superintelligence still apply to these narrow
systems . An AI could be dangerous if it has the capacity to do harm , its values or
goals are misaligned with human intentions , and it is unresponsive to human
correction . General intelligence is not required ( although it certainly could
magnify these risks )  . Goal misalignment is certain to be a flaw that will come up
in future systems . Even very simple AIs like EURISKO or the Tetris-pausing bot
have demonstrated a cleverness to accomplish their goals in unforeseen ways
that should give us pause . 
AIs are also likely to have access to powerful capabilities . As AI advances , it
will be used to power more-autonomous systems . If the crude state of AI today
powers learning thermostats , automated stock trading , and self-driving cars , 
what tasks will the machines of tomorrow manage ? 
To help get some perspective on AI risk , I spoke with Tom Dieterrich , the
president of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence 
( AAAI )  . Dietterich is one of the founders of the field of machine learning and , as
president of the AI professional society , is now smack in the middle of this
debate about AI risk . The mission of AAAI is not only to promote scientific
research in AI but also to promote its “ responsible use ,  ” which presumably
would include not killing everyone . 
Dietterich said “ most of the discussion about superintelligence is often in the
realm of science fiction .  ” He is skeptical of an intelligence explosion and has
written that it “ runs counter to our current understandings of the limitations that
computational complexity places on algorithms for learning and reasoning .  ” 
Dietterich did acknowledge that AI safety was an important issue , but said that
risks from AI have more to do with what humans allow AI-enabled autonomous
systems to do .  “ The increasing abilities of AI are now encouraging us to
consider much more sophisticated autonomous systems ,  ” he said .  “ It ’ s when we
have those autonomous systems and we put them in control of life-and-death
decisions that we enter this very high risk space .  .  . where cyberattack or bugs in
the software lead to undesirable outcomes .  ” 
Dietterich said there is a lot of work under way in trying to understand how
to build safe and robust AI , including AI that is “ robust to adversarial attack .  ” 
He said ,  “ People are trying to understand ,  ‘ under what conditions should I trust a
machine learning system ?  ’  ” 
Dietterich said that the optimal model is likely to be one that combines
human and machine cognition , much like Bob Work ’ s “ centaur ” vision of
human-machine collaboration .  “ The human should be taking the actions and the
AI ’ s job should be to give the human the right information that they need to
make the right decisions ,  ” Dietterich said .  “ So that ’ s human in the loop or very
intimately involved .  ” He acknowledged the model “ breaks down .  .  . when
there ’ s a need to act at rates faster than humans are capable of acting , like on
Wall Street trading .  ” The downside , as demonstrated vividly in automated
trading , is that machine speed can exacerbate risks .  “ The ability to scale it up
and do it at faster than human decision making cycles means that we can very
quickly cause a lot of trouble ,  ” Dietterich said .  “ And so we really need to assess
whether we want to go there or not .  ” 
When it comes to warfare , Dietterich saw both the military desire for
autonomy and its risks . He said ,  “ The whole goal in military doctrine is to get
inside your opponent ’ s OODA loop , right ? You want to make your decisions
faster than they can . That leads us to speed of light warfare and speed of light
catastrophe .  ” 
MILITARY AI : TERMINATOR VS . IRON MAN
If autonomous weapons are the kind of thing that keep you up at night , 
militarized advanced AI is pure nightmare fuel . If researchers don ’ t know how to
control an AI that they built themselves , it ’ s hard to imagine how they could
counter a hostile one . Yet however AI evolves , it is almost certain that advanced
AI will be militarized . To expect that humans will refrain from bending such a
broad and powerful technology to destructive ends seems optimistic to the point
of naïveté . It would be the equivalent of asking nations to refrain from
militarizing the internal combustion engine or electricity . How militaries use AI
and how much autonomy they give AI-powered systems is an open question . It
may be some comfort that Bob Work—the person in charge of implementing
military AI—stated explicitly , multiple times in our interview that artificial
general intelligence was not something he could envision applying to weapons . 
He cited AGI as “ dangerous ” and , if it came to pass , something the Defense
Department would be “ extremely careful ” with . 
Work has made robotics , autonomy , and AI a central component of his Third
Offset Strategy to renew American military technological superiority , but he
sees those technologies as assisting rather than replacing humans . Work has said
his vision of AI and robotics is more Iron Man than Terminator , with the human
at the center of the technology . The official DoD position is that machines are
tools , not independent agents themselves . The Department of Defense Law of
War Manual states that the laws of war “ impose obligations on persons .  .  . not
on the weapons themselves .  ” From DoD ’ s perspective , machines—even
intelligent , autonomous ones—cannot be legal agents . They must always be
tools in the hands of people . That doesn ’ t mean that others might not build AI
agents , however . 
Selmer Bringsjord is chair of the cognitive science department and head of
the Rensselaer Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning Lab . He pointed out that the
DoD position is at odds with the long-term ambition of the field of AI . He
quoted the seminal AI textbook , Introduction to Artificial Intelligence , that says 
 “ the ultimate goal of AI .  .  . is to build a person .  ” Bringsjord said that even if not
every AI researcher openly acknowledges it ,  “ what they ’ re aiming at are humanlevel capabilities without a doubt .  .  .  . There has been at least since the dawn of
modern AI a desire to build systems that reach a level of autonomy where they
write their own code .  ” Bringsjord sees a “ disconnect ” between the DoD ’ s
perspective and what AI researchers are actually pursuing . 
I asked Bringsjord whether he thought there should be any limits to how we
apply AI technology in the military domain and he had a very frank answer . He
told me that what he thinks doesn ’ t matter . What will answer that question for us
is “ the nature of warfare .  ” History suggests “ we can plan all we want ,  ” but the
reality of military competition will drive us to this technology . If our adversaries
build autonomous weapons ,  “ then we ’ ll have to react with suitable technology to
defend against that . If that means we need machines that are themselves
autonomous because they have to operate at a different timescale , we both know
we ’ re going to do that .  .  .  . I ’ m only looking at the history of what happens in
warfare ,  ” he said .  “ It seems obvious this is going to happen .  ” 
HOSTILE AI
The reality is that for all of the thought being put into how to make advanced AI
safe and controllable , there is little effort under way on what to do if it isn ’ t . In
the AI field ,  “ adversarial AI ” and “ AI security ” are about making one ’ s own AI
safe from attack , not how to cope with an adversary ’ s AI . Yet malicious
applications of AI are inevitable . Powerful AI with insufficient safeguards could
slip out of control and cause havoc , much like the Internet Worm of 1988 . 
Others will surely build harmful AI deliberately . Even if responsible militaries
such as the United States ’ eschew dangerous applications of AI , the ubiquity of
the technology all but assures that other actors—nation-states , criminals , or
hackers—will use AI in risky or deliberately harmful ways . The same AI tools
being developed to improve cyberdefenses , like the fully autonomous Mayhem
used in the Cyber Grand Challenge , could also be used for offense . Elon Musk ’ s
reaction to the Cyber Grand Challenge was to compare it to the origins of Skynet
—hyperbole to be sure , but the darker side of the technology is undeniable . 
Introspective , learning and adaptive software could be potentially extremely
dangerous without sufficient safeguards . While David Brumley was dismissive
of the potential for software to become “ self-aware ,  ” he agreed it was possible to
envision creating something that was “ adaptive and unpredictable .  .  .  [ such that ] 
the inventors wouldn ’ t even know how it ’ s going to evolve and it got out of
control and could do harm .  ” Ironically , the same open-source ethos in AI
research that aims to make safe AI tools readily available to all also places
potentially dangerous AI tools in the hands of those who might want to do harm
or who simply are not sufficiently cautious . 
Militaries will need to prepare for this future , but the appropriate response
may not be a headlong rush into more autonomy . In a world of intelligent
adaptive malware , autonomous weapons are a massive vulnerability , not an
advantage . The nature of autonomy means that if an adversary were to hack an
autonomous system , the consequences could be much greater than a system that
kept humans in the loop . Delegating a task to a machine means giving it power . 
It entails putting more trust in the machine , trust that may not be warranted if
cybersecurity cannot be guaranteed . A single piece of malware could hand
control over an entire fleet of robot weapons to the enemy . Former Secretary of
the Navy Richard Danzig has compared information technologies to a “ Faustian
bargain ” because of their vulnerabilities to cyberattack :  “ the capabilities that
make these systems attractive make them risky .  ” He has advocated safeguards
such as “ placing humans in decision loops , employing analog devices as a check
on digital equipment , and providing for non-cyber alternatives if cybersystems
are subverted .  ” Human circuit breakers and hardware-level physical controls will
be essential to keeping future weapons under human control . In some cases , 
Danzig says “ abnegation ” of some cybertechnologies may be the right approach , 
forgoing their use entirely if the risks outweigh the benefits . As AI advances , 
militaries will have to carefully weigh the benefits of greater autonomy against
the risks if enemy malware took control . Computer security expert David
Brumley advocated an approach of thinking about the “ ecosystem ” in which
future malware will operate . The ecosystem of autonomous systems that
militaries build should be a conscious choice , one made weighing the relative
risks of different alternative approaches , and one that retains humans in the right
spots to manage those risks . 
BREAKING OUT
The future of AI is unknown . Armstrong estimated an 80 percent chance of AGI
occurring in the next century , and a 50 percent chance of superintelligence . But
his guess is as good as anyone else ’ s . What we do know is that intelligence is
powerful . Without tooth or claw , humans have climbed to the top of the food
chain , conquered the earth , and even ventured beyond , all by the power of our
intelligence . We are now bestowing that power on machines . When machines
begin learning on their own , we don ’ t know what will happen . That isn ’ t a
prediction ; it ’ s an observation about AI today . 
I don ’ t lose sleep worrying about Frankenstein or Skynet or Ava or any of
the other techno-bogeymen science fiction writers have dreamed up . But there is
one AI that gives me chills . It doesn ’ t have general intelligence ; it isn ’ t a person . 
But it does demonstrate the power of machine learning . 
DeepMind posted a video online in 2015 of their Atari-playing neural
network as it learned how to play Breakout ( an early version of the popular
Arkanoid arcade game )  . In Breakout , the player uses a paddle to hit a ball against
a stack of bricks , chipping away at the bricks one by one . In the video , the
computer fumbles around hopelessly at first . The paddle moves back and forth
seemingly at random , hitting the ball only occasionally . But the network is
learning . Every time the ball knocks out a brick , the point total goes up , giving
the neural net positive feedback , reinforcing its actions . Within two hours , the
neural net plays like a pro , moving the paddle adeptly to bounce the ball . Then , 
after four hours of play , something unexpected happens . The neural net
discovers a trick that human players know : using the ball to make a tunnel
through the edge of the block of bricks , then sending the ball through the tunnel
to bounce along the top of the block , eroding the bricks from above . No one
taught the AI to do that . It didn ’ t even reason its way there through some
understanding of a concept of “ brick ” and “ ball .  ” It simply discovered this
exploit by exploring the space of possibilities , the same way the Tetris-playing
bot discovered pausing the game to avoid losing and EURISKO discovered the
rule of taking credit for other rules . AI surprises us , in good ways and bad ways . 
When we prepare for the future of AI , we should prepare for the unexpected . 
PART V
The Fight to Ban Autonomous
Weapons
16
ROBOTS ON TRIAL
AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS AND THE LAWS OF WAR
War is horrible , but the laws of war are supposed to protect humanity from its
worst evils . Codes of conduct in war date back to antiquity . The biblical book of
Deuteronomy and ancient Sanskrit texts Mahābhārata , Dharmaśāstras , and
Manusm ti (  “ Laws of Manu ”  ) all prohibit certain conduct in war . Modern-day
laws of war emerged in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries . Today
a series of treaties , such as the Geneva Conventions , form the law of armed
conflict , or international humanitarian law . 
International humanitarian law ( IHL ) has three core principles : The principle
of distinction means militaries must distinguish between enemy combatants and
civilians on the battlefield ; they cannot deliberately target civilians . IHL
acknowledges that civilians may be incidentally killed when targeting enemy
combatants , so-called “ collateral damage .  ” However , the principle of
proportionality says that any collateral civilian casualties cannot be
disproportionate to the military necessity of attacking that target . The principle
of avoiding unnecessary suffering prohibits militaries from using weapons that
cause superfluous injury beyond their military value . For example , IHL prohibits
weapons that leave fragments inside the body that cannot be detected by X-rays , 
such as glass shards , which would have no immediate benefit in taking the
enemy off the battlefield but could make it harder for wounded soldiers to heal . 
IHL has other rules as well : Militaries must exercise precautions in the
attack to avoid civilian casualties . Combatants who are ‘ hors de combat ’ —out of
combat because they have surrendered or have been incapacitated—cannot be
targeted . And militaries cannot employ weapons that are , by their nature , 
indiscriminate or uncontrollable . 
So what does IHL have to say about autonomous weapons ? Not much . 
Principles of IHL such as distinction and proportionality apply to the effects on
the battlefield , not the decision-making process . Soldiers have historically made
the decision whether or not to fire , but nothing in the laws of war prohibits a
machine from doing it . To be used lawfully , though , autonomous weapons
would need to meet the IHL principles of distinction , proportionality , and other
rules . 
Steve Goose , director of the Human Rights Watch ’ s Arms Division , doesn ’ t
think that ’ s possible . Goose is a leading figure in the Campaign to Stop Killer
Robots and has called for a legally-binding treaty banning autonomous weapons . 
I visited Goose at Human Rights Watch ’ s Washington , DC , office overlooking
Dupont Circle . He told me he sees autonomous weapons as “ highly likely to be
used in ways that violate international humanitarian law .  ” From his perspective , 
these would be weapons that “ aren ’ t able to distinguish combatants from
civilians , that aren ’ t able to tell who ’ s hors de combat , that aren ’ t able to tell
who ’ s surrendering , that are unable to do the proportionality assessment required
under international humanitarian law for each and every individual attack , and
that are unable to judge military necessity in the way that today ’ s commanders
can .  ” The result , Goose said , would be “ lots of civilians dying .  ” 
Many of these criteria would be tough for machines today . Impossible , 
though ? Machines have already conquered a long list of tasks once thought
impossible : chess , Jeopardy , go , poker , driving , image recognition , and many
others . How hard it would be to meet these criteria depends on the target , 
surrounding environment , and projections about future technology . 
DISTINCTION
To comply with the principle of distinction , autonomous weapons must be able
to accurately distinguish between military and civilian targets . This means not
only recognizing the target , but also distinguishing it from other “ clutter ” in the
environment—confusing objects that are not targets . Even for “ cooperative ” 
targets that emit signatures , such as a radar , separating a signature from clutter
can be challenging . Modern urban environments are rife with electromagnetic
signals from Wi-Fi routers , cell towers , television and radio broadcasts , and
other confusing emissions . It is even harder to distinguish non-cooperative
targets , such as tanks and submarines , that use decoys or try to blend into the
background with camouflage . 
New machine learning approaches such as deep neural networks are very
good at object recognition but are vulnerable to “ fooling image ” attacks . Without
a human in the loop as a final check , using this technology to do autonomous
targeting today would be exceedingly dangerous . Neural networks with these
vulnerabilities could be manipulated into avoiding enemy targets and attacking
false ones . 
In the near term , the best chances for high-reliability target recognition lie
with the kind of sensor fusion that DARPA ’ s CODE project envisions . By fusing
together data from multiple angles and multiple types of sensors , computers
could possibly distinguish between military targets and civilian objects or decoys
with high reliability . Objects that are dual-use for military and civilian purposes , 
such as trucks , would be more difficult since determining whether they are
lawful targets might depend on context . 
Distinguishing people would be far and away the most difficult task . Two
hundred years ago , soldiers wore brightly colored uniforms and plumed helmets
to battle , but that era of warfare is gone . Modern warfare often involves
guerrillas and irregulars wearing a hodgepodge of uniforms and civilian clothes . 
Identifying them as a combatant often depends on their behavior on the
battlefield . I frequently encountered armed men in the mountains of Afghanistan
who were not Taliban fighters . They were farmers or woodcutters who carried
firearms to protect themselves or their property . Determining whether they were
friendly or not depended on how they acted , and even then was often fraught
with ambiguity . 
Even simple rules like “ If someone shoots at you , then they ’ re hostile ” do
not always hold in the messy chaos of war . During the 2007–2008 “ surge ” in
Iraq , I was part of a civil affairs team embedded with U . S . advisors to Iraqi
troops . One day , we responded to reports of a gun battle between Iraqi police
and al Qaeda in Iraq ’ s volatile Diyala province . 
As we entered the city center , Iraqi Army troops led the way into the
deserted marketplace . The gunfire , which had been constant for about thirty
minutes , immediately ceased . The city streets were silent , like in an old Western
when the bad guy rides into town . 
The end of the street was blocked to prevent suicide car bomb attacks , so we
stopped our trucks . The Iraqi soldiers dismounted their vehicles and headed in
on foot while the U . S . advisors provided cover from the gun trucks . 
The Iraqi soldiers were dragging a wounded civilian to safety when gunfire
erupted from a rooftop . An Iraqi soldier was shot and the civilian was killed . The
Iraqis returned fire while the U . S . advisors tried to maneuver their gun trucks
into position to fire on the rooftop . From where I was , I couldn ’ t see the rooftop , 
but I saw one lone Iraqi soldier run into the street . Firing his AK-47 with one
hand , he dragged his wounded comrade across the open street into a nearby
building . 
In response , the entire marketplace lit up . Rounds started coming our way
from people we couldn ’ t see further down the street . We could hear bullets
pinging all around our truck . The Iraqi troops returned ferocious fire . U . S . 
Apache gunships radioed to say they were coming in on a gun run to hit the
people on the rooftops . The U . S . advisors frantically ordered the Iraqi soldiers to
pull back . Then at the last minute , the Apaches called off their attack . They told
us they thought the “ enemies ” on the rooftop shooting at us were friendlies . 
From their vantage point , it looked like a friendly fire engagement . 
The U . S . advisors yelled at the Iraqis to stop firing and mass confusion
followed . Word came down that the people at the other end of the street—
probably the ones who were shooting at us—were Iraqi police . Some of them
weren ’ t in uniform because they were members of an auxiliary battalion that had
been tapped to aid in the initial gunfight . So there were Iraqis running around in
civilian clothes with AK-47s shooting at us who were allegedly friendly . It was a
mess . 
As the fighting subsided , people began to come out from behind cover and
use the lull in fire as an opportunity to move to safety . I saw civilians fleeing the
area . I also saw men in civilian clothes carrying AK-47s running away . Were
they Iraqi police ? Were they insurgents escaping ? 
Or perhaps they were both ? The Iraqi police were often sectarian . In nearby
villages , people wearing police uniforms had carried out sectarian killings at
night . We didn ’ t know whether they were insurgents with stolen uniforms or offduty police officers . 
As for this firefight , it was hard to parse what had happened . Someone had
been shooting at us . Was that an accident or intentional ? And what happened to
the man on the roof who shot the Iraqi Army soldier ? We never found out . 
That wasn ’ t the only confusing firefight I witnessed . In fact , during that
entire year I was in Iraq I was never once in a situation where I could look down
my rifle and say for certain that the person I was looking at was an insurgent . 
Many other firefights were similarly fraught , with local forces ’ loyalties and
motives suspect . 
An autonomous weapon could certainly be programmed with simple rules , 
like “ shoot back if fired upon ,  ” but in confusing ground wars , such a weapon
would guarantee fratricide . Understanding human intent would require a
machine with human-level intelligence and reasoning , at least within the narrow
domain of warfare . No such technology is on the horizon , making antipersonnel
applications very challenging for the foreseeable future . 
PROPORTIONALITY
Autonomous weapons that targeted only military objects such as tanks could
probably meet the criteria for distinction , but they would have a much harder
time with proportionality . The principle of proportionality says that the military
necessity of any strike must outweigh any expected civilian collateral damage . 
What this means in practice is open to interpretation . How much collateral
damage is proportional ? Reasonable people might disagree . Legal scholars
Kenneth Anderson , Daniel Reisner , and Matthew Waxman have pointed out ,  
 “ there is no accepted formula that gives determinate outcomes in specific cases .  ” 
It ’ s a judgment call . 
Autonomous weapons don ’ t necessarily need to make these judgments
themselves to comply with the laws of war . They simply need to be used in ways
that comply with these principles . This is a critical distinction . Even simple
autonomous weapons would pass the principle of proportionality if used in an
environment devoid of civilians , such as undersea or in space . A large metal
object underwater is very likely to be a military submarine . It might be a friendly
submarine , and that raises important practical concerns about avoiding fratricide , 
but as a legal matter avoiding targeting civilians or civilian collateral damage
would be much easier undersea . Other environments , such as space , are similarly
devoid of civilians . 
Complying with the principle of proportionality in populated areas becomes
much harder . If the location of a valid military target meant that collateral
damage would be disproportionate to the target ’ s military value , then it would be
off-limits under international law . For example , dropping a 2 , 000-pound bomb
on a single tank parked in front of a hospital would likely be disproportionate . 
Nevertheless , there are a few ways autonomous weapons could be used in
populated areas consistent with the principle of proportionality . 
The hardest approach would be to have the machine itself make a
determination about the proportionality of the attack . This would require the
machine to scan the area around the target for civilians , estimate possible
collateral damage , and then judge whether the attack should proceed . This would
be very challenging to automate . Detecting individual people from a missile or
aircraft is hard enough , but at least in principle could be accomplished with
advanced sensors . How should those people be counted , however ? If there are a
half dozen adults standing around a military radar site or a mobile missile
launcher with nothing else nearby , it might be reasonable to assume that they are
military personnel . In other circumstances , such as in dense urban environments , 
civilians could be near military objects . In fact , fighters who don ’ t respect the
rule of law will undoubtedly attempt to use civilians as human shields . How
would an autonomous weapon determine whether or not people near a military
target are civilians or combatants ? Even if the weapon could make that
determination satisfactorily , how should it weigh the military necessity of
attacking a target against the expected civilian deaths ? Doing so would require
complex moral reasoning , including weighing different hypothetical courses of
action and their likely effects on both the military campaign and civilians . Such a
machine would require human-level moral reasoning , beyond today ’ s AI . 
A simpler , although still difficult , approach would be to have humans set a
value for the number of allowable civilian casualties for each type of target . In
this case , the human would be making the calculation about military necessity
and proportionality ahead of time . The machine would only sense the number of
civilians nearby and call off the attack if it exceeded the allowable number for
that target . This would still be difficult from a sensing standpoint , but would at
least sidestep the tricky business of programming moral judgments and
reasoning into a machine . 
Even an autonomous weapon with no ability to sense the surrounding
environment could still be used lawfully in populated areas provided that the
military necessity was high enough , the expected civilian harm was low enough , 
or both . Such scenarios would be unusual , but are certainly conceivable . The
military necessity of destroying mobile launchers armed with nuclear-tipped
missiles , for example , would be quite high . Millions of lives would be saved—
principally civilians—by destroying the missiles , far outweighing any civilian
casualties caused by the autonomous weapons themselves . Conversely , very
small and precise warheads , such as shaped charges that destroy vehicles without
harming nearby people , could reduce civilian casualties to such an extent that
autonomous targeting would be lawful without sensing the environment . In these
cases , the human launching the autonomous weapon would need to determine
that the military value of any potential engagements outweighed expected
civilian harm . This would be a high bar to reach in populated areas , but is not
inconceivable . 
UNNECESSARY SUFFERING
UNNECESSARY SUFFERING
Over centuries of warfare , various weapons have been deemed “ beyond the
pale ” because of the injuries they would cause . Ancient Sanskrit texts prohibit
weapons that are poisoned , barbed , or have tips “ blazing with fire .  ” In World
War I , German “ sawback ” bayonets , which have serrated edges on one side for
cutting wood , were seen as unethical by troops because of the purported
grievous injuries they would cause when pulled out of a human body . 
Current laws of war specifically prohibit some weapons because of the
wounds they cause , such as exploding bullets , chemical weapons , blinding
lasers , or weapons with non-X-ray-detectable fragments . Why some weapons are
prohibited and others allowed can sometimes be subjective . Why is being killed
with poison gas worse than being blown up or shot ? Is being blinded by a laser
really worse than being killed ? 
The fact that combatants have agreed to limits at all is a testament to the
potential for restraint and humanity even during the horrors of war . The
prohibition on weapons intended to cause unnecessary suffering has little
bearing on autonomous weapons , though , since it deals with the mechanism of
injury , not the decision to target in the first place . 
PRECAUTIONS IN ATTACK
Other IHL rules impinge on autonomous weapons , but in murky ways . The rule
of precautions in attack requires that those who plan or decide upon an attack 
 “ take all feasible precautions ” to avoid civilian harm . Similar to proportionality , 
the difficulty of meeting this requirement depends heavily on the environment ; it
is hardest in populated areas . The requirement to take “ feasible ” precautions , 
however , gives military commanders latitude . If the only weapon available was
an autonomous weapon , a military commander could claim no other options
were feasible , even if it resulted in greater civilian casualties .  ( Other IHL criteria
such as proportionality would still apply .  ) The requirement to take feasible
precautions could be interpreted as requiring a human in the loop or on the loop
whenever possible , but again feasibility would be the determining factor . Which
technology is optimal for avoiding civilian casualties will also shift over time . If
autonomous weapons became more precise and reliable than humans , the
obligation to take “ all feasible precautions ” might require commanders to use
them . 
HORS DE COMBAT
HORS DE COMBAT
The rule of hors de combat—French for “ outside the fight ” —prohibits harming
combatants who have surrendered or are incapacitated from injuries and unable
to fight . The principle that , once wounded and “ out of combat ,  ” combatants can
no longer be targeted dates back at least to the Lieber Code , a set of regulations
handed down by the Union Army in the American Civil War . The requirement to
refrain from targeting individuals who are hors de combat has little bearing on
autonomous weapons that target objects , but it is a difficult requirement for
weapons that target people . 
The Geneva Conventions state that a person is hors de combat if he or she is 
( a ) captured ,  ( b )  “ clearly expresses an intention to surrender ,  ” or ( c )  “ has been
rendered unconscious or is otherwise incapacitated by wounds or sickness , and
therefore is incapable of defending himself .  ” Identifying the first category seems
straightforward enough . Presumably a military should have the ability to prevent
its autonomous weapons from targeting prisoners under its control , just the same
way it would need to prevent autonomous weapons from targeting its own
personnel . The second two criteria are not so simple , however . 
Rob Sparrow , a philosophy professor at Monash University and one of the
founding members of the International Committee for Robot Arms Control , has
expressed skepticism that machines could correctly identify when humans are
attempting to surrender . Militaries have historically adopted signals such as
white flags or raised arms to indicate surrender . Machines could identify these
objects or behaviors with today ’ s technology . Recognizing an intent to surrender
requires more than simply identifying objects , however . Sparrow has pointed out
that “ recognizing surrender is fundamentally a question of recognizing an
intention .  ” 
Sparrow gives the example of troops that feign surrender as a means of
getting an autonomous weapon to call off an attack . Fake surrender is considered 
 “ perfidy ” under the laws of war and is illegal . Soldiers that fake surrender but
intend to keep fighting remain combatants , but discerning fake from real
surrender hinges on interpreting human intent , something that machines fail
miserably at today . If a weapon was too generous in granting surrender and
could not identify perfidy , it would quickly become useless as a weapon . Enemy
soldiers would learn they could trick the autonomous weapon . On the other
hand , a weapon that was overly skeptical of surrendering troops and mowed
them down would be acting illegally . 
Robotic systems would have a major advantage over humans in these
situations because they could take more risk , and therefore be more cautious in
firing in ambiguous settings . The distinction between semiautonomous systems
and fully autonomous ones is critical , however . The advantage of being able to
take more risk comes from removing the human from the front lines and exists
regardless of how much autonomy the system has . The ideal robotic weapon
would still keep a human in the loop to solve these dilemmas . 
The third category of hors de combat—troops who are incapacitated and
cannot fight—raises similar problems as recognizing surrender . Simple rules
such as categorizing motionless soldiers as hors de combat would be
unsatisfactory . Wounded soldiers may not be entirely motionless , but
nevertheless still out of the fight . And legitimate combatants could “ play
possum ” to avoid being targeted , fooling the weapon . As with recognizing
surrender , identifying who is hors de combat from injuries requires
understanding human intent . Even simply recognizing injuries is not enough , as
injured soldiers could continue fighting . 
To illustrate these challenges , consider the Korean DMZ . There are no
civilians living in the DMZ , yet fully autonomous antipersonnel weapons could
still face challenges . North Korean soldiers crossing the DMZ into South Korea
could be surrendering . People crossing the DMZ could be civilian refugees . 
Soldiers guarding heavily armed borders might assume anyone approaching their
position from enemy territory is hostile , but that does not absolve them of the
IHL requirements to respect hors de combat and the principle of distinction . If an
approaching person is clearly a civilian or a surrendering soldier , then killing
that person is illegal . 
Complying with hors de combat is a problem even in situations where other
IHL concerns fall away . Imagine sending small robots into a military ship , base , 
or tunnel complex to kill individual soldiers but leave the infrastructure intact . 
This would avoid the problem of distinction by assuming everyone was a
combatant . But what if the soldiers surrendered ? There is no obligation under the
laws of war to give an enemy the opportunity to surrender . One doesn ’ t need to
pause before shooting and say ,  “ Last chance , give it up or I ’ ll shoot !  ” yet
ignoring attempts to surrender is illegal . The general concepts of a flag of truce
and surrender date back millennia . The 1907 Hague Convention codified this
concept in international law , declaring ,  “ It is expressly forbidden .  .  . to declare
that no quarter will be given .  ” To employ weapons that could not recognize
when soldiers are hors de combat would not only violate the modern laws of
war , but would trespass on millennia-old norms of warfare . 
John Canning , a retired U . S . Navy weapons designer , has proposed an
elegant solution to this problem . In his paper ,  “ You ’ ve just been disarmed . Have
a nice day !  ” Canning proposed an autonomous weapon that would not target
people directly , but rather would target their weapons . For example , the
autonomous weapon would look for the profile of an AK-47 and would aim to
destroy the AK-47 , not the person . Canning described the idea as “ targeting
either the bow or the arrow but not the human archer .  ” In Canning ’ s concept , 
these would be ultra-precise weapons that would disarm a person without killing
them .  ( While this level of precision is probably not practical , it is also not
required under IHL .  ) Canning ’ s philosophy of “ let the machines target machines
—not people ” would avoid some of the most difficult problems of antipersonnel
weapons , since civilians or surrendering soldiers could avoid harm by simply
moving away from military objects . 
THE ACCOUNTABILITY GAP
Advocates of a ban on autonomous weapons raise concerns beyond these IHL
rules . Bonnie Docherty is a lecturer at Harvard Law School and a senior
researcher in the Arms Division at Human Rights Watch . A leading voice in the
campaign to ban autonomous weapons , Docherty is one of a number of scholars
who have raised the concern that autonomous weapons could create an 
 “ accountability gap .  ” If an autonomous weapon were to go awry and kill a large
number of civilians , who would be responsible ? If the person who launched the
weapon intended to kill civilians , it would be a war crime . But if the person
launching the weapon did not intend to kill civilians , then the situation becomes
murkier . Docherty told me it wouldn ’ t be “ fair nor legally viable to .  .  . hold the
commander or operator responsible .  ” At the same time , Docherty writes 
 “  ‘ punishing ’ the robot after the fact would not make sense .  ” The robot would not
be legally considered a “ person .  ” Technically speaking , there would have been
no crime . Rather , this would be an accident . In civilian settings , civil liability
would come into play . If a self-driving car killed someone , the manufacturer
might be liable . In war , though , military and defense contractors are generally
shielded from civil liability . 
The result would be a gap in accountability . No one would be responsible . 
Docherty sees this as an unacceptable situation . She told me she is particularly
troubled because she sees autonomous weapons as likely to be used in situations
where they are prone to killing civilians , which she described as a “ dangerous
combination ” when there is no accountability for their actions . Accountability , 
she said , allows for “ retributive justice ” for victims or their families and for
deterring future actions . The solution , Docherty argues , is to “ eliminate this
accountability gap by adopting an international ban on fully autonomous
weapons .  ” 
An accountability gap is a concern , but only arises if the weapon behaves in
an unpredictable fashion . When an autonomous system correctly carries out a
person ’ s intent , then accountability is clear : the person who put the autonomous
system into operation is accountable . When the system does something
unexpected , the person who launched it could reasonably claim they weren ’ t
responsible for the system ’ s actions , since it wasn ’ t doing what they intended . 
Better design , testing , and training can reduce these risks , but accidents will
happen . Accidents happen with people too , though , and not always in
circumstances where people can be held accountable . Accidents are not always
the result of negligence or malicious intent . That ’ s why they ’ re called accidents . 
Docherty ’ s solution of keeping a human in the loop so there is someone to
blame doesn ’ t solve the problem . People can make mistakes resulting in terrible
tragedies without a crime being committed . The USS Vincennes shootdown of
Iran Air Flight 655 is an example . The shootdown was a mistake , not a war
crime , which would require intent . No individual was charged with a crime , but
the U . S . government was still responsible . The U . S . government paid $61 . 8
million in compensation to the victims ’ families ( without admitting fault ) in
1996 to settle a suit Iran brought to the International Court of Justice . 
Docherty said accountability is an issue that “ resonates with everyone , from
military to lawyers to diplomats to ethicists .  ” The desire to hold someone
accountable for harm is a natural human impulse , but there is no principle in IHL
that says there must be an individual to hold accountable for every death on the
battlefield . States are ultimately responsible for the actions their militaries take . 
It makes sense to hold individuals responsible for criminal acts , but an
accountability gap already exists with human-induced accidents today . Charles
Dunlap , Duke law professor and former deputy judge advocate general for the
U . S . Air Force , has argued that for those concerned about an accountability gap , 
the “ issue is not with autonomous weapons , it is with the fundamental precepts
of criminal law .  ” 
Bonnie Docherty also said she thought accountability was important to deter
future harmful acts . While accidental killings are unintentional by definition and
thus something that cannot be deterred , an accountability gap could create an
insidious danger of moral hazard . If those who launch autonomous weapons do
not believe they are accountable for the killing that results , they could become
careless , launching the weapon into places where perhaps its performance was
not assured . In theory , compliance with IHL should prevent this kind of reckless
behavior . In practice , the fuzziness of principles like precautions in attack and
the fact that machines would be doing the targeting would increasingly separate
humans from killing on the battlefield . Complying with IHL might require
special attention to human-machine interfaces and operator training to instill a
mindset in human operators that they are responsible for the autonomous
weapon ’ s actions . 
THE DICTATES OF PUBLIC CONSCIENCE
Some advocates of a ban argue that complying with these IHL principles isn ’ t
enough . They argue autonomous weapons violate the “ public conscience .  ” An
IHL concept known as the Martens Clause states :  “ In cases not covered by the
law in force , the human person remains under the protection of the principles of
humanity and the dictates of the public conscience .  ” Bonnie Docherty and others
believe that the Martens Clause justifies a ban . 
The Martens Clause is a thin reed to lean on . For starters , it has never been
used to ban a weapon before . Even the legal status of the Martens Clause itself is
highly debated . Some view the Martens Clause as an independent rule of IHL
that can be used to ban weapons that violate the “ public conscience .  ” A more
conservative interpretation of the Martens Clause is that it is merely a
recognition of “ customary international law .  ” Customary laws exist by state
practice , even they aren ’ t explicitly written down . As one legal expert succinctly
put it :  “ There is no accepted interpretation of the Martens Clause .  ” 
Even if one were to grant the Martens Clause sufficient legal weight to
justify a ban , how does one measure the public conscience ? And which public ? 
The American public ? The Chinese public ? All of humanity ? 
Public opinions on morality and ethics vary around the globe , shaped by
religion , history , the media , and even pop culture . I am continually struck by
how much the Terminator films influence debate on autonomous weapons . In
nine out of ten serious conversations on autonomous weapons I have had , 
whether in the bowels of the Pentagon or the halls of the United Nations , 
someone invariably mentions the Terminator . Sometimes it ’ s an uncomfortable
joke—the looming threat of humanity ’ s extinction the proverbial elephant in the
room . Sometimes the Terminator references are quite serious , with debates about
where the Terminator would fall on a spectrum of autonomy . I wonder if James
Cameron had not made the Terminator movies how debates on autonomous
weapons would be different . If science fiction had not primed us with visions of
killer robots set to extinguish humanity , would we fear autonomous lethal
machines ? 
Measuring public attitudes is notoriously tricky for this very reason . 
Responses to polls can be swayed by “ priming ” subjects with information to tilt
them for or against an issue . Mentioning a word or topic early in a survey can
subconsciously place ideas in a person ’ s mind and measurably change the
answers they give to later questions . Two political scientists have tried to use
polling to measure the public conscience on autonomous weapons . They came to
very different conclusions . 
Charli Carpenter , a professor of political science at University of
Massachusetts at Amherst , made the first attempt to measure public views on
autonomous weapons in 2013 . She found that 55 percent of respondents
somewhat or strongly opposed “ the trend towards using completely autonomous
robotic weapons in war .  ” Only 26 percent of respondents somewhat or strongly
favored autonomous weapons , with the remaining unsure . Most interestingly , 
Carpenter found stronger opposition among military service members and
veterans . Carpenter ’ s survey became a sharp arrow in the quiver of ban
advocates , who frequently cite her results . 
Political scientist Michael Horowitz disagreed . Horowitz , a professor at
University of Pennsylvania ,  * released a study in 2016 that showed a more
complicated picture . Asking respondents in a vacuum for their views on
autonomous weapons , Horowitz found results similar to Carpenter ’ s : 48 percent
opposed autonomous weapons and 38 percent supported them , with the
remainder undecided . When Horowitz varied the context for use of autonomous
weapons , however , public support rose . If told that autonomous weapons were
both more effective and helped protect friendly troops , respondents ’ support rose
to 60 percent and opposition fell to 27 percent . Horowitz argued the public ’ s
views on autonomous weapons depended on context . He concluded ,  “ it is too
early to argue that [ autonomous weapon systems ] violate the public conscience
provision of the Martens Clause because of public opposition .  ” 
These dueling polls suggest that measuring the public conscience is hard . 
Peter Asaro—a professor and philosopher of science , technology , and media at
The New School in New York and another proponent of a ban on autonomous
weapons—suggests it might be impossible . Asaro distinguishes “ public
conscience ” from public opinion .  “  ‘ Conscience ’ has an explicitly moral
inflection that ‘ opinion ’ lacks ,  ” he writes . It is a “ disservice to reduce the
 ‘ dictates of public conscience ’ to mere public opinion .  ” Instead , we should
discern the public conscience “ through public discussion , as well as academic
scholarship , artistic and cultural expressions , individual reflection , collective
action , and additional means , by which society deliberates its collective moral
conscience .  ” This approach is more comprehensive , but essentially disqualifies
any one metric for understanding the public conscience . But perhaps that is best
if it is so . Reflecting on this debate , Horowitz concluded ,  “ The bar for claiming
to speak for humanity should be high .  ” 
Maybe attempts to measure the public conscience don ’ t really matter . It was
the public conscience in the form of advocacy by peace activist groups and
governments that led to bans on land mines and cluster munitions . Steve Goose
told me ,  “ the clearest manifestation of the ‘ dictates of the public conscience ’ is
when citizens generate enough pressure on their governments that the politicians
are compelled to take action .  ” If action is the metric , then the jury is still out on
the public conscience on autonomous weapons . 
FROM ANALYSIS TO ACTION
The legal issues surrounding autonomous weapons are fairly clear . What one
decides to do about autonomous weapons is another matter . I ’ ve observed in the
eight years I ’ ve been working on autonomous weapons that people tend to
gravitate quickly to one of three positions . One view is to ban autonomous
weapons because they might violate IHL . Another is that since those illegal uses
would , by definition , already be prohibited under IHL , there is no reason for a
ban ; we should let IHL work as intended . And then there is a third , middle
position that perhaps the solution is some form of regulation . 
Because fully autonomous weapons do not yet exist , in some respects they
end up being a kind of Rorschach test for how one views the ability of IHL to
deal with new weapons . If one is confident in the ability of IHL to handle
emerging technologies , then no new law is needed . If one is generally skeptical
that IHL will succeed in constraining harmful technologies , one might favor a
ban . 
Law professor Charles Dunlap is firmly in the camp that we should trust
IHL . From his perspective , ad hoc weapons bans are not just unnecessary , they
are harmful . In a series of essays , Dunlap has argued that if we were really
concerned about protecting civilians , we would abandon efforts to “ demonize
specific technologies ” and instead “ emphasize effects rather than weapons .  ” 
One of Dunlap ’ s concerns is that weapons bans based on a “ technological
 ‘ snapshot in time ’  ” do not leave open the possibility for technology
improvements that may lead to the development of more humane weapons later . 
Dunlap cited modern-day CS gas ( a form of tear gas ) as an example of a weapon
that could have beneficial effects on the battlefield by incapacitating , rather than
killing , soldiers , but is prohibited for use in combat by the Chemical Weapons
Convention . The prohibition seems especially nonsensical given that CS gas is
regularly used by law enforcement and is legal for military use against civilians
for riot-control purposes , but not against enemy combatants . The U . S . military
also uses it in its own troops in training . Dunlap also opposes bans on land mines
and cluster munitions because they preclude the use of “ smart mines ” that selfdeactivate after a period of time or cluster munitions with low dud rates . Both of
these innovations solve the core problem of land mines and cluster munitions : 
their lingering effects after war ’ s end . 
Without these tools at a military ’ s disposal , Dunlap has argued , militaries
may be forced to resort to more lethal or indiscriminate methods to accomplish
the same objectives , resulting in “ the paradox that requires nations to use far
more deadly ( though lawful ) means to wage war .  ” He gave a hypothetical
example of a country that could use self-neutralizing mines to temporarily shut
down an enemy airfield , but for the prohibition on mines , which forces them to
use high-explosive weapons instead . As a result , when the war is over , the
runways are not operable for deliveries of humanitarian aid to help civilians
affected by the war . Dunlap concluded : 
Given the pace of accelerated scientific development , the assumptions upon which the law relies
to justify barring certain technologies could become quickly obsolete in ways that challenge the
wisdom of the prohibition . 
In short , banning a weapon based on the state of technology at a given point in
time is ill-conceived , Dunlap argues , because technology is always changing , 
often in ways we cannot predict . A better approach , he has suggested , is to
regulate the use of weapons , focusing on “ strict compliance with the core
principles of IHL .  ” His critique is particularly relevant for autonomous weapons , 
for which technology is moving forward at a rapid pace , and Dunlap has been a
forceful critic of a ban . 
Bonnie Docherty and Steve Goose , on the other hand , aren ’ t interested in
whether autonomous weapons could theoretically comply with IHL someday . 
They are interested in what states are likely to actually do . Docherty cut her teeth
doing field research on cluster munitions and other weapons , interviewing
victims and their families in Afghanistan , Iraq , Lebanon , Libya , Georgia , Israel , 
Ethiopia , Sudan , and Ukraine . Goose is a veteran of prior ( successful ) campaigns
to ban land mines , cluster munitions , and blinding lasers . Their backgrounds
shape how they see the issues . Docherty told me ,  “ even though there are no
victims yet , if [ these weapons are ] allowed to exist , there will be and I ’ ll be
doing field missions on them .  .  .  . We shouldn ’ t forget that these things would
have real human effect . They aren ’ t just merely a matter for academics .  ” Goose
acknowledged that there might be isolated circumstances where autonomous
weapons could be used lawfully , but he said he had “ grave concern ” that once
states had them , they would use them in ways outside those limited
circumstances . 
There is precedent for Goose ’ s concern . Protocol II of the Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons ( CCW ) regulates the use of mines in order to
protect civilians , such as keeping mines away from populated areas and clearly
marking minefields . If the rules had been strictly followed , much of the harm
from mines likely would never have occurred . But they weren ’ t followed . The
Ottawa Treaty banning land mines was the reaction , to simply take away
antipersonnel mines entirely as a tool of war . Goose sees autonomous weapons
in a similar light .  “ The dangers just far outweigh the potential benefits ,  ” he said . 
Dunlap is similarly concerned with what militaries actually do , but he ’ s
coming from a very different place . Dunlap was a major general in the Air Force
and deputy judge advocate general from 2006 to 2010 . He spent thirty-four years
in the Air Force ’ s judge advocate general corps , where he provided legal advice
to commanders at all levels . There ’ s an old saying in Washington :  “ where you
stand depends on where you sit ,  ” meaning that one ’ s stance on an issue depends
on one ’ s job . This aphorism helps to explain , in part , the views of different
practitioners who are well versed in the law and its compliance , or lack thereof , 
on battlefields . Dunlap is concerned about the humanitarian consequences of
weapons but also about military effectiveness . One of his concerns is that the
only nations who will pay attention to weapons bans are those who already care
about IHL . Their enemies may not be similarly shackled . Odious regimes like
Saddam Hussein ’ s Iraq , Muammar Gaddafi ’ s Libya , or Bashar al-Assad ’ s Syria
care nothing for the rule of law , making weapons prohibitions one-sided . Dunlap
has argued “ law-abiding nations need to be able to bring bear the most effective
technologies ,  ” consistent with IHL .  “ Denying such capabilities to nations
because of prohibitions .  .  . could , paradoxically , promote the nefarious interests
of those who would never respect IHL in the first place .  ” 
BOUND BY THE LAWS OF WAR
There is one critical way the laws of war treat machines differently from people : 
Machines are not combatants . People fight wars , not robots . The Department of
Defense Law of War Manual concludes : 
The law of war rules on conducting attacks ( such as the rules relating to discrimination and
proportionality ) impose obligations on persons . These rules do not impose obligations on the
weapons themselves ; of course , an inanimate object could not assume an “ obligation ” in any
event .  .  .  . The law of war does not require weapons to make legal determinations , even if the
weapon ( e . g .  , through computers , software , and sensors ) may be characterized as capable of
making factual determinations , such as whether to fire the weapon or to select and engage a
target . 
This means that any person using an autonomous weapon has a responsibility to
ensure that the attack is lawful . A human could delegate specific targeting
decisions to the weapon , but not the determination whether or not to attack . 
This begs the question : What constitutes an “ attack ”  ? The Geneva
Conventions define an “ attack ” as “ acts of violence against the adversary , 
whether in offence or in defence .  ” The use of the plural “ acts of violence ” 
suggests that an attack could consist of many engagements . Thus , a human
would not need to approve every single target . An autonomous weapon that
searched for , decided to engage , and engaged targets would be lawful , provided
it was used in compliance with the other rules of IHL and a human approved the
attack . At the same time , an attack is bounded in space and time . Law professor
Ken Anderson told me “ the size of something that constitutes an attack .  .  . 
doesn ’ t include an entire campaign . It ’ s not a whole war .  ” It wouldn ’ t make
sense to speak of a single attack going on for months or to call the entirety of
World War II a single attack . The International Committee of the Red Cross 
( ICRC )  , an NGO charged with safeguarding IHL , made this point explicitly in a
1987 commentary on the definition of an attack , noting an attack “ is a
technical term relating to a specific military operation limited in time and place .  ” 
Anderson explained that the Geneva Conventions were negotiated in the
aftermath of World War II and so the context for the term “ attack ” was the kind
of attacks on whole cities that happened during the war .  “ The notion of the
launching of an attack is broader than simply the firing of any particular
weapon ,  ” he said .  “ An attack is going to very often involve many different
soldiers , many different units , air and ground forces .  ” Anderson said
determinations about proportionality and precautions in attack were “ human
questions ,  ” but there could be situations in an attack ’ s execution where humans
used machines “ to respond at speed without consulting .  ” 
Humans , not machines themselves , are bound by the laws of war . This
means some human involvement is needed to ensure attacks are lawful . A person
approving an attack would need to have sufficient information about the
target ( s )  , the environment , the weapon ( s )  , and the context for the attack in order
to make a determination about its legality . And the weapon ’ s autonomy would
need to be sufficiently bounded in time and space such that conditions are not
likely to change and render its employment unlawful . This is the problem with
persistent land mines . They remain lethal even after the context changes ( the war
ends )  . 
The fact that human judgment is needed in the decision to launch an attack
leads to some minimum requirement for human involvement in the use of force . 
There is considerable flexibility in how an “ attack ” might be defined , though . 
This answer may not be satisfactory to some proponents of a ban , who may want
tighter restrictions . Some proponents of a ban have looked outside the law , to
ethics and morals , as justification .  
* Horowitz is also codirector of the Ethical Autonomy Project at the Center for a New American Security
and a frequent coauthor of mine . 
17
SOULLESS KILLERS
THE MORALITY OF AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS
No one had to tell us on that mountaintop in Afghanistan that shooting a little
girl was wrong . It would have been legal . If she was directly participating in
hostilities , then she was a combatant . Under IHL , she was a valid target . But my
fellow soldiers and I knew killing her would have been morally wrong . We
didn ’ t even discuss it . We just felt it . Autonomous weapons might be lawful in
some settings , but would they be moral ? 
Jody Williams is a singular figure in humanitarian disarmament . She was a
leading force behind the original—and successful—campaign to ban land mines , 
for which she shared a Nobel Peace Prize in 1997 . She speaks with clarity and
purpose . Autonomous weapons are “ morally reprehensible ,  ” she told me . They
cross “ a moral and ethical Rubicon . I don ’ t understand how people can really
believe it ’ s okay to allow a machine to decide to kill people .  ” Williams readily
admits that she isn ’ t a legal or ethical scholar . She ’ s not a scientist .  “ But I know
what ’ s right and wrong ,  ” she said . 
Williams helped found the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots along with her
husband , Steve Goose of Human Rights Watch . The campaign ’ s case has always
included moral and ethical arguments in addition to legal ones . Ethical
arguments fall into two main categories . One stems from an ethical theory called
consequentialism , the idea that right and wrong depend on the outcome of one ’ s
actions . Another comes from deontological ethics , which is the concept that right
and wrong are determined by rules governing the actions themselves , not the
consequences . A consequentialist would say ,  “ the ends justify the means .  ” From
a deontological perspective , however , some actions are always wrong , regardless
of the outcome . 
THE CONSEQUENCES OF AUTONOMOUS
WEAPONS
A consequentialist case for a ban assumes that introducing autonomous weapons
would result in more harm than not introducing them . Ban advocates paint a
picture of a world with autonomous weapons killing large numbers of civilians . 
They argue that while autonomous weapons might be lawful in the abstract , in
practice the rules in IHL are too flexible or vague and permitting autonomous
weapons will inevitably lead to a slippery slope where they are used in ways that
cause harm . Thus , a ban is justified on ethical ( and practical ) grounds . 
Conversely , some opponents of a ban argue that autonomous weapons might be
more precise and reliable than humans and thus better at avoiding civilian
casualties . In that case , they argue , combatants would have an ethical
responsibility to use them . 
These arguments hinge primarily on the reliability of autonomous weapons . 
This is partly a technical matter , but it is also a function of the organizational and
bureaucratic systems that guide weapon development and testing . One could , for
example , be optimistic that safe operation might someday be possible with
robust testing , but pessimistic that states would ever invest in sufficient testing
or marshal their bureaucratic organizations well enough to capably test such
complex systems . The U . S . Department of Defense has published detailed policy
guidance on autonomous weapon development , testing , and training . Other
nations have not been so thorough . 
What might the consequences be if autonomous weapons were able to
reliably comply with IHL ? Many are skeptical that autonomous weapons could
comply with IHL in the first place . But what if they could ? How would that
change war ? 
EMPATHY AND MERCY IN WAR
In his book Just and Unjust Wars , philosopher Michael Walzer cites numerous
examples throughout history of soldiers refraining from firing on an enemy
because they recognized the other ’ s humanity . He calls these incidents “ naked
soldier ” moments where a scout or sniper stumbles across an enemy alone and
often doing something mundane and nonthreatening , such as bathing , smoking a
cigarette , having a cup of coffee , or watching the sunrise . Walzer notes : 
It is not against the rules of war as we currently understand them to kill soldiers who look funny , 
who are taking a bath , holding up their pants , reveling in the sun , smoking a cigarette . The refusal
of these men [ to kill ]  , nevertheless , seems to go to the heart of the war convention . For what does
it mean to say that someone has a right to life ? 
These moments of hesitation are about more than the enemy not posing an
immediate threat . In these moments , the enemy ’ s humanity is exposed , naked for
the firer to see . The target in the rifle ’ s cross hairs is no longer “ the enemy .  ” He
is another person , with hopes , dreams , and desires—same as the would-be
shooter . With autonomous weapons , there would be no human eye at the other
end of the rifle scope , no human heart to stay the trigger finger . The consequence
of deploying autonomous weapons would be that these soldiers , whose lives
might be spared by a human , would die . From a consequentialist perspective , 
this would be bad . 
There is a counterargument against empathy in war , however . I raised this
concern about mercy with an Army colonel on the sidelines of a meeting on the
ethics of autonomous weapons at the United States Military Academy in West
Point , New York , a few years ago and he gave me a surprising answer . He told
me a story about a group of his soldiers who came across a band of insurgents in
the streets of Baghdad . The two groups nearly stumbled into each other and the
U . S . soldiers had the insurgents vastly outnumbered . There was no cover for the
insurgents to hide behind . Rather than surrender , though , the insurgents threw
their weapons to the ground , turned and fled . The American soldiers didn ’ t fire . 
The colonel was incensed . Those insurgents weren ’ t surrendering . They were
escaping , only to return to fight another day . An autonomous weapon would
have fired , he told me . It would have known not to hold back . Instead , his
soldiers ’ hesitation may have cost other Americans their lives . 
This is an important dissenting view against the role of mercy in war . It
channels General William Tecumseh Sherman from the American Civil War , 
who waged a campaign of total war against the South . During his infamous 1864 
 “ March to the Sea ,  ” Sherman ’ s troops devastated the South ’ s economic
infrastructure , destroying railroads and crops , and appropriating livestock . 
Sherman ’ s motivation was to bring the South to its knees , ending the war sooner .  
 “ War is cruelty ,  ” Sherman said .  “ There is no use trying to reform it . The crueler
it is , the sooner it will be over .  ” 
The incidents Walzer cites of soldiers who refrained from firing contain this
dilemma . After one such incident , a sergeant chastised the soldiers for not killing
the enemy they saw wandering through a field , since now the enemy would
report back their position , putting the other men in the unit at risk . In another
example , a sniper handed his rifle to his comrade to shoot an enemy he saw
taking a bath .  “ He got him , but I had not stayed to watch ,  ” the sniper wrote in his
memoirs . Soldiers understand this tension , that sparing the enemy in an act of
kindness might prolong the war or lead to their own friends being put at risk
later . The sniper who handed his rifle to his teammate understood that killing the
enemy , even while bathing , was a necessary part of winning the war . He simply
couldn ’ t be the one to do it . 
Autonomous weapons wouldn ’ t defy their orders and show mercy on an
enemy caught unawares walking through a field or taking a bath . They would
follow their programming . One consequence of deploying autonomous weapons , 
therefore , could be more deaths on the battlefield . These moments of mercy
would be eliminated . It might also mean ending the war sooner , taking the
Sherman approach . The net result could be more suffering in war or less—or
perhaps both , with more brutal and merciless wars that end faster . In either case , 
one should be careful not to overstate the effect of these small moments of
mercy in war . They are the exception , not the rule , and are minuscule in scale
compared to the many engagements in which soldiers do fire . 
THE CONSEQUENCES OF REMOVING MORAL
RESPONSIBILITY FOR KILLING
Removing the human from targeting and kill decisions could have other broader
consequences , beyond these instances of mercy . If the people who launched
autonomous weapons did not feel responsible for the killing that ensued , the
result could be more killing , with more suffering overall . 
In his book On Killing , Army psychologist Lieutenant Colonel Dave
Grossman explained that most people are reluctant to kill . During World War II , 
Army historian S . L . A . Marshall interviewed soldiers directly coming off the
front lines and found , to his surprise , that most soldiers weren ’ t shooting at the
enemy . Only 15 to 20 percent of soldiers were actually firing at the enemy . Most
soldiers were firing above the enemy ’ s head or not firing at all . They were 
 “ posturing ,  ” Grossman explained , pretending to fight but not actually trying to
kill the enemy . Grossman drew on evidence from a variety of wars to show that
this posturing has occurred throughout history . He argued that humans have an
innate biological resistance to killing . In the animal kingdom , he explained , 
animals with lethal weaponry find nonlethal ways of resolving intraspecies
conflict . Deaths from these fights occasionally occur , but usually one animal
submits first . That ’ s because killing isn ’ t the point : dominance is . Humans ’ 
innate resistance to killing can be overcome , however , through psychological
conditioning , pressure from authority , diffused responsibility for killing , 
dehumanizing the enemy , or increased psychological distance from the act of
killing . 
One factor , Grossman argued , is how intimately soldiers see the reality of
their actions . If they are up close to the enemy , such that they can see the other
as a person , as the soldiers in Walzer ’ s examples did , then many will refrain
from killing . This resistance diminishes as the psychological distance from the
enemy grows . A person who at 10 meters might look like a human being—a
father , a brother , a son—is merely a dark shape at 300 meters . Twentieth-century
tools of war increased this psychological distance even further . A World War II
bombardier looked down his bombsight at a physical object : a bridge , a factory , 
a base . The people were invisible . With this kind of distance , war can seem like
an exercise in demolition , detached from the awful human consequences of
one ’ s actions . In World War II , the United States and United Kingdom leveled
whole cities through strategic bombing , killing hundreds of thousands of
civilians . It would have been far harder for most soldiers to carry out the same
equivalent killing , much of which was against civilians , if they had to see the
reality of their actions up close . 
Modern information technology allows warfare at unprecedented physical
distances , but recompresses the psychological distance . Drone operators today
may be thousands of miles away from the killing , but their psychological
distance is very close . With high-definition cameras , drone crews have an
intimate view of a target ’ s life . Drones can loiter for long periods of time and
operators may watch a target for days or weeks , building up “ patterns of life ” 
before undertaking a strike . Afterward , drone operators can see the human costs
of their actions , as the wounded suffer or friends and relatives come to gather the
dead . Reports of post-traumatic stress disorder among drone crews attest to this
intimate relationship with killing and the psychological costs associated with it . 
All military innovation since the first time a person threw a rock in anger has
been about striking the enemy without putting oneself at risk . Removing the
soldier from harm ’ s way might lower the barrier to military action . Uninhabited
systems need not be autonomous , though . Militaries could use robotic systems to
reduce physical risk and still keep a human in the loop . 
Delegating the decision to kill , however , could increase the psychological
distance from killing , which could be more problematic . By not having to
choose the specific targets , even via a computer screen , the human would be
even further removed from killing . Grossman ’ s work on the psychology of
killing suggests the result could be less restraint . 
Autonomous weapons could also lead to an offloading of moral
responsibility for killing . Grossman found that soldiers were more willing to kill
if responsibility for killing was diffused . While only 15–20 percent of World
War II riflemen reported firing at the enemy , firing rates for machine-gun crews
were much higher , nearly 100 percent . Grossman argued that each team member
could justify his actions without taking responsibility for killing , which only
occurred because of the collective actions of the team . The soldier feeding the
ammunition wasn ’ t killing anyone ; he was only feeding ammunition . The spotter
wasn ’ t pulling the trigger ; he was just telling the gunner where to aim . Even the
gunner could absolve himself of responsibility ; he was merely aiming where the
spotter told him to aim . Grossman explained ,  “ if he can get others to share in the
killing process ( thus diffusing his personal responsibility by giving each
individual a slice of the guilt )  , then killing can be easier .  ” Grossman argued that
much of the killing in war has historically been done by crew-served weapons : 
machine guns , artillery , cannon , and even the chariot . If the person launching the
autonomous weapon felt that the weapon was doing the killing , the lessening of
moral responsibility might lead to more killing . 
Mary “ Missy ” Cummings is director of the Humans and Autonomy Lab 
( HAL ) at Duke University . Cummings has a PhD in systems engineering , but her
focus isn ’ t just on the automation itself , but rather on how humans interact with
automation . It ’ s part engineering , part design , and part psychology . When I
visited her lab at Duke she showed me a van they were using to test how
pedestrians interact with self-driving cars . The secret , Cummings told me , was
that the car wasn ’ t self-driving at all . There was a person behind the wheel . The
experiment was to see if pedestrians would change their behavior if they thought
the car was self-driving . And they did .  “ We see some really dangerous
behaviors ,  ” she said . People would carelessly walk in front of the van , assuming
it would stop . Pedestrians perceived the automation as more reliable than a
human driver and changed their behavior as a result , acting more recklessly
themselves . 
In a 2004 article , Cummings wrote that automation could create a “ moral
buffer ,  ” reducing individuals ’ perceptions of moral responsibility for their
actions :  
[ P ] hysical and emotional distancing can be exacerbated by any automated system that provides a
division between a user and his or her actions .  .  . These moral buffers , in effect , allow people to
ethically distance themselves from their actions and diminish a sense of accountability and
responsibility . 
Cummings understands this not only as a researcher , but also as a former Navy
F-18 fighter pilot . She wrote :  
[ It ] is more palatable to drop a laser guided missile on a building than it is to send a Walleye
bomb into a target area with a live television feed that transmits back to the pilot the real-time
images of people who , in seconds , will no longer be alive . 
In addition to the greater psychological distance automation provides , humans
tend to anthropomorphize machines and assign them moral agency . People
frequently name their Roomba .  “ It is possible that without consciously
recognizing it , people assign moral agency to computers , despite the fact that
they are inanimate objects ,  ” Cummings wrote . Like crew-served weapons , 
humans may offload moral responsibility for killing to the automation itself . 
Cummings cautioned that this “ could permit people to perceive themselves as
unaccountable for whatever consequences result from their actions , however
indirect .  ” 
Cummings argued that human-machine interfaces for weapon systems
should be designed to encourage humans to feel responsible for their actions . 
The manner in which information is relayed to the human plays a role . In her
article “ Creating Moral Buffers in Weapon Control Interface Design ” she
criticized the interface for a decision-support tool for missile strikes that used a
Microsoft Excel puppy dog icon to communicate with the user . The “ cheerful , 
almost funny graphic only helps to enforce the moral buffer .  ” The human role in
decision-making also matters . Cummings criticized the Army ’ s decision to use
the Patriot in a supervised autonomous mode , arguing that may have been a role
in the F-18 fratricide . She said :  
[ E ] nabling a system to essentially fire at will removes a sense of accountability from human
decision makers , who then can offload responsibility to the inanimate computer when mistakes
are made . 
Cummings argued that a semiautonomous control mode where the human has to
take a positive action before the weapon fires would be a more appropriate
design that would better facilitate human responsibility . 
These design choices are not panaceas . Humans can also fall victim to
automation bias , trusting too much in the machine , even when they are
technically in the loop . A human was in the loop for the first Patriot fratricide . 
And of course humans have killed a great deal in wars throughout history
without automation of any kind . Pressure from authority , diffusion of
responsibility , physical and psychological distance , and dehumanizing the
enemy all contribute to overcoming the innate human resistance to killing . 
Modern psychological conditioning has also overcome much of this resistance . 
The U . S . Army changed its marksmanship training in the years after World War
II , shifting to firing on human-shaped pop-up targets , and by Vietnam firing
rates had increased to 90–95 percent . Nevertheless , automation could further
lower the barriers to killing . 
War at the distant edge of moral accountability can become truly horrific , 
especially in an age of mechanized slaughter . In the documentary Fog of War , 
former U . S . Defense Secretary Robert McNamara gave the example of the U . S . 
strategic bombing campaign against Japanese cities during World War II . Even
before the United States dropped nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki , 
U . S . aerial firebombing killed 50–90 percent of the civilian population of sixtyseven Japanese cities . McNamara explained that Air Force General Curtis
LeMay , who commanded U . S . bombers , saw any action that shortened the war
as justified . McNamara , on the other hand , was clearly troubled by these actions , 
arguing that both he and LeMay “ were behaving as war criminals .  ” 
Sometimes these concerns can lead to restraint at the strategic level . In 1991 , 
images of the so-called “ Highway of Death ,  ” where U . S . airplanes bombed
retreating Iraqi troops , caused President George H . W . Bush to call an early end
to the war . Then–chairman of the Joint Chiefs Colin Powell later wrote in his
memoirs that “ the television coverage was starting to make it look as if we were
engaged in slaughter for slaughter ’ s sake .  ” 
The risk is not merely that an autonomous weapon might kill the naked
soldier and continue bombing the Highway of Death . The risk is that no human
might feel troubled enough to stop it . 
BETTER THAN HUMANS
Human behavior in war is far from perfect . The dehumanization that enables
killing in war unleashes powerful demons . Enemy lives do not regain value once
they have surrendered . Torture and murder of prisoners are common war crimes . 
Dehumanization often extends to the enemy ’ s civilian population . Rape , torture , 
and murder of civilians often follow in war ’ s wake . 
The laws of war are intended to be a bulwark against such barbarity , but
even law-abiding nations are not immune to their seductions . In a series of
mental health surveys of deployed U . S . troops in 2006 and 2007 , the U . S . 
military found that an alarming number of soldiers expressed support for abuse
of prisoners and noncombatants . Over one-third of junior enlisted soldiers said
they thought torture should be allowed in order to gather important information
about insurgents ( a war crime )  . Less than half said they would report a unit
member for injuring or killing an innocent noncombatant . Actual reported
unethical behavior was much lower . Around 5 percent said they had physically
hit or kicked noncombatants when not necessary . While these survey results are
certainly not evidence of actual war crimes , they show disturbing attitudes
among U . S . troops .  ( Perhaps most troubling , the U . S . military stopped asking
questions about ethical behavior in its mental health surveys after 2007 . This
suggests that at the institutional level there was , at a minimum , insufficient
interest in addressing this problem , if not willful blindness .  ) 
Ron Arkin is a roboticist who believes robots might be able to do better . 
Arkin is a regents ’ professor , associate dean , and director of the Georgia Tech
Mobile Robot Laboratory . He is a serious roboticist whose resume is peppered
with publications like “ Temporal Coordination of Perceptual Algorithms for
Mobile Robot Navigation ” and “ Multiagent Teleautonomous Behavioral
Control .  ” He is also heavily engaged in the relatively new field of robot ethics , 
or “ roboethics .  ” 
Arkin had been a practicing roboticist for nearly twenty years before he
started wondering ,  “ What if [ robotics ] actually works ?  ” Arkin told me that in the
early 2000s , he began to see autonomy rapidly advance in robots .  “ That gave me
pause , made me reflect on what it is we are creating .  ” Arkin realized that
roboticists were “ creating things that may have a profound impact on humanity .  ” 
Since then , he has worked to raise consciousness within the robotics community
about the ethical implications of their work . Arkin cofounded the IEEE-RAS * 
Technical Committee on Roboethics and has given lectures at the United
Nations , the International Committee of the Red Cross , and the Pentagon . 
Arkin ’ s interest in roboethics encompasses not just autonomous weapons , 
but also societal applications such as companion robots . He is particularly
concerned about how vulnerable populations , such as children or the elderly , 
relate to robots . The common question across these different applications of
robotics is ,  “ What should we be building and what safeguards should be in
place ?  ”  “ I don ’ t care about the robots ,  ” Arkin said .  “ Some people worry about
robot sentience , superintelligence .  .  . I ’ m not concerned about that . I worry
about the effect on people .  ” 
Arkin also applies this focus on human effects to his work in the military
domain . In 2008 , Arkin did a technical report for the U . S . Army Research Office
on the creation of an “ ethical governor ” for lethal autonomous weapons . The
question was whether , in principle , it might be possible to create an autonomous
weapon that could comply with the laws of war . Arkin concluded it was
theoretically possible and outlined , in a broad sense , how one might design such
a system . An ethical governor would prohibit the autonomous weapon from
taking an illegal or unethical act . Arkin takes the consequentialist view that if
robots can be more ethical than humans , we have a “ moral imperative to use this
technology to help save civilian lives .  ” 
Just as autonomous cars might reduce deaths from driving , Arkin says
autonomous weapons could possibly do the same in war . There is precedent for
this point of view . Arguably the biggest life-saving innovation in war to date
isn ’ t a treaty banning a weapon , but a weapon : precision-guided munitions . In
World War II , bombadiers couldn ’ t have precisely hit military targets and
avoided civilian ones even if they wanted to ; the bombs simply weren ’ t accurate
enough . A typical bomb had only a 50–50 chance of landing inside a 1 . 25-mile
diameter circle . With bombs this imprecise , mass saturation attacks were needed
to have any reasonable probability of hitting a target . More than 9 , 000 bombs
were needed to achieve a 90 percent probability of destroying an average-sized
target . Blanketing large areas may have been inhumane , but precision air
bombardment wasn ’ t technologically possible . Today , some precision-guided
munitions are accurate to within five feet , allowing them to hit enemy targets
and leave nearby civilian objects untouched . 
The motivation behind the U . S . military ’ s move into precision guidance was
increased operational effectiveness . Because of the bombs ’ inaccuracy , in World
War II 3 , 000 bombing sorties were needed to drop the 9 , 000 bombs required to
take out a target . Today , a single sortie can take out multiple targets . A military
with precision-guided weapons is orders of magnitude more effective in
destroying the enemy . Fewer civilians killed in collateral damage is a beneficial
side effect of greater precision . 
This increased accuracy saves lives . It also shifted public expectations about
the degree of precision expected in war . We debate civilian casualties from
drone strikes today , but tens of thousands of civilians were killed by U . S . and
British bombers in the German cities of Hamburg , Kassel , Darmstadt , Dresden , 
and Pforzheim in World War II . Historians estimate that the U . S . strategic
bombing of Japanese cities in World War II killed over 300 , 000 civilians . Over
100 , 000 were killed on a single night in the firebombing of Tokyo . By contrast , 
according to the independent watchdog group The Bureau of Investigative
Journalism , U . S . drone strikes against terrorists in Somalia , Pakistan , and Yemen
killed a total of between three and sixteen civilians in 2015 and four civilians in
2016 . Sentiment has shifted so far that Human Rights Watch has argued that “ the
use of indiscriminate rockets in populated areas violates international
humanitarian law , or the laws of war , and may amount to war crimes .  ” This
position effectively requires precision-guided weapons . As technology has made
it easier to reduce collateral damage , societal norms have shifted too ; we have
come to expect fewer civilian casualties in war . 
Arkin sees autonomous weapons as “ next-generation precision-guided
munitions .  ” It isn ’ t just that autonomous weapons could be more precise and
reliable than people . Arkin ’ s argument is that people just aren ’ t that good , 
morally . While some human behavior on the battlefield is honorable , he said ,  
 “ some of it is quite dishonorable and criminal .  ” He says the status quo is “ utterly
and wholly unacceptable ” with respect to civilian casualties . Brutal dictators like
Saddam Hussein , Muammar Gaddafi , and Bashar al-Assad intentionally target
civilians , but individual acts of violence against civilians even occur within
otherwise law-abiding militaries . 
Autonomous weapons , Arkin has argued , could be programmed to never
break the laws of war . They would be incapable of doing so . They wouldn ’ t seek
revenge . They wouldn ’ t get angry or scared . They would take emotion out of the
equation . They could kill when necessary and then turn killing off in an instant , 
if it was no longer lawful . 
Arkin told me he envisions a “ software safety ” on a rifle that evaluates the
situation and acts as an ethical advisor for soldiers . He recounted to me a story
he heard third-hand about a Marine who was about to commit an atrocity ,  “ and
his lieutenant came up to him and just said ,  ‘ Marines don ’ t do that .  ’ And that
just stopped the whole situation . Just a little nudge—pulled him back , pulled him
back from the precipice of doing this criminal act .  .  .  . The same thing could be
used with ethical advisors for humans as well .  ” Arkin acknowledged the idea has
downsides . Introducing “ a moment of doubt ” could end up getting soldiers
killed . Still , he sees ample opportunity to improve on human behavior .  “ We put
way too much faith in human warfighters ,  ” he said . 
Arkin worries that an outright ban on autonomous weapons might prohibit
research on these potentially valuable uses of autonomy . To be effective , the
weapon Arkin envisions would need to be able to assess the situation on the
battlefield and make a call as to whether an engagement should proceed . To do
this , Arkin said , the governor would have to be at the actual point of killing . It
can ’ t be “ back in some general ’ s office . You ’ ve got to embed it in the weapon .  ” 
This technology , which has all of the enabling pieces of an autonomous
weapon , is precisely the kind of weapon that many ban advocates fear . Their fear
is that once the technology is created , the temptation to use it would be too great . 
Jody Williams told me she viewed autonomous weapons as more terrifying than
nuclear weapons not because they were more destructive , but because she saw
them as weapons that would be used .  “ There is no doubt in my mind that
autonomous weapons would be used ,  ” Williams said , even if plans today call for
a human in the loop . 
I asked Arkin whether he thought it was realistic that militaries might refrain
from using technology at their fingertips . He wasn ’ t sure .  “ Should we create
caged tigers and always hold the potential for those cages to be opened and
unleash these fearsome beasts on humanity ?  ” he asked rhetorically . Arkin is
sympathetic to concerns about autonomous weapons . It would be incorrect to
characterize him as pro–autonomous weapons .  “ I ’ m not arguing that everything
should be autonomous . That would be ludicrous . I don ’ t see fully automated
robot armies like you see in Terminator and the like .  .  .  . Why would we do that ?  
.  .  . My concern is not just winning . It ’ s winning correctly , ethically , and keeping
our moral compass as we win .  ” 
Arkin said he has the same goal of those who advocate a ban : reducing
unnecessary civilian deaths . While he acknowledges there are risks with
autonomous weapons , he sees the potential to improve on human behavior too .  
 “ Where does the danger lurk ?  ” he asked .  “ Is it the robots or is it the humans ?  ” 
He said he sees a role for humans on the battlefield of the future , but there is a
role for automation as well , just like in airplane cockpits today . He said the key
question is ,  “ Who makes what decision when ?  ” 
To answer that question , Arkin said “ we need to do the research on it .  .  .  . we
need to know what capabilities they have before we say they ’ re unacceptable .  ” 
Arkin acknowledged that “ technology is proceeding at a pace faster than we are
able to control it and regulate it right now .  ” That ’ s why he said he supports a
moratorium on autonomous weapon development “ until we can get a better
understanding of what we ’ re gaining and what we ’ re losing with this particular
technology ,  ” but he doesn ’ t go so far as to support a ban .  “ Banning is like
Luddism ,  ” he said .  “ It is basically saying , this can never turn out in any useful
way , so let ’ s never ever do that . Slowing down the process , inspecting the
process , regulating the process as you move forward makes far more sense .  .  .  . I
think there ’ s great hope and potential for positive outcomes with respect to
saving noncombatant lives , and until someone can show me that , in all cases , 
that this isn ’ t feasible , I can ’ t support a ban .  ” 
Arkin says the only ban he “ could possibly support ” would be one limited to
the very specific capability of “ target generalization through machine learning .  ” 
He would not want to see autonomous weapons that could learn on their own in
the field in an unsupervised manner and generalize to new types of targets .  “ I
can ’ t see how that could turn out well ,  ” he said . Even still , Arkin ’ s language is
cautious , not categorical .  “ I tend not to be prescriptive ,  ” he acknowledged . Arkin
wants “ discussion and debate .  .  . as long as we can keep a rational discussion as
opposed to a fear-based discussion .  ”  
 “ FUNDAMENTALLY INHUMAN ” 
Arkin acknowledged that he was considering autonomous weapons from a 
 “ utilitarian , consequentialist ” perspective .  ( Utilitarianism is a moral philosophy
of doing actions that will result in the most good overall .  ) From that viewpoint , 
Arkin ’ s position to pause development with a moratorium , have a debate , and
engage in further research makes sense . If we don ’ t yet know whether
autonomous weapons would result in more harm than good , then we should be
cautious in ruling anything out . But another category of arguments against
autonomous weapons use a different , deontological framework , which is rulesbased rather than effects-based . These arguments don ’ t hinge on whether or not
autonomous weapons would be better than humans at avoiding civilian
casualties . Jody Williams told me she believed autonomous weapons were 
 “ fundamentally inhuman , a-human , amoral—whatever word you want to attach
to it .  ” That ’ s strong language . If something is “ inhuman ,  ” it is wrong , period , 
even if it might save more lives overall . 
Peter Asaro , philosopher at The New School , also studies robot ethics , like
Ron Arkin . Asaro writes on ethical issues stemming not just from military
applications of robots but also personal , commercial , and industrial uses , from
sex to law enforcement . Early on , Asaro came to a different conclusion than
Arkin . In 2009 , Asaro helped to cofound the International Committee for Robot
Arms Control ( ICRAC )  , which called for a ban on autonomous weapons years
before they were on anyone else ’ s radar . Asaro is thoughtful and soft-spoken , 
and I ’ ve always found him to be one of the most helpful voices in explaining the
ethical issues surrounding autonomous weapons . 
Asaro said that from a deontological perspective , some actions are
considered immoral regardless of the outcome . He compared the use of
autonomous weapons to actions like torture or slavery that are mal en se ,  “ evil in
themselves ,  ” regardless of whether doing them results in more good overall . He
admitted that torturing a terrorist who has information on the location of a
ticking bomb might be utilitarian . But that doesn ’ t make it right , he said . 
Similarly , Asaro said there was a “ fundamental question of whether it ’ s
appropriate to allow autonomous systems to kill people ,  ” regardless of the
consequences . 
One could , of course , take the consequentialist position that the motives for
actions don ’ t matter—all that matters is the outcome . And that is an entirely
defensible ethical position . But there may be situations in war where people care
not only about the outcome , but also the process for making a decision . 
Consider , for example , a decision about proportionality . How many civilian lives
are “ acceptable ” collateral damage ? There is no clear right answer . Reasonable
people might disagree on what is considered proportionate . 
For these kinds of tasks , what does it mean for a machine to be “ better ” than
a human ? For some tasks , there are objective metrics for “ better .  ” A better driver
is one who avoids collisions . But some decisions , like proportionality , are about
judgment—weighing competing values . 
One could argue that in these situations , humans should be the ones to
decide , not machines . Not because machines couldn ’ t make a decision , but
because only humans can weigh the moral value of the human lives that are at
stake in these decisions . Law professor Kenneth Anderson asked ,  “ What
decisions require uniquely human judgment ?  ” His simple question cuts right to
the heart of deontological debates about autonomous weapons . Are there some
decisions that should be reserved for humans , even if we had all of the
automation and AI that we could imagine ? If so , why ? 
A few years ago , I attended a small workshop in New York that brought
together philosophers , artists , engineers , architects , and science fiction writers to
ponder the challenges that autonomous systems posed in society writ large . One
hypothetical scenario was an algorithm that could determine whether to “ pull the
plug ” on a person in a vegetative state on life support . Such decisions are thorny
moral quandaries with competing values at stake—the likelihood of the person
recovering , the cost of continuing medical care and the opportunity cost of using
those resources elsewhere in society , the psychological effect on family
members , and the value of human life itself . Imagine a super-sophisticated
algorithm that could weigh all these factors and determine whether the net
utilitarian benefit—the most good for everyone overall—weighed in favor of
keeping the person on life support or turning it off . Such an algorithm might be a
valuable ethical advisor to help families walk through these challenging moral
dilemmas . But imagine one then took the next step and simply plugged the
algorithm into the life-support machine directly , such that the algorithm could
cease life support . 
Everyone in the workshop recoiled at the notion . I personally find it deeply
unsettling . But why ? From a purely utilitarian notion , using the algorithm might
result in a better outcome . In fact , to the extent that the algorithm relieved family
members of the burden of having to make the decision themselves , it might
reduce suffering overall even if it had the same outcome . And yet .  .  . it feels
repugnant to hand over such an important decision to a machine . 
Part of the objection , I think , is that we want to know that someone has
weighed the value of a human life . We want to know that , if a decision is made
to take a human life , that it has been a considered decision , that someone has
acknowledged that this life has merit and it wasn ’ t capriciously thrown away . 
HUMAN DIGNITY
Asaro argued that the need to appreciate the value of human life applies not just
to judgments about civilian collateral damage but to decisions to take enemy
lives as well . He told me “ the most fundamental and salient moral question 
[ surrounding autonomous weapons ] is the question of human dignity and human
rights .  ” Even if autonomous weapons might reduce civilian deaths overall , Asaro
still saw them as unjustified because they would be “ violating that human
dignity of having a human decide to kill you .  ” 
Other prominent voices agree . Christof Heyns , a South African professor of
human rights law , was the United Nations Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial , 
summary or arbitrary executions from 2010 to 2016 . In the spring of 2013 , 
Heyns called on states to declare national moratoria on developing autonomous
weapons and called for international discussions on the technology . Because of
his formal UN role , his call for a moratorium played a significant role in
sparking international debate . 
I caught up with Heyns in South Africa by phone , and he told me that he
thought autonomous weapons violated the right to life because it was “ arbitrary
for a decision to be taken based on an algorithm .  ” He felt it was impossible for
programmers to anticipate ahead of time all of the unique circumstances
surrounding a particular use of force , and thus no way for an algorithm to make a
fully informed contextual decision . As a result , he said the algorithm would be
arbitrarily depriving someone of life , which he saw as a violation of their right to
life . Peter Asaro had expressed similar concerns , arguing that it was a 
 “ fundamental violation ” of human rights and human dignity to “ delegate the
authority to kill to the machine .  ” 
When viewed from the perspective of the soldier on the battlefield being
killed , this is an unusual , almost bizarre critique of autonomous weapons . There
is no legal , ethical , or historical tradition of combatants affording their enemies
the right to die a dignified death in war . There is nothing dignified about being
mowed down by a machine gun , blasted to bits by a bomb , burning alive in an
explosion , drowning in a sinking ship , slowly suffocating from a sucking chest
wound , or any of the other horrible ways to die in war . 
When he raised this issue before the UN , Heyns warned ,  “ war without
reflection is mechanical slaughter .  ” But much of war is mechanical slaughter . 
Heyns may be right that this is undignified , but this is a critique of war itself . 
Arguing that combatants have a right to die a dignified death appears to harken
back to a romantic era of war that never existed . The logical extension of this
line of reasoning is that the most ethical way to fight would be in hand-to-hand
combat , when warriors looked one another in the eye and hacked each other to
bits like civilized people . Is being beheaded or eviscerated with a sword
dignified ? What form of death is dignified in war ? 
A better question is : What about autonomous weapons is different , and does
that difference diminish human dignity in a meaningful way ? Autonomous
weapons automate the decision-making process for selecting specific targets . 
The manner of death is no different , and there is a human ultimately responsible
for launching the weapon and putting it into operation , just not selecting the
specific target . It is hard to see how this difference matters from the perspective
of the victim , who is dead in any case . It is similarly a stretch to argue this
difference matters from the perspective of a victim ’ s loved one . For starters , it
might be impossible to tell whether the decision to drop a bomb was made by a
person or a machine . Even if it were clear , victims ’ families don ’ t normally get
to confront the person who made the decision to launch a bomb and ask whether
he or she stopped to weigh the value of the deceased ’ s life before acting . Much
of modern warfare is impersonal killing at a distance . A cruise missile might be
launched from a ship offshore , the trigger pulled by a person who was just given
the target coordinates for launch , the target decided by someone looking at
intelligence from a satellite , the entire process run by people who had never
stepped foot in the country . 
When war is personal , it isn ’ t pretty . In messy internecine wars around the
world , people kill each other based on ethnic , tribal , religious , or sectarian
hatred . The murder of two million Cambodians in the 1970s by the Khmer
Rouge was up close and personal . The genocide of 800 , 000 people in Rwanda in
the 1990s , largely ethnic Tutsis killed by the Hutu majority , was personal . Many
of those killed were civilians ( and therefore those acts were war crimes )  , but
when they were combatants , were those dignified deaths ? In the abstract , it
might seem more comforting to know that a person made that decision , but when
much of the killing in actual wars is based on racial or ethnic hatred , is that
really more comforting ? Is it better to know that your loved one was killed by
someone who hated him because of his race , ethnicity , or nationality—because
they believed he was subhuman and not worthy of life—or because a machine
made an objective calculation that killing him would end the war sooner , saving
more lives overall ? 
Some might say , yes , that automating death by algorithm is beyond the pale , 
a fundamental violation of human rights ; but when compared to the ugly reality
of war this position seems largely a matter of taste . War is horror . It has always
been so , long before autonomous weapons came on the scene . 
One way autonomous weapons are clearly different is for the person behind
the weapon . The soldier ’ s relationship to killing is fundamentally transformed by
using an autonomous weapon . Here , Heyns ’ s concern that delegating life-ordeath decisions to machines cheapens society overall gets some traction . For
what does it say about the society using autonomous weapons if there is no one
to bear the moral burden of war ? Asaro told me that giving algorithms the power
to decide life and death “ changes the nature of society globally in a profound
way ,  ” not necessarily because the algorithms would get it wrong , but because
that suggests a society that no longer values life .  “ If you eliminate the moral
burden of killing ,  ” he said ,  “ killing becomes amoral .  ” 
This argument is intriguing because it takes a negative consequence of war—
post-traumatic stress from killing—and holds it up as a virtue . Psychologists are
increasingly recognizing “ moral injury ” as a type of psychological trauma that
soldiers experience in war . Soldiers with these injuries aren ’ t traumatized by
having experienced physical danger . Rather , they suffer enduring trauma for
having seen or had to do things themselves that offend their sense of right and
wrong . Grossman argued that killing is actually the most traumatic thing a
soldier can experience in war , more so than fear of personal injury . These moral
injuries are debilitating and can destroy veterans ’ lives years after a war ends . 
The consequences are depression , substance abuse , broken families , and suicide . 
In a world where autonomous weapons bore the burden of killing , fewer
soldiers would presumably suffer from moral injury . There would be less
suffering overall . From a purely utilitarian , consequentialist perspective , that
would be better . But we are more than happiness-maximizing agents . We are
moral beings and the decisions we make matter . Part of what I find upsetting
about the life-support algorithm is that , if it were my loved one , it seems to me
that I should bear the burden of responsibility for deciding whether to pull the
plug . If we lean on algorithms as a moral crutch , it weakens us as moral agents . 
What kind of people would we be if we killed in war and no one felt
responsible ? It is a tragedy that young men and women are asked to shoulder
society ’ s guilt for the killing that happens in war when the whole nation is
responsible , but at least it says something about our morality that someone
sleeps uneasy at night . Someone should bear the moral burden of war . If we
handed that responsibility to machines , what sort of people would we be ? 
THE ROLE OF THE MILITARY PROFESSIONAL
I served four combat tours in Iraq and Afghanistan . I saw horrible things . I lost
friends . Only one moment in those four tours repeatedly returns to me , though , 
sometimes haunting me in the middle of the night . 
I was on a mountaintop in Afghanistan with two other Rangers , Nick and
Johnny , conducting a long-range scouting patrol , looking for Taliban
encampments . The remainder of our reconnaissance team , also on foot , was far
away . At the furthest extent of our patrol , we paused on a rocky summit to rest . 
A deep narrow valley opened up before us . In the distance was a small hamlet . 
The nearest city was a day ’ s drive . We were at the farthest extent of
Afghanistan ’ s wilderness . The only people out there with us were goat herders , 
woodcutters , and foreign fighters crossing over the border from Pakistan . 
From our perch on the mountaintop , we saw a young man in his late teens or
early twenties working his way along a spur toward our position . He had a few
goats in trail , but I had long since learned that goat herding was often a cover
used by enemy spotters . Of course , it was also possible that he was just a goat
herder . I watched him from a distance through binoculars and discussed with my
teammates whether he was a scout or just a local herder . Nick and Johnny
weren ’ t concerned , but as we rested , catching our breath before the long hike
back , the man kept coming closer . Finally , he crossed under our position and
into a place where he was out of sight . A few minutes passed , and since Nick
and Johnny weren ’ t yet ready to head back , I began to get concerned about
where this other man was . Odds were good he was just a herder and in all
likelihood was unaware that we were even there . Still , the terrain was such that
he could use the rocks for cover to get quite close without us noticing , if he
wanted to sneak up on us . Other small patrols had been ambushed by similar
ruses—individual insurgents pretending to be civilians until they got close
enough to pull out a weapon from underneath their coat and fire . He probably
couldn ’ t get all three of us , but he could possibly kill one of us if he came upon
us suddenly . 
I told Johnny and Nick I was going to look over the next rock to see where
the man had gone , and they said fine , just to stay in sight . I picked up my sniper
rifle and crept my way along the rocky mountaintop , looking for the man who
had dropped out of sight . 
Before long , I spotted him through a crack in the rocks . He was not far at all
—maybe seventy-five meters away—crouching down with his back to me . I
raised my rifle and peered through my scope . I wanted to see if he was carrying
a rifle . It wouldn ’ t have necessarily meant he was a combatant , since Afghans
often carried weapons for personal protection in this area , but it would have at
least meant that he was a potential threat and I should keep an eye on him . If he
was concealing the rifle under his cloak , that certainly wouldn ’ t be a good sign . 
From my angle , though , I couldn ’ t quite tell . It looked like he had something in
his hands . Maybe it was a rifle . Maybe it was a radio . Maybe it was nothing . I
couldn ’ t see ; his hands were in front of him and his back blocked my view . 
The wind shifted and the man ’ s voice drifted over the rocks . He was talking
to someone . I didn ’ t see anyone else , but my field of view was hemmed in by
rocks on either side . Perhaps there was someone out of sight . Perhaps he was
talking on a radio , which would have been even more incriminating than a rifle , 
since goat herders didn ’ t generally carry radios . 
I settled into a better position to watch him .  .  . and a more stable firing
position if I had to shoot him . I was above him , looking down on him at an
angle , and it was steep enough that I remember thinking I would have to adjust
my aim to compensate for the relative rise of the bullet . I considered the range , 
angle , and wind to determine where I would aim if I had to fire . Then I watched
him through my scope . 
No one else came into view . If he had a rifle , I couldn ’ t see it , but I couldn ’ t
verify that he didn ’ t have one either . He stopped talking for a while , then
resumed . 
I didn ’ t speak Pashto so I didn ’ t know what he was saying , but as his voice
picked up again , his words came into context . He was singing . He was singing to
the goats , or maybe to himself , but I was confident he wasn ’ t singing out our
position over a radio . That would be peculiar . 
I relaxed . I watched him for a little longer till I was comfortable that there
was nothing I had missed , then headed back to Nick and Johnny . The man never
knew I was there . 
I ’ ve often wondered why that event , more than any other , comes back to me . 
I didn ’ t do anything wrong and neither did anyone else . He was clearly an
innocent man and not a Taliban fighter . I have no doubt I made the right call . 
Yet there is something about that moment when I did not yet know for certain
that has stuck with me . I think it is because in that moment , when the truth was
still uncertain , I held this man ’ s life in my hands . Even now , years later , I can
feel the gravity of that decision . I didn ’ t want to get it wrong . The four of us—
me , Johnny , Nick , and this Afghan goat herder—we were nothing in the big
scheme of the war . But our lives still mattered . The stakes were high for us—the
ultimate stakes . 
Making life-or-death decisions on the battlefield is the essence of the
military profession . Autonomous weapons don ’ t just raise ethical challenges in
the abstract—they are a direct assault on the heart of the military profession . 
What does it mean for the military professional if decisions about the use of
force are programmed ahead of time by engineers and lawyers ? Making
judgment calls in midst of uncertainty , ambiguous information , and conflicting
values is what military professionals do . It is what defines the profession . 
Autonomous weapons could change that . 
The U . S . Department of Defense has been surprisingly transparent about its
thought processes on autonomous weapons , with individuals like Deputy
Secretary of Defense Bob Work discussing the dilemma in multiple public
forums . Much of this discussion has come from civilian policy and technology
officials , many of whom were very open with me in interviews . Senior U . S . 
military personnel have said far less publicly , but this question of military
professional ethics is one of the few issues they have weighed in on . Vice
chairman of the Joint Chiefs General Paul Selva said in 2016 : 
One of the places that we spend a great deal of time is determining whether or not the tools we are
developing absolve humans of the decision to inflict violence on the enemy . And that is a fairly
bright line that we ’ re not willing to cross .  .  .  . Because it is entirely possible that as we work our
way through this process of bringing enabling technologies into the Department , that we could get
dangerously close to that line . And we owe it to ourselves and to the people we serve to keep it a
very bright line . 
Selva reiterated this point a year later in testimony before the Senate Armed
Services Committee , when he said : 
Because we take our values to war and because many of the things that we must do in war are
governed by the laws of war ,  .  .  . I don ’ t think it ’ s reasonable for us to put robots in charge of
whether or not we take a human life .  .  .  .  [ W ] e should all be advocates for keeping the ethical
rules of war in place , lest we unleash on humanity a set of robots that we don ’ t know how to
control . 
I often hear General Selva ’ s sentiments echoed by other military personnel , that
they have no interest in diminishing human accountability and moral
responsibility . As technology moves forward , it will raise challenging questions
about how to put that principle into practice . 
THE PAIN OF WAR
One of the challenges in weighing the ethics of autonomous weapons is
untangling which criticisms are about autonomous weapons and which are really
about war . What does it mean to say that someone has the right to life in war , 
when killing is the essence of war ? In theory , war might be more moral if lives
were carefully considered and only taken for the right reasons . In practice , 
killing often occurs without careful consideration of the value of enemy lives . 
Overcoming the taboo of killing often involves dehumanizing the enemy . The
ethics of autonomous weapons should be compared to how war is actually
fought , not some abstract ideal . 
Recognizing the awful reality of war doesn ’ t mean one has to discard all
concern for morality . Jody Williams told me she doesn ’ t believe in the concept
of a “ just war .  ” She had a much more cynical view :  “ War is about attempting to
increase one ’ s power .  .  .  . It ’ s not about fairness in any way . It ’ s about power .  
.  .  . It ’ s all bullshit .  ” I suspect there isn ’ t a weapon or means of warfare that
Williams is in favor of . If we could ban all weapons or even war itself , I imagine
she ’ d be on board . And if it worked , who wouldn ’ t be ? But in the interim , she
and others see an autonomous weapon as something that “ crosses a moral and
ethical Rubicon .  ” 
There is no question that autonomous weapons raise fundamental questions
about the nature of our relationship to the use of force . Autonomous weapons
would depersonalize killing , further removing human emotions from the act . 
Whether that is a good or a bad thing depends on one ’ s point of view . Emotions
lead humans to commit both atrocities and acts of mercy on the battlefield . There
are consequentialist arguments either way , and deontological arguments either
resonate with people or don ’ t . 
For some , the answers to these questions are simple . Williams told me ,  “ You
know the difference between a good robot and a bad robot .  ” A good robot was
one that saved lives , like a firefighting robot .  “ You give the sucker a machine
gun and set it loose , that ’ s a bad robot ,  ” she said . 
But not everyone thinks it ’ s so simple . For Ron Arkin , a good robot is one
that fights wars more justly and humanely than humans , saving noncombatant
lives . Arkin pointed out that even in the Terminator movies , there were good
Terminators . In Japanese culture , robots are often seen as protectors and saviors . 
Some people see autonomous weapons as inherently wrong . Others don ’ t . 
For some , the consequentialist view prevails . Ken Anderson told me he had
serious problems ruling out a potentially beneficial technology based on a 
 “ beyond-IHL principle of human dignity .  ” It would put militaries in the
backwards position of accepting more battlefield harm and more deaths for an
abstract concept . He said militaries would be , in effect , saying to those who were
killed by human targeting ,  “ Listen , you didn ’ t have to be killed here had we
followed IHL and used the autonomous weapon as being the better one in terms
of reducing battlefield harm . You wouldn ’ t have died . But that would have
offended your human dignity .  .  . and that ’ s why you ’ re dead . Hope you like
your human dignity .  ” For Anderson , human life trumps human dignity . 
Christof Heyns acknowledged the possibility that the consequentialist point
of view and the deontological might conflict . Heyns said that if autonomous
weapons do turn out to be better than humans at avoiding civilians ,  “ then we
must ask ourselves whether .  .  . dignity and this issue of accountability and not
arbitrariness , that those are important enough to say that we don ’ t want an
instrument , even if it can save lives .  ” Heyns said he didn ’ t know the answer . 
Rather , it is a “ question that those of us who say that these weapons should be
banned , that we need to answer for ourselves .  ” 
It ’ s hard to say that one perspective is more right than others . Even
consequentialists like Ron Arkin acknowledge the deontological issues at play . 
Arkin told me his hope was that we could use autonomous targeting to reduce
civilian deaths in war ,  “ as long as we don ’ t lose our soul in doing it .  ” The
challenge is figuring out whether there is a way to do both . The strongest ethical
objection to autonomous weapons is that as long as war exists , as long as there is
human suffering , someone should suffer the moral pain of those decisions . There
are deontological reasons for maintaining human responsibility for killing : it
weakens our morality to hand the moral burden of war over to machines . There
are also consequentialist arguments for doing so , because the moral pain of
killing is the only check on the worst horrors of war . This is not about
autonomous targeting per se , but rather how it changes humans ’ relationship
with violence and how they feel about killing as a result . 
Generals William Tecumseh Sherman and Curtis LeMay are an interesting
contrast in how warfighters can feel about the violence they mete out in pursuit
of victory . Both waged total war , LeMay on a scale that Sherman could never
have imagined . There ’ s no evidence LeMay was ever troubled by his actions , 
which resulted in the deaths of hundreds of thousands of Japanese civilians . He
said : 
Killing Japanese didn ’ t bother me very much at that time .  .  . I suppose if I had lost the war , I
would have been tried as a war criminal .  .  .  . Every soldier thinks something of the moral aspects
of what he is doing . But all war is immoral and if you let that bother you , you ’ re not a good
soldier . 
Sherman , on the other hand , didn ’ t shy from war ’ s cruelty but also felt its pain : 
I am tired and sick of war . Its glory is all moonshine . It is only those who have neither fired a shot
nor heard the shrieks and groans of the wounded who cry aloud for blood , for vengeance , for
desolation . War is hell . 
If there were no one to feel that pain , what would war become ? If there were no
one to hear the shrieks and groans of the wounded , what would guard us from
the worst horrors of war ? What would protect us from ourselves ? 
For it is humans who kill in war , whether from a distance or up close and
personal . War is a human failing . Autonomous targeting would change humans ’ 
relationship with killing in ways that may be good and may be bad . But it may
be too much to ask technology to save us from ourselves .  
* IEEE = Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ; RAS = IEEE Robotics and Automation Society . 
18
PLAYING WITH FIRE
AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS AND STABILITY
Just because something is legal and ethical doesn ’ t mean it is wise . Most hand
grenades around the world have a fuse three to five seconds long . No treaty
mandates this—logic does . Too short of a fuse , and the grenade will blow up in
your face right after you throw it . Too long of a fuse , and the enemy might pick
it up and throw it back your way . 
Weapons are supposed to be dangerous—that ’ s the whole point—but only
when you want them to be . There have been situations in the past where nations
have come together to regulate or ban weapons that were seen as excessively
dangerous . This was not because they caused unnecessary suffering to
combatants , as was the case for poison gas or weapons with non-x-ray-detectable
fragments . And it wasn ’ t because the weapons were seen as causing undue harm
to civilians , as was the case was with cluster munitions and land mines . Rather , 
the concern was that these weapons were “ destabilizing .  ” 
During the latter half of the twentieth century , a concept called “ strategic
stability ” emerged among security experts .  * Stability was a desirable thing . 
Stability meant maintaining the status quo : peace . Instability was seen as
dangerous ; it could lead to war . Today experts are applying these concepts to
autonomous weapons , which have the potential to undermine stability . 
The concept of stability first emerged in the 1950s among U . S . nuclear
theorists attempting to grapple with the implications of these new and powerful
weapons . As early as 1947 , U . S . officials began to worry that the sheer scale of
nuclear weapons ’ destructiveness gave an advantage to whichever nation struck
first , potentially incentivizing the Soviet Union to launch a surprise nuclear
attack . This vulnerability of U . S . nuclear forces to a surprise Soviet attack
therefore gave the United States a reason to themselves strike first , if war
appeared imminent . Knowing this , of course , only further incentivized the Soviet
Union to strike first in the event of possible hostilities . This dangerous dynamic
captures the essence of what theorists call “ first-strike instability ,  ” a situation in
which adversaries face off like gunslingers in the Wild West , each poised to
shoot as soon as the other reaches for his gun . As strategist and Nobel laureate
Thomas Schelling explained the dilemma ,  “ we have to worry about his striking
us to keep us from striking him to keep him from striking us .  ” The danger is that
instability itself can create a self-fulfilling prophecy in which one side launches a
preemptive attack , fearing an attack from the other . 
The United States took steps to reduce its first-strike vulnerability , but over
time evolved a desire for “ stability ” more generally . Stability takes into account
the perspective of both sides and often involves strategic restraint . A country
should avoid deploying its military forces in a way that threatens an adversary
with a surprise attack , thus incentivizing him to strike first . A stable situation , 
Schelling described , is “ when neither in striking first can destroy the other ’ s
ability to strike back .  ” 
A stable equilibrium is one that , if disturbed by an outside force , returns to
its original state . A ball sitting at the bottom of a bowl is at a stable equilibrium . 
If the ball is moved slightly , it will return to the bottom of the bowl . Conversely , 
an unstable equilibrium is one where a slight disturbance will cause the system
to rapidly transition to an alternate state , like a pencil balanced on its tip . Any
slight disturbance will cause the pencil to tip over to one side . Nuclear strategists
prefer the former to the latter . 
Beyond “ first-strike stability ”  ( sometimes called “ first-mover advantage ”  )  , 
several variants of stability have emerged .  “ Crisis stability ” is concerned with
avoiding conditions that might escalate a crisis . These could include perverse
incentives for deliberate escalation (  “ strike them before they strike us ”  ) or
accidental escalation ( say a low-level commander takes matters into his or her
own hands )  . Automatic escalation by predelegated actions—to humans or
machines—is another concern , as is misunderstanding an adversary ’ s actions or
intentions .  ( Recall the movie War Games , in which a military supercomputer
confuses a game with reality and almost initiates nuclear war .  ) Crisis stability is
about ensuring that any escalation in hostilities between countries is a deliberate
choice on the part of their national leadership , not an accident , miscalculation , or
driven by perverse incentives to strike first . Elbridge Colby explained in
Strategic Stability : Contending Interpretations ,  “ In a stable situation , then , major
war would only come about because one party truly sought it .  ” 
Accidental war may seem like a strange concept—how could a war begin by
accident ? But Cold War strategists worried a great deal about the potential for
false alarms , miscalculations , or accidents to precipitate conflict . If anything , 
history suggests they should have worried more . The Cold War was rife with
nuclear false alarms , misunderstandings , and near-use incidents that could have
potentially led to a nuclear attack . Even in conventional crises , confusion , 
misunderstanding enemy intentions , and the fog of war have often played a role
in escalating tensions .  
 “ War termination ” is another important component of escalation control . 
Policymakers need to have the same degree of control over ending a war as they
do—or should—over starting one . If policymakers do not have very high control
over their forces , because attack orders cannot be recalled or communications
links are severed , or if de-escalation could leave a nation vulnerable , 
policymakers may not be able to de-escalate a conflict even if they wanted to . 
Strategists also analyze the offense-defense balance . An “ offense-dominant ” 
warfighting regime is one where it is easier to conquer territory ; a defensedominant regime is one where it is harder to conquer territory . Machine guns , for
example , favor the defense . It is extremely difficult to gain ground against a
fortified machine gun position . In World War I , millions died in relatively static
trench warfare . Tanks , on the other hand , favor the offense because of their
mobility . In World War II , Germany blitzkrieged across large swaths of Europe , 
rapidly acquiring terrain .  ( Offense-defense balance is subtly different from firststrike stability , which is about whether there is an advantage in making the first
move .  ) In principle , defense-dominant warfighting regimes are more stable since
territorial aggression is more costly . 
Strategic stability has proven to be an important intellectual tool for
mitigating the risks of nuclear weapons , especially as technologies have
advanced . How specific weapons affect stability can sometimes be
counterintuitive , however . One of the most important weapon systems for
ensuring nuclear stability is the ballistic missile submarine , an offensive strike
weapon . Extremely difficult to detect and able to stay at underwater for months
at a time , submarines give nuclear powers an assured second-strike capability . 
Even if a surprise attack somehow wiped out all of a nation ’ s land-based nuclear
missiles and bombers , the enemy could be assured that even a single surviving
submarine could deliver a devastating attack . This effectively removes any firstmover advantage . The omnipresent threat of ballistic missile submarines at sea , 
hiding and ready to strike back , is a strong deterrent to a first strike and helps
ensure stability . 
In some cases , defensive weapons can be destabilizing . National missile
defense shields , while nominally defensive , were seen as highly destabilizing
during the Cold War because they could undermine the viability of an assured
second-strike deterrent . Intercepting ballistic missiles is costly and even the best
missile defense shield could not hope to stop a massive overwhelming attack . 
However , a missile defense shield could potentially stop a very small number of
missiles . This might allow a country to launch a surprise nuclear first strike , 
wiping out most of the enemy ’ s nuclear missiles , and use the missile defense
shield to protect against the rest . A shield could make a first strike more viable , 
potentially creating a first-mover advantage and undermining stability . 
For other technologies , their effect on stability was more intuitive . Satellites
were seen as stabilizing during the Cold War since they gave each country the
ability to observe the other ’ s territory . This allowed them to confirm ( or deny ) 
whether the other had launched nuclear weapons or whether they were trying to
break out and gain a serious edge in the arms race . Attacking satellites in an
attempt to blind the other nation was therefore seen as highly provocative , since
it could be a prelude to an attack ( and the now-blind country could have no way
of knowing if there was , in fact , an attack under way )  . Placing nuclear weapons
in space , on the other hand , was seen as destabilizing because it could
dramatically shorten the warning time available to the defender if an opponent
launched a surprise attack . Not only did this make a surprise attack more
feasible , but with less warning time the defender might be more likely to respond
to false alarms , undermining crisis stability . 
During the Cold War , and particularly at its end , the United States and Soviet
Union engaged in a number of unilateral and cooperative measures designed to
increase stability and avoid potentially unstable situations . After all , despite their
mutual hostility , neither side was interested in an accidental nuclear war . These
efforts included a number of international treaties regulating or banning certain
weapons . The Outer Space Treaty ( 1967 ) bans placing nuclear weapons in space
or weapons of any kind on the moon . The Seabed Treaty ( 1971 ) forbids placing
nuclear weapons on the floor of the ocean . The Environmental Modification
Convention ( 1977 ) prohibits using the environment as a weapon of war . The
Anti-Ballistic Missile ( ABM ) Treaty ( 1972 ) strictly limited the number of
strategic missile defenses the Soviet Union and the United States could deploy in
order to prevent the creation of robust national missile defense shields .  ( The
United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty in 2002 .  ) The Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces ( INF ) Treaty bans intermediate-range nuclear missiles , which
were seen as particularly destabilizing , since there would be very little warning
time before they hit their targets . 
In other cases , there were tacit agreements between the United States and
Soviet Union not to pursue certain weapons that might have been destabilizing , 
even though no formal treaties or agreements were ever signed . Both countries
successfully demonstrated antisatellite weapons , but neither pursued large-scale
operational deployment . Similarly , both developed limited numbers of neutron
bombs ( a “ cleaner ” nuclear bomb that kills people with radiation but leaves
buildings intact )  , but neither side openly pursued large-scale deployment . 
Neutron bombs were seen as horrifying since they could allow an attacker to
wipe out a city ’ s population without damaging its infrastructure . This could
make their use potentially more likely , since an attacker could use the conquered
territory without fear of harmful lingering radiation . In the late 1970s , U . S . plans
to deploy neutron bombs to Europe caused considerable controversy , forcing the
United States to change course and halt deployment . 
The logic of stability also applies to weapons below the nuclear threshold . 
Ship-launched anti-ship missiles give a significant first-mover advantage in
naval warfare , for example . The side who strikes first , by sinking some fraction
of the enemy ’ s fleet , instantly reduces the number of enemy missiles threatening
them , giving a decisive advantage to whoever strikes the first blow . Many
technologies will not significantly affect stability one way or the other , but some
military technologies do have strategic effects . Autonomous weapons , along
with space / counter-space weapons and cyberweapons , rank among the most
important emerging technologies that should be continually evaluated in that
context . 
AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS AND STABILITY
Michael Horowitz began exploring similar questions in a recent monograph ,  
 “ Artificial Intelligence , War , and Crisis Stability .  ” For starters , he argued we
should distinguish between “ what is unique about autonomy , per se , versus what
are things that autonomy accentuates .  ” 
Autonomous weapons could come in many forms , from large
intercontinental bombers to small ground robots or undersea vehicles . They
could have long ranges or short ranges , heavy payloads or light payloads . They
could operate in the air , land , sea , undersea , space , or cyberspace . Speculating
about the first-strike stability or offense-defense balance implications is thus
very challenging . Autonomous weapons will be subject to the same physical
constraints as other weapons . For example , ballistic missile submarines are
stabilizing in part because it is difficult to find and track objects underwater , 
making them survivable in the event of a first strike . The defining feature of
autonomous weapons is how target selection and engagement decisions are
made . Thus we should evaluate their impact on stability relative to
semiautonomous weapons with similar physical characteristics but a human in
the loop . 
This makes it important to separate the effects of robotics and automation in
general from autonomous targeting in particular . Militaries are investing heavily
in robotics and as the robotics revolution matures , it will almost certainly alter
the strategic balance in significant ways . Some analysts have suggested that
robot swarms will lead to an offense-dominant regime , since swarms could be
used to overwhelm defenders . Others have raised concerns that robots might
lower the threshold for the use of force by reducing the risk of loss of life to the
attacker . These outcomes are possible , but they often presuppose a world where
only the attacker has robotic weapons and not the defender , which is probably
not realistic . When both sides have robots , the offense-defense balance may look
different . Swarms could also be used for defense too , and it isn ’ t clear whether
swarming and robotics on balance favors the offense or defense . 
The assumption that robots would result in fewer casualties also deserves a
closer look . Robots allow warfighters to attack from greater distances , but this
has been the trend in warfare for millennia , from the invention of the sling and
stone to the intercontinental ballistic missile . Increased range has yet to lead to
bloodless wars . As weapons increase in range , the battlefield simply expands . 
People have moved from killing each other at short range with spears to killing
each other across oceans with intercontinental missiles . The violence , however , 
is always inflicted on people . It will always be so , because it is pain and
suffering that causes the enemy to surrender . The more relevant question is how
fully autonomous weapons might alter the strategic balance relative to
semiautonomous weapons . Horowitz suggested it was useful to start by asking ,  
 “ When is it that you would deploy these systems in the first place ?  ” 
COMMUNICATIONS : OFFENSE-DEFENSE BALANCE , 
RESILIENCE , AND RECALLABILITY
One advantage of fully autonomous weapons over semiautonomous or
supervised autonomous ones is that they do not require a communications link
back to human controllers . This makes them more resilient to communications
disruption . 
Communications are more likely to be challenging on the offense , when one
is operating inside enemy territory and subject to jamming . For some defensive
applications , one can use hardwired cables in prepared positions that cannot be
jammed . For example , the South Korean SGR-A1 robotic sentry gun on the
DMZ could be connected to human controllers via buried cables . There would
be no need for a fully autonomous mode . Even if speed required immediate
reaction ( which is unlikely for antipersonnel applications )  , human supervision
would still be possible . For some applications such as the Aegis , humans are
physically colocated with the weapon system , making communications a
nonissue . Fully autonomous weapons without any human supervision would be
most useful on the offensive . It would be a leap to say that they would
necessarily lead to an offense-dominant regime , as that would depend on a great
many other factors unrelated to autonomy . In general , autonomy benefits both
offense and defense ; many nations already use defensive supervised autonomous
weapons . But fully autonomous weapons would seem to benefit the offense
more . 
With respect to first-mover advantage , if a country required a human in the
loop for each targeting decision , an adversary might be able to diminish their
offensive capabilities by attacking their communications links , such as by
striking vulnerable satellites . If a military can fight effectively without reliable
communications because of autonomous weapons , that lowers the benefit of a
surprise attack against their communications . Autonomous weapons , therefore , 
might increase stability by reducing incentives for a first strike . 
But the ability to continue attacking even if communications are severed
poses a problem for escalation control and war termination . If commanders
decide they wish to call off the attack , they would have no ability to recall fully
autonomous weapons . 
This is analogous to the Battle of New Orleans during the War of 1812 . 
Great Britain and the United States ended the war on December 24 , 1814 , but
news did not reach British and American forces until six weeks later . The Battle
of New Orleans was fought after the treaty was signed but before news reached
the front . Two thousand British sailors and soldiers died fighting a war that had
technically ended . 
SPEED AND CRISIS STABILITY
While the ability to carry out attacks without communications has a mixed effect
on stability , autonomous weapons ’ advantage in speed is decidedly negative . 
Autonomous weapons risk accelerating the pace of battle and shortening time for
human decision-making . This heightens instability in a crisis . Strategist Thomas
Schelling wrote in Arms and Influence : 
The premium on haste—the advantage , in case of war , in being the one to launch it or in being a
quick second in retaliation if the other side gets off the first blow—is undoubtedly the greatest
piece of mischief that can be introduced into military forces , and the greatest source of danger that
peace will explode into all out war . 
Crises are rife with uncertainty and potential for miscalculation , and as Schelling
explained ,  “ when speed is critical , the victim of an accident or false-alarm is
under terrible pressure .  ” Some forms of autonomy could help to reduce these
time pressures . Semiautonomous weapons that find and identify targets could be
stabilizing , since they could buy more time for human decision-makers . Fully
autonomous and supervised autonomous weapons short-circuit human decisionmaking , however , speeding up engagements . With accelerated reactions and
counterreactions , humans could struggle to understand and control events . Even
if everything functioned properly , policymakers could nevertheless effectively
lose the ability to control escalation as the speed of action on the battlefield
begins to eclipse their speed of decision-making . 
REMOVING THE HUMAN FAIL-SAFE
In a fast-paced environment , autonomous weapons would remove a vital safety
in preventing unwanted escalation : human judgment . Stanislav Petrov ’ s fateful
decision in bunker Serpukhov-15 represents an extreme case of the benefits of
human judgment , but there are many more examples from crisis situations . 
Schelling wrote about the virtues of
restraining devices for weapons , men , and decision-processes—delaying mechanisms , safety
devices , double-check and consultation procedures , conservative rules for responding to alarms
and communication failure , and in general both institutions and mechanisms for avoiding an
unauthorized firing or a hasty reaction to untoward events . 
Indeed , used in the right way , automation can provide such safeties , as in the
case of automatic braking on cars . Automation increases stability when it is
additive to human judgment , but not when it replaces human judgment . When
autonomy accelerates decisions , it can lead to haste and unwanted escalation in a
crisis . 
COMMAND-AND-CONTROL AND THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
CRISIS DECISION-MAKING
Stability is as much about perceptions and human psychology as it is about the
weapons themselves . Two gunslingers staring each other down aren ’ t interested
only in their opponent ’ s accuracy , but also what is in the mind of the other
fighter . Machines today are woefully unequipped to perform this kind of task . 
Machines may outperform humans in speed and precision , but current AI cannot
perform theory-of-mind tasks such as imagining another person ’ s intent . At the
tactical level of war , this may not be important . Once the gunslinger has made a
decision to draw his weapon , automating the tasks of drawing , aiming , and firing
would undoubtedly be faster than doing it by hand . Likewise , once humans have
directed that an attack should occur , autonomous weapons may be more
effective than humans in carrying out the attack . Crises , however , are periods of
militarized tension between nations that have the potential to escalate into fullblown war , but where nations have not yet made the decision to escalate . Even
once war begins , war among nuclear powers will by necessity be limited . In
these situations , countries are attempting to communicate their resolve—their
willingness to go escalate if need be—but without actually escalating the
conflict . This is a delicate balancing act . Unlike a battle , which is fought for
tactical or operational advantage , these situations are ultimately a form of
communication between national leaders , where intentions are communicated
through military actions . Michael Carl Haas of ETH Zurich argues that using
autonomous weapons invites another actor into the conversation , the AI itself :  
[ S ] tates [ who employ autonomous weapons ] would be introducing into the crisis equation an
element that is beyond their immediate control , but that nonetheless interacts with the human
opponent ’ s strategic psychology . In effect , the artificial intelligence ( AI ) that governs the
behavior of autonomous systems during their operational employment would become an
additional actor participating in the crisis , though one who is tightly constrained by a set of
algorithms and mission objectives . 
Command-and-control refers to the ability of leaders to effectively marshal
their military forces for a common goal and is a frequent concern in crises . 
National leaders do not have perfect control over their forces , and warfighters
can and sometimes do take actions inconsistent with their national leadership ’ s
intent , whether out of ignorance , negligence , or deliberate attempts to defy
authorities . The 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis was rife with such incidents . On
October 26 , ten days into the crisis , authorities at Vandenberg Air Force Base
carried out a scheduled test launch of an Atlas ICBM without first checking with
the White House . The next morning , on October 27 , an American U-2
surveillance plane was shot down while flying over Cuba , despite orders by
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev not to fire on U . S . surveillance aircraft .  ( The
missile appears to have been fired by Cuban forces on Fidel Castro ’ s orders .  ) 
Later that same day , another U-2 flying over the Arctic Circle accidentally
strayed into Soviet territory . Soviet and American leaders could not know for
certain whether these incidents were intentional signals by the adversary to
escalate or individual units acting on their own . Events like these have the
potential to ratchet up tensions through inadvertent or accidental escalation . 
In theory , autonomous weapons ought to be the perfect soldier , carrying out
orders precisely , without any deviation . This might eliminate some incidents . 
For example , on October 24 , 1962 , when U . S . Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) 
was ordered to DEFCON 2 , just one step short of nuclear war , SAC commander
General Thomas Power deviated from his orders by openly broadcasting a
message to his troops on an unencrypted radio channel . The unencrypted
broadcast revealed heightened U . S . readiness levels to the Soviets , who could
listen in , and was not authorized . Unlike people , autonomous weapons would be
incapable of violating their programming . On the other hand , their brittleness
and inability to understand the context for their actions would be a major
liability in other ways . The Vandenberg IBCM test , for example , was caused by
officers following preestablished guidance without pausing to ask whether that
guidance still applied in light of new information ( the unfolding crisis over
Cuba )  . 
Often , the correct decision in any given moment depends not on rigid
adherence to guidance , but rather on understanding the intent behind the
guidance . Militaries have a concept of “ commander ’ s intent ,  ” a succinct
statement given by commanders to subordinates describing the commander ’ s
goals . Sometimes , meeting the commander ’ s intent requires deviating from the
plan because of new facts on the ground . Humans are not perfect , but they are
capable of using their common sense and better judgment to comply with the
intent behind a rule , rather than the rule itself . Humans can disobey the rules and
in tense situations , counterintuitively , that may be a good thing . 
At the heart of the matter is whether more flexibility in how subordinates
carry out directions is a good thing or a bad thing . On the battlefield , greater
flexibility is generally preferred , within broad bounds of the law and rules of
engagement . In “ Communicating Intent and Imparting Presence ,  ” Lieutenant
Colonel Lawrence Shattuck wrote : 
If .  .  . the enemy commander has 10 possible courses of action , but the friendly commander , 
restricted by the senior commander , still has only one course of action available , the enemy
clearly has the advantage . 
In crises , tighter control over one ’ s forces is generally preferred , since even
small actions can have strategic consequences . Zero flexibility for subordinates
with no opportunity to exercise common sense is a sure invitation to disaster , 
however . Partly , this is because national leaders cannot possibly foresee all
eventualities . War is characterized by uncertainty . Unanticipated circumstances
will arise . War is also competitive . The enemy will almost certainly attempt to
exploit rigid behavioral rules for their own advantage . Michael Carl Haas
suggests these tactics might include : 
relocating important assets to busy urban settings or next to inadmissible targets , such as
hydroelectric dams or nuclear-power stations ; altering the appearance of weapons and
installations to simulate illegitimate targets , and perhaps even the alteration of illegitimate targets
to simulate legitimate ones ; large-scale use of dummies and obscurants , and the full panoply of
electronic deception measures . 
Even without direct hacking , autonomous weapons could be manipulated by
exploiting vulnerabilities in their rules of engagement . Humans might be able to
see these ruses or deceptions for what they are and innovate on the fly , in
accordance with their understanding of commander ’ s intent . Autonomous
weapons would follow their programming . On a purely tactical level , other
benefits to autonomous weapons may outweigh this vulnerability , but in crises , 
when a single misplaced shot could ratchet up tensions toward war , careful
judgment is needed . 
In recent years , the U . S . military has begun to worry about the problem of
the “ strategic corporal .  ” The basic idea is that a relatively low-ranking individual
could , through his or her actions on the battlefield , have strategic effects that
determine the course of the war . The solution to this problem is to better educate
junior leaders on the strategic consequences of their actions in order to improve
their decision-making , rather than giving them a strict set of rules to follow . Any
set of rules followed blindly and without regard to the commander ’ s intent can
be manipulated by a clever enemy . Autonomous weapons would do precisely
what they are told , regardless of how dumb or ill-conceived the orders appear in
the moment . Their rigidity might seem appealing from a command-and-control
standpoint , but the result is the strategic corporal problem on steroids . 
There is precedent for concerns about the strategic consequences of
automation . During development of the Reagan-era “ Star Wars ” missile defense
shield , officially called the Strategic Defense Initiative , U . S . lawmakers wrote a
provision into the 1988–1989 National Defense Authorization Act mandating a
human in the loop for certain actions . The law requires “ affirmative human
decision at an appropriate level of authority ” for any systems that would
intercept missiles in the early phases of their ascent . Intercepts at these early
stages can be problematic because they must occur on very short timelines and
near an adversary ’ s territory . An automated system could conceivably mistake a
satellite launch or missile test for an attack and , by destroying another country ’ s
rocket , needlessly escalate a crisis . 
Even if mistakes could be avoided , there is a deeper problem with leaders
attempting to increase their command-and-control in crises by directly
programming engagement rules into autonomous weapons : leaders themselves
may not be able to accurately predict what decisions they would want to take in
the future .  “ Projection bias ” is a cognitive bias where humans incorrectly project
their current beliefs and desires onto others and even their future selves . 
To better understand what this might mean for autonomous weapons , I
reached out to David Danks , a professor of philosophy and psychology at
Carnegie Mellon University . Danks studies both cognitive science and machine
learning , so he understands the benefits and drawbacks to human and machine
cognition . Danks explained that projection bias is “ a very real problem ” for
autonomous weapons . Even if we could ensure that the autonomous weapon
would flawlessly carry out political leaders ’ directions , with no malfunctions or
manipulation by the enemy ,  “ you still have the problem that that ’ s a snapshot of
the preferences and desires at that moment in time ,  ” he said . Danks explained
that people generally do a good job of predicting their own future preferences for
situations they have experience with , but for “ a completely novel situation .  .  . 
there ’ s real risks that we ’ re going to have pretty significant projection biases .  ” 
Again , the Cuban Missile Crisis illustrates the problem . Robert McNamara , 
who was secretary of defense at the time , later explained that the president ’ s
senior advisors believed that if the U-2 they sent to fly over Cuba were shot
down , it would have signaled a deliberate move by the Soviets to escalate . They
had decided ahead of time , therefore , that if the U-2 was shot down , the United
States would attack :  
[ B ] efore we sent the U-2 out , we agreed that if it was shot down we wouldn ’ t meet , we ’ d simply
attack . It was shot down on Friday .  .  .  . Fortunately , we changed our mind , we thought “ Well , it
might have been an accident , we won ’ t attack .  ” 
When actually faced with the decision , it turns out that McNamara and others
had a different view . They were unable to accurately predict their own
preferences as to what they would want to do if the plane were shot down . In
that example , McNamara and others could reverse course . They had not actually
delegated the authority to attack . There was another moment during the Cuban
Missile Crisis , however , when Soviet leadership had delegated release authority
for nuclear weapons and the world came chillingly close to nuclear war . 
On October 27 , the same day that the U-2 was shot down over Cuba and
another U-2 flying over the Arctic strayed into Soviet territory , U . S . ships at the
quarantine ( blockade ) line began dropping signaling depth charges on the Soviet
submarine B-59 to compel it to surface . The U . S . Navy was not aware that the B59 was armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo with a 15-kiloton warhead , about
the size of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima . Furthermore , Soviet command had
delegated authority to the ship ’ s captain to use the torpedo if the ship was 
 “ hulled ”  ( a hole blown in the hull from depth charges )  . Normally , authorization
was required from two people to fire a nuclear torpedo : the ship ’ s captain and
political officer . According to Soviet sailors aboard the submarine , the
submarine ’ s captain , Valentin Savitsky , ordered the nuclear torpedo prepared for
launch , declaring ,  “ We ’ re going to blast them now ! We will die , but we will sink
them all .  ” Fortunately , the flotilla commander , Captain Vasili Arkhipov , was
also present on the submarine . He was Captain Savitsky ’ s superior and his
approval was also required . Reportedly , only Arkhipov was opposed to
launching the torpedo . As with Stanislav Petrov , once again the judgment of a
single Soviet officer may have again prevented the outbreak of nuclear war . 
DETERRENCE AND THE DEAD HAND
Sometimes , there is a benefit to tying one ’ s hands in a crisis . Strategists have
often compared crises to a game of chicken between two drivers , both hurtling
toward the other one at deadly speed , daring the other to swerve . Neither side
wants a collision , but neither wants to be the first to swerve . One way to win is
to demonstrably tie one ’ s hands so that one cannot swerve . Herman Kahn gave
the example of a driver who “ takes the steering wheel and throws it out the
window .  ” The onus is now entirely on the other driver to avoid a collision . 
Horowitz asked whether autonomous weapons might excel in such a
situation . Here , machines ’ rigid adherence to rules and lack of recallability
would be a benefit . A robot designed to never swerve would be the perfect driver
to win at chicken . In “ Artificial Intelligence , War , and Crisis Stability ,  ” 
Horowitz presented the thought experiment of an alternative Cuban Missile
Crisis in which the U . S . ships conducting the blockade were autonomous
weapons . They would be programmed to fire on any Soviet ships crossing the
blockade line . If this could be credibly communicated to the Soviets , it would
have put the onus of avoiding conflict on the Soviets . The problem , Horowitz
asked , was “ how would the Kennedy Administration have persuaded the Soviet
Union that that was the case ?  ” There would be no way to convincingly prove to
Soviet leadership that the robotic vessels were actually programmed to fire . U . S . 
leaders could claim that was the case , but the claim would be meaningless , since
that ’ s also what they would say if they were bluffing . The United States would
certainly not allow the Soviets to inspect the code of U . S . ships at the blockade . 
There would be no credible way to demonstrate that one had , in fact , tied one ’ s
hands . It would be the equivalent of ripping out the steering wheel , but being
unable to throw it out the window .  ( Similarly , the Soviets could program their
ships to run the blockade without any option for turning back , but there would be
no way to prove to the Americans they had done so .  ) 
Stanley Kubrick ’ s 1964 film Dr . Strangelove explores the bizarre logic of
deterrence and mutual assured destruction . In the film , the Soviet ambassador
explains to an assembled group of American military and political leaders that
the Soviet Union has built a “ doomsday machine ” which , if the Soviet Union is
attacked , will automatically launch a massive nuclear counterattack that will
destroy humanity . The title character Dr . Strangelove explains ,  “ because of the
automated and irrevocable decision-making process , which rules out human
meddling , the doomsday machine is terrifying .  .  .  . and completely capable and
convincing .  ” Unfortunately , in the movie , the Soviets fail to tell their American
counterparts that they have built such a device . Strangelove yells at the Soviet
ambassador ,  “ the whole point of the doomsday machine is lost if you keep it a
secret !  ” 
As an example of truth being sometimes stranger than fiction , after the Cold
War evidence emerged that the Soviets did in fact build a semiautomatic
doomsday device , nicknamed “ Dead Hand .  ” Officially called “ Perimeter ,  ” the
system was reportedly an automated nuclear command-and-control system
designed to allow a massive retaliatory attack even if a U . S . first strike took out
Soviet leadership . Accounts of Perimeter ’ s functionality differ , but the essential
idea was that the system would remain inactive during peacetime but , in the
event of a crisis , it could be activated as a “ fail-deadly ” mechanism for ensuring
retaliation . When active , a network of light , radiation , seismic , and pressure
sensors would evaluate whether there had been any nuclear detonations on
Soviet soil . If a nuclear detonation was detected , then the system would check
for communications to the General Staff of the Soviet military . If
communications were active , then it would wait a predetermined about of time , 
ranging from on the order of fifteen minutes to an hour , for an order to cancel
the launch . If there was no order to stop the launch , Perimeter would act like a 
 “ dead man ’ s switch ,  ” a switch that is automatically triggered if a person
becomes incapacitated or dies . In many hazardous machines , a dead man ’ s
switch is used as a fail-safe mechanism . If a person becomes incapacitated , the
machine will revert to a safe mode of operation , like a lawnmower shutting off if
you release the handle . In this case , Perimeter was intended to “ fail deadly .  ” If
there was no signal from the Soviet General Staff to halt the launch , Perimeter
would bypass normal layers of command and transfer launch authority directly
to individuals within a deep underground protected bunker . There would still be
a human in the loop , but the decision would reside with whichever staff officer
was on duty at the time . Soviet leadership would be cut out of the loop . With a
push of a button , that individual could launch a series of communications rockets
that would fly over Soviet territory and beam down the nuclear launch codes to
missiles in hardened silos . Soviet ICBMs would then launch a massive strike on
the United States , the last zombie attack of a dying nation . 
There was a purpose to the madness . In theory , if everything worked
properly , a system like Perimeter would enhance stability . Because a retaliatory
strike would be assured , the system would remove the need for haste from Soviet
leaders ’ decision-making in a crisis . If there were warnings of an incoming U . S . 
surprise attack , as was the case in 1983 in the Stanislav Petrov incident and
again in 1995 when Russian military leaders brought the nuclear suitcase to
Boris Yeltsin in response to a Norwegian scientific rocket launch , there would
be no rush to respond . Soviet or Russian leaders would have no incentive to fire
their nuclear missiles in an ambiguous situation , because even if the United
States succeeded in a decapitating strike , retaliation was assured . The knowledge
of this would also presumably deter the United States from even considering a
preemptive first strike . The problem , of course , is that such a system comes with
tremendous risks . If Perimeter were to falsely detect an event , as the Soviet Oko
satellite system did in 1983 when it falsely detected U . S . ICBM launches , or if
Soviet leaders were unable to stop the mechanism once it was activated , the
system would obliterate humanity . 
By some accounts , Perimeter is still operational within Russia today . 
STABILITY-INSTABILITY PARADOX AND THE MAD ROBOT
THEORY
The logic of mutual assured destruction ( MAD ) is to make any nuclear attack
inherently suicidal . If a retaliatory response is assured , then attacking the enemy
is akin to attacking oneself . This dynamic is stabilizing in the sense that it deters
both sides from using nuclear weapons . Ironically , though , over time strategists
began to worry that too much stability was a bad thing . This became known as
the “ stability-instability paradox .  ” 
The essence of the problem is that if nuclear weapons are fully and mutually
restrained , then they could lose their value as a deterrent . This could embolden
aggression below the nuclear threshold , since countries could be confident that
an adversary would not respond with nuclear weapons . Under this logic , some
instability—some risk of accidents and miscalculation—is a good thing , because
it induces caution . Returning to the gunslingers in their standoff , if stabilizing
measures are those that make it less likely that a gunslinger will draw his
weapon , too much stability might encourage other forms of aggression . One
might be willing to insult or even steal from the other gunslinger , confident that
he wouldn ’ t draw his gun , since doing so would be suicidal . 
One response to this paradox is the “ madman theory .  ” As the acronym MAD
implies , the logic of mutual assured destruction is fundamentally insane . Only a
mad person would launch a nuclear weapon . The principle behind the madman
theory , espoused by President Richard Nixon , is to convince the enemy ’ s
leadership that a nation ’ s leaders are so volatile and irrational that they just
might push the button . Mutual suicide or no , one would hesitate to insult a
gunslinger with a reputation for rash , even self-destructive acts . 
This suggests another way autonomous weapons might improve stability : the 
 “ mad robot theory .  ” If countries perceive autonomous weapons as dangerous , as
introducing an unpredictable element into a crisis that cannot be completely
controlled , then introducing them into a crisis might induce caution . It would be
the equivalent of what Thomas Schelling has described as “ the threat that leaves
something to chance .  ” By deploying autonomous weapons into a tense
environment , a country would effectively be saying to the enemy ,  “ Things are
now out of my hands . Circumstances may lead to war ; they may not . I cannot
control it , and your only course of action if you wish to avoid war is to back
down .  ” Unlike the problem of credibly tying one ’ s hands by locking in
escalatory rules of engagement , this threat does not require convincing the
enemy what the autonomous weapons ’ rules of engagement are . In fact , 
uncertainty makes the “ mad robot ” threat more credible , since deterrence hinges
on the robot ’ s unpredictability , rather than the certainty of its actions . Deploying
an untested and unverified autonomous weapon would be even more of a
deterrent , since one could convincingly say that its behavior was truly
unpredictable . 
What is interesting about this idea is that its efficacy rests solely on humans ’ 
perception of autonomous weapons , and not the actual functionality of the
weapons themselves . The weapons may be reliable or unreliable—it doesn ’ t
matter . What matters is that they are perceived as unpredictable and , as a result , 
induce caution . Of course , the actual functionality of the weapons does matter
when it comes to how a crisis unfolds . The key is the difference between how
humans perceive the risk of autonomous weapons and their actual risk . If leaders
overestimate the risks of autonomous weapons , then there is nothing to worry
about . Their introduction into crises will induce caution but they will be unlikely
to cause harm . If leaders underestimate their risks , then their use invites disaster . 
How accurately people can assess the risks of autonomous weapons hinges
on individual psychology and how organizations evaluate risk in complex
systems . I asked David Danks what he thought about peoples ’ ability to
accurately assess these risks , and his answer was not encouraging .  “ There ’ s a
real problem here for autonomous weapons ,  ” he said . For starters , he explained
that people are poor predictors of behavior in systems that have feedback loops , 
where one action creates a counterreaction and so on .  ( Real-world experience
with complex autonomous systems in uncontrolled environments , such as stock
trading , lends weight to this theory .  ) 
Furthermore , Danks said , due to projection bias , people are poor predictors
of risk for situations for which they have no experience . For example , Danks
explained , people are good estimators of their likelihood of getting into an
automobile accident because they frequently ride in vehicles . But when they
have no prior knowledge , then their ability to accurately assess risks falls apart .  
 “ Autonomous weapon systems are very new . They aren ’ t just a bigger gun ,  ” he
said .  “ If you think of them as a bigger gun , you say ,  ‘ Well we ’ ve got a lot of
experience with guns .  ’  ” That might lead one to think that one could accurately
evaluate the risks of autonomous weapons . But Danks said he thought they were 
 “ qualitatively different ” than other weapons . 
This suggests we lack the necessary experience to accurately assess the risks
of autonomous weapons . How much testing is required to ensure an autonomous
weapon fails less than 0 . 0001 percent of the time ? We don ’ t know , and we can ’ t
know until we build up experience with more sophisticated autonomous systems
over time . Danks said it would be different if we already had extensive
experience with safely operating complex autonomous systems in real-world
environments . Unfortunately , the experience we do have suggests that surprises
are often lurking below the surface of complex systems . Danks concluded that 
 “ it ’ s just completely unreasonable and hopelessly optimistic to think that we
would be good at estimating the risks .  ” 
UNTYING THE KNOT
At the height of the Cuban Missile Crisis , Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev
sent an impassioned letter to President Kennedy calling on them to work
together to step back from the brink of nuclear war : 
Mr . President , we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied
the knot of war , because the more the two of us pull , the tighter that knot will be tied . And a
moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the
strength to untie it , and then it will be necessary to cut that knot , and what that would mean is not
for me to explain to you , because you yourself understand perfectly of what terrible forces our
countries dispose . 
Autonomous weapons raise troubling concerns for stability and escalation
control in crises . Michael Carl Haas concluded ,  “ there are scenarios in which the
introduction of autonomous strike systems could result in temporary loss of
high-level control over operations , and unwanted escalation ( conventional or
nuclear )  .  ” He argued policymakers “ should exercise prudence and caution ” 
before adding autonomous weapon systems “ into an equation that is highly
complex as it stands .  ” Their rigid rule-following could tighten the knot , with no
understanding of the context for or consequences of their actions . 
During the Cuban Missile Crisis , U . S . leaders were constantly trying to
understand the psychology of their Soviet counterparts . While they had differing
interests , President Kennedy empathized with Premier Khrushchev ’ s position . 
Kennedy understood that if the United States moved against Cuba , the Soviets
would be compelled to respond elsewhere in the world , perhaps in Berlin . 
Kennedy understood that he needed to give Khrushchev an option to remove the
missiles from Cuba while saving face . Kennedy and others were able to think
through the second-and third-order consequences of their actions .  ( Khrushchev
eventually agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for a U . S . pledge not to
invade Cuba and a secret promise to remove American missiles from Turkey .  ) 
Vasili Arkhipov , on the Soviet submarine B-59 , similarly understood that if they
fired a nuclear torpedo , obliterating a U . S . aircraft carrier , the Americans would
feel compelled to respond with nuclear weapons elsewhere . The result would be
escalating to a level it might be impossible to back down from . 
Humans are not perfect , but they can empathize with their opponents and see
the bigger picture . Unlike humans , autonomous weapons would have no ability
to understand the consequences of their actions , no ability to step back from the
brink of war . Autonomous weapons would not take away all human decisionmaking in crises , but they do have the potential to tighten the knot , perhaps so
far that it cannot be undone .  
*  “ Strategic stability ” is often used to refer specifically to nuclear weapons—hence , the use of “ stability ” in
this book when used in reference to autonomous weapons . 
PART VI
Averting Armageddon : The
Weapon of Policy
19
CENTAUR WARFIGHTERS
HUMANS + MACHINES
If there is one common theme across the legal , ethical , and strategic issues
surrounding autonomous weapons , it is whether , and how much , the decision to
use force depends on context . Machines , at least for the foreseeable future , will
not be as good as humans at understanding the context for their actions . Yet
there are circumstances in which machines perform far better than humans . The
best decision-making system would be one that leverages the advantages of
each . Hybrid human-machine cognitive systems , often called “ centaur
warfighters ” after the classic Greek myth of the half-human , half-horse creature , 
can leverage the precision and reliability of automation without sacrificing the
robustness and flexibility of human intelligence . 
THE CENTAUR EDGE
To glimpse the future of cognition , we need look no further than one of the most
high-profile areas in which AI has bested humans : chess . In 1997 , IBM ’ s Deep
Blue defeated world chess champion Gary Kasparov , cementing the reality that
humans are no longer the best chess players in the world . But neither , as it turns
out , are machines . A year later , Kasparov founded the field of “ advanced chess ,  ” 
also called centaur chess , in which humans and AI cooperate on the same team . 
The AI can analyze possible moves and identify vulnerabilities or opportunities
the human player might have missed , resulting in blunder-free games . The
human player can manage strategy , prune AI searches to focus on the most
promising areas , and manage differences between multiple AIs . The AI system
gives feedback to the human player , who then decides what move to make . By
leveraging the advantages of human and machine , centaur chess results in a
better game than either humans or AI can achieve on their own . 
Understanding how this might work for weapons engagements requires first
disaggregating the various roles a human performs today in targeting decisions :  
( 1 ) acting as an essential operator of the weapon system ;  ( 2 ) acting as a fail-safe ; 
and ( 3 ) acting as a moral agent . 
When acting as an “ essential operator ” of the weapon system , a human
performs a vital function without which the weapon cannot work . A human 
 “ painting ” a target with a laser to direct a laser-guided bomb onto the target is
acting as an essential operator . When a human acts as a fail-safe , the weapon
could function on its own , but the human is in the loop as a backup to intervene
if it fails or if circumstances change such that the engagement is no longer
appropriate . When acting as a “ moral agent ,  ” the human is making value-based
judgments about whether the use of force is appropriate . 
An anecdote from the U . S . air campaign over Kosovo in 1999 includes an
instructive example of all three roles in action simultaneously : 
On 17 April 1999 , two F-15E Strike Eagles , Callsign CUDA 91 and 92 , were tasked to attack an
AN / TPS-63 mobile early warning radar located in Serbia . The aircraft carried AGM-130 , a
standoff weapon that is actually remotely flown by the weapons system officer ( WSO ) in the F15E , who uses the infra-red sensor in the nose of the weapon to detect the target . CUDA 91 .  .  . 
launched on coordinates provided by the Air Operations Center . As the weapon approached the
suspected target location , the crew had not yet acquired the [ enemy radar ]  . At 12 seconds from
impact , the picture became clearer .  .  .  .  [ The pilots saw the profile outline of what appeared to be
a church steeple .  ] Three seconds [ from impact ]  , the WSO makes the call :  “ I ’ m ditching in this
field ” and steers the weapon into an empty field several hundred meters away .  .  .  . Postflight
review of the tape revealed no object that could be positively identified as a radar , but the profile
of a Serbian Orthodox church was unmistakable . 
In this example , the pilots were performing all three roles simultaneously . By
manually guiding the air-to-ground weapon they were acting as essential
operators . They were also acting as fail-safes , observing the weapon while it was
in flight and making an on the spot decision to abort once they realized the
circumstances were different from what they had anticipated . They were also
acting as moral agents when they assessed that the military necessity of the
target was not important enough to risk blowing up a church . 
Acting as the essential operator , which is traditionally the primary human
role , is actually the easiest role to automate . A network-enabled GPS bomb , for
example , gives operators the ability to abort in flight , preserving their role as
moral agents and fail-safes , but the weapon can maneuver itself to the target . We
see this often in nonmilitary settings . Commercial airliners use automation to
perform the essential task of flying the aircraft , with human pilots largely in a
fail-safe role . A person on medical life support has machines performing the
essential task of keeping him or her alive , but humans make the moral judgment
whether to continue life support . As automation becomes more advanced , 
automating many of the weapon system ’ s functions could result in far greater
accuracy , precision , and reliability than relying on humans . Automating the
human ’ s role as moral agent or fail-safe , however , is far harder and would
require major leaps forward in AI that do not appear on the horizon . 
THE ROLE OF THE HUMAN AS MORAL AGENT AND FAILSAFE
The benefit to “ centaur ” human-machine teaming is that we don ’ t need to give
up the benefits of human judgment to get the advantages of automation . We can
have our cake and eat it too ( at least in some cases )  . The U . S . counter-rocket , 
artillery , and mortar ( C-RAM ) system is an example of this approach . The CRAM automates much of the engagement , resulting in greater precision and
accuracy , but still keeps a human in the loop . 
The C-RAM is designed to protect U . S . bases from rocket , artillery , and
mortar attacks . It uses a network of radars to automatically identify and track
incoming rounds . Because the C-RAM is frequently used at bases where there
are friendly aircraft in the sky , the system autonomously creates a “ Do Not
Engage Sector ” around friendly aircraft to prevent fratricide . The result is a
highly automated system that , in theory , is capable of safely and lawfully
completing engagements entirely on its own . However , humans still perform
final verification of each individual target before engagement . One C-RAM
operator described the role the automation and human operators play : 
The human operators do not aim or execute any sort of direct control over the firing of the CRAM system . The role of the human operators is to act as a final fail-safe in the process by
verifying that the target is in fact a rocket or mortar , and that there are no friendly aircraft in the
engagement zone . A [ h ] uman operator just presses the button that gives the authorization to the
weapon to track , target , and destroy the incoming projectile . 
Thus , the C-RAM has a dual-safety mechanism , with both human and automated
safeties . The automated safety tracks friendly aircraft in the sky with greater
precision and reliability than human operators could , while the human can react
to unforeseen circumstances . This model also has the virtue of ensuring that
human operators must take a positive action before each engagement , helping to
ensure human responsibility for each shot . 
In principle , C-RAM ’ s blended use of automation and human decisionmaking is optimal . The human may not be able to prevent all accidents from
occurring ( after all , humans make mistakes )  , but the inclusion of a human in the
loop dramatically reduces the potential for multiple erroneous engagements . If
the system fails , the human can at least halt the weapon system from further
operation , while the automation itself may not understand that it is engaging the
wrong targets . 
In order for human operators to actually perform the roles of moral agent and
fail-safe , they must be trained for and supported by a culture of active
participation in the weapon system ’ s operation . The Patriot fratricides stemmed
from “ unwarranted and uncritical trust in automation ,  ” Ensuring human
responsibility over engagements requires : automation designed so that human
operators can program their intent into the machine , human-machine interfaces
that give humans the information they need to make informed decisions , training
that requires the operators to exercise judgment , and a culture that emphasizes
human responsibility . When these best practices are followed , the result can be
safe and effective systems like C-RAM , where automation provides valuable
advantages but humans remain in control . 
THE LIMITS OF CENTAUR WARFIGHTING : SPEED
The idealized centaur model of human-machine teaming breaks down , however , 
when actions are required faster than humans can react or when communications
are denied between the human and machine . 
Chess is again a useful analogy . Centaur human-machine teams generally
make better decisions in chess , but are not an optimal model in timed games
where a player has only thirty to sixty seconds to make a move . When the time
to decide is compressed , the human does not add any value compared to the
computer alone , and may even be harmful by introducing errors . Over time , as
computers advance , this time horizon is likely to expand until humans no longer
add any value , regardless of how much time is allowed . 
Already , machines do a better job than humans alone in certain military
situations . Machines are needed to defend against saturation attacks from
missiles and rockets when the speed of engagements overwhelms human
operators . Over time , as missiles incorporate more intelligent features , including
swarming behavior , these defensive supervised autonomous weapons are likely
to become even more important—and human involvement will necessarily
decline . 
By definition , a human on the loop has weaker control than a human in the
loop . If the weapon fails , there is a greater risk of harm and of lessened moral
responsibility . Nevertheless , human supervision provides some oversight of
engagements . The fact that supervised autonomous weapons such as Aegis have
been in widespread use for decades suggests that these risks are manageable . In
all of these situations , as an additional backup , humans have physical access to
the weapon system so that they could disable it at the hardware level . Accidents
have occurred with existing systems , but not catastrophes . A world with more
defensive supervised autonomous weapons is likely to look not much different
than today . 
Why Use Supervised Autonomy ? 
There will undoubtedly be offensive settings where speed is also valuable . In
those cases , however , speed will be valuable in the execution of attacks , not
necessarily in the decision to launch them . For example , swarming missiles will
need to be delegated the authority to coordinate their behavior and deconflict
targets , particularly if the enemy is another swarm . Humans have more choice
over the time and place of attack for offensive applications , though . For some
types of targets , it may not be feasible to have humans select every individual
enemy object . This will especially be the case if militaries move to swarm
warfare , with hundreds or thousands of robots involved . But there are weapon
systems today—Sensor Fuzed Weapon and the Brimstone missile , for example
—where humans choose a specific group of enemy targets and the weapons
divvy up the targets themselves . A human selecting a known group of targets
minimizes many of the concerns surrounding autonomous weapons while
allowing the human to authorize an attack on the swarm as a whole , without
having to specify each individual element . 
DEGRADED COMMUNICATIONS
Human supervision is not possible when there are no communications with the
weapon , such as in enemy air space or underwater . But communications in
contested areas is not an all-or-nothing proposition . Communications may be
degraded but not necessarily denied . Advanced militaries have jam-resistant
communications technology . Or perhaps a human in a nearby vehicle has some
connection with an autonomous weapon to authorize engagements . In any event , 
some communication is likely possible . So how much bandwidth is required to
keep a human in the loop ? 
Not much . As one example , consider the following screen grab from a video
of an F-15 strike in Iraq , a mere 12 kilobytes in size . While grainy , it clearly
possesses sufficient resolution to distinguish individual vehicles . A trained
operator could discriminate military-specific vehicles , such as a tank or mobile
missile launcher , from dual-use vehicles such as buses or trucks . 
DARPA ’ s CODE program intends to keep a human in the loop via a
communications link that could transmit 50 kilobits per second , roughly on par
with a 56K modem from the 1990s . This low-bandwidth communications link
could transmit one image of this quality every other second .  ( One kilobyte
equals eight kilobits , so a 12-kilobyte image is 96 kilobits .  ) It would allow a
human to view the target and decide within a few seconds whether to authorize
an engagement or not . 
Targeting Image from F-15 Strike in Iraq ( 12 kilobytes in size ) This targeting image from an F-15 strike
in Iraq shows a convoy of vehicles approaching an intersection . Images like this one could be passed over
relatively low-bandwidth networks for human operators to approve engagements . 
This reduced-bandwidth approach would not work in areas where
communications are entirely denied . In such environments , semiautonomous
weapons could engage targets that had been preauthorized by human controllers , 
as cruise missiles do today . This would generally only be practical for fixed
targets , however ( or a mobile target in a confined area with a readily identifiable
signature )  . In these cases , accountability and responsibility would be clear , as a
human would have made the targeting decision . 
But things get complicated quickly in communications-denied environments . 
Should uninhabited vehicles be able to defend themselves if they come under
attack ? Future militaries will likely deploy robotic vehicles and will want to
defend them , especially if they are expensive . If there were no communications
to a human , any defenses would need to be fully autonomous . Allowing
autonomous self-defense incurs some risks . For example , someone could fire at
the robot to get it to return fire and then hide behind human shields to
deliberately cause an incident where the robot kills civilians . There would also
be some risk of fratricide or unintended escalation in a crisis . Even rules of
engagement ( ROE ) intended purely to be defensive could lead to interactions
between opposing systems that results in an exchange of fire . Delegating selfdefense authority would be risky . However , it is hard to imagine that militaries
would be willing to put expensive uninhabited systems in harm ’ s way and leave
them defenseless . Provided the defensive action was limited and proportionate , 
the risks might be manageable . 
While it seems unlikely that militaries would publicly disclose the specific
ROE their robotic systems use , some degree of transparency between nations
could help manage the risks of crisis escalation . A “ rules of the road ” for how
robotic systems ought to behave in contested areas might help to minimize the
risk of accidents and improve stability overall . Some rules , such as ,  “ if you shoot
at a robot , expect it to shoot back ,  ” would be self-reinforcing . Combined with a
generally cautious “ shoot second ” rule requiring robots to withhold fire unless
fired upon , such an approach is likely to be stabilizing overall . If militaries could
agree on a set of guidelines for how they expect armed robotic systems to
interact in settings where there is no human oversight , this would greatly help to
manage a problem that is sure to surface as more nations field weaponized
robotic systems . 
Why Use Full Autonomy ? 
Hunting mobile targets in communications-denied areas presents the greatest
challenge for maintaining human supervision . Ships , air defense systems , and
missile launchers are all harder to hit precisely because their movement makes it
difficult to find them . In an ideal world , a swarm of robotic systems would
search for these targets , relay the coordinates and a picture back to a human
controller for approval ( as CODE intends )  , then the swarm would attack only
human-authorized targets . If a communication link is not available , however , 
then fully autonomous weapons could be used to search for , select , and mobile
attack targets on their own . 
There is no doubt that such weapons would be militarily useful . They would
also be risky . In these situations , there would be no ability to recall or abort the
weapon if it failed , was hacked , or was manipulated into attacking the wrong
target . Unlike a defensive counterfire response , the weapon ’ s actions would not
be limited and proportionate . It would be going on the attack , searching for
targets . Given the risks that such weapons would entail , it is worth asking
whether their military value would be worth the risk . 
When I asked Captain Galluch from the Aegis training center what he
thought of the idea of a fully autonomous weapon , he asked ,  “ What application
are we trying to solve ?  ” It ’ s an important question . For years , militaries have had
the ability to build loitering munitions that would search for targets over a wide
area and destroy them on their own . With a few exceptions like the TASM and
Harpy , these weapons have not been developed . There are no known examples
of them being used in a conflict . Fully autonomous weapons might be useful , but
it ’ s hard to make the case for them as necessary outside of the narrow case of
immediate self-defense . 
The main rationale for building fully autonomous weapons seems to be the
assumption that others might do so . Even the most strident supporters of military
robotics have been hesitant about fully autonomous weapons .  .  . unless others
build them . This is a valid problem—and one that could become a self-fulfilling
prophecy . The fear that others might build autonomous weapons could be the
very thing that drives militaries to build them . Jody Williams asked me ,  “ If they
don ’ t exist , there is no military necessity and are we not , in fact , creating it ?  ” 
Michael Carl Haas , who raised concerns about crisis stability , suggested that
countries explore “ mutual restraint ” as an option to avoid the potentially
dangerous consequences of fully autonomous weapons . Others have suggested
that such weapons are inevitable . The history of arms control provides evidence
for both points of view . 
20
THE POPE AND THE CROSSBOW
THE MIXED HISTORY OF ARMS CONTROL
In the summer of 2015 , a group of prominent AI and robotics researchers signed
an open letter calling for a ban on autonomous weapons .  “ The key question for
humanity today ,  ” they wrote ,  “ is whether to start a global AI arms race or to
prevent it from starting . If any major military power pushes ahead with AI
weapon development , a global arms race is virtually inevitable .  ” 
There have been many attempts to control weapons in the past . Some have
succeeded , but many attempts at restricting weapons have failed . Pope Innocent
II banned the use of the crossbow ( against Christians ) in 1139 . There is no
evidence that it had any effect in slowing the proliferation of the crossbow
across medieval Europe . In the early twentieth century , European nations tried to
cooperate on rules restricting submarine warfare and banning air attacks on
cities . These attempts failed . On the other hand , attempts to restrain chemical
weapons use failed in World War I but succeeded in World War II . All the major
powers had chemical weapons in World War II but did not use them ( on each
other )  . Today , chemical weapons are widely reviled , although their continued
use by Bashar al-Assad in Syria shows that no ban is absolute . The Cold War
saw a host of arms control treaties , many of which remain in place today . Some
treaties , such as bans on biological weapons , blinding lasers , and using the
environment as a weapon of war , have been highly successful . In recent years , 
humanitarian campaigns have led to bans on land mines and cluster munitions , 
although the treaties have not been as widely adopted and these weapons remain
in use by many states . Finally , nonproliferation treaties have been able to slow , 
but not entirely stop , the proliferation of nuclear weapons , ballistic missiles , and
other dangerous technologies . 
DEVELOP
TECHNOLOGY
DEVELOP
WEAPON PRODUCTION USE
Nonproliferation treaties aim to
prevent access to the
technology
Some bands
prohibit developing
a weapon
Arms limitation treaties limit
the quantities of a weapon
Some bans
only prohibit
or regulate
use
Types of Weapons Bans Weapons bans can target different stages of the weapons production process , 
preventing access to the technology , prohibiting states from developing the weapon , limiting production , or
regulating use . 
These successes and failures provide lessons for those who wish to control
autonomous weapons . The underlying technology that enables autonomous
weapons is too diffuse , commercially available , and easy to replicate to stop its
proliferation . Mutual restraint among nations on how they use this technology
may be possible , but it certainly won ’ t be easy . 
WHY SOME BANS SUCCEED AND OTHERS FAIL
Whether or not a ban succeeds seems to depend on three key factors : the
perceived horribleness of the weapon ; its perceived military utility ; and the
number of actors who need to cooperate for a ban to work . If a weapon is seen as
horrific and only marginally useful , then a ban is likely to succeed . If a weapon
brings decisive advantages on the battlefield then a ban is unlikely to work , no
matter how terrible it may seem . The difference between how states have treated
chemical weapons and nuclear weapons illustrate this point . Nuclear weapons
are unquestionably more harmful than chemical weapons by any measure : 
civilian casualties , combatant suffering , and environmental damage . Nuclear
weapons give a decisive advantage on the battlefield , though , which is why the
Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty ’ s goals of global nuclear disarmament remain
unrealized . Chemical weapons , on the other hand , have some battlefield
advantages , but are far from decisive . Had Saddam Hussein used them against
the United States , the result might have more U . S . casualties , but it would not
have changed the course of the first Gulf War or the 2003 Iraq War . 
Successful and Unsuccessful Weapons Bans
PRE-MODERN ERA
Era Weapon Year Regulation or
Treaty
Legally
binding ? 
Type of
Regulation
Successful ? Motivation
poisoned
or barbed
arrows
Dates
vary -
1500 to
200 BC
Laws of Manu ; 
Dharmaśāstras ; 
Mahābhārata
legally
binding
banned use success
unknown
unnecessary
suffering
concealed
weapons
Dates
vary -
1500 to
200 BC
Laws of Manu legally
binding
banned use success
unknown
perfidy
fire-tipped
weapons
Dates
vary -
1500 to
200 BC
Laws of Manu legally
binding
banned use success
unknown
unnecessary
suffering
crossbow 1097 ; 
1139
1097 Lateran
Synod ; 1139
Second
Lateran
Council
legally
binding
banned use failed political
control
firearms 1607–
1867
Tokugawa
Shogunate
Japan
legally
binding
effectively
prohibited
production
successful 
( lasted
~250
years ) 
political
control
firearms 1523–
1543
King Henry
VIII
legally
binding
limited
ownership
among
civilian
population
short-lived political
control
TURN OF THE CENTURY
Era Weapon Year Regulation
or Treaty
Legally
binding ? 
Type of
Regulation
Successful ? Motivation
explosive or
inflammable
projectiles
below 400
grams
1868 1868 St . 
Petersburg
Declaration
legally
binding
banned use superseded
by
technology , 
but adhered
to in spirit
unnecessary
suffering
expanding
bullets
1899 1899 Hague
Declaration
legally
binding
banned use successful
in limiting
battlefield
use , 
although
lawful in
civilian
applications
unnecessary
suffering
asphyxiating
gases ( from
projectiles ) 
1899 1899 Hague
Declaration
legally
binding
banned use failed -
used in
WW I
unnecessary
suffering
poison 1899 ; 
1907
1899 and
1907 Hague
Declarations
legally
binding
banned use successful unnecessary
suffering
weapons that
cause
superfluous
injury
1899 ; 
1907
1899 and
1907 Hague
Declarations
legally
binding
banned use mixed , but
generally
successful
unnecessary
suffering
balloondelivered
projectiles or
explosives
1899 ; 
1907
1899 and
1907 Hague
Declarations
legally
binding
banned use short-lived civilian
casualties
aerial
bombardment
against
undefended
cities
1907 1907 Hague
Declaration
legally
binding
banned use failed civilian
casualties
WORLD WAR I TO WORLD WAR II
Era Weapon Year Regulation or
Treaty
Legally
binding ? 
Type of
Regulation
Successful ? Motivation
sawback
bayonets
World
War I
tacit
cooperation on
the battlefield
no explicit
agreement
norm
against
possession
successful unnecessary
suffering
chemical and
bacteriological
weapons
1925 1925 Geneva
Gas and
Bacteriological
Protocol
legally
binding
banned use largely
successful
in
restraining
battlefield
use in
WWII
unnecessary
suffering
submarines 1899 ; 
1921–
1922
1899 Hague
convention ; 
1921–1922
Washington
Naval
Conference
never
ratified
attempted
bans -
never
ratified
failed -
treaty
never
ratified
civilian
casualties
submarines 1907 ; 
1930 ; 
1936
1907 Hague
Declaration ; 
1930 London
Naval Treaty ; 
1936 London
Protocol
legally
binding
regulated
use
failed -
compliance
collapsed
in war
civilian
casualties
size of navies 1922 ; 
1930 ; 
1936
1922
Washington
Naval Treaty ; 
1930 London
Naval Treaty ; 
1936 Second
London Naval
Treaty
legally
binding
limited
quantities
and size of
ships
short-lived limit arms
races
COLD WAR
Era Weapon Year Regulation or
Treaty
Legally
binding ? 
Type of
Regulation
Successful ? Motivation
nuclear tests 1963 ; 
1967 ; 
1985 ; 
1995 ; 
1996
Limited Test
Ban Treaty ; 
Treaty of
Tlatelolco ; 
Treaty of
Rarotonga ; 
Treaty of
Bangkok ; Treaty
of Pelindaba ; 
Comprehensive
Nuclear Test
Ban Treaty
legally
binding
restricted
testing
generally
successful , 
with some
exceptions
effects on
civilians ; 
limit arms
races
weapons in
Antarctica
1959 Antarctic Treaty legally
binding
banned
deployment
successful limit arms
races
weapons of
mass
destruction
in space
1967 Outer Space
Treaty
legally
binding
banned
deployment
successful strategic
stability
weapons on
the moon
1967 Outer Space
Treaty
legally
binding
banned
deployment
successful limit arms
races
nuclear-free
zones
1967 ; 
1985 ; 
1995 ; 
1996
Treaty of
Tlatelolco ; 
Treaty of
Rarotonga ; 
Treaty of
Bangkok ; Treaty
of Pelindaba
legally
binding
banned
developing , 
manufacturing , 
possessing , or
stationing
successful limit arms
races
nuclear
weapons
1970 Nuclear
NonProliferation
Treaty
legally
binding
banned
proliferation
generally
successful , 
with some
exceptions
strategic
stability
nuclear
weapons on
the seabed
1971 Seabed Treaty legally
binding
banned
deployment
successful strategic
stability
ballistic
missile
defenses
1972 Anti-ballistic
Missile Treaty
legally
binding
limited
deployment
successful
during Cold
War ; 
strategic
stability
defenses War ; 
collapsed in
multipolar
world
biological
weapons
1972 Biological
Weapons
Convention
legally
binding
banned
development , 
production , 
stockpiling , 
and use
generally
successful , 
with some
exceptions
unnecessary
suffering ; 
civilian
casualties ; 
prevent arms
race
using the
environment
as a weapon
1976 Environmental
Modification
Convention
legally
binding
banned use successful civilian
casualties ; 
prevent arms
race
antisatellite
weapons
1970s 
& 
1980s
tacit cooperation
between U . S . 
and U . S . S . R . 
no explicit
agreement
norm against
deployment
successful , 
but
currently
threatened
in
multipolar
world
strategic
stability
neutron
bombs
1970s tacit cooperation
between U . S . 
and U . S . S . R . 
no explicit
agreement
norm against
deployment
successful strategic
stability
non-x-raydetectable
fragments
1980 Convention on
Certain
Conventional
Weapons 
( CCW ) Protocol
I
legally
binding
banned use successful unnecessary
suffering
land mines 1980 CCW Protocol
II
legally
binding
regulated use unsuccessful civilian
casualties
incendiary
weapons
1980 CCW Protocol
III
legally
binding
regulated use mixed
success
civilian
casualties
chemical and
biological
weapons
1985 Australia Group not legally
binding
banned
proliferation
mixed
success
unnecessary
suffering ; 
civilian
casualties
ballistic and
cruise
missiles
1987 ; 
2002
Missile
Technology
Control Regime ; 
Hague Code of
Conduct
not legally
binding
limited
proliferation
has had
some
success
strategic
stability
intermediaterange
missiles
1987 IntermediateRange Nuclear
Forces ( INF ) 
legally
binding
banned
possession
successful , 
but
currently
strategic
stability
missiles Forces ( INF ) 
Treaty
currently
threatened
in
multipolar
world
nuclear
weapons and
launcher
quantities
1972 ; 
1979 ; 
1991 ; 
2002 ; 
2011
SALT I ; SALT
II ; START ; 
SORT ; New
START
legally
binding
limited
quantities
successful limit arms
races
POST–OLD WAR
Era Weapon Year Regulation
or Treaty
Legally
binding ? 
Type of
Regulation
Successful ? Motivation
conventional
air and
ground
forces
1991 Conventional
Forces in
Europe
legally
binding
limited
quantities
collapsed
in
multipolar
world
limit arms
races
chemical
weapons
1993 Chemical
Weapons
Convention
legally
binding
banned
development , 
production , 
stockpiling , 
and use
generally
successful , 
with some
exceptions
unnecessary
suffering ; 
civilian
casualties
blinding
lasers
1995 CCW
Protocol IV
legally
binding
banned use successful unnecessary
suffering
conventional
weapons
1996 Wassenaar
Arrangement
not legally
binding
limited
proliferation
has had
some
success
political
control
land mines 1997 Mine Ban
Treaty 
( Ottawa
Treaty ) 
legally
binding
banned
development , 
production , 
stockpiling , 
and use
generally
successful , 
with some
exceptions
civilian
casualties
cluster
munitions
2008 Convention
on Cluster
Munitions
legally
binding
banned
development , 
production , 
stockpiling , 
and use
generally
successful , 
with some
exceptions
civilian
casualties
The result of this dynamic is that many ineffective weapons have been
banned . But it is overly simplistic to say that if a weapon has value , then a ban is
doomed to fail . If the only factor that mattered was the battlefield utility of a
weapon , then militaries would almost certainly use poison gas . It has value in
disrupting enemy operations and terrorizing enemy troops . Expanding bullets
and blinding lasers—both of which are banned by treaties—also have some
military utility . In these cases , though , the perceived value is low enough that
states have generally not considered them important enough to break these
prohibitions . 
The number of countries that need to participate for a ban to succeed is also a
critical factor . Arms control was easier during the Cold War when there were
only two great powers . It was far more difficult in the early twentieth century , 
when all powers needed to agree . A single defector could cause an arms control
agreement to unravel . Since the end of the Cold War , this dynamic has begun to
reemerge . 
Interestingly , the legal status of a treaty seems to have little to no bearing on
its success . Legally-binding treaties have been routinely violated and restraint
has existed in some cases without any formal agreements . International
agreements , legally binding or not , primarily serve as a focal point for
coordination . What actually deters countries from violating bans is not a treaty , 
since by default there are no legal consequences if one wins the war , but rather
reciprocity . Countries show restraint when they fear that another country might
retaliate in kind . When fighting nations who do not have the ability to retaliate , 
they have shown less restraint . For example , during World War II Japan used
chemical weapons in small amounts against China , who did not have them , and
Germany killed millions of people in gas chambers during the Holocaust . 
Neither country used poison gas against adversaries who could retaliate in kind . 
For mutual restraint to occur , there must be a clear focal point for
coordination . In his books Strategy of Conflict and Arms and Influence , Thomas
Schelling explained that “ the most powerful limitations , the most appealing
ones , are those that have a conspicuousness and simplicity , that are qualitative
and not a matter of degree , that provide recognizable boundaries .  ” Schelling
observed :  “ Some gas ” raises complicated questions of how much where , under
what circumstances :  “ no gas ” is simple and unambiguous . Gas only on military
personnel ; gas used only by defending forces ; gas only when carried by vehicle
or projectile ; no gas without warning—a variety of limits is conceivable ; some
may make sense , and many might have been more impartial to the outcome of
the war . But there is a simplicity to “ no gas ” that makes it almost uniquely a
focus of agreement when each side can only conjecture at what rules the other
side would propose and when failure to coordinate on the first try may spoil the
chances for acquiescence in any limits at all . 
This simplicity undoubtedly played a role in making it possible for European
nations to refrain from using poison gas against each other in World War II , in
spite of a total war that devastated the continent . 
Germany and the United Kingdom also attempted to mutually avoid
bombing attacks on civilian targets . These failed , but not necessarily because
aerial bombing was more effective than gas or less horrible . Aerial bombing of
cities was largely ineffective and universally reviled . The main purpose of
Britain and Germany launching these attacks seemed to be relation for the other
having done so . 
The chief difference between aerial bombardment and gas , and what made
restraint with aerial bombardment so difficult , is that restraint against civilian
targets lacked the clarity and simplicity of the “ no gas ” rule . Bombers were
already used in other capacities outside of attacks on cities . First they were used
against ships , then land-based military targets ( which inevitably had civilian
casualties )  , then eventually cities . Each of these steps was gradual . Escalation
from one step to another could even happen by accident . In fact , the final step
toward full-scale aerial bombardment seems to have occurred because of an
accident . Early in the war , Hitler gave explicit instructions to the Luftwaffe to
avoid attacks on cities and stick to military targets , because he was worried
about British reprisals . On August 24 , 1940 , however , several German bombers
strayed in the dark and bombed central London by mistake . The British
retaliated by hitting Berlin . Hitler was incensed . In a public speech , he declared ,  
 “ If they declare that they will attack our cities on a large scale—we will
eradicate their cities .  ” Germany launched the London Blitz , and all attempts at
restraint were gone . Gas was different . Moving from “ no gas ” to suddenly using
it crossed a clear threshold . It was an unambiguous decision to escalate . Had gas
been used on the battlefield against military targets , it likely would have
expanded to attacks on cities as well . 
Treaties that completely ban a weapon tend to be more successful than
complicated rules governing a weapon ’ s use . Other attempts to regulate how
weapons are used on the battlefield in order to avoid civilian casualties—such as
restrictions on submarine warfare , incendiary weapons , and the CCW land mine
protocol—have had a similarly poor track record of success . Complete bans on
weapons—such as those on exploding bullets , expanding bullets , chemical
weapons , biological weapons , environmental-modification weapons , and
blinding lasers—have fared better . 
Two interesting exceptions that seem to prove this rule are the bans on land
mines and cluster munitions . Both treaties articulate a simple and
straightforward prohibition in their text . States who sign the treaties pledge 
 “ never under any circumstances to use ” land mines and cluster munitions . That ’ s
about as straightforward as it gets , a clear and simple prohibition . The
complicating details are buried in the definitions . In both cases , the definitions
are written in such a way to carve out loopholes for certain existing weapons . 
The definition of “ antipersonnel land mine ” permits anti-vehicle mines , 
including those that have anti-handling devices ( which are lethal to people )  . The
cluster munitions convention has an even more complicated definition that
covers the number and weight of submunitions . The effect is to permit many
weapon systems that , to an ordinary person , would appear to be cluster
munitions . This is no accident . The definition was crafted in such a way during
negotiations to permit some countries to retain their existing inventories of nownot-quite-cluster-munitions . During signing , Australia made clear that the treaty
would not cover its SMArt 155 artillery shells , which dispense two antitank
submunitions . By burying these complicated rules in the definitions , though , the
ban has the appearance of clarity , making it a stronger ban from a normative
perspective . It ’ s easier to stigmatize a weapon if it is perceived as illegitimate in
all circumstances .  “ No cluster munitions ” is simpler and easier to justify than 
 “ these cluster munitions , but not those ,  ” even though in practice that ’ s what the
ban does . 
Carving out exceptions can make it easier to get more countries to sign on to
a ban , but can be problematic if the technology is still evolving . One lesson from
history is that it is very hard to predict the future path of technology . The 1899
Hague declarations banned gas-filled projectiles , but not poison gas in canisters , 
a technicality that Germany exploited in World War I in defense of its first largescale poison gas attack at Ypres . On the other hand , the 1899 declarations also
banned expanding bullets , a technology that turned out not to be particularly
terrible . Expanding bullets are widely available for purchase by civilians in the
United States for personal self-defense , although militaries have generally
refrained from their use . 
Hague delegates were aware of these challenges and tried to mitigate them , 
particularly for rapidly-evolving aerial weapons . The 1899 declarations banned
projectiles from balloons or “ or by other new methods of a similar nature ,  ” 
anticipating the possibility of aircraft , which came only four years later . The
1907 Hague rules attempted to solve the problem of evolving technology by
prohibiting “ attack or bombardment , by whatever means , of towns , villages , 
dwellings , or buildings which are undefended .  ” This still fell short , however . 
The focus on “ undefended ” targets failed to anticipate the futility of defending
against air attack , and the reality that even with defenses ,  “ the bomber will
always get through .  ” 
Technology will evolve in unforeseen ways . Successful preemptive bans
focus on the intent behind a technology , rather than specific restrictions . For
example , the ban on blinding lasers prohibits lasers specifically designed to
cause permanent blindness , rather than limit a certain power level in lasers . The
United States takes a similar intent-based interpretation of the ban on expanding
bullets , that they are prohibit only to the extent that they are intended to cause
unnecessary suffering . 
Preemptive bans pose unique challenges and opportunities . Because they are
not yet in states ’ inventories , the military utility of a new weapon , such as
blinding lasers or environmental modification , may be amorphous . This can
sometimes make it easier for a ban to succeed . States may not be willing to run
the risk of sparking an arms race if the military utility of a new weapon seems
uncertain . On the other hand , states often may not fully understand how terrible
a weapon is until they see it on the battlefield . States correctly anticipated the
harm that air-delivered weapons could cause in unprotected cities , but poison gas
and nuclear weapons shocked the conscience in ways that contemporaries were
not prepared for . 
VERIFICATION
One topic that frequently arises in discussions about autonomous weapons is the
role of verification regimes in treaties . Here the track record is mixed . A number
of treaties , such as the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty , Chemical Weapons
Convention , INF Treaty , START , and New START have formal inspections to
verify compliance . Others , such as the Outer Space Treaty ’ s prohibition against
military installations on the moon , have de facto inspection regimes . The land
mine and cluster munitions bans do not have inspection regimes , but do require
transparency from states on their stockpile elimination . 
Not all successful bans include verification . The 1899 ban on expanding
bullets , 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol , CCW , SORT , and the Outer Space Treaty ’ s
ban on putting weapons of mass destruction ( WMD ) in orbit all do not have
verification regimes . The Environmental Modification Convention and
Biological Weapons Convention ( BWC ) only say that states who are concerned
that another is cheating should lodge a complaint with the UN Security Council .  
( The Soviet Union reportedly had a secret biological weapons program , making
the BWC a mixed case .  ) In general , verification regimes are useful if there is a
reason to believe that countries might be developing the prohibited weapon in
secret . That could be the case if they already have it ( chemical weapons , land
mines , or cluster munitions ) or if they might be close ( nuclear weapons )  . 
Inspection regimes are not always essential . What is required is transparency . 
Countries need to know whether other nations are complying or not for mutual
restraint to succeed . In some cases , the need for transparency can be met by the
simple fact that some weapons are difficult to keep secret . Anti-ballistic missile
facilities and ships cannot be easily hidden . Other weapons can be . 
WHY BAN ? 
Finally , the motivation behind a ban seems to matter in terms of the likelihood of
success . Successful bans fall into a few categories . The first is weapons that are
perceived to cause unnecessary suffering . By definition , these are weapons that
harm combatants excessive to their military value . Restraint with these weapons
is self-reinforcing . Combatants have little incentive to use these weapons and
strong incentives not to , since the enemy would almost certainly retaliate . 
Bans on weapons that were seen as causing excessive civilian harm have also
succeeded , but only when those bans prohibit possessing the weapon at all 
( cluster munitions and the Ottawa land mine ban )  , not when they permit use in
some circumstances ( air-delivered weapons , submarine warfare , incendiary
weapons , and the CCW land mine protocol )  . Bans on weapons that are seen as
destabilizing ( Seabed Treaty , Outer Space Treaty , ABM Treaty , INF Treaty ) 
have generally succeeded , at least when only a few parties are needed for
cooperation . Arms limitation has been exceptionally difficult , even when there
are only a few parties , but has some record of success . Prohibiting the expansion
of war into new geographic areas has only worked when the focal point for
cooperation is clear and there is low military utility in doing so , such as banning
weapons on the moon or in Antarctica . Attempts to regulate or restrict warfare
from undersea or the air failed , most likely because the regulations were too
nuanced .  “ No submarines ” or “ no aircraft ” would have been clearer , for
example . 
Ultimately , even in the best of cases , bans aren ’ t perfect . Even for highly
successful bans , there will be some nations who don ’ t comply . This makes
military utility a decisive factor . Nations want to know they aren ’ t giving up a
potentially war-winning weapon . This is a profound challenge for those seeking
a ban on autonomous weapons . 
21
ARE AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS
INEVITABLE ? 
THE SEARCH FOR LETHAL LAWS OF ROBOTICS
In the nearly ten years I have spent working on the issue of autonomous
weapons , almost every person I have spoken with has argued there ought to be
some limits on what actions machines can take in war , although they draw this
line in very different places . Ron Arkin said he could potentially be convinced to
support a ban on unsupervised machine learning to generate new targets in the
field . Bob Work drew the line at a weapon with artificial general intelligence . 
There are clearly applications of autonomy and machine intelligence in war that
would be dangerous , unethical , or downright illegal . Whether nations can
cooperate to avoid those harmful outcomes is another matter . 
Since 2014 , countries have met annually at the United Nations Convention
on Certain Conventional Weapons ( CCW ) in Geneva to discuss autonomous
weapons . The glacial progress of diplomacy is in marked contrast to the rapid
pace of technology development . After three years of informal meetings , the
CCW agreed in 2016 to establish a Group of Governmental Experts ( GGE ) to
discuss autonomous weapons . The GGE is a more formal forum , but has no
mandate to negotiate a multinational treaty . Its main charge is to establish a
working definition for autonomous weapons , a sign of how little progress
countries have made . 
Definitions matter , though . Some envision autonomous weapons as simple
robotic systems that could search over a wide area and attack targets on their
own . Such weapons could be built today , but compliance with the law of war in
many settings would be difficult . For others ,  “ autonomous weapon ” is a general
term that applies to any kind of missile or weapon that uses autonomy in any
fashion , from an LRASM to a torpedo . From this perspective , concern about
autonomous weapons is ill-founded ( since they ’ ve been around for seventy
years !  )  . Some equate “ autonomy ” with self-learning and adapting systems , 
which although possible today , have yet to be incorporated into weapons . Others
hear the term “ autonomous weapons ” and envision machines with human-level
intelligence , a development that is unlikely to happen any time soon and would
raise a host of other problems if it did . Without a common lexicon , countries can
have heated disagreements talking about completely different things . 
The second problem is common to any discussions about emerging
technologies , which is that it is hard to foresee how these weapons might be
used , under what conditions , and to what effect in future wars . Some envision
autonomous weapons as more reliable and precise than humans , the next logical
evolution of precision-guided weapons , leading to more-humane wars with
fewer civilian casualties . Others envision calamity , with rogue robot death
machines killing multitudes . It ’ s hard to know which vision is more likely . It is
entirely possible that both come true , with autonomous weapons making war
more precise and humane when they function properly , but causing mass
lethality when they fail . 
The third problem is politics . Countries view autonomous weapons through
the lens of their own security interests . Nations have very different positions
depending on whether or not they think autonomous weapons might benefit
them . It would be a mistake to assume that discussions are generating
momentum toward a ban . 
Still , international discussions have made some progress . An early consensus
has begun to form around the notion that the use of force requires some human
involvement . This concept has been articulated in different ways , with some
NGOs and states calling for “ meaningful human control .  ” The United States , 
drawing on language in DoD Directive 3000 . 09 , has used the term “ appropriate
human judgment .  ” Reflecting these divergent views , the CCW ’ s final report
from its 2016 expert meetings uses the neutral phrase “ appropriate human
involvement .  ” But no country has suggested that it would be acceptable for there
to be no human involvement whatsoever in decisions about the use of lethal
force . Weak though it may be , this common ground is a starting point for
cooperation . 
One of the challenges in current discussions on autonomous weapons is that
the push for a ban is being led by NGOs , not states . Only a handful of states
have said they support a ban , and none of them are major military powers . When
viewed in the context of historical attempts to regulate weapons , this is unusual . 
Most attempts at restricting weapons have come from great powers . 
The fact that the issue ’ s framing has been dominated by NGOs campaigning
to ban “ killer robots ” affects the debate . Potential harm to civilians has been
front and center in the discussion . Strategic issues , which have been the rationale
for many bans in the past , have taken a back seat . The NGOs campaigning for a
ban hope to follow in the footsteps of bans on land mines and cluster munitions , 
but there are no successful examples of preemptive bans on weapons because of
concerns about civilian harm . It is easy to see why this is the case . Bans that are
motivated by concern about excessive civilian casualties pit an incidental
concern for militaries against a fundamental priority : military necessity . Even
when countries genuinely care about avoiding civilian harm , they can justifiably
say that law-abiding nations will follow existing rules in IHL while those who
do not respect IHL will not . What more would a ban accomplish , other than
needlessly tie the hands of those who already respect the law ? Advocates for the
bans on cluster munitions and land mines could point to actual harm caused by
those weapons , but for emerging technologies both sides have only
hypotheticals . 
When weapons have been seen as causing excessive civilian casualties , the
solution has often been to regulate their use , such as avoiding attacks in
populated areas . In theory , these regulations allow militaries to use weapons for
legitimate purposes while protecting civilians . In practice , these prohibitions
have almost always failed in war . In analyzing Robert McNamara ’ s call for a 
 “ no cities ” nuclear doctrine , Thomas Schelling pointed out the inherent problems
with these rules :  “ How near to a city is a military installation ‘ part ’ of a city ? If
weapons go astray , how many mistakes that hit cities can be allowed for before
concluding that cities are ‘ in ’ the war ?  .  .  . there is no such clean line .  ” 
Supporters of an autonomous weapons ban have wisely argued against such
an approach , sometimes called a “ partition ,  ” that would permit them in
environments without civilians , such as undersea , but not populated areas . 
Instead , the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots has called for a complete ban on the
development , production , and use of fully autonomous weapons . Opponents of a
ban sometimes counter that the technology is too diffuse to be stopped , but this
wrongly equates a ban with a nonproliferation regime . There are many examples
of successful bans ( expanding bullets , environmental modification , chemical and
biological weapons , blinding lasers , the Mine Ban Treaty , and cluster munitions ) 
that do not attempt to restrict the underlying technologies that would enable
these weapons . 
What all these bans have in common and what current discussions on
autonomous weapons lack , however , is clarity . Even if no one has yet built a
laser intended to cause permanent blindness , the concept is clear . As we ’ ve seen , 
there is no widespread agreement on what an autonomous weapon is . Some
leaders in the NGO community have actually argued against creating a working
definition . Steve Goose from Human Rights Watch told me that it ’ s “ not a wise
campaign strategy at the very beginning ” to come up with a working definition . 
That ’ s because a definition determines “ what ’ s in and what ’ s out .  ” He said ,  
 “ when you start talking about a definition , you almost always have to begin the
conversation of potential exceptions .  ” For prior efforts like land mines and
cluster munitions , this was certainly true . Countries defined these terms at the
end of negotiations . The difference is that countries could get on board with the
general principle of a ban and leave the details to the end because there was a
common understanding of what a land mine or a cluster munition was . There is
no such common understanding with autonomous weapons . It is entirely
reasonable that states and individuals who care a great deal about avoiding
civilian casualties are skeptical of endorsing a ban when they have no idea what
they would actually be banning . Automation has been used in weapons for
decades , and states need to identify which uses of autonomy are truly
concerning . Politics gets in the way of solving these definitional problems , 
though . When the starting point for discussions is that some groups are calling
for a ban on “ autonomous weapons ,  ” then the definition of “ autonomous
weapons ” instantly becomes fraught . 
The result is a dynamic that is fundamentally different than other attempted
weapons bans . This one isn ’ t being led by great powers , and it isn ’ t being led by
democratic nations concerned about civilian harm either , as was the case with
land mines and cluster munitions . The list of nations that support a ban on
autonomous weapons is telling : Pakistan , Ecuador , Egypt , the Holy See , Cuba , 
Ghana , Bolivia , Palestine , Zimbabwe , Algeria , Costa Rica , Mexico , Chile , 
Nicaragua , Panama , Peru , Argentina , Venezuela , Guatemala , Brazil , Iraq , and
Uganda ( in order of when they endorsed a ban )  . Do Cuba , Zimbabwe , Algeria , 
and Pakistan really care more about human rights than countries like Canada , 
Norway , and Switzerland , who have not endorsed a ban ? What the countries
supporting a ban have in common is that they are not major military powers . 
With a few exceptions , like the Holy See , for most of these countries their
support for a ban isn ’ t about protecting civilians ; it ’ s an attempt to tie the hands
of more-powerful nations . Most of the countries on this list don ’ t need to know
what autonomous weapons are to be against them . Whatever autonomous
weapons may be , these countries know they aren ’ t the ones building them . 
The prevailing assumption in international discussions seems to be that
autonomous weapons would most benefit advanced militaries . In the short term , 
this is likely true , but as autonomous technology diffuses across the international
system , the dynamic is likely to reverse . Fully autonomous weapons would
likely benefit the weak . Keeping a human in the loop in contested environments
will require protected communications , which is far more challenging than
building a weapon that can hunt targets on its own . Nevertheless , these countries
likely have the perception that a ban would benefit them . 
This sets up a situation where NGOs and smaller states who are advocating
for a ban would asymmetrically benefit , at least in the near term , and would not
be giving up anything . This only generates resistance from states who are leaders
in military robotics , many of whom see their technology development
proceeding in an entirely reasonable and prudent fashion . The more that others
want to take them away , the more that autonomous weapons look appealing to
the countries that might build them . 
This is particularly the case when ban supporters have no answer for how
law-abiding nations could defend themselves against those who do develop fully
autonomous weapons . Steve Goose acknowledged this problem :  “ You know
you ’ re not going to get every country in the world to sign something
immediately , but you can get people to be affected by the stigma that would
accompany a comprehensive prohibition ,  ” he said .  “ You have to create this
stigma that you don ’ t cross the line .  ” This can be a powerful tool in encouraging
restraint , but it isn ’ t foolproof . There is a strong stigma against chemical
weapons , but they continue to be used by dictators who care nothing for the rule
of law or the suffering of civilians . Thus , for many the case against a ban is
simple : it would disarm only the law-abiding states who signed it . This would be
the worst of all possible outcomes , empowering the world ’ s most odious regimes
with potentially dangerous weapons , while leaving nations who care about
international law at a disadvantage . Proponents of a ban have yet to articulate a
strategic rationale for why it would be in a leading military power ’ s self-interest
to support a ban . 
Though they haven ’ t always succeeded in the past , great powers have
worked together to avoid weapons that could cause excessive harm . This time , 
however , leading military powers aren ’ t trying , in part because the issue has
been framed as a humanitarian one , not a strategic one . In CCW discussions , 
countries have heard expert views on the Martens Clause , which has never been
used to ban a weapon before , but strategic considerations have gotten short
shrift . A few experts have presented on offense-defense balance and arms races , 
but there has been virtually no discussion of how autonomous weapons might
complicate crisis stability , escalation control , and war termination . John Borrie
from the UN Institute for Disarmament Research is concerned about the risk of 
 “ unintended lethal effects ” from autonomous weapons , but he acknowledged ,  
 “ it ’ s not really a significant feature of the policy debate in the CCW .  ” 
This is unfortunate , because autonomous weapons raise important issues for
stability . There may be military benefits to using fully autonomous weapons , but
it would be facile and wrong to suggest that overall they are safer and more
humane than semiautonomous weapons that retain a human in the loop . This
argument conflates the benefits of adding automation , which are significant , with
completely removing the human from the loop . There may be cases where their
use would result in more-humane outcomes , provided they functioned properly , 
such as hostage rescue in communications-denied environments or destroying
mobile missiles launchers armed with WMD . On the whole , though , the net
effects of introducing fully autonomous weapons on the battlefield are likely to
be increased speed , greater consequences when accidents occur , and reduced
human control . 
States have every incentive to cooperate to avoid a world where they have
less control over the use of force . Mutual restraint is definitely in states ’ 
interests . This is especially true for great powers , given the destruction that war
among them would bring . Restraint doesn ’ t come from a treaty , though . The fear
of reciprocity is what generates restraint . A treaty is merely a focal point for
coordination . Is restraint possible ? History suggests any attempt to restrain
autonomous weapons must meet three essential conditions to succeed . 
First , a clear focal point for coordination is needed . The simpler and clearer
the line , the better . This means that some rules like “ no general intelligence ” are
dead on arrival . The open letter signed by 3 , 000 AI scientists called for a ban on 
 “ offensive autonomous weapons beyond meaningful human control .  ” Every
single one of those words is a morass of ambiguity . If states could agree on the
difference between “ offensive ” and “ defensive ” weapons , they would have
banned offensive weapons long ago .  “ Meaningful human control ” is even more
vague . Preemptive bans that try to specify the exact shape of the technology
don ’ t work either . The best preemptive bans focus on the key prohibited concept , 
like banning lasers intended to cause permanent blindness . 
Second , the horribleness of a weapon must outweigh its military utility for a
ban to succeed . Regardless of whether the weapon is seen as destabilizing , a
danger to civilians , or causing unnecessary suffering , it must be perceived as bad
enough—or sufficiently useless militarily—that states are not tempted to breach
the ban . 
Third , transparency is essential . States must trust that others are not secretly
developing the weapon they themselves have foresworn . Bob Work told me that
he thought countries “ will move toward some type of broad international
discussion on how far we should go on autonomous weapons .  ” The problem he
saw was verification :  “ The verification of this regime is going to be very , very
difficult because it ’ s just—it ’ s ubiquitous . It ’ s now exploding around us .  ” This is
a fundamental problem for autonomous weapons . The essence of autonomy is
software , not hardware , making transparency very difficult . 
Are there models for restraint with autonomous weapons that meet these
criteria ? Is there a military equivalent to Asimov ’ s Laws , a “ lethal laws of
robotics ” that states could agree on ? There are many possible places countries
could draw a line . States could focus on physical characteristics of autonomous
weapons : size , range , payload , etc . States could agree to refrain from certain
types of machine intelligence , such as unsupervised machine learning on the
battlefield . To illustrate the range of possibilities , here are four very different
ways that nations could approach this problem . 
OPTION 1 : BAN FULLY AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS
The Campaign to Stop Killer Robots has called for “ a comprehensive , 
preemptive prohibition on the development , production and use of fully
autonomous weapons .  ” Assuming that states found it in their interests to do so , 
could they create a ban that is likely to result in successful restraint ? 
Any prohibition would need to clearly distinguish between banned weapons
and the many existing weapons that already use autonomy . It should be possible
to clearly differentiate between the kind of defensive human-supervised
autonomous weapons in use today and fully autonomous weapons that would
have no human supervision .  “ Offensive ” and “ defensive ” are distinctions that
wouldn ’ t work , but “ fixed ” and “ mobile ” autonomous weapons could . The types
of systems in use today are all fixed in place . They are either static ( immobile ) or
affixed to a vehicle occupied by people . 
Distinguishing between mobile , fully autonomous weapons and advanced
missiles would be harder . The chief difference between the semiautonomous
HARM and the fully autonomous Harpy is the Harpy ’ s ability to loiter over a
wide area and search for targets . Debates over weapons like the LRASM and
Brimstone show how difficult it can be to make this distinction without
understanding details about not only the weapon ’ s functionality , but also its
intended use . Drawing a distinction between recoverable robotic vehicles and
nonrecoverable munitions would be easier . 
From the perspective of balancing military necessity against the horribleness
of the weapon , these distinctions would be sensible . The most troubling
applications of autonomy would be fully autonomous weapons on mobile robotic
vehicles . Fixed autonomous weapons would primarily be defensive . They also
would be lower risk , since humans could supervise engagements and physically
disable the system if it malfunctioned . Nonrecoverable fully autonomous
weapons ( e . g .  , loitering munitions ) would be permitted , but their risks would be
mitigated by the fact that they can ’ t be sent on patrol . Militaries would want to
have some indication that there is an enemy in the vicinity before launching
them . There are other ways nations could draw lines on what is and isn ’ t
allowed , but this is one set of choices that would seem sensible . 
Regardless of where nations draw the line , there are a number of factors that
make restraint challenging . How would nations know that others were
complying ? The United States , the United Kingdom , France , Russia , China , and
Israel are already developing experimental stealth drones . Operational versions
of these aircraft would be sent into areas in which communications might be
jammed . Even if nations agreed that these combat drones should not attack
targets unless authorized by a human , there would be no way for them to verify
each other ’ s compliance . Delegating full autonomy would likely be valuable in
some settings . Even if in peacetime nations genuinely desired mutual restraint , in
wartime the temptation might be great enough to overcome any reservations . 
After all , it ’ s hard to argue that weapons like the Harpy , TASM , or a radarhunting combat drone shock the conscience . Using them may entail accepting a
different level of risk , but it ’ s hard to see them as inherently immoral . Further
complicating restraint , it might be difficult to even know whether nations were
complying with the rules during wartime . If a robot destroyed a target , how
would others know whether a human had authorized the target or the robot
itself ? 
All of these factors : clarity , military utility , horribleness of the weapon , and
transparency suggest that a ban on fully autonomous weapons is unlikely to
succeed . It is almost certain not to pass in the CCW , where consensus is needed , 
but even if it did , it is hard to see how such rules would remain viable in
wartime . Armed robots that had a person in the loop would need only a flip of
the switch , or perhaps a software patch , to become fully autonomous . Once a
war begins , history suggests that nations will flip the switch , and quickly . 
OPTION 2 : BAN ANTIPERSONNEL AUTONOMOUS
WEAPONS
A ban on autonomous weapons that targeted people may be another matter . The
ban is clearer , the horribleness of the weapon greater , and the military utility
lower . These factors may make restraint more feasible for antipersonnel
autonomous weapons . 
It would be easier for states to distinguish between antipersonnel
autonomous weapons and existing systems . There are no antipersonnel
equivalents of homing missiles or automated defensive systems in use around
the world . This could allow states to sidestep the tricky business of carving out
exceptions for existing uses . 
The balance between military utility and the weapon ’ s perceived
horribleness is also very different for antipersonnel autonomous weapons . 
Targeting people is much more problematic than targeting objects for a variety
of reasons . Antipersonnel autonomous weapons are also significantly more
hazardous than anti-matériel autonomous weapons . If the weapon malfunctions , 
humans cannot simply climb out of a tank to escape being targeted . A person
can ’ t stop being human . Antipersonnel autonomous weapons also pose a greater
risk of abuse by those deliberating wanting to attack civilians . 
Finally , the public may see machines that target and kill people on their own
as genuinely horrific . Weapons that autonomously targeted people would tap
into an age-old fear of machines rising up against their makers . Public revulsion
could be a decisive factor in achieving political support for a ban . There is
something clean and satisfying to the rule , to paraphrase Navy engineer John
Canning :  “ let machines target machines ; let people target people .  ” 
The military utility of antipersonnel autonomous weapons is also far lower
that anti-matériel autonomous weapons . The reasons for moving to supervised
autonomy ( speed ) or full autonomy ( no communications ) don ’ t generally apply
when targeting people . Defensive systems like Aegis need a supervised
autonomous mode to defend against salvos of high-speed missiles , but
overwhelming defensive positions through waves of human attackers has not
been an effective tactic since the invention of the machine gun . The additional
half second it would take to keep a human in the loop for a weapon like the
South Korean sentry gun is marginal . Antipersonnel autonomous weapons in
communications-denied environments are also likely to be of marginal value for
militaries . At the early stages of a war when communications are contested , 
militaries will be targeting objects such as radars , missile launchers , bases , 
airplanes , and ships , not people . Militaries would want the ability to use small , 
discriminating antipersonnel weapons to target specific individuals , such as
terrorist leaders , but those would be semiautonomous weapons ; a human would
be choosing the target . 
Transparency would still be challenging . As is the case for weapons like the
South Korean sentry gun , others would have to essentially trust countries when
they say they have a human in the loop . Many nations are already fielding armed
robotic ground vehicles , and they are likely to become a common feature of
future militaries . It would be impossible to verify that these robotic weapons do
not have a mode or software patch waiting on the shelf that would enable them
to autonomously target people . Given the ubiquity of autonomous technology , it
would also be impossible to prevent terrorists from creating homemade
autonomous weapons . Large-scale industrial production of the kinds of
antipersonnel weapons that Stuart Russell fears , however , would be hard to hide . 
If the military utility of these weapons were low enough , it isn ’ t clear that the
risk of small scale uses would compel other nations to violate a prohibition . 
Russell has argued that a treaty could be effective in “ stopping an arms race
and preventing large-scale manufacturing of such weapons .  ” The combination of
low military utility and high potential harm may make restraint possible for
antipersonnel autonomous weapons . 
OPTION 3 : ESTABLISH “ RULES OF THE ROAD ” FOR
AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS
Different problems with autonomous weapons lend themselves to different
solutions . A ban on antipersonnel autonomous weapons would reduce the risk of
harm to civilians , but would not address the problems autonomous weapons pose
for crisis stability , escalation control , and war termination . These are very real
concerns , and nations will want to cooperate to ensure their robotic systems do
not interact in ways that lead to unintended outcomes . 
Rather than a treaty , one solution could be to adopt a non-legally-binding
code of conduct to establish a “ rules of the road ” for autonomous weapons . The
main goal of such a set of rules would be to reduce the potential for unintended
interactions between autonomous systems in crises . The best rules would be
simple and self-enforcing , like “ robotic vehicles should not fire unless fired
upon ” and “ return fire must be limited , discriminating , and proportionate .  ” Like
maritime law , these rules would be intended to govern how autonomous agents
interact when they encounter one another in unstructured environments , 
respecting the right of self-defense but also a desire to avoid unwanted
escalation . 
Any ruleset could undoubtedly be manipulated by clever adversaries spoiling
for a fight , but the main purpose would be to ensure predictable reactions from
robotic systems among nations seeking to control escalation . The rules wouldn ’ t
need to be legally binding , since it would be in states ’ best interests to cooperate . 
These rules would likely collapse in war , as rules on submarine warfare did , but
that wouldn ’ t matter since the intent would be to control escalation in
circumstances short of war . Once a full-blown war is under way , the rules
wouldn ’ t be needed . 
OPTION 4 : CREATE A GENERAL PRINCIPLE ABOUT THE
ROLE OF HUMAN JUDGMENT IN WAR
The problem with the above approaches is that technology is always changing . 
Even the most thoughtful regulations or prohibitions will not be able to foresee
all the ways that autonomous weapons could evolve over time . An alternative
approach would be to focus on the unchanging element in war : the human . 
The laws of war do not specify what role ( s ) humans should play in lethal
force decisions , but perhaps they should . Is there a place for human judgment in
war , even if we had all the technology we could imagine ? Should there be limits
on what decisions machines make in war , not because they can ’ t , but because
they shouldn ’ t ? 
One approach would be to articulate a positive requirement for human
involvement in the use of force . Phrases like “ meaningful human control ,  ”  
 “ appropriate human judgment ,  ” and “ appropriate human involvement ” all seem
to get at this concept . While these terms are not yet defined , they suggest broad
agreement that there is some irreducible role for humans in lethal force decisions
on the battlefield . Setting aside for the moment the specific label , what would be
the underlying idea behind a principle of “ _______ human _______ ”  ? 
IHL may help give us some purchase on the problem , if one adopts the
viewpoint that the laws of war apply to people , not machines . This was the view
captured in the U . S . Department of Defense Law of War Manual : 
The law of war rules on conducting attacks ( such as the rules relating to discrimination and
proportionality ) impose obligations on persons . These rules do not impose obligations on the
weapons themselves ;  .  .  . Rather , it is persons who must comply with the law of war . 
Humans are obligated under IHL to make a determination about the lawfulness
of an attack and cannot delegate this obligation to a machine . This means that
the human must have some information about the specific attack in order to
make a determination about whether it complies with the principles of
distinction , proportionality , and precautions in attack . The human must have
sufficient information about the target ( s )  , the weapon , the environment , and the
context for the attack to determine whether that particular attack is lawful . The
attack also must be bounded in time , space , targets , and means of attack for the
determination about the lawfulness of that attack to be meaningful . There would
presumably be some conditions ( time elapsed , geographic boundaries crossed , 
circumstances changed ) under which the human ’ s determination about the
lawfulness of the attack might no longer be valid . 
How much information the person needs and what those bounds are on
autonomy is open for debate . This perspective would seem to suggest , though , 
that IHL requires some minimum degree of human involvement in lethal force
decisions :  ( 1 ) human judgment about the lawfulness of an attack ;  ( 2 ) some
specific information about the target ( s )  , weapon , environment , and context for
attack in order to make a determination about lawfulness of that particular
attack ; and ( 3 ) the weapon ’ s autonomy be bounded in space , time , possible
targets , and means of attack . 
There may be other ways of phrasing this principle and reasonable people
might disagree , but there could be merit in countries reaching agreement on a
common standard for human involvement in lethal force . While an overarching
principle along these lines would not tell states which weapons are permitted and
which are not , it could be a common starting point for evaluating technology as
it evolves . Many principles in IHL are open to interpretation : unnecessary
suffering , proportionality , and precautions in attack , for example . These terms do
not tell states which weapons cause unnecessary suffering or how much
collateral damage is proportionate , but they still have value . Similarly , a broad
principle outlining the role of human judgment in war could be a valuable
benchmark against which to evaluate future weapons . 
HARD PROBLEMS , IMPERFECT INSTITUTIONS
HARD PROBLEMS , IMPERFECT INSTITUTIONS
Humanity is at the threshold of a new technology that could fundamentally
change our relationship with war . The institutions that human society has to deal
with these challenges are imperfect . Getting agreement in the CCW is
challenging , given its structure as a consensus-based organization . It ’ s possible
that fully autonomous weapons are a bad idea , whether for legal , moral , or
strategic reasons , but that restraint among nations is doomed to fail . It wouldn ’ t
be the first time . For now , nations , NGOs , and international organizations like
the ICRC continue to meet in the CCW to discuss the challenges of autonomous
weapons . Meanwhile , technology races forward . 
Conclusion
NO FATE BUT WHAT WE MAKE
In the Terminator films , Sarah Connor and her son John , who will eventually
lead the resistance against the machines , are hounded by an enemy even worse
than the Terminators : fate . No matter how many times Sarah and John defeat
Skynet , it still returns to haunt them in yet another film . Part of this is good
Hollywood business . Sarah and John are victims of being in a film series where
a sequel is a surefire moneymaker . But their trap of fate is also essential to the
storytelling of the Terminator movies . In film after film , Sarah and John are
perpetually hunted by Terminators sent back from the future to kill them and
prevent John from eventually leading the human resistance against the machines . 
The essence of the events that propel the story are a time-travel paradox : if the
Terminators succeeded in killing Sarah or John , then John couldn ’ t lead the
human resistance , which would negate the reason for killing them in the first
place . Meanwhile , Sarah and John attempt to destroy Skynet before it can come
into existence . It ’ s another paradox ; if they succeeded , Skynet would never send
a Terminator back in time to attack them , giving them the motivation to destroy
Skynet . 
Sarah and John are forever trapped in a battle against Skynet across the past , 
present , and future . Judgment Day continues to occur , no matter their actions , 
although the date keeps shifting ( conveniently , to just a few years after each
film ’ s release date , keeping Judgment Day forever in the audience ’ s future )  . In
spite of this , Sarah and John fight against fate , never wavering in their faith that
this time they will be able to defeat Skynet for good and avert Judgment Day . In
Terminator 2 : Judgment Day , John Connor quotes his mother as saying ,  “ The
future ’ s not set . There ’ s no fate but what we make for ourselves .  ” The line
returns again and again in subsequent movies :  “ There is no fate but what we
make .  ” 
Of course , Sarah Conner is right . In the real world , the future isn ’ t written . 
The visions of possible futures presented in this book—scary visions , good
visions—are only wisps of imagination . The real future unfolds one step at a
time , one day at a time , one line of code at a time . Will the future be shaped by
technology ? Of course . But that technology is made by people . It ’ s being crafted
by people like Duane Davis , Bradford Tousley , and Brandon Tseng . It ’ s shaped
by government officials like Larry Schuette , Frank Kendall , and Bob Work . 
Their decisions are guided by voices like Stuart Russell , Jody Williams , and Ron
Arkin . Each of these individuals has choices and , collectively , humanity has
choices . 
The technology to enable machines that can take life on their own , without
human judgment or decision-making , is upon us . What we do with that
technology is up to us . We can use artificial intelligence to build a safer world , 
one with less human suffering , fewer accidents , fewer atrocities , and one that
keeps human judgment where it is needed . We can preserve a space for empathy
and compassion , however rare they may be in war , and leave the door open to
our better angels . Or we can become seduced by the allure of machines—their
speed , their seeming perfection , their cold precision . We can delegate power to
the machines , trusting that they will perform their assigned tasks correctly and
without hesitation , and hope that we haven ’ t got it wrong , that there are no flaws
lurking in the code for unforeseen events to trigger or enemies to exploit . 
There are no easy answers . If war could be averted and nations could secure
their peace through treaties and not force of arms , they would have done so long
ago . Militaries exist as a means to defend people from those who are not
deterred by laws or international goodwill . To ask nations to surrender a
potential means to defend themselves is to ask them to take a grave and weighty
gamble . 
And yet .  .  . 
Despite this—despite the reality that there are no police to enforce the laws
of war and that only the victors decide who stands trial .  .  .  . Despite the reality
that might , not right , decides who wins and dies on the battlefield .  .  .  . Despite all
this , codes of conduct have governed human behavior in war for millennia . Even
the earliest of these codes contain guidance for which weapons could be used in
war and which were beyond the pale . Barbed and poison-tipped arrows were
surely useful in war . Yet they were wrong nevertheless . 
Human societies have cooperated time and again to restrain the worst
excesses in war , to place some actions or means of killing out of bounds , even
when life and death are at stake . Sometimes this cooperation has failed , but the
miracle is that sometimes it hasn ’ t . In the modern era , militaries have largely
stepped away from chemical weapons , biological weapons , blinding lasers , land
mines , and cluster munitions as weapons of war . Not all militaries , but most of
them . Nuclear powers have further agreed to limit how nuclear weapons are
deployed in order to improve strategic stability . These rules are sometimes
broken , but the fact that restraint exists at all among states that otherwise fear
each other shows that there is hope for a better world . 
This restraint—the conscious choice to pull back from weapons that are too
dangerous , too inhumane—is what is needed today . No piece of paper can
prevent a state from building autonomous weapons if they desire it . At the same
time , a pell-mell race forward in autonomy , with no clear sense of where it leads
us , benefits no one . States must come together to develop an understanding of
which uses of autonomy are appropriate and which go too far and surrender
human judgment where it is needed in war . These rules must preserve what we
value about human decision-making , while attempting to improve on the many
human failings in war . Weighing these human values is a debate that requires all
members of society , not just academics , lawyers , and military professionals . 
Average citizens are needed too , because ultimately autonomous military robots
will live—and fight—in our world . 
Machines can do many things , but they cannot create meaning . They cannot
answer these questions for us . Machines cannot tell us what we value , what
choices we should make . The world we are creating is one that will have
intelligent machines in it , but it is not for them . It is a world for us . 
