Preface
Since Walter ’ s Turtles , technology has come a long way and we can now boast of
state-of-the-art robots , such as ASIMO , PR2 , NaO and Pepper . My interest in this field
of study , which has taken on obsessive proportions , is due to my academic background , 
my participation in various open source robotic communities ( Player / Stage , ROS , MORSE
etc .  )  , my teaching assignments and projects with my students and above all , a child-like
desire to make robots . Not withstanding my personal desire to put together nearly all that
I have learnt over the last ten years , robotics and AI truly stand to change the world as we
know it . In this text spanning ten chapters , I have looked to various researchers ; Braitenberg , 
Dennett , Brooks , Arkin , Murphy , Winfield , Vaughan , Dudek , Dorigo , Sahin , Bekey , Abney , 
Wendell , Takeno , Bringsjord and the Andersons , as those who have had a lasting impression
on me and have shown me the proverbial light to the correct path . Other than these academic
influences and motivation , science fiction , particularly Isaac Asimov , Philip K . Dick , Arthur
C . Clarke , Cory Doctorow , Peter Watts etc .  , led me to engaging queries on various aspects
of AI and robots and their influence on human society and helped me to illustrate ideas
in the later chapters . Furthermore , I have been influenced by and have enjoyed a long list
of movies , among which are iconic robot movies such as , Wall-E , IRobot and cult classics , 
such as The Metropolis , Blade Runner and West World , and the more recent ones , such as
Interstellar , Real Steel , Robot and Frank , Big Hero 6 and Ex-Machina . 
This text is meant for undergraduate students and may also serve as a reference for
graduate students . It attempts to introduce the reader to what has been achieved in
agent-based robotics over the last four decades , the ways we can implement such concepts
with easily available electronics and open source tools , multirobot teams , swarm robotics and
human robot interaction , as well as the efforts to develop artificial consciousness in robots . 
The last chapter is on the future of AI and robotics in the foreshadow of the prophecies of
super intelligent AI and technological singularity . 
The journey starts with mythical lore from ancient Greece and ends with a debate on
a futuristic prophecy where human beings and technology merge to create superior beings
as heir to our evolutionary pathways . From Haphaestus to Philon to Da Vinci to Tesla to
Walter to Toda to Moravec to Braitenberg to Brooks to Kurzweil , this text is livened up
with examples , pictures , one-on-one chatter with experts , schematics and cartoons . 
The seven broad themes addressed across the ten chapters are ; 
1 . AI vs . Applied AI
There is always some contrast in the theory and the practice for any discipline , and the
appeal for classroom teaching versus hands-on application in the laboratory , workshop or in
industry has had its contrasts . It is many folds more for AI . It has been my experience that
the question often boils down to either ‘ learn AI ’ or ‘ make robots ’  . Outstanding texts in AI
as Russell and Norvig and Rich and Knight don ’ t really help much towards building a robot , 
and one has to dig out online tutorials , YouTube videos etc . The same is true for machine
FIGURE 1 The bridge from AI to applied AI . For new initiates the two domains appeal as
two different disciplines . An undergraduate student will find it difficult to see the convergence
of the doctrines of AI ; for example , planning , search and knowledge representation are the
philosophical basis and analytical tools for making robots , but at a beginners level it reduces
to simple programming scripts , interfacing of sensors with motors and ease of design . Therefore , 
the correlation between AI and robotics may not be very apparent to a young enthusiast . 
learning ; a text which introduces a student to neural network , such as Bishop is probably
the best treatment that one can offer on the subject , but to make a neural network , the
student will have to find suitable C or Python libraries . The bridge , as shown in Figure
1 , between theory and application is not only distant but requires different faculties . It
is also to be added that AI , by itself is not enough to make robots ; the effort calls for
electronics , mechanical design , sensor design and other overlapping disciplines , depending
on the specifics of the robot . The book makes an effort to shorten this bridge and hopefully , 
make the crossing easier , by correlating concepts to their applications . 
The applications cover designing simple behaviours in Chapter 2 and 3 , navigation in
Chapter 4 , and multirobot systems and swarming , many of these are supplemented with
examples from practical scenarios , algorithms and introduction to the software . Navigation
is unique as it is a basic behaviour and also a design tool . Chapter 5 has a few examples
with hardware which are meant as appetizers to whet the imagination and creativity of the
budding robot enthusiast . 
2 . Deliberative vs . Reactive and the Question of Relevance
This debate between the two ways of approaching agent-based robotics was triggered by
the pioneering work of Rodney Brooks in the mid 1980s . However , the thread of thought
can be traced back to behaviourism and phenomenology . Behaviourism was established as
a sub-discipline in psychology in late 1890s through the works of Pavlov , Thorndike and by
Skinner in 1950s . Philosophical development in phenomenology by Husserl , Heidegger and
Merleau-Ponty helped to cement the concepts of situatedness and embodiment . Assimilation
of these ideas into robotics was done independently by three daring scientists , who had the
wish to create artificial creatures : Walter in late 1940s , Toda in mid 1960s and Braitenberg
in early 1980s . Walter explicitly demonstrated design of behaviour in his turtles , Toda
suggested the first models of autonomous agency and Braitenberg ’ s gedanken experiments
showed that simple agency can lead to very advanced performance . These independent
conclusions led to the basic principles of behaviour-based robotics . 
The frame problem and the question of relevance is an inherent burden in designing a
robot and forms the crux of the argument . It cannot be eradicated , and has to be either
completely avoided as in behaviour-based paradigm , or consider addressing it to a minimal
as in PENGI . In sheer contrast , we human beings can ‘ solve ’ the frame problem ‘ on the run ’  . 
Nowadays , most robots have deliberative as well as reactive modules and are supplemented
with machine learning , thus overcoming the issue of relevance at least in low-level repetitive
behaviours contained in a more or less known environment . However , this ugly monster raises
its head time and again . The utilitarianism vs . deontology debate for autonomous vehicles
is a direct extension of the deliberative vs . reactive quarrel , where all deontic approaches
are pegged to a set ‘ frame ’ of pre-programmed rules and utilitarian principles are based
on immediacy . Also , most attempts to develop conscious robots such as those discussed
in Chapter 9 are defacto inquiries into the question of relevance : Is the dynamics of a
tambourine relevant for its beat ? Will looking into the mirror make the robot find its own
image ? Can a robot appropriate causality , and relate actions to conclusion ? I would wish to
believe that a robot which can ‘ solve ’ the frame problem across five senses as human beings
do , would be conscious , devoid of any shade of doubt . 
Fodor claimed that due to the frame problem , AI is dead . For what the last two decades
of research has provided , the debate of the frame problem has added to the richness of AI . 
3 . Engineering Robot Behaviour
My best reference for understanding behaviour is , Ronald Arkin ’ s tome , Behaviour Based
Robotics , and the works of Richard Vaughan and Alan Winfield , and a good part of the
book documents the engineering of desired behaviour in a robot . 
Reactive systems are faster and easier to design than the deliberative or hybrid ones , and
they do not need sleek hardware such as a camera or a laser scanner . The unwitting contrast
is that since behaviour is emergent it is difficult to design the architecture for a desired
performance . Very simple behaviours , such as ‘ track a light source ’ or ‘ follow a line ’  , hardly
demonstrate the inherent relation between the agent and the environment . Swarm robotics
and Braitenberg vehicles help to illustrate such intimate relations and contrast of the ease of
design to the unpredictable nature of performance . Gerardo Beni , very cleverly summarises
this phenomenon , that [ robot ] behaviour stands as a convergence of two radically different
ideas , unpredictability and the wish to find order . The definition of robot behaviour has
been modified over the last three decades , and may be further edited in the years to come . 
Walter ’ s Turtles was the beginning of agent based robotics , but it was left to Simon and
later Toda , to envisage a self-sustaining mobile agency with local landmarks and multiple
goals which can negotiate tradeoff between its energy supply and the task at hand . The
fungus eaters mined uranium on a far off planet and gathered fungus which when digested
provided them with energy , Toda ’ s model was also a blueprint for early path planning
models . The Mars rovers can be said to be the modern-day avatars of the fungus eater , 
though they harness their energy from solar panels and not Martian fungus . 
In the 1980s , Wilson ’ s model of the ANIMATs , Pfeifer ’ s principles for design and
development of agent based robotics and Lumelsky and Stepanov ’ s Bug Algorithms were
motivated from mother nature and streamlined the principles for designing of automated
self-sustaining mobile agency . 
Braitenberg ’ s vehicles are designs of more involved functionalities , as emotions , value
systems , correspondence of information , collating aspects of reality to memory , learning
and evolution , all of these from simple sensory-motor principles . Braitenberg ’ s vehicles have
served as illustrative examples in a number of chapters and is a recurring theme across the
book . 
AI has wilfully plagiarised from the natural world and anthropomorphic motivation in
design and behaviour models derived from ethological studies has been the trend . Best
examples are : Fukuda ’ s brachiatron was motivated from the swinging motion of apes ; 
ECOBOT series of robots modelled on the process of digestion ; swarm behaviour designed
on trophallaxis in insects and birds ; INSBOT project which introduced robot decoys in a
cockroach colony etc . 
The contrast between robot groups and robot swarms further helps to appreciate the
facets for engineering a behaviour . Reactive methods are the basis of multirobot swarming , 
this cohesion among the robots is a boon as it is flexible to dynamical changes in the local
environment , and easier to scale up without hampering the performance . However , robot
swarms are notorious and it is difficult to warrant their reliability and tag its performance
to a factor of fault tolerance . Therefore , engineering a desired swarm behaviour is more
a subject for future research than a cutting-edge technology . On the other hand , robot
groups with designed with deliberative paradigm working over a local wifi network lend
more safety and predictability . However , they are not very flexible , and they lack versatility
and are difficult to scale up . 
4 . Replicating Human-Like Intelligence
Nearly all human activities can be classified as motivated either by survival or curiosity . 
The former is essential for our homeostasis , the latter encourages growth of culture , society , 
intellect , technology etc . Robot designs have exploited both these facets , both in low-level
behaviour and also in sophisticated ones . Self preservation is enshrined into Asimov ’ s laws
and is also coded into simple robots , viz . Roomba , and curiosity is closely tagged to the
phenomenon of emergence and is the driver of the behaviour-based paradigm . 
Behaviour-based approaches are insufficient to provide for ethical agency and artificial
consciousness , and the ethical question finds the best answer in developmental approaches , 
while the question on artificial consciousness for robots has probed into various avenues , and
there is yet to be human-like conscious behaviour in robots . To fully address the question
on ethics and consciousness leads to queries regarding the human brain , and robotics still
awaits a breakthrough in medical science , neurology and psychology . 
5 . Open Source Robotics
Robotic suites Player / Stage / Gazebo and later ROS were designed for UBUNTU
installations and helped unify the domains of simulation and running of the real robot . These
software suites function in a client server fashion and encourage crowd sourcing in code
pieces , designs and tweaks to hardware , thereby establishing a benchmark for hardware and
software in robotics . ROS also integrates open source hardware such as Arduino , Raspberry
Pi , ODROID , etc . making the design and development of a new robot more modular and
therefore open to crowdsourcing . 
6 . Robots as Conscious Beings — More Than a Tool , a Machine or a Slave
As a robot enthusiast , I cannot justify a book without the mention of Isaac Asimov . 
His vision for a human robot society is the backdrop of Chapter 8 . However , his three laws
are found to be mutually conflicting . They have implementation issues and lack practical
applications . Similarly , the Turing test is more a concept than a real tool to distinguish
between the natural and the artificial . Such failures of Asimov ’ s laws and the Turing test
make us reflect as to what robots are and will they ever measure up to being humans , 
and what future they may have . Instead of labeling robots as tools or slaves , the greatest
triumph of AI would be if robots can acquire free will and demonstrate human-like sentient
behaviour and such ideas are discussed in Chapter 9 . 
Robots imbued with deontic ethics have been a success in the laboratory and may soon
be employed as nurse and carer robots . However , consciousness in robots as yet has been
in either a narrow concern or it is short lived — for a few seconds . 
The unfortunate consequence of this triumphant robot revolution is the loss of human
jobs , and this has fueled a parley which is raging across newspapers , blogs , online forums
and election manifestos . If the trend continues , we may soon have a modern-day Luddite
revolution which might change the rules of our social and economic systems and call for
a limitation in use of automation and AI . The irony of AI ’ s greatest achievement doesn ’ t
end here and an apocalyptic future where robots annihilate the human race or alternatively
dominate our world and reduce human beings to an inferior second-rate species , starts
to seem all too real . Experts in the field foresee this as a neo-Darwinian ‘ jump ’ in our
evolutionary track which will be discussed in Chapter 10 . 
Will artificial consciousness lead us to super intelligent beings which may spell doom for
humanity and eventual extinction of the human race ? The query reminds me of a Hindu
mythological tale1
that my parents told me as a kid . The story is about four disciples who
have learned physiology , anatomy and medicine and have set out to hone their skills on
real-world problems . These four happen upon the carcass of a dead tiger , and in the hope
of testing their skills the first disciple assembles the bones of the dead tiger in an upright
position , the second disciple gives muscles to this structure of bones and , not to be undone , 
the third disciple adds the organs . The fourth one , who was supposedly the smartest of the
lot , was unabashed of his skills and despite warnings from the other three , gives life to the
tiger . As a tragic end , the tiger leaps up with a growl and gobbles up the four disciples . 
Metaphorically , we are at the dare of the fourth disciple and AI may well pounce upon us
— sooner rather than later , if we are not careful enough . 
7 . AI as the New Definition of Science
Science is the study of the underlying principles governing the working of the universe , 
and is largely based on experimentation and observation . This consistent and unified body
of knowledge is as perceived by our sensory organs and inferred by the processing power
of our brain . As we move towards a future dominated by automation , self enriching AI
agents and virtual reality , the process of experimentation and observation will be dictated
by technology , AI in particular . Therefore , AI will be the tool and discipline to lead us to
science . Further , it is believed that close to technological singularity , technological growth
will be off the charts , way too fast for biological intelligence such as ourselves to grasp
at . With such a crescendo of processing power and plethora of information in the artificial
realm , our definition of science as a consistent body of information and principles drawn
from logic , and cause relating to effect will start to be strongly tied to AI . 
Super intelligent robots , which are foreseen to have incredible processing power and have
access to a mind boggling amount of information , are at the crossroads of romance and
horror and found a number of nom de guerre . Skynet , AGI / ASI , Good ’ s ultra intelligent
self replicating machines and of course the moniker of technological singularity , which is
discussed in detail in the last chapter . Kurzweil contends that by the 2040s human activities
will be more in the virtual domain than the real world , and it will be accompanied with
brain uploading which will eliminate death , at least as we known it , and thereby lead us
towards a seamless merger between the biological and the artificial . Therefore , AI will be
an overarching discipline encompassing all beings across known realms of knowledge and
information , be it symbolic or sensory , and therefore indicate towards a paradigm shift and
therefore a new definition of science . 
Writing the book made me discover the part-time artist and the rookie cartoonist in
1This is one of the 25 tales which are conversations between King Vikramaditya and a ghost named
Betal . 
FIGURE 2 McDermott ’ s uncanny mountain . Humour underscores human social interactions 
[ 223 ] and has defied attempts to recreate it in the artificial domain . This can be seen as an
equivalence of Masahiro Mori ’ s uncanny valley [ 214 ]  . Humour is a unique attribute of human beings , 
with most acceptance in the average human being ( IQ : 125-140 )  . It thins out with increasing IQ
and is negligible for a robot with access to all sorts of information across the world . 
me and a great number of the cartoons and schematics have been sketched by yours truly . 
I found both laughter and wisdom in various webcomics , including the very popular ones , 
such as xkcd , Far Side , Dilbert , Oatmeal , smbc , Zen Pencils to the not so well known , such
as Widder ’ s Geek and Poke , McDermott ’ s Red pen Black pen and Iyad Rahwan ’ s cartoons
on his webpage . 
The cartoons has been helped by the inherent humour expressed by AI scientists and
roboticists in their research papers or marked by the idiosyncrasy or opinion of a person . For
example , Asimov ’ s whiskers , Brook ’ s elephants , Kirsh ’ s earwig , PENGI ’ s model on penguin , 
Dennett ’ s illustration of the frame problem with variants of R2D2 , the trolley problems , 
Hawking ’ s opinions on a moratorium for AI , Knowledge game , Sparrow ’ s test , Philosophical
Zombie , Nagel ’ s Bat etc . have found their way into my cartoons . Another glowing reason
is that the text is written for human beings and may lack a similar appeal to robots and
other super intelligent entities who may dare to read the book in the years to come , as
is shown in Figure 2 . Humour , particularly cartoons helps to illustrate a concept , and the
satire uniquely blends it into human memory , such hardly happens for rote information , 
and more traditional means to teach a concept . 
A mention needs to be made for the cartoon featuring Stephen Hawking and a growling
Roomba robot which has a placard with ones and zeroes scribbled on it . This is now on the
title page and it tells the story of how we are contemplating a moratorium on AI . 
Other than my cartoons , there are breathtaking contributions from renowned animator
and emmy prize winner , Maciek Albrecht with reproductions of 3 of his sketches2
in Chapter
3 and a cheeky cartoon by Mark Shrivers in Chapter 2 . There are also 4 one-on-one
interviews ,  ( 1 ) STDR team from Aristotle University in Greece and ( 2 ) Daniel and Marcus
at Yujin Robot , Seoul ( 3 ) Elizabeth Broadbent at University of Auckland , New Zealand , 
and ( 4 ) Junichi Takeno at Meji University , Japan . While interesting anecdotal references
have been graciously provided by the Cool Farms team , Antony Beavers ( Genesis at Twin
2The captioning for his 3 sketches have been done by me . 
FIGURE 3 Toby — first sketches . These are the earliest sketches of the comic strip which I
drew in the summer of 2015 . The four-part comic strip illustrates various salient features of agent
based robotics , and speculates on the future of human-robot interaction . A comic strip may seem
out of place in a textbook , but the light humour helps to bring forth various themes , such as
the semi-sentient paradigm , ethics in artificial agents , current issues in human-robot interaction , 
open source robotics , a future with robots with near-human mannerisms and social values , etc . 
The four-part Toby comic strip has been designed , developed and sketched by me , CC-by-SA 4 . 0
license . 
Earth )  , Alan Winfield ( The Walterians )  , Owen Barder ’ s blog ( Trolley Problems ) and Kevin
Kelly ’ s blog ( Maes-Garreau Law )  . For the software , Matt Zucker at Swarthmore College
allowed me to use his web based Braitenberg vehicle simulator and my good friend and
collaborator Luke Dunn let me use his Wall-E / Eva python chat script . 
Two tools that I have used to convey ideas and information to the reader are : 
1 . Toby & the Walkers
Toby is a personal robot who is a mascot of sorts for the book and appears across four
short comic strips . My early sketches for the robot are shown in Figure 3 . This is the 2015
version of Toby and it is derived from the anthropomorphic motivations of a penguin without
the beak , with a differential drive , interactive touchscreen , a mini keyboard , a camera and
an array of sonars . It is priced at $600 , and while the 2036 version is not discussed at
length , it is left more to the reader ’ s imagination and the promise of the future . In the
first of the comic strips in the first Chapter , the Walkers are amused at the news about
Philae , a robot which is exploring a comet . In the second comic strip , the Walkers purchase
a C3-90 robot as a Christmas family present , and the robot connects with the little kid over
bonds of perceived and apparent congeniality , while in contrast the father and the older
kid approach it as a technological curio . In the third comic strip , Toby is instrumental in
attending to a medical emergency of the mother . In the last comic strip , in 2036 , the robot
is obsolete and is given a new design and new age hardware , with a humanoid exoskeleton
and the ability to communicate in near human mannerisms . This gives Toby a new avatar
— more like a human being , than a mere piece of machinery . Toby ’ s story spreads across
21 years , is a reflection of the endearing relationship a robot may have with human beings
and also illustrates various facets of modern day and futuristic robotics , and hints towards
the seven themes discussed previously . 
2 . Nomenclature for Boxed and Shaded Information
To illustrate an important piece of information , I have used 4 types of boxes , a
nomenclature followed throughout the book is as follows : 
1 . Boxed Braces — this is used to mention a definition or a rule . They contain very
important information and are closely related to the text . 
2 . Short Box — this is meant to illustrate a piece of information that may be interesting , 
but cannot be expressed in great detail in the current scope of the chapter . Makes for
appealing reading , but is not very closely tied with the text . 
3 . Roof & Floor Box - this is used for examples and illustrations . 
4 . Shaded Portions — contain very interesting information , many of which I have had
the privilege of personally acquiring such . Content covers interviews and information
acquired over personal emails . 
Our greatest reach in the known universe has been to comet 67P helped by a robot . 
Newer frontiers of medicine boasts of state-of-the-art robots , the Da Vinci and Zeus system . 
The nurse robot and Paro are the latest cutting-edge applications in the care industry
and therapeutics , respectively . In warfare DARPA has provided various advanced options
for the use of robots in the US military and the matter has fueled an ethical debate . 
Automated vehicles and delivery robots such as Starship etc . stand as the latest innovation
in transportation . It is obvious that robots are getting woven into the fabric of our lives
and the personal robot industry is probably one of the most potent for the next decade . 
In conclusion , robots are a joy to behold . Not only are they a reflection of the convergence
of human endeavour and mental faculties of design , aesthetics , logic and social interaction
but they are the best examples of the handshake between technology and mother nature , 
and the following ten chapters reinforce these ideas . 
I
Theory
C H A P T E R 1 
.  .  . and then there were
mobile robots 
 “ In the 1920s science fiction was becoming a popular art form for the first
time .  .  .  .  . and one of the stock plots .  .  .  . was that of the invention of a robot .  .  .  . 
Under the influence of the well-known deeds and ultimate fate of Frankenstein
and Rossum , there seemed only one change to be rung on this plot — robots
were created and destroyed their creator .  .  . I quickly grew tired of this dull
hundred-times-told tale .  .  .  . Knowledge has its dangers , yes , but is the response
to be a retreat from knowledge ?  .  .  .  . I began in 1940 , to write robot stories of
my own — but robot stories of a new variety .  .  .  .  .  . My robots were machines
designed by engineers , not pseudo-men created by blasphemers .  ” 
– Isaac Asimov [ 367 ] 
1 . 1 EARLY PIONEERS AND THE STORY TILL SHAKEY
T
he wish for automated machines doing chores on human command goes back to the
lore of Greek mythology . Homer writes about artificial servants with the ability of
thinking , speech , and locomotion for the Gods at Mt . Olympus , which were built by the
blacksmith cum craftsman Haphaestus [ 25 ]  . 
It is some coincidence that the first evidence of an automaton is also found in ancient
Greece at Alexandria , around 250 BC when Philon of Byzantium build a human-like
automaton [ 197 ] which looked like a maid , holding a jug of wine in her right hand . When
a cup was placed in the automaton ’ s left palm it poured some wine , followed by water to
mix in and served a drink . Philon designed his automaton with smart mechanisms and
pneumatics and named it Automatiopoeica , which historically is said to be the first robot . 
Lion-like automatons are found in the accounts of Byzantine emperor Theophilos
around 820 , while around medieval times , building automatons in the Muslim world is
well documented in the works of Al-Jazari and Banu Musa . From the 11th to 15th century
automatons such as horsemen , birds , doors etc . as parts of mechanical clocks were found
both in Europe and the Arab world . Near the European renaissance , Da Vinci [ 283 ] helped
by royal patronage in Italy , developed mechanically maneuverable automatons , shown in
Figure 1 . 1 . 
At about the same time across the globe Japan had made its own automaton , the
Karakuri Ningyo puppets . These puppets had using mechanical arrangements , where a
wound up spring was employed to store energy , This was followed up with a coordination of
cams , levers and gears to actuate the puppet . Meant for recreational purposes , as shown in
4  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 1 Da Vinci ’ s Bird . These are sketches for a bird-like automaton ;  ( a ) is from Da Vinci ’ s
Codex Atlanticus and ( b ) is from Codex Huygens . From Rosheim [ 283 ]  , with kind permission from
Springer Science and Business Media . 
Figure 1 . 2 , it was popularly used as a tea-serving automaton , the puppet can move forward
with a cup of tea in its hands and then bow its head to offer tea to the guest , after drinking
when the cup is returned by the guest to the puppet , it raises its head in a show of gratitude , 
turns around and returns . 
More sophisticated automatons were to follow in the coming century . Vaucanson made
his automated duck [ 368 ] in 1738 with mechanical arrangements as shown in Figure 1 . 3 . His
duck could flap its wings , make quacking noise , drink water , eat grain and seeds with a near
realistic gulping action . The duck was designed to be the same size as a living duck , made
out of gold-plated copper . Vaucanson also developed other such automatons : the flute player
and the tambourine player which were life-size human figures which created an imitation of
playing musical instruments and android waiters which would serve food and clear tables . 
Around the late 18th century a similar mechanical arrangement was employed in Mysore , 
India , to build a mechanical wooden tiger which responded to turning a handle with a growl
and an animated attack . Various historians have suggested that this may have been an
outcome of Tipu Sultan ’ s collaboration with the French . 
All of these developments took place without any electricity , and were powered either
by a smart mechanical arrangement which most of time was a coiled up spring , or by
pneumatics and hydraulics . It was not until around 1890 that Tesla used electricity to build
miniaturised boats which were controlled remotely using radio signals , as shown in Figure
1 . 4 . 
The coining of the word ‘ robot ’  , had to wait until 1920 . This etymology is derived from
the Czech word ‘ robota ’ meaning committed labour . It was first used in Karel Cˇapek ’ s play , 
R . U . R — Rossum ’ s Universal Robots1 
. The evolution in the usage of the word ‘ robot ’ is
shown in Figure 1 . 5 and the word cloud from Wikipedia associating it with other words and
ideas is shown in Figure 1 . 6 . 
The first humanoid robot , Eric was made by W . H . Richards in 1928 and put on display in
London . The Westinghouse Electric Company developed another humanoid , Electro around
the 1940s which was controlled by electrical relays and could play recorded speech , respond
1Cˇapek ’ s play ‘ Rosumovi Univerz´aln´i Roboti ’ was written in Czech , published in 1920 , and first screened
at Prague , Czechoslovakia , on 25 January 1921 . 
 5
FIGURE 1 . 2 Karakuri Puppets . These puppets , made in Japan from the 17th to the 19th century , 
were triggered by a wound-up spring and could serve tea . Image courtesy en . wikipedia . org . 
FIGURE 1 . 3 Vaucanson ’ s Duck , made in 1738 , is an example of early automaton . Image courtesy
en . wikipedia . org . 
6  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 4 Tesla ’ s radio-controlled boat . Nikola Tesla patented a radio-controlled robot-boat
in the winter of 1898 , and named it ‘ teleautomaton ’  . Tesla demonstrated his invention at
Madison Square Garden , New York City , in the Electrical Exhibition that year . Image courtesy
commons . wikimedia . org , CC license . 
 7
FIGURE 1 . 5 Use of the word ‘ robot ’  . Considering 1950 as a base year , around 1985 the usage
of the word ‘ robot ’ saw an increase of about 12-fold , after the 1990s there has been a decline in
usage due to development of nomenclature such as ‘ roomba ’  , which has become a tag name for
all cleaning robots ,  ‘ PUMA ’ and its variants which have ruled the arm robots domain ,  ‘ drones ’ to
connote all flying robots , and newer science fiction is more about androids and cyborgs , than the
simplistic R2D2 and C3P0 of the 1980s . Made using Google Books Ngram Viewer [ 230 ] 
FIGURE 1 . 6 Wordcloud of the word ‘ robot ’ from Wikipedia . Nearly all the words seen here
are used in the chapters to follow . Made using the wordsalad app , 
8  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 7 LUNOKHOD-1 , from a Russian lunar mission , is one of the earliest examples
of teleoperation and telemanipulation . From Spenneman [ 308 ]  , reprinted by permission of the
publisher Taylor & Francis Ltd ,  (  .  ) 
to voice commands and moved on wheels attached to its toes . Claude Shannon in 1938
made the electromechanical mouse , which could find its way to the goal point by trial and
error — a humble ancestor of the modern day micromouse . 
Despite Tesla ’ s boat and Shannon ’ s mouse , in the first half of the last century , robots
were still difficult to build because computer technology such as ENIAC relied on bulky and
cumbersome electronics of gas valves which were just too big to be integrated into a mobile
unit . It was not until 1949 that Walter ’ s robots [ 344 ] heralded in the concept of a mobile
computational unit readily interacting with the environment . These robots had likeness to
turtles and could perform simples behaviours as following the light and avoid obstacles . 
Walter had achieved the first bonding of electronics and mechanical modules which could
respond to an external stimuli . In the 1950s , Devol designed the Unimate robot arm which
was the first programmable industrial arm manipulator . 
Later , in the early 1970s , Shakey and the Stanford Cart were early robots developed
from principles of autonomous agents and AI . Around the same time , researchers at Waseda
University developed a full-scale humanoid , Wabot-1 , which had two legs and two arms and
could communicate with human beings in Japanese . From a cognitive point of view , the
robot had the mental faculty of a 2-year-old kid . 
The Russian moon missions led to the development of the Lunokhod programme . The
Lunokhod-1 , shown in Figure 1 . 7 , was the first robot to land on another heavenly body . The
Lunokhod-1 in 1970 and the Lunokhod-2 three years later were remote-controlled robotic
vehicles designed to chart the lunar surface . The robot vehicles were equipped with solar
panels for power by day and a radioisotope heater unit for power by night . Explorer robots , 
 9
FIGURE 1 . 8 Philae ( Toby , 1 of 4 .  ) The robotic lander on Comet 67P came alive [ 134 ] with the
falling sunlight on its solar panels and reestablished contact with Earth on 13 June 2015 . Cartoon
made as a part of the Toby series ( 1 of 4 ) by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
since Lunokhod have come of age and gone on to explore other planets and heavenly bodies
such as comets as shown in Figure 1 . 8 . 
With the microelectronics revolution in the 1970s and computer revolution in the 1980s , 
robotics took a leap with readily available miniaturised components and smaller processing
units and user friendly software interfaces . 
1 . 1 . 1 Walter ‘ s turtles
Modern day mobile robotics was born in 1949 , when W . G Walter built 2 three-wheeled
automated turtle-like robots [ 154 ]  . These automated turtles had a light sensor , a touch
sensor , a propulsion motor for a front-wheel drive , a steering motor to move around and
a vacuum tube analog computer . Walter named his project Machina speculatrix , and he
named the 2 turtles after characters in ‘ Alice in Wonderland ’  , Elmer and Elsie , which also
fit the suitable acronyms , ELectro MEchanical Robots , Light Sensitive , with Internal and
External stability . This was the first electromechanical autonomous mobile robot . These
turtles had three characteristics : attraction to moderate light and repulsion by bright light
and obstacles . In various experiments , the turtles responded to a number of external stimuli : 
1 . Goal seeking behaviour . When started in the dark , the turtle made its way towards
a beam of light and tracked it to reach its feeding hutch . 
2 . Free will as in the ability to to choose between alternatives , choosing to reach the
nearer of two light sources when executing light tracking behaviour , staying close to
it for some time and then moving on to the next light source and then returning back
to the former . This cyclic behaviour continues until power runs out . 
3 . Pertinacity . The turtles showed dogged determination , when tracking a light source
if it so happened that the light source was not visible from their field of view due
to obstacles , they would resort to moving in a random direction and on finding the
source of light they would assume light tracking behaviour . This behaviour is shown
in Figure 1 . 9 . 
4 . Preference for an optimum . The turtles avoided extreme stimuli and opted for
moderation , e . g .  , when tracking a light source , they were attracted to the light source , 
but were repelled by excess brightness . 
10  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 9 Walter ’ s turtles . A time lapse photograph of Elsie where she demonstrates
Pertinacity . Chasing for a light source , it is put off track by the reflection of its own candle
in the polished fire-screen . She eventually finds her way to the candle behind the screen . From
Fong et al .  [ 107 ]  , with permission from Elsevier . 
5 . Social organisation and competition . When the two turtles are set up
simultaneously in a dark environment with candles serving as light sources mounted
on each of them . Both the turtles are attracted by the other ’ s light source still repelled
by excess brightness . That led to a concerted dance where each turtle waltzed around
the other . Walter made this experiment even more interesting by adding in a third
external light source , which encouraged a competitive behaviour as the turtles raced
to reach the third light source . 
6 . Response to internal physiological changes such as low battery power . 
Walter designed the turtles such that with a low battery the turtle is attracted to
a certain intensity of brightness which guides it to a charging pod . 
7 . Realisation of self . Walter tried even more innovative experiments with mirrors . 
Mounted with a candle the turtle tracked itself in a mirror but on reaching the mirror
and touching it , its tactile sensing detects the mirror as an obstacle and then it walks
around the mirror . Walter called this behaviour as realisation of self . In Chapter 9 it
will be discussed and demonstrated that a mirror is indeed very crucial for tests of
consciousness . 
8 . Other than the above a firsthand account identified Elsie as a woman , and Elmer as
a man . 
This was unlike Da Vinci ’ s bird and Tesla ’ s boat as the turtles didn ’ t have a
fixed behaviour . Rather performance was on the merit of the stimuli acquired from its
environment , mostly at runtime . The turtles demonstrated automaton and path planning as
a response to external stimuli . According to Walter , his turtles were an imitation of life [ 344 ]  , 
and were the first examples of Artificial Life ( ALIFE ) and established the grounding for
anthropomorphic motivation to design robots . It is interesting to note that Walter knew
 11
FIGURE 1 . 10 Ninja and Amy , replicas of Walter ’ s robots , built by Ian Horsfield in The Bristol
Robotics Lab . The only modern components used are the 2 motors and the batteries , rest remains
nearly as Walter would have made it . Image courtesy Alan Winfield , University of West England , 
Bristol , used with permission . 
12  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
that his turtles were far from perfect and left to themselves they would exhaust their supply
of energy in the quest for light sources , getting stuck with rigid obstacles or engaging in
competitive duels with similar creatures . 
These two turtles were disassembled to provide parts to construct six more turtles . While
most of them got misplaced or destroyed , at Walter ’ s death in 1977 his son inherited one . 
In 1995 Holland and his team of technicians restored this turtle to working order and also
made the replicas , Ninja and Amy , seen in Figure 1 . 10 . 
Walter had further planned to build Machina docilis or the CORA turtle [ 345 ]  , on the
same footing as Elmer and Elsie , but with the added ability to learn from interaction with
the environment . CORA is an acronym for COnditioned Reflex Analogue . Walter was
guided by Pavlov ’ s study of conditioned reflexes and employed rudimentary neural models
to implement learning . However , while it is certain that Walter had developed a standalone
learning-based device , it is not certain if he built such faculties into a turtle robot [ 363 ]  . 
His later efforts to build the IRMA device — Innate Releasing Mechanism Analogue —
exploited more advanced learning models and as with the CORA , was not integrated into
a turtle robot . 
Though it is a coincidence [ 155 ]  , but not really a surprise that in 1949 Walter started
developing his turtles and Wiener [ 352 ] discussed preliminary ideas of marrying sensor
readings and motor action , via an ultra-rapid computing machine , and around the same
time Turing started developing ideas for the Turing machine and Shannon modelled the
theory of communication . 
1 . 1 . 2 Shakey and the Stanford Cart
Mobile robotics took a big leap forward around the end of 1970s decade . At SRI , Nilsson
built and programmed Shakey [ 253 ]  ( Figure 1 . 11 ) and was able to navigate it in a grid-based
environment . This technological advancement was fueled by modern-day electronics , user
friendly software interfaces and analytical models and tools developed by AI over the
previous 30 odd years . Shakey could perform tasks that required planning , navigation , 
finding path by search methods as A * search algorithm and also using sophisticated
techniques such as the Hough transform and the visibility graph method . When set up , 
Shakey was controlled by a SDS-940 computer with a 64K 24-bit memory and programming
was done in Fortran and LISP . In later versions the SDS-940 computer was replaced by a
PDP-10 / PDP-15 interface . Later robots as The Stanford Cart and the CMU Rover were
developed as direct descendents of Shakey and tried to plugup its shortcomings . 
The Stanford Cart was built as a remotely controlled mobile robot with an onboard TV
by Adams in 1960 for his research project , later improvements were supervised by Earnest , 
McCarthy and Moravec over a period of 20 years . They developed it into the first robot road
vehicle , though it was broadly employed for research in visual navigation . Adams made the
cart to support his research on NASA JPL project Prospector , which hoped to establish
teleoperation in robots on the lunar surface using radio control from Earth . The Cart had
four small bicycle wheels with electric motors powered by a car battery and carried a TV
camera aligned in the forward direction . The interaction of the Cart with its environment
was via this onboard TV . Much later , from th mid to late 1970s , Moravec programmed it
to navigate autonomously in a cluttered environment . Though , the Cart was appreciably
slow at an average speed of 1 meter in 10 to 15 min , in lurches , at the end of each lurch
it stopped and took some pictures , and slowly processed them to plan its next path , and
this processs continued . Negotiating 20-meter courses , while avoiding obstacles often took
about 5 hours . 
 13
FIGURE 1 . 11 Shakey in 1972 . This iconic robot was designed from the late 1960s to the early
1970s at SRI . Nilsson [ 253 ] describes Shakey as a mobile robot system “ endowed with a limited
ability to perceive and model its environment ”  . Shakey was navigable using grid based methods
and could also rearrange simple objects . Shakey is an exhibit on display at the Computer History
Museum in Mountain View , California . Image courtesy commons . wikimedia . org . 
14  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 12 Telepresence and teleoperation most often features as a basic functionality in
modern day robotics and finds support from most robotic software suits . As shown , a telepresence
robot lacks in autonomy and is remote controlled over at a distance , and it ’ s controller can
communicate with people in the robot ’ s local environment over vision ( screen ) and voice 
( microphone ) channels . Telepresence is the first steps to a future when communication will
commence over virtual reality . On the left is Anybots QA , and on the right is iRobot ’ s Ava 500 , 
both images courtesy commons . wikimedia . org , CC-by-SA 3 . 0 license . 
Walter ’ s turtles and Nilsson ’ s Shakey were near isolated events spaced across 20
years in which there was no appreciable experimental progress , but there was theoretical
development of AI as a whole : cybernetics in particular by Wiener , the basis of artificial
animals and early ideas which led to ANIMATs by Toda and a general integration of
electronics leading to electronic processors . At the end of the 1970s , the development cycle
of mobile robots became simpler due to innovations in AI , electronics , computer science , 
software design etc . In the next three sections I try to relive these technological developments
and paradigm shifts . 
1 . 2 CURRENT-DAY MOBILE ROBOTICS
In the new millennia , Walter ’ s turtles powered by vacuum tubes and Nilsson ’ s bulky
processors are relics confined to the museum and robots are now designed with sleek , 
portable and easy-to-use hardware . High-end robots such as the PR2 or ASIMO or even
AIBO are yet to become a part of human society , partly because of the price and also
since these robots are still being developed into a niche for proactive human participation . 
Today , robots work across various domains ; as interactive tour-guides in museums , as a
coffee delivery robot in office environments , actors of sorts in stage plays , soccer players , 
assistants to the elderly with their daily chores and they also chart unknown terrains in
faraway planets , attend to a patient as a robotic nurse , a robotic newsreader can liven up
a news channel and various others such arenas . 
 15
There is a lack of a broad classification scheme , however robots with wheeled bases and
differential drive are usually termed ‘ mobile ’  , those with 2 legs are ‘ bipeds ’ and those with
human exoskeleton and legs are called ‘ humanoids ’  . 
Khepera
Khepera was developed at the
EPFL in the late 1990s , and it
went commercial with the K-Team
Corporation , broadly for use in
education and research . This robot
is often credited with being a vital
aspect for the development of
evolutionary robotics . Shown here is
Khepera , the original version . From
Fong et al .  [ 107 ]  , with permission
from Elsevier . 
State of the art robots are equipped with a vision module for object recognition , NLP
module for language processing and voice-based human interaction , added information and
rules for specific operations and a learning module . Teleoperation and telepresence , shown in
Figure 1 . 12 along with map building with SLAM algorithms have been basic functionalities
of modern-day robots and are often provided by the manufacturer . 
Roomba
The Roomba made by the iRobot
company in 2002 , is a vacuum
cleaning robot . While vacuuming , 
the Roomba can change directions
when encountering an obstacle . 
It can also detect an edge , thus
preventing it from tumbling down
stairs . To aid the vacuuming
and cleaning process , there is
a pair of brushes , rotating in
opposite directions which helps
to pick up dirt from the floor . 
Shown here is Roomba 780 . Image
courtesy commons . wikimedia . org , 
CC license . 
Developmental routes have become simpler and more modular with Arduino and similar
boards and smaller and easy to use processors such as Raspberry Pi , ODROID etc . Motion
sensing with Microsoft Kinect and other such devices has provided an avenue to develop
quality robots on a strict budget . 
16  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Pioneer Robot
The Pioneer has been very popular
with current day researchers . 
Developed at ActivMedia Robotics , 
Georgia , the robot is equipped with a
ring of 8 forward-facing sonars and
8 optional rear-facing sonars . The
basic robot can attain maximum
speed of 1 . 6 meters per second
and carry a payload of up to 23
kg . Shown here is a variation , 
where the Pioneer base is mounted
with an arm manipulator , image
courtesy commons . wikimedia . org , 
CC license . 
Some robots are favourites among undergraduates such as the Khepera and the Pioneer
and some universities have made the PR2 a part of their robotics courses . For the hobbyists , 
the Roomba , iBot and LEGO Mindstorms are cheaper options . The Roomba is a vacuum
cleaning robot , however it has found great acceptance in the hobbyist fraternity . iRobot
also provides a separate platform for the robot enthusiasts the icreate , which is very much
like the roomba but without the vacuuming parts . 
Erratic Robot
Erratic was designed and developed
as a clone of the Pioneer robot , 
by Videre in 2000 . It has found
applications in academia and is
often mounted by a SICK or
HOKUYO laser . Shown here is a
model of the Erratic spawned in
simulations using gazebo . 
The Khepera has seen four generations . This robot was designed by Jean-Daniel Nicoud
and his team at EPFL as a readily usable platform for experiments and training , such as
in local navigation , artificial intelligence , collective behaviour etc . It was developed using
the Motorola 68331 processor in the 1990s . The latest avatar , version IV of the robot is
equipped with 8 infrared sensors , 5 ultrasonic sensors , WiFi , Bluetooth , accelerometer , 
gyroscope , color camera and uses a 800MHz ARM Cortex-A8 processor . It is priced at
$2700 . 
 17
The Turtlebot
Turtlebot was developed by Melonee Wise and
Tully Foote at Willow Garage in late 2010 . 
Shown here is Turtlebot 2 , which has a Yujin
Kobuki base , a Kinect sensor and a laptop with
a dual core processor and is available as open
source hardware with a BSD license . Priced at
about $1000 , the robot has found support from
the ROS community and is used in various
universities in their robotics laboratory courses . 
There will always be a need for quality simulators in robotics as every experiment
cannot be performed with real-world robots due to extreme logistics and cost considerations . 
As a contrast , path planning was targeted in the earliest 2D simulators such as Karel
and Rossum ’ s Playhouse ( RP1 )  , 3D simulators such as Webots and Microsoft Robotics
Developer Studio ( Microsoft RDS , MRDS ) provided added designing capabilities and near
life-like models of the robot . Currently , Gazebo which is a standalone project and also a
part of ROS is one of the best and is often accepted as a standard for robotics simulations . 
Personal Robot-2 , PR2
PR2 is a near humanoid developed
at Willow Garage , but instead of legs
it is mounted on a wheeled base . It
has two 7-DOF arms and is equipped
with a 5-megapixel camera , a tilting
laser range finder , and an inertial
measurement unit and is powered by
two 8-core servers , each of which
has 24 gigabytes of RAM , for a total
of 48 gigabytes , and are located at
the base of the robot . The PR2 can
open doors , fold towels , fetch beer
and also play billiards . 
AIBO and similar designs such as the Tekno and the CHiP are anthropomorphised on a
dog and often create a false bond of caring and compassion with human beings . In context , 
the PARO which is a robotic seal and the Pleo which is a robotic dinosaur are state of the
art pet robots and both have a congenial appearance and respond positively to touch and
cuddles . The PARO has found application in psychological therapy of the depressed and
the elderly and the AIBO has been used in nursing homes as a company for the residents . 
18  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
AIBO
SONY ’ s iconic series of robots were
inpired from dogs and lion cubs
and their name means ‘ Artificial
Intelligence RoBOt , and also
suggests the Japanese , aibo¯ , 
meaning pal , friend , partner . 
Toshitada Doi and Masahiro
Fujita are the pioneers whose
work led to the development of
the AIBO in 1998 . The image is
from commons . wikimedia . org , CC
license . 
LEGO Mindstorms kit is meant for educational robotics . This affordable kit provides for
easy assembling of custom-designed robots and for programming them with user friendly
languages . The latest version , EV3 , is based on a Linux ARM9 CPU and also contains
motors , touch sensors , color sensors and an infrared sensor . 
Honda ASIMO
Honda ’ s celebrated humanoid robot ASIMO
is said to be inspired by Isaac Asimov
but the acronym reads otherwise ,  ‘ Advanced
Step in Innovative MObility ’  . Designed as
a walking assistant robot , the ASIMO stands
130 cm , weighs about 50 kgs , can attain
maximum speeds of 9 km per hour in running
mode and can be controlled by PC , wireless
controller , or voice commands . Honda , most
unabashedly claims it ,  “ the world ’ s most
advanced humanoid robot ”  . The image is from
commons . wikimedia . org , CC license . 
Willow Garage the company that developed ROS , build the Turtlebots I and II and the
PR2 , all of which integrates 3D sensors with a mobile base . The Turtlebot-I employed a
icreate base , while the Turtlebot-II has a Kobuki base developed by Yujin Robot . Building
humanoids have always drawn interest , and while PR2 is only partially humanoid , Honda ’ s
ASIMO has human-like legs and can dance to a tune . Honda has not yet put up the ASIMO
 19
for sale but leasing is at an astronomical price of $150 , 000 a month . The PR2 is priced at
a staggering $400 , 000 with discounts for academic projects . 
Nao
This iconic mini humanoid was made by
the French company , Aldebaran Robotics in
2006 as an open source software . The robot
was acquired by Japan ’ s SoftBank Robotics [ 2 ] 
in 2013 . Standing at 58 cm and weighing
4 . 3 kg , it is powered by the Intel Atom
processor and has an assortment of sensors , 
HD cameras , microphones , sonar rangefinder , 
infrared , tactile and pressure sensors . The
robot has quite a reputation : it has acted in
a ballet , been the most prolific robot in robo
soccer , has been employed as a therapeutic robot
for children suffering from autism , has been
programmed to be the first robot with deontic
ethics and also , to a degree it is the first robot
to attain sentience , albeit for a very short time . 
The image is from commons . wikimedia . org , CC
license . 
Open source has been the buzz word in the robotics community and Robot Operating
System ( ROS )  , Robotic Open Platform ( ROP )  , Poppy and RoboEarth are projects that
target crowd sourcing and thus freely provide technology and know-how . 
Segway
This battery-powered , self-balancing
two-wheeled scooter was developed at the
University of Plymouth in collaboration
with BAE Systems and Sumitomo Precision
Products , and uses gyroscopic sensors and an
accelerometer for maintaining balance . While
not a robot as per the traditional definitions , 
the Segway is an early ancestor of autonomous
vehicles of the immediate present and the
promise of the future . At a maximum speed of
about 12 miles per hour , it is ideal for the golf
course and other short tours and it has also
been designed into a companion robot [ 120 ] 
1 . 3 CULTURAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT
Robots inspire awe across all ages . Engaging in a conversation with a social robot such as
Kismet , whom we will meet again in Chapter 7 , or making a robot using LEGO Mindstorms
20  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 13 LEGO Mindstorms have been very popular both as toys and teaching aids since
the late 1990s . These robot kits contain sensors ( touch , light and colour )  , motors and a processor
encased in the ‘ brick ’ and can be programmed with various programming languages . Both these
images are of robots built with the NXT kit . Both images courtesy commons . wikimedia . org . 
kits , as shown in Figure 1 . 13 or watching ASIMO dance to a tune , are situations when
robots contribute to entertainment and recreation . In academia , readily available open
source simulators and software for robot has fueled robotics research in universities and
hobbyists , such as MORSE [ 100 ] shown in Figure 1 . 14 . On the other hand we have the the
prophecy of singularity and a Terminator-like doomsday scenario where intelligent machines
take over the earth , which is a script for various science fiction potboilers . In this section , 
I look into the fiction , movies and popular opinions on robots , utilities of mobile robots
across various domains such as medicine , army , public interface , entertainment etc . 
1 . 3 . 1 Science fiction , entertainment industry , medical surgery and military
Verne ’ s steam-powered mechanical elephant , Shelley ’ s Frankenstein and Baum ’ s tin man
are some of the first fictional accounts of automatons . In 1940 , Asimov ushered in added
sophistication . His robots were electromechanical devices unlike any previous authors ’  . 
Arthur C . Clark , Alvin Toffler and Philip K . Dick are near contemporaries of Asimov who
gave us timeless classics with robotic characters . With the advent of cinematography , robots
came to be synonymous with depiction of futuristic themes in movies . Lang ’ s pioneering
direction in the 1927 silent movie Metropolis had the first robot in cinema , Maria as shown
in Figure1 . 15 . She was a metal cast female android . The three robots in Nolan ’ s 2014 sci-fi
Interstellar , TARS , CASE and KIPP often wisecracked in slangs and sarcasm with the rest
of the characters of the movie . Robots have added to the intrigue , drama , humour and
fun in cinemas . Over these 90 odd years as shown in Figure 1 . 16 , many of these robots
have attained cult status , become household names and have added to idiomatic references . 
Robbie in Forbidden Planet ( 1956 ) as shown in Figure 1 . 17 , HAL 9000 in 2001 ( 1968 )  , 
various replicant robots in Blade Runner ( 1982 )  , Andrew an NDR-114 humanoid robot in
Bicentennial Man ( 1999 )  , the iconical star wars robots R2D2 and C3P0 , as shown in Figure
1 . 18 and Wall-E and Eva , as shown in Figure 1 . 19 are a few to name . 
Fiction with robots often traces some of the popular storylines , one where robots accept
human norms and values and try fitting into human society , but are often reminded of their
shortcomings . David in Spielberg ’ s movie AI and Andrew in Asimov ’ s Bicentennial Man
 21
FIGURE 1 . 14 6 PR2 in MORSE . MORSE [ 100 ] is a 3D simulator built on Blender , it was
developed by LAAS , Tolouse . MORSE particularly targets human robot interaction and has
bindings with various meta-platforms and middlewares ROS , YARP and MOOS . 
are such accounts where the robot struggles with its own existence , trying hard to imitate
human behaviour , values and cultural nuances . The second is the dystopian scenario where
robots and smart AI rebel against human beings and has been the plot for Blade Runner , 
Terminator and Battle Star Galactica . A third brings to light the the endearing attachment
between human and the robot , as seen in , Frank and the Robot and Real Steel . Robots are
mostly shown to be near perfect artificial beings but with lesser appreciation for human
emotions and humanly values though Replicants in Blade Runner , Lieutenant Commander
Data in Star Trek and Cylons in Battle Star Galactica can be said to be near humans and
special psychological tests similar to the Turing test had to be devised in order to distinguish
between human and the artificial . 
Asimov ’ s three laws , as shown in Figure 1 . 20 , have been seen as an overarching principle
for robots , however these three laws lack practical application and often conflict in real-life
scenarios . In Chapter 8 , it will be discussed that ethical principles for robots cannot be
drawn from these three laws . Various leading roboticists and AI researchers have suggested
that these laws are flawed and serve more as an instrument of control for human beings to
reign as the superior ‘ master ’ race and controlling the robots as slaves . Asimov made some
amends to these laws in 1985 by introducing a fourth law , the zeroeth law . 
Other than movies , there have been some brave attempts to follow in the footsteps of
Cˇapek and make stage plays with robots and robotic characters , though very much still in
the experimental domain .  ‘ Hello Hi There ’  , a stage play directed by Annie Dorsen and first
screened at Steirischer Herbst , Graz in September 2013 and subsequently across Europe and
America , features no actors but two chatbots , two computer screens spitting out sentences
which structures the play . The chatbots converse using materials from a script which has
been taken from a famous debate on human nature between Noam Chomsky and Michel
Foucault in 1971 . The intriguing part is that the play doesn ’ t have a fixed plot and can play
out in about 84 million different ways . 
Bold and unconventional explorations to use robots in-sync with live human actors and
dancers on stage are few but commendable and may be the definition of a newer realm of
acting and stage performance . Francesca Talenti ’ s play ‘ The Uncanny Valley ’  [ 1 ] which has
22  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 15 Maria , the first ever robot in cinema was in Fritz Lang ’ s 1927 silent movie ,  
 ‘ Metropolis ’  . Made in Weimar Germany , the movie was a science fiction tale set in a dystopian
future . Shown here is a commemorative statue of the robot at the Filmpark , outside the Babelsberg
studio where the movie was made . Image courtesy commons . wikimedia . org . 
 23
FIGURE 1 . 16 Timeline for robots in movies and popular media , 1920 — 2015 . 
24  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 17 Robbie the Robot , in the 1954 movie ‘ The Forbidden Planet ’ was one of the earliest
appearances of robots in movies . Robbie was designed to be a 6 foot 11 inches tall humanoid robot
which could turn , twist and move around on wheeled legs . Robbie ’ s personality in the films original
screenplay was written by Cyril Hume and made into a real robot with the effort of an art team
led by the director Robert Kinoshita at a cost of about $100 , 000 . 
 25
FIGURE 1 . 18 Cometh the robot , cometh the man .  , Anthony Daniels played the role of C3PO
the humanoid droid in the Star Wars movie series , seen here with the C3PO mask . C3PO along
with its companion R2D2 have become household names and attained iconic status . Image courtesy
commons . wikimedia . org . 
FIGURE 1 . 19 Wall-E and Eva , iconic robots from the movie Wall-E , courtesy de . wikimedia . org
26  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 20 Asimov ’ s laws . His 3 laws of robotics have attained cult status among science fiction
fans and roboticists alike . First formulated in 1942 , Asimov later added the zeroeth law in 1985 . 
Though popular , the laws have been found to conflict with one another and are lacking in practical
applications , Academic opinion and research into robot ethics has been more inclined towards a
developmental approach than a codification of laws . More on the shortcomings of Asimov ’ s law is
in Chapter 8 . 
a robo-thespian robot , Oriza Hirata used a Wakamaru robot and Blanca Li ’ s dance drama 
 ‘ ROBOT ’ had seven Nao robots dance on stage synchronously with eight human dancers . 
Other than the movie and entertainment industry , mobile robotics is the heart and soul
of space research . It is being extensively used in the military and medical surgery and it also
bears promise for modern agriculture . A great many modern-day space programmes have a
robotic rover , which is unmanned and attempts to chart an unknown heavenly body . They
are usually equipped with both modes of control viz . autonomous and remotely controlled , 
the later used more prominently . In the military , use of robots has been hotly debated as
trusting a robot with lethal capabilities may prove to be fatal . Historically , Goliath a mobile
land mine was the first use of robots in the military by Nazi Germany in World War II . In
recent times , the use of robots in the military is a prospect NATO and American forces have
looked forward to , and in Iraq from 2004-2007 they employed unmanned military robots , 
SWORDS and MARS systems . Unmanned robotic vehicles have been used in times of
crisis such as earthquakes , landslides and tsunamis . In medical science , teleoperated robotic
surgery units such as the Da-Vinci systems , shown in Figure 1 . 21 is one of the miracles
of robotics , which has allowed the surgeon to operate on a patient who is located a few
thousand kilometers away on a different continent . 
1 . 3 . 2 Do robots pose a threat for human beings ? 
The Vox Populii gathered over questionnaires and polls shows how people have responded
to robots and their influence on their lives . A poll conducted in 2014 in the University of
Middlesex with more than 2000 participants showed that more than 30% believed that their
jobs will be taken over by robots ; 46% felt that technology was progressing too quickly ( for
comfort )  ; 35% were worried by the use of unmanned military drones ; about 10% expected to
see a Robocop-like police force in about a decade ; 42% said ‘ Yes ’ when asked if teachers can
be replaced by robots ; 11% were ready to adopt a robot child akin to David in Spielberg ’ s
AI ; replacing a beloved animal with a robotic pet invited the interest of about 20% of pet
owners ; 25% opined that robots will be capable of feeling human emotions ; and what might
come as bizarre , nearly 20% were ready to have sex with robots .  ‘ Human-like ’ has been a
buzzword in current day human robot interactions . In a user poll in Plano , Texas , conducted
 27
FIGURE 1 . 21 Da Vinci system . Teleoperation in advanced medical systems has allowed for
surgeries where the surgeon and the patient are on different continents . From Kroh and Chalikonda 
[ 190 ]  , with kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media . 
by Hanson Robotics , the participants were shown images of two different robots that were
programmed to imitate known human-like emotions , expressed by facial expressions . This
effort met with an overwhelming 73% approval ; the participants did like and connect with
what they saw . While in another popular poll conducted by Amazon UK and IMDB , R2D2
got voted in by over 8000 people as the ‘ world ’ s favourite robot ’  . His Star Wars companion
C3P0 was ranked fourth . Crossing the Atlantic , in the US , a poll from Monmouth University , 
New Jersey , with about 1700 participants on the concerns over the use of unmanned drones
yielded interesting results : while 80% were in support of search and rescue efforts , about
67% were good with drones tracking runaway criminals and 64% conformed to drones for
border control . However the participants were apprehensive about drones issuing speeding
tickets and it met with only 23% approval . In context of human approval and level of comfort
with an ensuing human-robot interaction , an online poll by robohub exploring the tradeoff
between privacy vs . automaton of using robots , the poll asked the participants ,  ‘ What level
of autonomy would you be comfortable with in a bathing robot ’  . Bathing robots for the
elderly have been considered as a commercial venture by electronics giant Sanyo . The results
did illustrate that human beings are rather comfortable with robots being in control while
taking a bath , only 4% objected to the robots being autonomous , while 48% were at ease
with the robot being in charge , 39% were comfortable giving partial control to the robot
and 13% were agreeable to full-autonomy however , with human supervision . 
Various of these polls dig into dystopian scenarios such as robots taking over human jobs , 
the Skynet apocalypse , human-AI war etc . The idea that AI poses an existential threat has
fueled a debate , with the CEO of Space-X Elon Musk , renowned physicist Stephen Hawking
and Microsoft guru Bill Gates at one end of the debate and AI researcher Ray Kurzweil at
the other end . Should we try to noose AI and tame it , so it doesn ’ t go out of control ? An
online poll by The Telegraph in October 2014 yielded mixed response as is shown in Figure
1 . 22 : 36% responded with a ‘ Yes ’  , that care should be taken in developing AI ; 42% chose
otherwise . 
The threat that robots will take over human jobs is a neo-Luddite nightmare , though
it is not baseless . Recent studies in the UK by University of Oxford and Deloitte have
28  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 1 . 22 Do robots pose an ‘ existential threat ’  ?  , Results of an online poll at
telegraph . co . uk in October 2014 in reaction to Elon Musk ’ s ‘ summoning the demon ’ remark . 
indicated that 35% of UK jobs may be at high risk from advancing technology , automaton
and robotics in the next 20 years . The other side to this debate suggests that advancing
technology will lead to a new way of living which will develop newer forms of sentient
intelligence . Robots have had effective human interactions as artificial pets , in the role of
carer , romantic attachment and lover , organised tour guide , receptionist etc . Human-robot
interaction and robot ethics are avenues of research which find application in the near future . 
More on these topics is discussed in Chapter 10 . 
SUMMARY
1 . Robotics had its history in automata , where smart mechanical manoeuvres were
employed for locomotion . Da Vinci in 15th century Italy and Vaucanson in 17th
century France are the most well-known accounts . 
2 . Tesla developed a radio-controlled boat at the turn of the century . 
3 . Walter ’ s turtles were the first mobile units which worked on inputs from the
environment . 
4 . Toda ’ s theoretical models of cognition for a hypothetical animal , with given goals and
survival mechanisms were the first mathematical models for an autonomous agent . 
5 . Mobile robots are fundamentally different from arm manipulators as they move
around , which can be known / unknown terrain . 
6 . With revolution in microelectronics and theoretical developments in AI , Shakey was
the big leap that mobile robotics achieved around the late 1960s . 
7 . Robots have had immense social impact via movies , educational tools , science fiction
and household appliances . 
8 . Existential risk from robots is a question being asked more often than ever , and is
closely connected with the prophecy of Technological Singularity . 
NOTES
1 . Cˇapek ’ s R . U . R — Rossum ’ s Universal Robots , the play ends with the end of human
civilisation , and two robots named ‘ Adam ’ and ‘ Eve ’ falling in love . 
2 . Vaucanson ’ s Duck was unfortunately destroyed in a fire in 1879 . 
3 . In Nillson ’ s early research the name Shakey is not found ; rather the robot is explained
 29
by its construction ,  “  .  .  . an SDS-940 computer and associated programs controlling a
wheeled vehicle that carries a TV camera and other sensors .  ” 
4 . Walter put up a notice above the hutch where he kept his turtles , Elmer and Elsie , 
which read “ Please do not feed these machines .  ” 
5 . Cyborg , CYBernetic ORGanism . The etymology was coined by Austrian scientist , 
Manfred Clynes in the 1960s to suggest the need for using AI to enhance human
biologial functions to survive in hostile and unfavourable environments . 
6 . Flakey was a successor to Shakey . Developed in the mid-90s , it could be controlled
using fuzzy logic . Both the Pioneer robot and Erratic robot are motivated from Flakey . 
7 . Large and the small . The largest robot measuring 8 . 2 meters in height and 15 . 7 meters
in length , an automated fire breathing dragon was made by Zollner Elektronik AG at
Zandt , Germany , while RoboBee , a robot bee with a wing span of 3 cm and ALICE
with dimensions of 2 cm x 2 cm x 2 cm are examples of small robots . 
8 . Some of the exotic applications of robots :  ( 1 ) WF3-RIX is a flute playing robot made
at Waseda University in 1990 ;  ( 2 ) Xian ’ er [ 61 ]  , a miniaturised robot monk which is
about 2 foot tall , has a cartoonish appearance and is robed in yellow and has a touch
screen on his chest , can chant Buddhist mantras and hold a short conversation for
about 20 minutes . It has been a chief attraction at Longquan temple in Beiijing since
2015 .  ( 3 ) Various arm manipulators have been used to sketch portraits and scenic
settings . 
9 . Simulators to study robot navigation is an essential tool in an academic course for
robotics . Nowadays , meta-software platforms as ROS or MOOSE are preferred than
standalone simulators , however simple and easy to install softwares have not lost their
appeal . For example , Kiks is a freely available MATLAB plugin for 2D simulation of
the Khepera robot , Kiks is available at http :  /  / www . tstorm . se / kiks . php . 
EXERCISES
1 . Turtles vs . Shakey . draw a contrast between Walter ’ s Turtles and Shakey from
design and performance point of view . The study should also address the evolution
of the technology in the 20 years between these two projects , and also attempt to see
the projects from the aims they were designed for . Walter attempted to build models
for human cognitive capabilities while Shakey was designed for mobile locomotion . 
C H A P T E R 2
Embodied AI , or the tale of
taming the fungus eater 
 “ The body is our general medium for having a world .  ” 
– Maurice Merleau-Ponty [ 228 ]  
 “ How high in the intuitive scale of cognitive sophistication can such unwitting
prowess reach ?  ” 
– Daniel Dennett , on using no representations [ 92 ] 
2 . 1 FROM AI TO ROBOTS
Walter used vacuum tubes for his turtles and Nilsson used an onboard computer
for Shakey . These two projects had contrasting outcomes , it was very fruitful for
the turtles , but it was slow and cumbersome for Shakey . Other than these experimental
endeavours , another cue for autonomous agency was Toda ’ s model of fungus eaters . These
hypothetical organisms were capable of long-term self sustainment while attending to
multiple goals and provided the earliest model for an artificial autonomous agency . Wilson ’ s
concept of ANIMATs and guiding inputs from biology and psychology laid the groundwork
for robot design and architecture . This chapter explores how AI has been used to design
robots , the inspirations from the natural world , the contributions from various disciplines
and the shortcomings of traditional AI . 
2 . 2 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR ROBOTS
What constitutes a robot , and how is it different from a machine ? the answer to this question
has changed over the past eight decades . Humanoid automatons , such as those in ‘ Rossum ’ s
Universal Robots ’ and ‘ The Metropolis ’  , were modelled on the human body but lacked
smooth human functions and limb orientations and were low on emotional content1 
. With
progress in industry and manufacturing and the automation of the production line and the
car industry , the concept of a robot was more or less limited to the arm manipulator which
engaged in repetitive ‘ pick and place ’ operations . Robots for mobile and other superior
1Of course , these were never made into robots rather Cˇapek ’ s actors reflected such features in their roles
as robots . 
32  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
agencies , as in navigation , simple behaviour , social agency etc . was a promise to kindle only
after Walter ’ s turtles . 
In contrast to industrial manipulators , AI robots are meant for navigation and
exploration of their local environment , with demonstrable intelligence and many times are
meant for a particular task or role , viz . explorer robots , household robots , search and rescue
robots etc . 
Bekey suggests the following definition for a robot ,  
 “  .  .  . a robot is a machine , situated in the world that senses , thinks , and acts .  .  .  ” 
This definition is not tied to a given task and doesn ’ t highlight the robot ’ s interaction
with the environment . Therefore ( 1 ) robots performing repetitive jobs such as industrial
robots and arm maniplators ,  ( 2 ) those which lack in a very clear mandate such as the
Martian rovers ,  ( 3 ) those with human appearance as automatons or humanoid robots
suitable to the domain of social robotics and ( 4 ) futuristic robots made by extending biology , 
such as androids and cyborgs , are all covered by this definition . The definition is not limited
to the popularly accepted mechatronic design for robots which marries the mechanical to the
electronic with a processing unit . However , an engineering point of view tends to constrain
the definition and a robot is to have electronics , mechanical hardware and a processing
unit . An actuation without the electronics and processing unit is more in the automaton
domain and controlled by compressed springs , pneumatic valves and / or hydraulic control , 
probably such as the ones designed by Philon and in Japanese Karakuri puppets . Since , the
definition is based on the ability of the robot to engage in real-world tasks , without external
control , it is tempting to consider that the robot is truly ‘ thinking ’ as it is processing data
from sensors to a processing unit to actuation much like the human brain ; however this is
merely executing a code piece and not ‘ thinking ’ per se . Chapter 9 will try to focus on the 
 ‘ thinking ’ faculty and sentient action in robots . Particular goals for the robot may either be
specific , such as line following , light tracking or picking up empty coke cans , or a number
of chores which converge towards a predetermined profile such as a military robot , a nurse
robot , a domestic help robot or an office assistant robot are discussed in Chapters 7 and 8 . 
A more AI centric definition is given by Murphy ,  
 “ a mechanical creature which can function autonomously ” 
The definition specifically mentions ‘ creature ’ and conforms to anthropomorphism
and dovetails the works of Toda [ 322 ] and Wilson [ 356 ]  . Implicitly it also suggests that
autonomous functioning overlaps with intelligent behaviour . 
As a working definition as per the scope of this chapter , a robot is an autonomous
or semi-autonomous agency that undertakes jobs under direct human control , or it is
partially autonomous but supervised and groomed by human supervision , or completely
autonomously . In later chapters , one will find that this definition is not enough and as
we progress towards newer realms of agent-based robotics , the definition will need to be
modified . 
Early ideas of Artificial Intelligence were suggested by Alan Turing in the late 1930s
with hypothetical models which he called the automatic machine , which was later named
the Turing machine . This was the bare bones of a central processing unit and helped to
design computers in the post-war era . These early concepts were made into a fledgling
discipline by the pioneering effort of McCarthy , Minsky , Newell and Simon . 
Artificial Intelligence can be partitioned into the following seven subdivisions [ 248 ]  . 
1 . Knowledge representation . How does the robot represent the world ? In human
 33
context , for simple jobs such as locomotion , we tend to use maps or landmarks and
resort to previous knowledge and experience . A robot does it using lasers or sonar , 
a table in the real world will reduce to an array of numbers corresponding to the
intensity as perceived by the sensor . Since the onboard microprocessor if not very
powerful , these methods approximate the dimensions and reduce objects to assortment
of cubes , cuboids etc . much like a minecraft world . 
2 . Natural language . Language is unique since such unification of syntactic and
semantic structures exists only for human beings and not in animals and is the
definitive underpinning of our cultural and social systems . Noted linguist Noam
Chomsky opines that language is at the interface of the two prominent cognitive
processes : it is sensorimotor for externalisation and more intentional and deliberative
for conceptual mental processing . To make robots understand and respond to human
voice comes into play only in designing and developing more sophisticated robots
which can closely interact with human society . Natural language processing libraries
and chatbots have been very promising and are discussed in Chapter 7 . Voice based
systems are still being explored into and Siri from Apple , Cortana from Microsoft and
Google Now are promising results . 
3 . Learning . Robots are programmed with a number of task specific manoeuvre , but
these are not exhaustive and to perform efficiently it must learn from experience . 
Popular learning paradigms are cased based approach , artificial neural network , fuzzy
logic and evolutionary methods . Nearly all state-of-the-art robot have a learning
module . 
4 . Planning and problem solving . Making plans or algorithmic steps to accomplish a
goal and solve the problems encountered in this process is inherent to AI agents , and
is often a mark of their performance . For simple robots , planning is largely motion
planning . However planning is also required for more interesting tasks such as , solving
the Rubik ’ s cube , a game of chess , sliding tile puzzle , building a stack of blocks , 
making a schedule of daily chores etc . 
5 . Inference is to develop a conclusion from incomplete or inaccurate data sets . A
robot often encounters inaccurate data from the sensors . In order to encounter this
and prevent complete system shutdown the robot has to rely on inference , and ensures
continuance of the processes . 
6 . Search for a robot usually means a search in the physical space — searching for an
object or a goal point , but it can also mean a heuristic search where the robot is
searching out solutions in an analytical manner . 
7 . Vision has become an integral part of robotics . For human beings , vision is unique
compared to the other senses and is the trigger for most of our motor actions , the
same is true for most of the animal world , so efforts to invent models of intelligence
which can manipulate its local environment will have to address vision . Psychologists
contend that vision enables our inner world , and nearly every consequence of our
actions is simulated in our inner world prior to acting it out in the real world . Vision
has had an important place in AI since early days with the pioneering research of
Gibson [ 121 ] and later Marr [ 221 ]  . Vision appeals unlike any of the other senses , and
the overlap of ‘ looking ’ and ‘ seeing ’ seems as a deliberative process involving fast
processing from our brain , but in more recent times , enactive models have established
vision as an exploitative sensorimotor model . 
34  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 1 Agent-world cycle , the agent and the world interact cyclically : agent acts on the
world , the change in the world influences perceptions of the agent . 
2 . 2 . 1 What is an ‘ agent ’  ? 
The term ‘ agent ’ is interchangeably used with robots , programs , behaviours , animated
characters etc . and can mean software as well as hardware implements . Russell and Norvig
qualify an agent as an abstract entity which perceives its environment using sensors and
acts upon that environment through effectors . Mobile robotics research is replete with the
nomenclature for ‘ autonomous agents ’  , autonomy is more often defined on context , or as
per behaviour . 
Autonomy loosely would mean that no other entity is required to feed its input nor is any
required to keep it running . The robots can sense and act to fulfill given and implied goals
in a dynamic environment , and they can go on working without any external intervention
for substantially long periods of time . Franklin and Graesser [ 111 ] suggest the following
definition for autonomous agents :  
 “ An autonomous agent is a system situated within and a part of an environment
that senses that environment and acts on it , over time , in pursuit of its own
agenda and so as to effect what it senses in the future .  ” 
This agent is a part of the environment , and thrives on interactivity as shown in Figure
2 . 1 . This line of thought leads to a classification as suggested by Luck et al .  [ 210 ] shown in
Figure 2 . 2 , however since agency is context-based , a strict categorisation into agents and
non-agents would be superfluous if not just redundant . Every agent is situated , and is a
part of the world . It can interact with the world and change the world and also its own
perceptions . Caution should be taken to distinguish software agent from just any program . 
As an illustration , a program which prints a line of text is not an agent , because it works
on an input from a user . It doesn ’ t have any facility to interact with the environment ( in
the real world ) or other programs ( in the software world )  . This output would not effect
later programs that are run and it runs once and stops lacking temporal continuity . While
characters in a computer game ,  ( viz . the ghosts in pac man ) are agents as they have their
own perception and consciously interact with the world ( pac man 2D universe )  , every action
from the player has consequences which enables an action from the ghosts , thus dynamically
 35
FIGURE 2 . 2 Autonomous agent definition , adapted from Luck et al .  [ 210 ] 
changing the environment and , once run the game characters keep doing their job until the
end of the game . 
It is rewarding to have a quick jog through the various types of definitions that has been
suggested for agents . One of the earliest definition is by Virdhagriswaran , with an eye on
mobile agent technology ;  
 “ The term agent is used to represent two orthogonal concepts . The first is
the agent ’ s ability for autonomous execution . The second is the agent ’ s ability
to perform domain oriented reasoning ” 
Russell and Norvig , acknowledged the binding between the sensing and acting ;  
 “ An autonomous agent is a system situated within and a part of an environment
that senses that environment and acts on it , over time , in pursuit of its own
agenda and so as to effect what it senses in the future .  ” 
Maes , from a roboticist ’ s point of view , added the inherent pursuit of the agent towards
a set of goal ;  
 “ Autonomous agents are computational systems that inhabit some complex
dynamic environment , sense and act autonomously in this environment , and
by doing so realize a set of goals or tasks for which they are designed ” 
Hayes-Roth ’ s defintion made agent interaction as an overlap of perception , action and
reason ;  
 “ Intelligent agents continuously perform three functions : perception of dynamic
conditions in the environment ; action to affect conditions in the environment ; 
and reasoning to interpret perceptions , solve problems , draw inferences , and
determine actions ” 
These definitions can be further extended , viz .  ( 1 ) the ability to perceive information
from the world as a cognitive agent , as most mobile robots are ,  ( 2 ) to work in unison with a
large number of agents to lead to collective agency as in robot groups and swarms — swarm
36  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
agency which is discussed in Chapter 6 ,  ( 3 ) to demonstrate significant autonomy , intentional
behaviour and concerns of responsibility to define moral agency – Artificial Moral Agent 
( AMA ) which is discussed in Chapter 8 and ( 4 ) ability to construct causality of two or more
events and demonstrate a semblance of consciousness will convey towards conscious agency
which is discussed in Chapter 9 . 
2 . 3 EMBODIED AI - MAKING OF AUTONOMOUS AGENTS
Toda ’ s fungus eaters [ 322 ] were the earliest model of complete autonomous agents . Previous
model by Simon [ 304 , 305 ] provided a foundation for Toda ’ s hypothetical animal . Toda ’ s
fungus eaters could survive both the tough terrain and attacks from predators and
simultaneously strive towards its goal of collecting uranium . Both Simon ’ s and Toda ’ s
models provided extension to Walter ’ s experimental work and related physiological concepts
as starvation and hunger threshold making the hypothetical animal negotiate trade-offs
between attaining goals ( collecting uranium ) and survival ( not running out of fungus and
continuing its energetic wellbeing )  . Simon had concluded that in a treacherous and life
threatening terrain , a randomly selected path will greatly jeopardise the chance of survival , 
however there exist hints in the environment which an organism must exploit for survival . 
Toda used similar ideas and also equipped the artificial animal with multiple sensors , early
ideas of incremental learning and adaptability . Behavioural economics approach , dynamical
systems approach and evolutionary approach are some of the design principles probed
in the early 1990s , these developments were instrumental in the ANIMAT approach and
interconnected the principles of anthropomorphism , autonomy and sensory-motor for the
development process . Here , I discuss Toda ’ s model and how it has motivated research in
the last 50 odd years . 
2 . 3 . 1 Toda ’ s model for fungus eaters
Toda ’ s fungus eaters were humanoid , artificial creatures mining uranium at planet Taros , 
α-Sapporo star system served as the first models for autonomous agents . These artificial
creatures were supposed to have the means of collection , locomotion and ability for
decision making by virtue of information perceived from the environment . Toda ’ s seminal
research paper titled ,  “ The design of a fungus eater : a model of human behaviour in an
unsophisticated environment ”  , blended Darwinian-like survival instincts with sensory-motor
based stimulus-response with models of rationality with commercial goals to search , mine
and store uranium ores . It also incorporated game theory and behavioural psychology to
develop the fungus eater as an asymptote for human behaviour . Toda ’ s efforts were an
extension of Simon ’ s model , where it was suggested that the ability of making rational
choices is not accrued into the agent but rather governed by its environment . Toda ’ s
approach did not subscribe to traditional psychological methods of observation , test , 
experiment and statistics rather Toda suggested the study of complete systems , rather
than only isolated aspects like planning , memory , or decision making . 
The project Solitary Fungus Eaters ( SFE ) is set in the year 2061 when these artificial
animals are sent to an imaginary planet named Taros , in the α-Sapporo star system , for
collecting uranium ores . The source of replenishment for these creatures is a type of fungus
that is typical to that planet . These fungus eaters took instructions from the base command
and there was no communication among themselves . The fungus eaters would roam around
collecting uranium , unloading it in marked containers until they became inactive due to lack
of fungi ( starvation ) or accident . Toda ’ s Taros is a planet with not much to its environment , 
 37
and it is littered with black and white pebbles with the much valued fungi being grey in
colour . However , project SFE is seen to be of low efficiency and Toda ’ s seminal paper enlists
suggestions to improve performance ; 
1 . The fungus eaters are designed as wheeled humanoids , Toda [ 261 , 322 ] suggests that
the bodily form should be determined after the study of the terrain , gravity , climatic
conditions , humidity , temperature , topography etc . 
2 . Since the primary job of the fungus eaters is to navigate the terrain and collect uranium
and fungus at Taros which is a flat topology , this merits a wheeled model rather than
legs . 
3 . Toda develops detailed designs for the visual sensors or eyes , which should be at the
top of the body for maximum visibility . 
4 . Height of the fungus eaters should be optimal , too tall may not be cost effective and
might be unstable , while too short will hinder the process of surveying the terrain
effectively . 
5 . Addition of an olfactory sensor to smell out the fungus is also recommended . 
6 . Choice programs , for a fungus eater let E ( ur ) be the expected amount of uranium
acquired following path r ; Σru is the uranium picked up by the fungus eater ; let v0
be the initial amount of fungus storage prior to engaging in the exploit of path r ; let
Σrv the fungus eaten along the path r and wr the best estimated amount of fungus
to be consumed to finish the path , 
E ( ur )  = Σru + f ( v0 , Σrv , wr )  ( 2 . 1 ) 
where the form of function2 f will depend on the adaptability of the fungus eater
to the terrain . Toda further suggests that f will improve with experience , suggesting
learning and memorising techniques . Toda develops stochastic models of the above
choice program and melds path planning with the physiological constraints of the
fungus eaters . 
7 . After the modifications , the fungus eater is supposed to have three sensors at its
disposal : geiger counter for uranium , olfaction for finding fungus and visual sensors
for navigation . Toda suggests development of programs for coordination between these
3 streams of incoming information . These are early concepts of sensor integration . 
8 . Toda later extends his model to consider emotion , irrational behaviour , adding
conditions for stopping an ongoing process — which would concur with ‘ exceptions
handling ’ and the halting problem — and finally Toda introduces predators at planet
Taros to simulate prey-predator like social psychological and game theoretic models . 
Toda ’ s model served as a blueprint for an autonomous and self-sufficient agency with
a set of goals , working over long periods of time without any external support and
incrementally adapting to the environment . Much like Walter , Toda also believed that this
approach will lead to models of human behaviour and cognition . 
2 . 3 . 2 Design principles for autonomous AI agents
Toda ’ s model was broadly built on sensory-motor principles , and the fungus eater lacked
the ability for appreciable cerebral activities , so however good uranium miners they may
2Toda uses a linear relation , f ( v0 + Σrv − wr ) in his model , while I have used f ( v0 , Σrv , wr )  . 
38  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
have been , one would never hear them whistle a tune or sing along to liven up the ambiance . 
Therefore , the fungus eater model did not consider emotions and motivations . After about
two decades , first Braitenberg and then Pfeifer designed models of emotion , viz . love , 
hate , attraction etc . using simple sensory-motor principles , and demonstrated that reactive
models also lead to emotions and a value system . That does raise question : does autonomy , 
emotions and a value system mean intelligence ? Is fungus eater and later its improvements
intelligent ? The answer would lead us to look into the typical characteristics of embodied
cognition [ 354 ]  . 
1 . Cognition is situated . Unlike the generic notion of cognition , embodied cognition is
a situated activity . The agent interacts with a real-world environment , and cognition
happens due to perception-action pairings . Situated cognition involves a continuous
process , where perceptual information continues to flow through the sensors which
leads to motor action which in turn changes the environment in task-relevant ways . 
Walking , tightening a screw , switching on a light bulb are some examples of situated
cognition . Wilson points out that large portions of human cognition takes place 
 ‘ off-line ’  , without any task relevant input and output , thus without any appreciable
participation of the environment , and by definition is not situated . Creative thought
processes such as writing a letter or scripting musical notes are examples . 
2 . Cognition is time-pressured . Embodied cognition is often accompanied with the
terms ‘ real time ’ and ‘ run time ’  . Since , embodied cognition is situated , it requires
real-time response from the environment . The time pressure , if not met , leads to 
 ‘ representational bottleneck ’ and instead of a continuously evolving response the
system fails to build a full symbolic model . Behaviour-based approach is a remedy
to such bottlenecks , and proceeds by generating situation-appropriate action on the
fly by considering real-time situated action as the basis for cognitive activity , which
appreciably lessens the time pressure . However , such models of situated cognition
cannot be scaled up and therefore never lead to a model for human cognition . 
3 . The agency off-loads cognitive work onto the environment . Situated agency
attempts to use the environment in strategic ways , by manipulating the environment
to attend to the job at hand , rather than fully shaping up the system response to the
concerned behaviour . For example , navigation with a compass exploits the magnetic
alignment of the planet to enable finding the right direction . Similarly for the task of
assembly , the pieces are arranged or used nearly in the order and spatial relationships
of the desired finished product . This off-loading happens because there is usually a
limit on the information processing , physical limits on attention and a limited working
memory available to the agent . Concepts of psychology and behaviourism confirm this
facet , as is seen later in the chapter . 
4 . The environment is part of the cognitive system . Cognition is not an activity of
the mind but is distributed across the agency and the situation as they interact and is
the result of continuous agent-environment interactions . Therefore , the situation and
the situated agency are a single system . Similar ideas have been expressed by Uxekull , 
from a biological point of view , as will be discussed later . 
5 . Cognition is for action . Unlike cognition as per traditional AI , embodied cognition
is always action oriented . Perception is dynamic , real time and occurs in tandem with
motor action . 
6 . Off-line cognition is body-based . When not situated in the environment , in the
decoupled agency , cognitive processes are driven by mental structures which are similar
to simulations of sensory processing and motor control . The concept of the inner word
is discussed in detail later in the context of conscious agency . 
 39
Therefore , the fungus eater can be said to be the most fundamental cognitive behaviour . 
However this model is incomplete in regards to the psychological state of such an agency
and cognitive processing achieved is very low . It is compelling to suggest that the mind
must be understood as an attribute of the agent ’ s body continuously interacting with
the environment . Biological evolution has witnessed growth from the purely reactive , in
single-celled organisms , to cognitive minds as in human beings ; therefore our ascent has
been from creatures with primary skills of perceptual sensing and motoring , and whose
cognition consisted more of immediate , on-line interaction with the environment than
cerebral activities . Therefore , from this argument , sensory-motor processing is a ground
level intelligent behaviour . The fungus eater brings to light a set of design principles and
guidelines for developing artificial autonomous AI agents [ 262 ]  : 
1 . The complete agent , or the ‘ fungus eater principle ’  . Embodied AI agents are :  
( a ) Autonomous ; capable of executing required tasks in the real world without human
interventions 
( b ) Self sufficient ; they can sustain themselves over extended periods of time ,  
( c ) Embodied ; they must be designed as dynamical systems , in the real world . 
Simulations , though useful , are not sufficient to appreciate agent world dynamics 
( d ) Situated ; the agent world dynamics is controlled from an agent perspective , which
is enriched with experience
The ‘ fungus eater principle ’  , is not in agreement with traditional AI and agency is
defined by its embodiments and context . However , an agency completely fulfilling all
of the above four criterion doesn ’ t yet exist . 
2 . Ecological niche . The first principle makes sense only once the agent is in ecological
niche with the world . AI agents typically lack in universality and the versatality seen
in human intelligence , and are often designed for a particular niche . The execution
of a behaviour is done in the real world by the capabilities afforded by the agent
world interactions . For example , a line follower will not heed any command such as ,  
 ‘ move forward ’  , until its sensors can perceive the black / white line it is supposed to
follow . Similarly , flocking algorithms in multi robot systems are designed considering
a sufficiently large flock , and are found to be ineffective with low number of robots . A
niche can be seen as relations which strongly tie the agent to the local environment . 
The concept of a niche is in contrast to classical AI , and instead of computer programs
coded by a programmer , intelligence is defined as the interworking of the agent and
the local environment . 
3 . Parallel processes . Observations from biology confirm that cognition happens as an
overlap of a number of parallel processes . These processes run parallel to each other , 
loosely coupled , asynchronous and they require little or no centralised control . The lack
of a centralised control reduces performance to a mere reflexive motion . It has been the
subject of debate whether higher level , human-like cognition can truly be developed
with the lack of centralised control3 
. For human beings , our cognitive abilities are an
overlap of the five senses conjoined with memory and reasoning from our brain and
clearly we engage in various activities which are more diverse than those of insects , 
rats etc . However , as I will discuss later this principle has been very successful and
led to the development of behaviour-based approach in designing mobile robots . 
4 . Learning mechanisms and a ‘ value principle ’  . The ‘ value principle ’ broadly conveys , 
3
In Chapter 9 , this contention will be discussed further in the perspective of artificial consciousness
40  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
that the agent is able to judge what is good for itself - a set of values . Implicit values
can be developed with supervised learning or by tailoring the sensor response . 
5 . Sensory-motor coordination . Primitive levels of cognition as locomotion , suggested in
the previous two principles would be manifested using a sensory-motor model . This
would mean classification , perception and memory should be viewed as sensory-motor
coordinations rather relying on reactive performance than as individual modules . 
6 . Ecological balance . For every artificial agent to perform optimally , there needs to be
a sync between the sensor , processing and actuation . As an example , a robot which is
equipped with a sophisticated motion sensor cannot have low processing power such
as primitive PIC microprocessor . Such will add to lag time and bottlenecking , and
will deter its performance . 
7 . Good design , for embodied agents exploits agent world interaction and the ecological
niche . Consider a robot which is tasked to go around a square of 5 meters in an
anticlockwise trajectory . The job can be accomplished with a program which turns
the robot at a right angle after every 5 meters or alternatively , it can be made to
work with a light sensor and a black strip made according to the robot ’ s trajectory , 
and the programming is made such that the robot turns at a right angle whenever the
black strip ends . The first method will incur error due to friction and other dissipative
forces and will start to give wrong trajectories after a few runs , but the second solution
to the problem is strongly tied to the local environment and will always give good
trajectories , until of course the on-board batteries run down . This principle is more
useful than is apparent , particularly in swarm robotics , which will be discussed in
Chapter 6 . 
The next section discusses how motivations from the natural world have shaped
agent-based robotics . 
Moravec ’ s Paradox
Moravec observed , that to design and develop elementary sensorimotor skills
required more extensive resources than getting it to acquire high-level logical reasoning . 
It was seen that , making an artificial agency play a game of checkers or respond to an
IQ test is much easier than replicating the perception and motor skills of a one-year-old
baby . 
FIGURE 2 . 3 Parking lot problem . What is the number under the parked car ? To solve this
rather simple problem one has to turn the image top side down , thus using a human ability , 
while an algorithmic route fails . Image of the car , CC image at pixbay . 
This paradox is due to our attempts to recreate biologically intelligent entities via
programming routes . The rules for biological systems such as human cognition has
evolved through interactions with the environment over billions of years of evolution
 41
and has been encoded into our genetic material . We still do not know how most of these
processes work and we resort to approximate mathematical models to replicate them
in the artificial domain . Some researchers do point out that the bone of contention is
that AI researchers , philosophers and psychologists have yet to converge on how we
define intelligence . However , a comparison of a human brain to an artificial intelligence
tells us some of the story . In the human brain , connecting neurons store memories , 
distributing information and generating thoughts through sensations received broadly
from the outside world and often related to previous memory and stimulus response
acquired over years of learning ; thus providing different responses to any given situation . 
Our perception of the outer world is with our sensory organs — which contributes
to our mental states . The CPU on the other hand is structured on digital logic , 
following algorithms . Simple facets of human perception cannot often be tackled with a
computational basis and such starts at the very nascent level as a one-year-old baby . On
the other hand , a game of checkers or an IQ test are problems which can be pursued with
an algorithmic approach , the rules for which are readily known and can be programmed
into an AI agent . 
2 . 4 ANTHROPOMORPHISM — A TREASURE TROVE FROM MOTHER
NATURE
Robots are often motivated from mother nature . Da Vinci ’ s birds and lions are the earliest
examples of anthropomorphism . Four particular concepts have helped robotics cross the
bridge from the natural world to the artificial :  ( 1 )  ‘ UMWELT ’ or the harmony of the inner
and outer world ,  ( 2 ) ecological approaches which are based on vision ,  ( 3 ) the techniques
in psychology to manipulate and modify behaviour and ( 4 ) principles to design of artificial
animals like Toda ’ s fungus eaters . 
2 . 4 . 1 Concepts from semiotics — ‘ UMWELT ’ 
Uexkull ’ s semiotics was an inquiry into harmony of the sensed world and the real world , 
studied across a large number of creatures and established sensing as a tool for the agency
to construct an ‘ inner world ’ and thus find meaning to objects . 
The word ‘ UMWELT ’ in German means both environment and ecology . Uexkull pictured
it as unique phenomenal worlds embracing the agent , as though ‘ UMWELT ’ is much like a
soap bubble surrounding the organism . The ‘ UMWELT ’ surrounds the agent and contains
objects and processes pertaining to its natural workings . Also the agent is always striving
towards a perception of reality , thereby actively creating its ‘ UMWELT ’ 4 
. Therefore , an
agent ’ s ‘ UMWELT ’  , is the best agreement formed by the perceptual and effector worlds
together , as shown in the schematics of the functional cycle in Figure 2 . 4 . The organism ’ s
nervous system is equipped with receptors ( sense net ) and effectors ( effect net )  . The
sense net helps to represent some particular features of the organism ’ s UMWELT . The
representation produced by a unique receptor is marked to a feature sign . The effect net
produces muscle impulse patterns and stimulates effector cells to produce effector sign . If
a particular feature in the organism ’ s UMWELT stimulates the cells of the receptors , the
corresponding sense net produces a feature cue . This cycle is incremental and enriched with
4Uexkull introduced this term in 1909 in his book The Environment and Inner World of Animals . 
42  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 4 Functional cycle and the inner world attempts to unify sensing and acting , over
the the perceptual field and the motor field respectively . This helps to incrementally build the
agent ’ s inner world . 
feedback and is therefore reafferent . Identifying features in an organisms UMWELT to suit
its well being develops with gradual experience , as it explores more of its world . 
A simple world for a simple organism such as a paramecium or a tick , a well-articulated
world for a complex ones , such as human beings , a bat ’ s ‘ UMWELT ’ is governed by
echolocation as is shown in Figure 2 . 5 . The soap bubble analogy is most appreciable in
lower animals limited by a few number of senses , and is not very visible for higher animals
and human beings . 
These ideas conveyed that the mind and the world are inseparable , because it is the
mind that interprets the world for the organism . It will be seen , that Uexkull ’ s semiotics
forms the basis of enactive cognition , which is now considered the fundamental model of
cognition in embodied AI . 
Illustrating the concept of ‘ UMWELT ’  , with examples : 
1 . Female tick : The tick often nests on the human / animal body and feeds on human
blood . The female tick is oblivious to most of the things that we human beings find
interesting . The life of a tick is concerned with finding a warm-blooded mammal to
feed on its blood and to lay its eggs and then die . The tick is both deaf and blind
but has a photosensitive skin and after mating it is guided by the sun to the highest
point on a blade of grass or the top of a branch , until its prey , the mammal , comes
along . The tick is able to recognise its prey by the smell of its sweat ( butyric acid
from sebaceous follicles ) typical of all mammals , and then the tick falls towards its
prey . Once on the mammal , its next job is to find a warm , hairless spot to feed on , 
nest and lay eggs . These three biosemiotic indicators make up the tick ’ s ‘ UMWELT ’  ,  
( 1 ) guiding by the sun ,  ( 2 ) sensing the sweat of the mammal and ( 3 ) sensing the heat
and finding a hairless spot on the prey mammal . 
2 . Fighting fish : Fighting fishes do not recognise their own reflection unless at a minimum
of 30 times per second [ 35 ]  . This helps us make inroads into their ‘ UMWELT ’  . These
fishes prey on fast moving fishes and other sea creatures . Their motor processes are at
 43
FIGURE 2 . 5 ‘ UMWELT ’ — Unique Phenomenal World . Here the ‘ UMWELT ’ for a bat , 
shown as a soap bubble is more or less determined by its echolocation . The phenomenology is
unique to the creature , and helps it to perceive its world . The bat is also a topic of interesting
discussion in artificial consciousness , as will be seen in chapter 9 . 
reduced speeds — like a slow-motion camera — thus their ability to hunt down their 
 ‘ slow moving ’ prey . 
3 . Bee : It has been observed that bees have a preference for alighting on objects which
have broken shapes such as stars and crosses , and are seen to avoid compact forms
such as circles and squares . A bee has the primary job of collecting nectar from
blossoming flowers . Correlating this to a bee ’ s ‘ UMWELT ’  , it perceives blossoming
flowers as stars and crosses , while buds are perceived as compact forms — probably
as circles and squares . It is worth noting that the bee is probably one of the lowest
creatures that has awareness of shape and form , while lower creatures such as the
paramecium , mollusk , earthworm , tick , etc .  , lack in such schemata , and thus have no
true perceptual images in their inner worlds . All higher creatures , such as animals
and human beings have an appreciation for shape , form and direction , which shows
in their inner worlds . 
This was a radically different attempt to understand biology , not as a technical model but
as an ever-unfolding and ever-transforming harmonious agreement between the autonomous
being and its ‘ UMWELT ’  , where the focus is not to study agents as objects , but as active
subjects via their interaction with their environments . This approach has helped to develop
the concept of embodiment and ecology in embedded AI , as will be discussed in the rest of
the chapter . 
2 . 4 . 2 Concepts from ecology — Uniqueness of vision
Visual perception has a special place in AI . It is usually the strongest of all human
perceptions , and forms the most persistent memories . Vision comprises both sensation , 
as a reactive stimuli ( to see ) and also as a deliberative perception , relating objects and
events in the environment ( to watch )  . Various theories for vision have been forwarded over
44  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
the last 300 years ; Berkley ’ s empiricism ( early 1700s )  , Gestalt six point principles ( 1920s ) 
and Gregory ’ s top down approach ( 1970 ) are the more traditional approaches to vision , 
where the concept of vision relies heavily on known visual representations of the world . 
Therefore in traditional view , vision actively constructs our perception of reality based on
our environment , known representations and memory , and is more or less silent on dynamics
of the environment or the agency . 
Since vision cannot be readily manipulated as a sensory-motor pair , researchers have
considered other routes to model it and , while image processing is often a favoured tool and
is used in robotics research , alternatively simpler and inexpensive robots usually employ
non-visual sensors such as sonar and infrared , which provide metric distance information , 
supplementing in low-level tasks and navigation-centric behaviour . 
Gibson [ 121 ] in the 1980s and Marr [ 221 ] in the 1990s provided the impetus towards
modelling vision as an ecological phenomenon . The function of vision is to produce
descriptions and representations of what ’ s out there in the field of view , the shape and
space and spatial arrangement , and also help in acquiring higher level information such as
reading a sign board . Gibson suggested that vision is not merely limited to such cognitive
processes but often the mechanism to orchestrate motion . Gibson ’ s bottom up approach
was the first in psychology to relate motion in tandem with perception , a radical departure
from traditional theories of vision . Gibson was critical of both behaviourism and internal
representations and developed the concept of optical flow . Similarly Marr rejected image
processing and considered vision as information flow than interlinking of isolated standalone
phenomenon . 
Gibson ’ s approach was based on information flow and considered the environment and
the observer as ‘ inseparable pairs ’  . Where the environment should not be modelled as a
coordinate frame but rather in ecological aspects ; medium , substance and surfaces etc . as
animals perceive the latter not the former . Vision is modelled on the optic array , which
is formed of all the rays converging on a given point . The optic array is different at each
point , so for an observer in motion the array changes continuously creating an optical
information flow field . The transformations in the optic array sampled by a moving observer
simultaneously specify the path of locomotion , rather than the more traditional coordinate
frame for start point and end point etc . The Optic flow contains information about both the
layout of the surface and the motion of the agency . Gibson ’ s model states that properties of
the environment as perceived by the agency are usually due to the physical and physiological
ability of the observer . For example ,  ( 1 ) surfaces of a certain height , size and inclination
afford sitting on by humans , those of a different height and size afford stepping up on and 
( 2 ) objects moving at a certain speed afford catching . Others are too fast or too slow etc . It
is to be noted that these actions are ubiquitous reactions from human psychology and not
learned with experience etc . Perception of these possibilities for motion are essential , and
they are contained in the optic array . To start locomotion is to contract muscles so as to
allow the forward optic array to flow outward ; to stop locomotion is to make this flow stop . 
Therefore , the agent ’ s internal forces are a function of the optic flow [ 98 ]  . 
Finternal = g ( flow )  ( 2 . 2 ) 
Where Finternal is the internal force and flow is the optic flow . Utilising such control
laws and extending ecological psychology into robotics has seen promising results in robots
interacting in a real-time dynamic environment with obstacles and human beings . Such
a radical theory of vision clearly lacks in quantifying optic flow or internal force , as it is
dependent on the context and the agency etc . However , it does hint towards ideas that
locomotion is not rote Newtonian mechanics , but is driven by perception which is triggered
 45
for psychological and ecological reasons . Extending Gibson ’ s framework in biology , Duchon 
[ 99 ] summarises the following principles for ecological robotics . 
1 . The agent and the environment are ‘ inseparable ’ and treated as a system
2 . The agent ’ s behaviour emerges out of the dynamics of the system
3 . Depending on the relationship between perception and action , the agent is tasked with
mapping available information to the control , to realise a desired state for the system
4 . The environment provides information and hints to encourage adaptive behaviour
5 . Since the agent is a part of the environment , no a priori or real-time 3D map or model
is needed
Duchon demonstrated robot navigation and obstacle avoidance using the above
principles . 
Since , cognition is not something that occurs ‘ inside ’ an agent , but is attributed to its
embodiment , the cognition of the agency in its environments is marked in the adaptive
interaction itself . Therefore , the environment that is experienced by the agent is not only
conditioned by its own agency , but is enacted-in , in such a way that it emerges through
the bodily activities of the agent . The experienced world is portrayed and determined
by mutual interactions between the physiology of the agent , its sensorimotor circuit and
the environment5 as is shown in Figure 2 . 6 . This means that the agent ’ s body is a live , 
experiential structure and also the context for all cognitive actions [ 333 ] and therefore
perception doesn ’ t happen to an agency or inside an agency , but rather the perceiving is the
action . According to the enactive approach [ 320 ]  , agency ’ brings forth ’ their own cognitive
domains , with the ability to exercise some control on their own selves , primarily for well
being and sustenance . Therefore , the agent makes its agency in direct interaction with
itself and its environment . Symbolic computation and the informational model is not the
essence of cognition , neither can external events dictate the cognitive process . Cognition is
contextual , and never happens in abstraction , and it is the adaptive coordination and control
of actions achieved by the overlap of embodied and situated cognition . Lastly , Experience
is important to the understanding of cognition and the mind . 
O ’ Regan and Noe [ 259 , 260 ] have suggested that vision and visual consciousness is indeed
a sensorimotor activity which is strongly tied to action , and works more as exploratory
sensing than as a strict sensorimotor pair . This explorative process is mediated by the
knowledge of what the authors have termed ‘ sensorimotor contingencies ’  . This approach
emphasises the phenomenal character of vision rather than its more traditionally held
representational nature .  ‘ Sensorimotor contingencies ’ can be defined as the regularities of
sensory stimulation as per the action of the perceiver . The perceiver ’ s vision acquaints itself
to known shapes , colour , texture , lighting and active processes , which helps it to discern
the known world . 
For example , since vision is enabled as sampling of a two-dimensional projection of
three-dimensional space the top view of a 2D square and a 3D cube may appear to be
the same , but a slight movement towards or away from the object , leads to expansion or
contracting of the amount of light entering the retina and therefore the eye will perceive
it differently . Another example is , since each colour dictates the amount of light reflected , 
each colour patch corresponds to a unique contingency , and thus often conveys psychological
meaning , viz . red which has light reflectance values between 0 . 4 and 0 . 5 , reflects nearly half
of the incidence radiations , and therefore causes higher retinal excitation than other colours . 
Hence , red is associated with excitation , warmth etc . 
5The enactive approach was suggested by Varela , Thompson and Rosch , by extending Merleau-Ponty ’ s
phenomenology of the body . 
46  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 6 Enactive agency is a continuous process of exploration of the environment where the
self-constitution is the agent ’ s identity , which is conserved during coupling with its environment 
( continous arrows )  . The coupling relations change with adaptivity ( dotted arrows )  . Adapted from
Froese and Di Paolo [ 113 ]  . 
The experience of vision occurs when the agent has mastered or experienced , over a
good number of times , these known laws of how the brain codes visual attributes , to develop 
 ‘ sensorimotor contingencies ’ and enable explorative sensing in other words , enactive inquiry
of the world . As we have seen , vision is strongly tied to action and it is arguably the most
important sensing capability of enactive agency . 
2 . 4 . 3 Concepts from psychology — Behaviourism
Behaviourism , a branch of psychology , is the study of the relation between one ’ s
environments and the impending behaviour . It is broadly a ‘ black box ’ approach and the
cerebral functions of the brain are irrelevant . Behaviourism found great favour between 1920s
to 1950 . Early pioneer were Pavlov , Twitmyer and Thorndike , all working independently . 
Pavlov ’ s experiments in the 1890s were focused on digestion in dogs as shown with a hint of
humour in Figure 2 . 7 , where the dogs would first be exposed to the sound of the metronome , 
and then food was immediately served . After several such trials , it was observed that the
dogs began to salivate after hearing the metronome . The metronome had acquired the
property of stimulating salivary secretion . Pavlov ’ s findings confirmed that a previously
neutral stimulus , the metronome , after many trials had become a conditioned stimulus that
would provoke salivation . Similar results were reported by Twitmyer . This modification of
an animal behaviour where a biological stimulus is paired with a previously neutral stimulus 
( such as sound or light etc .  ) is known as classical or Pavlovian conditioning . 
In the 1930s , Skinner developed operant conditioning , which relied on modifying
behaviour by its consequence , either by reinforcement or punishment and not by
manipulating a reflex of the Pavlovian conditioning . Typical Skinner box experiments on
rats , as shown in Figure 2 . 8 , presented the subject rat with positive reinforcement such as
food on pressing a particular lever and negative punishment such as denying food or positive
punishment such as subjecting the rat to a minor electric shock or a spray of cold water on
pressing a different lever or a button . Over time , the rats would press the food lever more
frequently and avoid the punishment causing levers / buttons . Over time a stimuli worked as
 47
FIGURE 2 . 7 Pavlov ’ s dogs . One of the earliest experiments in behaviourism was conducted by
Pavlov , where he studied digestion in dogs for his theory of conditioned reflex .  ( c ) 2003 Mark
Stivers www . stiverscartoons . com , used with permission . 
a means for manipulating response and therefore as a control of the subject . The five types
of operant conditioning are shown in Figure 2 . 9 . 
Reinforcement can happen in two ways , in positive reinforcement a response is followed
by a reward such as , viz . presented with food on pressing a lever , and in negative
reinforcement a response leads to a stemming of an unpleasant influence such as , viz . the rat
was subject to a loud annoying noise which was switched off when it pressed a lever / button . 
Punishment also has two modes , in positive punishment a response is followed by something
unpleasant , and in negative punishment the response removes something pleasant . Both
scenarios discourage the response . It is not always easy to discern between punishment
and negative reinforcement . Usually , punishment is characterised by modulating fear and
engages an aggressive response , and punishment is suppression and the response is seen
once when punishment is removed over a long period of time . In extinction , a previously
reinforced response is no longer reinforced with either positive or negative reinforcement , 
and as a result of not experiencing an expected outcome weakens the response . Skinner
believed that operant conditioning can be used to design in an organism extremely complex
and rich behaviour . 
The contrast of classical and operant conditioning is that the former warrants a reflexive
behaviour while the latter works to manipulate a stimuli to control the subject ’ s behaviour . 
Behaviourism has directly influenced agent-based robotics , the takeaways are : 
1 . Behaviourism is primarily concerned with observable behaviour , as opposed to internal
events like thinking and emotion . Observable ( i . e .  , external ) behaviour can be
48  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 8 The Skinner box . is the experimental tool to study both operant conditioning and
classical conditioning . The box is a glass-lined enclosure that contains a key , or a bar or a lever
that an animal can press in response to a specific stimuli , such as a light or sound signal , which
will then release food or water as reinforcement . 
FIGURE 2 . 9 Operant conditioning . Reinforcement and punishment are the control mechanisms
of Skinner ’ s approach . 
objectively and scientifically measured . Internal events , such as thinking , should be
explained through behavioural terms — or eliminated altogether . 
2 . People have no free will ; a person ’ s environment determines behaviour
3 . When born , our mind is a blank slate , with no memory , nor any experience . 
4 . There is little difference between the learning that takes place in humans and that in
other animals . Therefore research can be carried out on animals as well as humans . 
5 . Behaviour is the result of response to stimulus . Thus , all behaviour , no matter
how complex , can be reduced to simple stimulus response models . Skinner ’ s
stimulus-response ( SR ) theory was an effort to reinforce a positive behaviour while
eliminating an undesirable behaviour . 
6 . All behaviour is learned from the environment . New behaviours are learned through
classical or operant conditioning . 
 49
2 . 4 . 4 Artificial animals — ANIMAT
ANIMATs or artificial animals , are robots motivated from animal behaviour and kinematics . 
After Toda , similar models of artificial animals were suggested by various others : 
Braitenberg , Holland and Brooker and Wilson [ 356 , 357 ]  , who coined the term in the mid
1980s . Wilson ’ s ANIMATs were an advancement on Walter ’ s turtles , as they not only
interacted with the environment , but also learned from experience6 
, and behaviourism and
conditioned response formed a founding principle for Wilson ’ s model . In particular included
paradigms such as , rule-adaptiveness , genetic evolution , emergence and association . Wilson
identified four principles to define an ANIMAT ; 
1 . The artificial animal exists in a sea of sensory signals , but at any given instance only
some of the signals are significant ( to motor action ) while the rest are redundant . 
2 . The artificial animal is capable of action , which in effect tends to change these signals . 
3 . Certain signals and / or the absence of certain signals have a special status for the
artificial animal , viz . lack of food will trigger survival instincts , sight of a predator , 
life-threatening terrain , etc . will call into question the artificial animal ’ s survival and
supersede all other behaviours . 
4 . The artificial animal acts externally and also through internal operations , so as to
best optimise the occurrence of the special signals . 
While the first two principles are about the concepts of sensory motor and embodiment , 
the third enshrines survivability as the most fundamental behaviour and the fourth
incorporates conditioned response and rule adaptiveness . 
It is suggested that the most suitable rule which binds the sensory signal with desired
action will have to be ‘ discovered ’ as a serendipitous exercise by the ANIMAT , or otherwise
the undesired rules should be ignored . Mirroring an animal allows for the exvivo inception 
[ 349 ] of behaviour without extraneous influences ; thus it allows a scope to engineer these
behaviours with precision , flexibility and efficiency in a concerned context that may never be
observed in studies with real animals , as will be illustrated with examples in later sections . 
ANIMAT research was instrumental in development of behaviour-based paradigms and also
in shaping the discipline of artificial life ( ALIFE )  . 
A poetic adaptation of the biblical tale of genesis is shown in Figure 2 . 10 , here Beavers
considers various principles of ANIMAT development , such as learning , emergence , forming
into complex beings with growth of intelligence , etc .  , to make the case for artificial evolution
and growth . Darwin ’ s natural selection effected by natural calamities such as the lore of
Noah ’ s flood and a futuristic dystopia robot apocalypse are there to maintain quality and
these also work as fail safe techniques and the proverbial ‘ kill switch ’  . 
ANIMAT has been instrumental in probing the natural world to exploit designs from
mother nature , to work in tandem with known mathematical models and technology . 
However , there is no single route to design ANIMATs , and researchers have used various
methods to bring their artificial animals to life . The brachiating robot controller as shown
in Figure 2 . 11 was designed by observing primates swinging from one branch of a tree to
another . Nakanishi et . al [ 250 ] modelled this motion as a modified pendulum oscillation
and added machine learning facets with a neural network . In complete contrast is the
gastrobot [ 353 ] and later the ECOBOT series of robots as its mature avatars , which are
designed on the digestive process and the gastrointestinal system in human beings and are
aimed to attain energetic autonomy using a microbial fuel cell ( MFC )  . 
6Wilson considers Walter ’ s turtles as ‘ sub-ANIMATs ’  , as they lack a learning capability . 
50  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 10 Genesis at Twin Earth . Beavers ’ parody on the book of genesis , where ANIMATs
are developed by ‘ Godlike operations ’ and are coded in with evolutionary AI , from simple ones to
complex types such as androids . In time they develop free will and moral values . Darwinian spirited
natural selection dotted by calamities such as Noah ’ s flood and a futuristic robocalypse are tools
meant to be used if things go wrong . Courtesy Antony Beavers , University of Evansville , used with
permission . 
 51
FIGURE 2 . 11 Brachiatron , a robot based on primate brachiation . Nakanishi et . al designed this
motion by modifying pendulum oscillations . Image on the right courtesy wikipedia . org , CC-by-SA
3 . 0 license , image on the left courtesy NASA JPL Laboratory , www-robotics . jpl . nasa . gov . 
Research has always tried to bring in newer ideas from mother nature to AI , as
opportunism [ 11 ] and inner-world [ 149 ] which are discussed in the later chapters . One of the
most interesting and sophisticated ANIMAT research involves neuromorphic brain-based
robots , which are modelled on animal brain functions . ANIMAT research in the new
millennium has focused on application of neural networks for learning and also to imitate
the human nervous system and neuronal processes . Newer buzzwords in ANIMAT research
and bio-inspired design are CPG and brain-based robotics . 
Development of robots on animal likenesses not only helps to tally known natural
behaviours , but also helps to appreciate the confluence of the robot ’ s design , behaviours and
processes as a single system . Researchers have utilised the ANIMAT paradigm in various
ways , as discussed with case studies in the later paragraphs . 
1 ) Behaviour modelling in an ANIMAT : The behaviour modelled in the ANIMAT
can be used to understand engineering and biological mechanisms of insect and animal
locomotion . 
1 . a ) The artificial insect project : Developing animal behaviours into interacting
modules connected by control loops has been done independently by Beer , Lorenz , Baerends
and Arkin . In Beer ’ s artificial cockroach model as shown in Figure 2 . 12 , feeding is modelled
as two behaviours : appetitive and consummatory . The former behaviour is an effort to
to identify food while the latter behaviour is an attempt to ingest it . The energy level
determines the arousal and satiation level of the artificial cockroach , which in a fully
satiated state will not attempt to acquire food . Locomotion is not explicitly represented
as a separate behaviour . It happens insitu via ‘ edge following ’ and ‘ wandering ’  . Beer
notes that feeding ( appetitive and consummatory ) apparently gets a higher priority over
edge-following , however this ordering reverses if an obstacle blocks the insect ’ s path to food . 
Then the artificial cockroach follows the edge of the obstacle in an attempt to reach the
food . Therefore , the ordering between these two behaviours is variable and dependent on
the environment . Baerends named this approach ‘ functional explanations of behaviour ’  . 
Beer ’ s cockroach and Baerends ’ digger wasp and the herring gull showed that animal
behaviour can be expressed as a series of simultaneously acting primitive modules , with
52  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 12 Behaviour decomposition for a cockroach . The sensors used are the antennae
and mouth sensors to extract information from the environment and interact with it . The artificial
cockroach is capable of feeding , locomotion , wandering and edge-following . The lines with darkened
circles show inhibition between behaviours . Adapted from Beer [ 33 ] 
 53
FIGURE 2 . 13 Jumping robot — GRILLO III , developed with motivations from Kangaroo , 
Rabbit , Frog , Cricket , Leaf Hopper and Flea . From [ 205 ] courtesy Elsevier , used with permission . 
hierarchical ordering and / or inhibition or suppression of modules depending on the situation
encountered . Arkin et al . designed a similar decomposition of behaviour of the praying
mantis and put it to work in Miguel , a Hermes-II robot . 
1 . b ) GRILLO III , the jumping robot : Li and co-researchers [ 205 ] at Zhejiang University , 
Hangzhou , China , and at CRIM Lab , Polo Sant ’ Anna Valdera , Italy , drew inspirations
from kangaroo , rabbit , frog , cricket , leaf hopper and flea to build a 50 mm x 25 mm
x 20 mm jumping robot , GRILLO III , shown in Figure 2 . 13 . The design considerations
were small body size , light weight , less ground contact and high-energy efficiency to
actuate the jump . They were guided by a semi-empirical relation which holds good for
millimeter-to-centimeter-sized insects . 
Fmax
W
∝
l
2
l
3
∼
1
l 
( 2 . 3 ) 
Here , Fmax is the maximum exerted force by the insect ’ s muscles , which depends on the area
of contact , W is the weight of the insect and l is the characteristic length of the insect . A
lower characteristic length enabled less force on the ANIMAT ’ s joints , ensured more stability
and warranted a preferred means of locomotion by jumping . Here the ecological niche of
various insects and animals has to be exploited in order to model a jumping behaviour . 
GRILLO III weighed 22 g and could jump about 200 mm forward in a single jump . The
researchers conclude that with such a model , it does supplements the knowledge of how
insects choose their mode of locomotion and evolve to improve their well being . 
54  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 14 Disney ’ s hopping robot , is still in the developmental phase and at 2 . 3 kg and
a height of 30 . 5 cm , it can maintain balance for about 7 seconds or 19 hops before tipping over . 
Disney fans have claimed that this hopping is reminiscent of Winnie the Pooh ’ s best friend Tigger , 
though there has not been any official statement from Disney . 
1 . c ) Disney ’ s Gait robots : The design of a hopper [ 57 , 206 ] from Disney ’ s research lab
is shown in Figure 2 . 14 . This one-legged gait robot is unique and one of its kind since it
entirely runs on lithium batteries . Gait robots are usually designed with hydraulics , but
this one uses a linear elastic actuator in parallel ( LEAP ) mechanism as shown . The LEAP
has 4 components : encoder , temperature sensor , voice coil actuator in parallel with two
compression springs and two servo motors enable the hopping action . The robot is still
under developmental phase and can jump for about seven seconds or nearly 19 hops before
tipping over , it lacks an aesthetic appeal and has a mess of wires at its top . Later versions will
hope to maintain the balance of the robot for a longer time with more on-board processing
power using Odroid , Raspberry Pi , etc . Hopping motion of a gait is very similar to Tigger ’ s
movements in the cartoon series Winnie the Pooh , though there has not been an official
confirmation from Disney . 
1 . d ) Walking in biped and quadruped : Central pattern generators ( CPGs )  , are
oscillatory neuron circuits modelled on the central nervous system and produce and govern
rhythmic motor processes which are similar to known animal / human motor patterns . In
nature , these processes work from within the organism , without any sensory input from
limbs , other muscles or any other motor control , and are believed to be responsible
for chewing , breathing , digesting and locomotion . Such rhythmic motor processes for
locomotion have been confirmed for cats , dogs and rabbits and are believed to exist for
human locomotion . A CPG can be said to be analogous to a pendulum , producing sinusoids
at a constant frequency . A pattern generator is useful for mimicking known biological motor
functions when it involves two or more motor processes such that each process follows the
next one in a serial order . Therefore , to devise a CPG solution to a dynamic problem
 55
FIGURE 2 . 15 Biped locomotion has been a novel application of CPG . Using motion primitives
as ,  ( A ) nalancing motion ,  ( B ) flexion motion and ( C ) compass motion Matos and Santos [ 222 ] 
have been able to demonstrate walking in the DARWIN robot . Image courtesy Elsevier , used with
permission . 
researchers design a number of primitives which work in a serial order to realise a biological
process , such as walking or breathing . 
CPG has been used is to design walking in legged robots as an extension of arm robots , 
and modelled on the principles of inverse kinematic . This has been found to be cumbersome
and resource intensive and is usually a slow process where the on-board microprocessor
computes the next position of the humanoid robot by calculating each one of its arm / leg
extensions and the motion is nowhere similar to human motion . Tackling the same problem
from a behaviour point of view , considering ‘ walking ’ as an emergent behaviour from
primitive motor behaviours of ‘ advance ’ and ‘ balance ’ than explicitly programming a serial
coding helps to significant improvement in performance . Bio-inspired designs using CPG
is a good alternative for biped and quadruped locomotion and renders ease of design . 
Biological processes defy mathematical modelling but can be carefully designed from
primitive behaviours . 
As shown in Figure 2 . 15 , Matos and Santos [ 222 ] have designed walking in the DARWIN
robot from three motion primitives ,  ‘ balancing motion ’  ,  ‘ flexion motion ’ and ‘ compass
motion ’ working simultaneously . 
CPGs source is located close to the head position for the biped and produces periodic
motor movements for locomotion . The feedback from the sensors placed at the limbs helps
in adapting to the environment by modifying the pattern ( s ) generated by the CPG . 
2 ) ANIMATS as lab rats : ANIMATs provide a ready platform to exploit animal
behaviour , which helps in extrapolating a model which may be used in human beings
at a later stage , and also to understand animal psychology and kinematics . ANIMATs
is a less expensive , more efficient and ethical alternative than guinea pigs and rabbits for
demonstration , teaching and research purposes . 
2 . a ) From Rodents to Robots , WR-3 Robot and iRAT : The following two examples
are direct motivation from rats and help to develop psychological and kinematic models in
rats , and therefore helps to develop an experimental test bed for drug testing . Ishii et al . at
56  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Waseda University , Tokyo have made rat-like robots , first the WM-6 [ 161 ] and then a more
refined WR-3 [ 151 , 162 ] as shown in Figure 2 . 16 , modelled on rats which are employed to
induce stress and depression in real rats , thus creating instances of psychological conditions
on which new drugs can be tested . To mimic rat-like dynamics and ergonomics the robot
has 14 active degrees of freedom , 12 of which mimic rat behaviour while 2 active wheels are
supplied at the hips . This research attempts to chart the psychological stimulus of stress
and mental disorder leading to stress-vulnerability on the homeostasis of rats . WR-3 is
developed for attacking and chasing behaviours , and as an experiment , it is let loose on a
sample of 3-week-old rats and the stimulus-response on the rat ’ s behavioural patterns and
physiology is noted . Rats , guinea pigs , rabbits and hamsters are often used in lab trials , the
results of which are extrapolated to human beings and further human trials are made in
similar conditions . To induce stress and depression , the olfactory faculty of rats is severed
or made to undergo extreme physical hardship such as long hours of swimming , while other
alternatives are genetic modification and environmental stress , however none of these are
able to recreate a human-like version of depression . The development of stress , stigma and
depression as often happens in with human beings is recreated in real time among rats
in experiments employing the WR-3 robot . Ishii et al . carried out experiments on two
groups of 12 rats . The rats in the first group were constantly harassed by the aggressive
behaviour of the robot rat , while the rats in the second group were attacked by the robot
rat whenever they moved . A general rule of thumb that worked out to quantify the research
was that a depressed rat exhibits lessened mobility . It was found that the highest levels
of depression were induced by intermittent attacks on a rat that had a history of being
harassed in previous weeks . Employing such methods to correlate to human conditions has
led to attempts to find treatments for sepsis , burns and trauma . Thus tailoring the clinical
trials also effectively bringing down the cost of such trials . A further goal of this research is
the prospect to extend such trials to the domain of mental disorders such as schizophrenia
and anxiety disorder . WR-3 is a continuation of efforts from Waseda University from the 
 ‘ Mental Model Robot ’ group , on rat-robot interactions over the last 17 years . 
A similar project is the iRat , which is an acronym for Intelligent Rat ANIMAT
Technology [ 28 ]  , as shown in Figure 2 . 17 , was developed at the University of Queensland as
a tool for studying the response of rats with the artificial rat . Studies have show that the
rats cautiously approach and interact with their robot counterpart . The researchers propose
to study competitive and cooperative behaviour of the iRAT with the real rats . The iRAT
has been used with RatSLAM , a biological motivation to SLAM , structured on cognitive
mechanisms of the neural processes governing navigation in the rat ’ s brain . The advantages
of RatSLAM is that it works well with low-resolution and poor-intensity profile visual data . 
There has been growing enthusiasm for brain-based models and biologically inspired
cognitive robotics [ 56 ]  . The adult human brain is about 1 , 300 to 1 , 400 g , and has 1011
neurons , and the sheer complexity defies any attempts to replicate it . Neither has it yet
been possible to measure the timing and flow of information in the animal brain and this
adds to the difficulty of any direct attempt at designing robots based on the working of the
brain . However , using indirect means , projects such as the WR-3 and iRAT / RatSLAM have
attempted to correlate rodent behaviour directly to brain functions . OpenWorm Project 
[ 81 , 103 ] has taken the problem to the citizen roboticist and is a novel attempt to crowd
source , design and code in models of neural connections of the brain . Such projects provide
an opportunity in the offing , since being embedded in the real world the sensory stimuli
are as experienced by animals and it is possible to study the flow of information across the
neuronal network . Agent design in brain-based robotics can be identified in three ways [ 189 ]  . 
1 . Brain-based models for cognitive robotics work hand in hand with biological cognition , 
 57
FIGURE 2 . 16 WR-3 robot , motivated from rats , the pioneering research by Ishii and
co-researchers at Waseda University . From [ 162 ]  , reprinted by permission of the publisher ( Taylor 
& Francis Ltd , www . tandfonline . com )  . 
FIGURE 2 . 17 iRAT , or Intelligent Rat ANIMAT Technology [ 28 ]  , is an artificial rat which is used
to manipulate rat behaviour , as a machine-animal interaction , and also for conducting RatSLAM . 
Reprinted with permission of Springer . 
58  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
as per the very definition of this field of study , and have served as a means to test
theories of brain functions such as operant conditioning , fear conditioning and skill
acquisition , which helps us to better understand adaptive behaviour , learning and
memory , such as was seen in the WR-3 project . 
2 . The second type uses a known neural map to design a robot and tasks it with more
AI related jobs , such as map making , localisation and navigation . For the project
Autonomous Robot Based on Inspirations from Biology ( ARBIB )  [ 82 , 83 ]  , named in
honour of the well-known cybernetics and neuroscientist Michael Arbib , Damper
and co-researchers designed an artificial creature which could learn and adapt from
its environment , employing an artificial nervous system made using central pattern
generators ( CPG )  . ARBIB was modelled on classical conditioning and demonstrated
improvement in behaviour with experience . Other examples are , the RatSLAM
algorithm from the iRAT project which harnessed a rat ’ s connectome to improve on
SLAM algorithms . Similarly , the OpenWorm project [ 81 , 103 , 216 ] which began in 2011
simulates a neural network of 302 neurons of a roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans to
form 6393 synapses connectome . This helps to develop models for locomotion which
needs 95 muscle cells . This code is downloaded into a small LEGO robot on two
wheels to demonstrate simple obstacle avoidance and the ringworm ’ s nose neurons are
replaced by a sonar sensor on the robot . It was seen that the LEGO robot somewhat
replicated worm behaviour : and stimulation of the sonar would make the robot stop
if it gets within 20 centimetres of an obstacle . Once stopped , feedback from the touch
sensors helped the robot to negotiate forward and backward movements . In other
experiments it has also been seen that this robot can be ‘ lured ’ to move towards a
sound source once its intensity is higher than a certain threshold . It is to be noted
that such simple behaviour was all due to the ringworm ’ s connectome and there was
no other coding or any atomic creation of behaviour . OpenWorm connectome model
and therefore ‘ uploading ’ of the human brain has a promise for the future . 
3 . The third type attempts to replicate a particular perceptive process , particularly vision
or somatosensory process of the brain to design the robot . For example , to facilitate
somatosensory sensing in the brain-based Darwin IX robot , as shown in Figure 2 . 18 , 
is supplemented with an array of ‘ whiskers ’ made of polyamide strips that emit a
signal when bent , and arranged in rows and columns [ 225 ]  . The ‘ whiskers ’ arranged
in columns simulate the artificial nervous system in wall following and avoidance
behaviours , akin to similar faculty in animals such as cats , hedgehog etc . 
Anthropomorphic models and brain-based robotics seem to converge on computational
neuroscience , which can be said to be midway between neurobiological modelling , which
is motivated to recreate the animal neural network , and parallel distributed processes
augmented by supervised and / or unsupervised learning . However , the shortcomings are
many :  ( 1 ) the brain body balance has lacked appreciation as research has either focused too
much on the brain functions and neurological design or has developed agents based on lower
level behaviour , and has anticipated emergence to higher functions ,  ( 2 ) there have not been
cognitive robots that have demonstrated a high degree of concurrency ; a cognitive robot
which has a state-of-the-art vision system will not have a good enough somatosensory system
or olfactory sensing ; neither has there been a seamless integration across sensory systems ,  
( 3 ) the ANIMAT model prevents any attempts to model morphological computation ; in
animals there is constant computation carried out the body system across various sensory
nodes and is transmitted to the brain using a central nervous system ; which has not yet
been replicated in the artificial domain , and lastly ( 4 ) the ANIMAT model doesn ’ t consider
the thinking capacity of the robot , while , in contrast cognitive robotics relies on neural maps
 59
FIGURE 2 . 18 DARWIN IX with whiskers . The Darwin series of robots made in 2005-2007 , 
as test bed robots for brain based robotics . In this experiment , Darwin IX was primarily meant
for obstacle avoidance and wall following using its ‘ whiskers ’ as novel touch sensors — as seen in
animals such as cats , hedgehog etc . It was also meant to stop and turn back on encountering high
reflectivity , detected from its downward pointing infrared sensor , a behaviour which the researchers
have named as ‘ foot-shock ’  . Such ‘ foot-shocks ’ made of highly reflective material were placed as
shown , and the robot was trained in the local environment . Later , when the foot-shocks were
removed , the robot still responded as per the conditioned response , and avoided those areas . The
robot ’ s simulated nervous system was made up of 17 neural areas with 1101 neuronal units and
about 8400 synaptic connections . Image from Krichmar [ 189 ]  , with permission from Elsevier . 
and brain functionality , but neither addresses unique experiential abilities of an agency and
therefore not enough to demonstrate consciousness . This topic will be further discussed in
Chapter 9 . 
2 . b ) SNAKE-like robots : Snake robots are made with a number of interconnected
modular gaits and designed with CPG , as shown in Figure 2 . 19 . Such ANIMAT models
of the salamander lizard have been developed at EPFL , Lausanne and hopes to provide a
kinematic model which will contribute to electrical stimulation therapies for patients with
spinal cord injuries . 
3 ) Study of social behaviours in organised groups and swarms : ANIMATs provide us
with the opportunity to understand and exploit social behaviour as cooperation , cohesion
and adaptation in animal-robot societies and has proved to be a boon for swarm robotics . 
In the following 2 scenarios , the robot is first providing leadership to a flock of ducks , while
in the second one the robot cockroach finds social acceptance in a cockroach colony and in
turn is instrumental in modifying the group behaviour . It is interesting to note that unlike
WR-3 , these 2 projects did not strive to visually amicable robot models , i . e .  , to resemble
one of the target species , viz . ducks and cockroach . 
3 . a ) The Robotic Sheepdog Project : The Robotic Sheepdog project [ 335 ] was the
brainchild of Cameron and his co-researchers at Oxford University . It was the first research
into animal interactive robotics . The goal of the project was to build and program an
autonomous robot to herd a flock of ducks . The robot will display leadership and gather
60  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 19 Snake-like robots , are made with a number of interconnected CPG modules . Image
courtesy wikipedia . org . 
together a flock of ducks and lead them to a known safe location . The project exploited the
generic tendencies of animals , insects and birds to form flocks for reasons such as , gathering
food , staving off a predator , social cohesion , same / similar geographical locations as goal
points , appearance , nest building etc . The entire system as shown in Figure 2 . 20 consisted
of a custom-built rover , two workstations and an overhead camera . The rover should have
speeds of about 1-2 ms , which was about twice that of the ducks and it was meant to target
the flock of ducks as a single entity rather than individual birds , and also to avoid obstacles . 
This project demonstrated that behaviour simulation using robots can be a suitable design
tool and such methods can be readily employed for animal-robot interactions . 
3 . b ) The INSBOT : A Mobile Robot in Cockroach Colony : Since ANIMATs are
motivated from animals , they should be socially acceptable in animal societies . Since the
sheepdog project was build on a conditioned response of the ducks and a robot was efficiently
able to herd the swarm , other behaviours in similar societies should be plausible . Halloy et
al .  [ 139 , 296 ]  , in a collaboration across 4 laboratories spread over three countries , exploited
a cockroach society by introducing a few robot among them . The Insbot , as seen in Figure
2 . 21 , is dressed in filter paper treated with pheromone collected from male cockroaches , and
introduced in the cockroach colony . The pheromone from the Insbot triggers the amicable
behaviour of acceptance , as is ingrained in the physiology of the cockroaches . Halloy et al . 
prepared two shelters , one is dark and the other is bright and it is known that cockroaches
prefer dark conditions . However the Insbot has no such preference . The cockroach colony
prefers the darker shelter 73% of the time , but on introducing Insbots the collective opinion
radically changes , and the cockroach-insbot society prefers the darker shelter only 39% of
the time — a difference of 34% . This not only shows that the cockroaches have accepted
the Insbot into their society , but it also confirms a coherent group behaviour in which the
Insbots are treated as equals to cockroaches . Animal robot group dynamics and cohesion
have drawn the interest of ethologists [ 87 ] and swarm robotics researchers alike . 
 61
FIGURE 2 . 20 Robotic sheep dog project .  ( a ) Simulation ,  ( b ) the robot and ( c ) and ( d ) 
experimental set up , from Vaughan et al .  [ 335 ] courtesy Elsevier , used with permission . 
FIGURE 2 . 21 INSBOT in the cockroach colony . The INSBOT is dressed in filter paper treated
with pheromone collected from male cockroach and is not made to look like a cockroaches since all
cockroach social interactions are pheromone-based not vision-based . From [ 296 ] courtesy Elsevier , 
used with permission . 
62  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
4 ) Ready Implementation of Behavioural Models : Control models which determine
optimality , prey-predator dynamics , signaling , game theoretic aspects of social interactions
in animals can be verified experimentally using the ANIMAT approach . 
To support the new architectural paradigm of behaviour-based robotics Brooks designed
his robotic creatures at MIT using a layering of behaviours , where each behaviour was
designed as a finite state model . Locomotion was fundamental to such creatures , with
obstacle avoidance the most primitive behaviour , followed by wandering as the second layer , 
and motion to goal as the third layer . Each of these behavioural layers is a complete loop , 
from sensor reading to actuation , and mutual interaction between these layers is limited to
none . However , a higher layer could support , mitigate , interrupt or override a lower one . 
Brooks called his artificial creatures mobots ( mobile robots ) and he and his team designed
them on the following principles : 
1 . An artificial creature has to cope accordingly with changes in its dynamic environment . 
2 . An artificial creature should be robust enough to endure its environment . 
3 . An artificial creature should be able to negotiate between multiple goals . 
4 . An artificial creature should demonstrate purpose in its being , and act to modify its
world . 
Brooks ’ robotic creatures were the landmarks of the new AI for robots which will be
discussed in the next few sections and the next chapter . The salient points of the new
paradigm was a lack of a planning module , low to no world modelling and direct motivations
from mother nature . This was radically different from known traditional techniques of AI , 
as was Nilsson ’ s grid-based approach for Shakey ’ s locomotion . The repertoire of Brooks
and his co-researchers included a number of robots : Toto , Allen , Herbert , Seymour , Tito , 
Genghis , Labnav , Squirt and many more . Shown in Figure 2 . 22 , Herbert was designed for
the office work space . Its primary job was to wander around and collect empty soft drink
cans from apparently inaccessible places by extending its arm . Genghis , was designed as a
six-legged robot and it walked by means of an emergent synchronisation of primitive and
simple behaviours . Squirt was an early attempt to make microbots , and in a most jovial
way Brooks called it the “ world ’ s largest one-cubic-inch robot ”  . 
Cog , shown in Figure 2 . 23 , was a humanoid designed on sensorimotor principles . However
the trend has not really been much of a motivation and all modern state-of-the-art
humanoids such as the ASIMO , PR2 and NaO have sensorimotor and representational
information . 
In complete contrast , Hasslacher and Tilden at Los Alamos Laboratories developed
a radically different model [ 145 ]  , where survival determined behaviour and locomotion . 
Their artificial creatures , which were named BIOMORPHS ( BIOlogical MORPHology ) 
were designed to survive in an a priori unknown and apparently unfriendly terrain . These
machines were meant to following three rules : 
1 . A machine must protect its existence . 
2 . A machine must acquire more energy than it exerts . 
3 . A machine must exhibit ( directed ) motion . 
The BIOMORPHS were designed to survive and not to perform a set of goal-oriented
tasks . Solar energy is the fuel for these robots and BEAM ( Biology , Electronics , Aesthetics , 
and Mechanics ) technology is used to manufacture them . BEAM uses tiny solar cells
to mimic biological neurons and generate minute amounts of electricity required for
micromotors and LEDs . The walker was the most popular of the BIOMORPHS and 2-legged , 
 63
FIGURE 2 . 22 Herbert , has an arm manipulator mounted on top of it and its purpose was to search
out Pepsi cans in a cluttered environment and collect them . Image courtesy wikipedia . org , CC0 1 . 0
Universal Public Domain Dedication license . 
64  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 23 Cog was a humanoid bust designed on sensorimotor principles [ 92 ]  . Image courtesy
wikipedia . org , CC0 1 . 0 Universal Public Domain Dedication license
4-legged and 6-legged variants were designed by Hasslacher and Tilden . BIOMORPHS were
not just minimal agencies , but were attempts to create life and the control core of these
robots included an artificial nervous system , a neural layer to function as a brain . therefore
it had a rich range of behaviours and showed remarkable learning ability . 
5 ) modelling a biological process : The fungus eaters could digest fungus and obtain
energy . This energetic autonomy to generate its operational power by the digestion of
organic material has been the motivation for Gastrobot and Ecobot series of robots . These
robots digest organic material in a Microbial Fuel Cell ( MFC ) to generate energy . Since
Wilkinson ’ s gastrobot project in 2000 [ 353 ] newer projects as the Ecobot-III and Ecobot-IV
have demonstrated proven energetic autonomy . 
Gastronome — Wilkinson ’ s gastrobot robot , could gather food in the real world , chew
it to break it up into smaller digestable chunks , ingesting it to the artificial stomach , where
a controlled chemical reaction produces energy and the waste materials are removed as
excreta . The gastronome was powered by an MFC , which can directly convert the chemical
energy of various food components and organic waste matter directly into electricity by the
action of microorganisms . Wilkinson identifies six different operations for the robot : 
1 . Foraging , finding and identifying food
2 . Harvesting , gathering food
3 . Mastication , chewing to break it up into smaller chunks
4 . Ingestion , swallowing to the artificial stomach
5 . Digestion , energy extraction
6 . Defecation , waste removal
Its motion was demonstrated by light-following behaviour . However , efficiency was rather
 65
poor at about 1 . 56% which has not improved significantly in its later versions and prevents
its utlity in the commercial domain as a household robot , office robot etc . This was the first
step towards energy autonomy with minimum or no human intervention , however it still
needed to use onboard batteries and needed initial charging from the main power supply . 
To improve performance and versatility , advanced designs were supposed to have an array
of sensors , vision and olfactory sensing for foraging and harvesting and gustative sensing to
avoid ingesting food which may be harmful to the working of the microbes . 
The robot can sustain its energy needs from the natural resources in its local
environment . Some prospects of energetic autonomy in near future are : fruit picking or
soil testing robots powered by fallen leaves or fruit , sea exploration robotic modules which
are powered by seaweed and algae , forest exploration fueled by fruits , vegetables and grass
etc . 
As per the design paradigm these robots are fueled by energy released by the
microbes , which are provided with food by the robot ’ s collection agency , this is a unique
interdependence between non-biological and biological and has been given the moniker of
artificial symbiosis , Symbiotic Robot ( SymBot )  . 
The Ecobot series of robots , Ecobot-I ( in 2002 )  , Ecobot-II ( in 2004 )  , Ecobot-III ( in
2010 )  ( shown in Figure 2 . 24 ) and Ecobot-IV ( ongoing )  , are a series of robots which are
made for energetic autonomy by Ieropoulos and coworkers at Bristol Robotics Laboratory
and Bristol Bioenergy Centre . The Ecobots do not have an onboard power source such as
liquid fuel or battery power , nor are they charged from an external power source prior to
locomotion . Rather they are energetically nearly autonomous and are equipped to extract
energy from the environment by collecting waste materials . Ecobot-I weighed 960 g and used
sugar as fuel and was sustained by the oxidation action of the bacteria Ecoli as the anode
and ferricynade as the cathode . Ecobot-II was an advancement , used sludge microbes and
could synthesise energy from flies and rotten fruit . Ecobot-II can be arguably said to be the
first robot which attained energetic autonomy and also conformed to artificial symbiosis . 
Ecobot-IV is the latest and ongoing in this series of robots and is aimed to study the effects
of miniaturisation of the design . 
Various special ANIMAT are identified by their concept designs , robots which retain
their abstract idea despite change in implementation , software and platform . For example , 
for ARBIB the robot retains its CPG model and neural simulator over various hardware
implementations , over Zilog as shown in Figure 2 . 25 , ARM or the Khepera avatar . Other
such examples are Stiquito which retains its shape-memory feature despite changes in
hardware , R-Hex which is characterised by its unique hexapod design has seen a number
of implementations , and the turtlebot with its round base , onboard notebook laptop and
sleek motion sensor such as Microsoft Kinect or ASUS Xtion which has seen three official
versions and motivated a number of newer robot designs . 
ANIMAT research by definition is the overlap of artificial intelligence with animal
intelligence , as shown in Figure 2 . 26 and governed by sensorimotor interactions and relies on
lower level behavioural response . Amicable anthropomorphic features often help the robot
to blend into human society , as shown in Figure 2 . 27 , but this is insufficient for human-like
cognitive processes . The next chapter will briefly discuss how simple sensorimotor designs
can also exhibit emotions and values akin to human beings . 
2 . 5 EVALUATING PERFORMANCE - AI VS . ENGINEERING
A good engineering design is often capable of executing a job to perfection , while a good
cognitive science design will work towards making the agent a situated entity , embedded into
66  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 24 ECOBOT III made at the Bristol Robotics Laboratory , it is energetically
autonomous and can digest organic matter to obtain its operational energy . Image courtesy
wikipedia . org , CC-by-SA 3 . 0 license
 67
FIGURE 2 . 25 ARBIB , Autonomous Robot Based on Inspirations from Biology , shown here in the
Zilog Z180 avatar . Image from Dampier et . al [ 83 ]  , with permission from Elsevier . 
FIGURE 2 . 26 Three realms of intelligence .  ( 1 ) Confluence of animal and human intelligence is
probably most common and seen at work in domesticated animals , harnessing animal power , such
as riding a horse , etc .  ( 2 ) ANIMAT research has been an overlap of animal and artificial intelligence .  
( 3 ) Human intelligence has worked hand-in-hand with artificial intelligence in chatbots , humanoid
robots and in ethical agency which is discussed in Chapter 8 .  ( 4 ) the overlap of all these three
realms has been targeted by neuromorphic and brain-based robotics . The diagram is adapted from
Yampolskiy [ 370 ]  . 
68  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 27 The Christmas present ( Toby , 2 of 4 .  ) Dad brings Toby to the Walker household . 
Cartoon made as a part of Toby series ( 2 of 4 ) by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
 69
the niche of the ecosystem . Pfeifer illustrates this point by considering the task of collecting
ping-pong balls . An engineering solution would be a high-powered vacuum cleaner while a
cognitive science solution would be a mobile robot going around , picking up objects and
identifying them to the known image of the ping pong ball . The engineering solution will
be quicker and will also collect objects other than the desired one . The cognitive science
solution will be slower but will collect only ping pong balls . An evaluation criterion of time
will not be enough to select the better of the two methods , since a vacuum cleaner would
never show adaptivity and flexibility as the mobile robot would . A similar comparison can
be for a task to find the location on a map of an unknown terrain as is shown in Figure
2 . 28 . An engineering solution would invoke surveying methods while a cognitive science
solution would be Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping ( SLAM )  . In SLAM , the robot
goes around the given terrain a number of times and incrementally develops a map . An
engineering approach would be fast and would involve knowing a few angles and distances , 
while the cognitive science approach would be slower and needs no such requirements . Pfeifer
points out that mere quickness of a particular method will not fully merit its attributes . 
For example SLAM can be used for terrains which cannot be accesed by human beings , 
viz . surveying planetary bodies and other hazardous and difficult terrains which cannot be
addressed by surveying methods . While this will work on land , water and air as long as
some of the angles and distances can be obtained , it will be difficult for SLAM to have this
flexibility . Thus , a basis of ‘ how quickly ’ the solution is achieved would truly not represent
the privileges attached to the method . 
Various routes have been taken by researchers to evaluate the performance of an
autonomous AI agent , however there is a lack of consensus on a particular approach . Since
AI agents are situated , they are significantly different from conventional control systems
manipulated using feedback . In conventional systems the performance is usually the quotient
of the average deviation of control variables from their predicted values , the sensitivity of
the controller to noise , the stability of the controller dynamics and repeatability within
the realms of acceptable error . However , in situated agents , the desired robot behaviour is
obtained as an emergent property of the agent-environment interactions . Therefore there
need to be methods which differ significantly from the conventional types . 
1 . Extrapolating conventional ideas ; make the robot repeat a given task a large number
of times and the percentage of success will quantify performance . As an illustration , 
an automated robotic waiter can be evaluated on the number of times it can
serve correctly without fumbling . An appreciable high percentage will confirm the
consistency of performance . The obvious shortcoming is that this robotic waiter , when
performing some task other than serving , will need another set of benchmarking
to suit that task . Also , as a demerit , this sort of an approach will fail to cover
all types of tasks , viz . unknown terrain , dynamic tasks , effective human-robot and
robot-robot interactions and faulty hardware . However , these methods due to their
simplicity , remain favourites among researchers and most research papers resort to
such evaluations . 
2 . Correlate actual performance to simulation [ 163 , 371 ]  ; though this paradigm is
an oxymoron as it is meant to relate a situated phenomenon to a non-situated
simulated process , even then this approach remains another favourite in the research
community . Present-day software simulation methods are very sophisticated , can
mimic a real environment , usually have a physics engine and yield nearly real-time
performance . However , simulation still has its pitfalls as it fails to provide for
realistic physics for friction , magnetic interactions , wear and tear , fracture , effects of
moisture , second-order effects etc . Further , this will bring into play the benchmarking , 
70  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 28 Engineering solution vs . cognitive science solution . To make a map of a
given terrain , engineering approaches ( shown above ) would be surveying heights and distances
using triangulation . Cognitive Science ( shown below ) will employ a mobile agency for simultaneous
localisation and mapping ( SLAM )  , to make maps . 
 71
performance , computational capacity and the hardware aspects of the machine on
which the simulation is run , viz . RAM , data rate , CPU power , clock etc . Also , as
in the previous method , this approach also fails to account for unknown terrain and
dynamic tasks . 
Evaluation is easier for social robots , multiple robot groups , robot swarms etc . as agency
is tagged to a job at hand , strongly context related and is not arbitrary . Therefore , methods
of evaluation are focused on the human-robot interactions and quality of group behaviour , 
respectively . 
2 . 6 THREE FORKS IN THE ROAD
Despite the motivations , making autonomous agents has been marred by issues and
problems . AI leads to a rule-based and symbol-based approach where correct reasoning
to the correct representation is seen as the desired agent behaviour . In contrast embodied
agency doesn ’ t seem to tally with such an approach . This section discusses three engaging
problems which has plagued this discipline and been a sore spot to designing robots , and
the attempts to solve these problems have led to a new approach to AI and newer methods
for designing autonomous agency . 
Dennett ’ s Tower & Artificial Evolution
Toda ’ s fungus eaters , Tilden ’ s BioMorphs and Wilson ’ s ANIMATs design autonomy
from remarkably low level cognitive faculties . This bears striking similarity to biological
evolution where increasing intelligence and adaptability lead to superior life forms . Dennett
illustrated these attributes of evolution with what he called the ‘ Tower of Generate-and-Test ’ 
in his book , Darwin ’ s Dangerous Idea . In this tower , lower down are unintelligent lifeforms
and intelligence and adaptability increase with each successive level , which are however
are smaller and a subset of the level below it . Each level can be identified with a 
 ‘ Generate-and-Test mechanism . 
Darwinian creatures have only natural selection as their ‘ Generate-and-Test ’ 
mechanism ; mutation and selection are the only way that these creatures can adapt as
a species . The individuals do not possess their own ‘ Generate-and-Test ’ mechanism . The
fittest survive , the rest are rejected . In our concern , on Planet Earth , the number of
Darwinians is the total number of evolved species . Skinnerian creatures have evolved from
natural selection and can learn only by literally generating and blindly testing all different
possible response until one of them is reinforced . On its next attempt the Skinnerian creature
will choose the reinforced response . The downside is that while trying and testing all possible
methods , the unfortunate Skinnerian may die as a result of testing out a fatally wrong
method . Named after the pioneer of operant conditioning , B . F Skinner , the Skinnerians
have reinforced learning as the dominant theme of intelligent action in addition to natural
selection . Popperian creatures , as an advancement over the blind testing of the Skinnerian
creatures , act with a sense of foresight such that the undesired behaviours and fatal actions
can be discarded . Dennett contends that for this ability of preselection , a feedback must
have come from a sort of inner environment which is similar to creating a simulation of the
prospective actions and then choosing the best one , or selectively rooting out the bad ones . 
Dennett also fuels the debate that it is not very easy to clearly distinguish between the genus
of Skinnerian creatures and Popperian creatures . However as per trends of research , the sea
slug Aplysia can be classified as Skinnerian , while birds , fish , reptiles dominantly exhibit
72  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Popperian traits . Gregorian creatures have tool making as their ‘ Generate-and-Test
mechanism and in particular can develop abstract tools like language , semantics , logic and
gestures ; which means that individuals no longer have to ‘ Generate-and-Test ’ all possible
hypotheses since others have done so already and can pass on that knowledge as cultural
and social interactions , thus cyclically improving generators and testers , to a very high
number . While human beings are the best example of Gregorians , there is discernible sense
of social behaviour and cultural epithet in various animals , apes in particular . Here , it is
worth noting that though natural selection , conditioned response and preselection is also
prevalent in the Gregorian creatures , however the dominant expression of intelligent action
is using mind tools — language and gestures . The scientific creatures have the ability of
convergence of mind tools of the Gregorian creatures and can rigorously , collectively and
publically ‘ Generate-and-Test — the scientific method . It is a debate whether this transition
started at the invention of the wheel or at the Copernican revolution in the mid 1500s or
the development of string theory in late 1980s . However the ability to scientifically process
and structure information to form intelligent action is the ‘ Generate-and-Test mechanism
the scientific creature . 
FIGURE 2 . 29 Dennett ‘ s Tower . Winfield suggests another layer to Dennett ’ s tower as shown and
proposes the evolution of artificially engineered , Walterian creatures in the near future , principled
on embodied AI and named after W . G . Walter . 
Extending the tower upward , Winfield [ 359 ] suggests Walterian creatures , where
scientific creatures are instrumental in the development of artificial beings . The tools initially
made by Gregorian creatures take on a life of their own , independent of the resources and
support of the toolmakers . The Walterian creatures are smart tools that have learned to
think , grown up and left the toolbox behind and taken on a being of their own . While also
like Gregorian creatures , they are able to share tools , knowledge and experience . Embodied
AI , ANIMAT and Artificial Life has this ability , by its defintion — tools attaining life . 
However , as an advancement over the Gregorians , the Walterians are capable of memetic
learning . Therefore , if at least one fellow Walterian has learned a skill and is either online
or has previously uploaded that skill , then another Walterian can simply download it . The
Walterians are intended to be beyond human beings as creatures that have not only left
the toolbox and the tool maker , but also the gene pool and escaped natural selection . They
would be creations of Gregorians but will not be bound in to the biosphere afforded by Planet
Earth , viz . instead of oxygen , water and food to survive , the Walterians eventually , after
evolving themselves would probably only need energy . However they would still relate to its
 73
Gregorian–scientific roots via inheritance and evolutionary processes , artificially motivated
from biology . 
Winfield believes that Walterian creatures would be profoundly different and seemingly
unimaginable by Gregorian and scientific creatures . These heirs to Elmer and Elsie are
prospected to be far superior to the humble fungus eaters since the Walterian creatures
are capable of evolving themselves as per their need and requirement . We human beings
augment and acquaint ourselves with newer tools to compensate for the lack of our sensory
and survival capabilities . In stark contrast the Walterians can effect their own artificial
evolution . The ability is not entirely new and is found in mother nature where lizards , 
earthworms and few other lower animals with the ability to grow back their some of their
limbs if they are lost in some unfortunate incident . However the Walterians will be able to
evolve much faster than all known biological lifeforms . As an example , Winfield considered a
futuristic scenario in which an intelligent autonomous explorer robot is charting an unknown
planet . The robot — a Walterian — has the capability to simulate and foresee aspects of
the future , and as per the simulation re-build parts of itself on the fly using a 3D printer like
an inbuilt facility . Thus by smartly evolving it deals with the situation it has encountered in
that unknown terrain . Suppose , the unknown terrain is a planet that has large waterbodies
and the robot falls into one of those , a fully evolved Walterian may be able to ‘ grow fins ’ and
replicate fish-like swimming ability before it drowns , thus evolving faster than the dynamic
environment to ensure survival and well being . 
Walterian creatures are not without parallels . Toda and Braitenberg both had predicted
the natural evolution of cooperation , competition and interdependence , therefore creating
an ecological niche of artificial creatures , trending towards the development of their own
societies and cultures . The ability to change its own physiology and control its adaptability
and evolution is similar to the models of self-replicating machines discussed by Von Neumann
in the 1940s . In the real robot domain , current day AI research has developed robots with
multiple limbs which can continue to function and pursue there goals even when they have
lost a limb and some functionality . These robots can ‘ heal ’ and ‘ grow ’ the lost limb ( s ) on
the fly using an on-board 3D printing facility . 
2 . 6 . 1 The problem of completeness — Planning is NP-hard
A robot is usually tasked with locomotion , to move to an assigned location in reasonable
time , with least effort and hassles . Motion planning and trajectory generation are often
used for these kinds of problems . A good lot of other sophisticated tasks are extension of
locomotion , therefore navigation and path planning are seen both as basic behaviours and
also as design tools . 
It has been shown that planning gets more complicated with dimensions of the planning
space , viz . a two-dimensional navigation contained on an xy plane is simpler to design and
easier to program than a three-dimensional navigation in xyz space . The complexity of
path planning increases exponentially with the number of dimensions , and with increasing
number of obstacles . However , simple planning centric jobs such as , go to goal point , search , 
tracking , mapping etc . in principle may take infinite time and / or become so involved that
it is rendered impractical . These types of problems are called NP-hard ( non-deterministic
polynomial-time hard )  . For such problems it is rather easy to verify a given solution but
there is no analytical method to find the solution to the given problem in finite and
reasonable time . This renders planning incomplete and therefore not always yielding a
74  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
result . Real-world problems which need planning in at least three dimensions , with moving
obstacles are difficult and intractable in principle . 
As an illustration , suppose that the job for a robot is to cross a busy street . The solution
is to watch for vehicles and other pedestrians and when there is appreciably low traffic , 
carefully walk to the other side of the street . Most of us have experienced this first hand , and
as simple as it looks , this will not be very easy to program into a robot as there will hardly
be a scenario with no traffic , and simple programs such as , watch left , watch right and
for no traffic progress to the other end of the street will outrightly fail , or be
stuck for infinite time attempting to execute this job . In such scenarios , the robot often
continues in the programming loop , to attempt to find the desired end point of locomotion , 
and continues to fail to do so until it exhausts its fuel . Therefore programmers put in
conditions known as ‘ exceptional handling ’ to prevent the unending loop , where the robot
stops after a few attempts and reports that the job cannot be accomplished . 
A good algorithm should gurantee finding a solution when there is one , and report if
there is none , but issues of completeness can never be ‘ cured ’  . However they can be suitably
avoided , or reduced to a minimum . Exhaustive search is an apparent solution but is a
compromise in time , other methods are , granulating space by slicing it preemptively or
employing subgoals and hybrid approaches and employing a second path planner when the
first one is rendered redundant . These techniques are navigation centric and discussed in
Chapter 4 . 
Completeness may come across as a problem for designing robots , but it is omnipresent
and is also a tagged to human cognition , and at various times we human beings may fail
to comprehend a solution which does exist in principle , or we may be stuck in logical
conundrums when no solution exists . 
2 . 6 . 2 The problem of meaning — The symbol grounding problem
In the 1980s Searle proposed a thought experiment , which can be worded as :  ; suppose in
the near future , AI has developed artificial agency which can understand Chinese and can
also pass the Turing Test rendering indistinguishable output in at least text and speech
content when compared to human response . Therefore , such an AI will be able to convince
any Chinese that it is also a Chinese-speaking human being . Searle ’ s inquiry , does the
agency literally ‘ understand ’ Chinese ?  ( strong AI ) or is it merely simulating the ability to
understand Chinese ?  ( weak AI )  . Since the agency is producing the output by relating the
input to a rule of syntax , as given in the program script without really getting the hang
of the semantics as is true for current-day translating software shown in Figure 2 . 30 , the
conclusion is that program script cannot lead to ‘ consciousness ’  , but can at best mimic it , 
and therefore strong AI cannot exist . 
The symbol grounding problem is very closely related to Searle ’ s Chinese room problem . 
The symbol grounding problem is the shortcoming in associating verbal labels as words and
syntaxes ( symbols ) to actual aspects . For example , considers a robot which has a ball in
front of it . The robot will not be able to connect the word ( symbol ) to the object ( aspect )  , 
and on being given a command like “ pick up the ball ” will not be able to execute the
job . Human beings overcome this problem as cognition is developed by neural learning and
groomed by gradual acquaintance with the environment and known social norms . 
The symbol grounding problem , inquires “ Can a robot deal with grounded symbols ?  ” or , 
can a robot recognise , represent and communicate information about the world ? Engineers
and designers have been able to make robots which can identify a word with an image
or video employing intensity heuristics or image processing , however this is limited to a
 75
FIGURE 2 . 30 Google Translate and similar translating software are more fast dictionary searches
than attempts to understand the language , its semantics and cultural aspects . A machine learning
algorithm will easily translate alphabet , words and sentences by observing patterns . In contrast , 
a human translator will learn the language , than merely relate the symbols to form semantics . As
Searle argues , a computer only manipulates the symbols and will not understand the semantics . 
Therefore strong AI doesn ’ t exist and no artificial means will ever supersede human cognition . 
select known set of objects , and tends to tailor the robot for a particular job , sacrificing
context and therefore its versatility across various other jobs and serendipitous activities as
exploration and discovery . Therefore , a robot can be programmed to interact and manipulate
with symbols grounded in reality with its sensorimotor embodiment , but obviously lacks
universality . 
Harnad [ 142 ] has suggested than the symbol grounding problem is more compelling
than merely developing a robot dictionary of sorts by relating image to name as shown in
Figure 2 . 31 , and to deal with grounded symbols is the robot ’ s ability to autonomously and
ubiquitously establish the semiotic networks relating symbols to the world . Therefore , the
phenomenon of symbol groundng sets the precedence for conscious behaviour where mental
states are of vital importance . 
2 . 6 . 2 . 1 Solving the symbol grounding problem
Attempts to solve the problem , have ranged from approximate solutions to complete denial
of the problem to accepting it as an inherent problem of human cognition . 
1 . Approximate solutions : The most obvious method to attack the symbol grounding
problem is supervised learning . Experiments which enable a handshake over verbal
and vision modes has demonstrated gradual betterment of behaviour . However , this
is a good approximation and broadens the horizons without ever solving the problem . 
2 . Avoided for low-level behaviours : The problem which seemingly has serious concerns
for computers is insignificant for robots or at best remains a philosophical issue
which can be safely avoided . For embodied AI , the onus is more on constructing
and manipulating symbols than really grounding them . Since robots are localised , the
meaning of objects and action can be gradually ascertained , or completely neglected
if it doesn ’ t matter to the robot . For example for a robot with low-level behaviour it
will hardly mean much if an obstacle is a book , brick or a box . All it needs to do is
avoid the obstacle . Therefore , in embodied cognition the symbol grounding problem
is more of a technical problem than a problem of cognition , and Vogt [ 340 ] calls it the 
 ‘ physical symbol grounding problem ’  . 
3 . As a philosophical limitation of human cognition : The need for meaning is higher-level
76  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 31 A very poor solution to the symbol grounding problem . An apparent brute
force solution to the symbol grounding problem is to label everything . However that is still
insufficient to develop all of the semiotic relationships and give meaning to objects . 
cognition . When attempts for solution for a robot are made , the semiotic relations and
hence the meaning to the objects are carefully mapped out and then coded by human
programmers , most of which are based on human semantics and culture , and are
not autonomously established by the artificial agent , as is desirable by the problem
definition . Therefore , such a solution to the symbol grounding problem is biased on
human knowledge and reasoning and not on the arbitration of the autonomous agent . 
Touretzky [ 324 ] suggests a ‘ robot version of the Chinese room problem ’ which poses as a
counter argument to Searle by using a robot instead of a computer . Modifying the Chinese
room problem , suppose we have a robot which can pass the Turing Test and boldly speaking
in idiomatic Chinese , and the question asked is ‘ walk up to the window and tell me what
you see ?  ’  . Here , visual perception will be an inquiry into mental imagery , and may not be
the desired human response , viz . the robot may not perceive the sky as blue , or the sunlight
as warm etc . Therefore , demonstrating that the Chinese room problem can be overcome
with embodied agency . This is a version of the Turing Test and such methods are further
discussed in chapter 9 . 
The symbol grounding is hardly a concern for robots with low-level behaviour , but it
will be an issue for developing higher cognitive functions for enabling human-like behaviour . 
The shortcoming in relating symbols and the real world is not a problem unique to robots
but one often faced by us human beings . For example , on encountering fruits and vegetables
from a different biome many of us face such an issue , and we resort to online search on the
Internet . 
Thoughts which gives meaning to an object and thoughts which interpret them are
often not the same . Therefore meaning in higher cognitive functions is always contextual
and will differ with perception , memory , training , cognitive bias etc . Hence , the symbol
grounding problem will never be solved [ 79 , 310 ]  , but it can be effectively reduced with ( 1 ) 
 77
compartmentalisation of knowledge which is often by localisation and context-driven tasks , 
viz . for navigation it can be ; marking the goal point , get to the red mark , cross three static
obstacles etc .  ( 2 ) machine learning and ( 3 ) since we are in the age of the Internet , use of
an online knowledge base to search for the suitable meaning of a given object or instance . 
2 . 6 . 3 The problem of relevance — The frame problem
Of the three problems , the frame problem has attracted most controversy [ 166 ] and has
had the audacity to change the discipline of AI . It is not an issue pertaining to AI or
programming , but rather is a lacuna in logic and our understanding of the world , and
is often reworded as ‘ the problem of relevance ’  . The problem is about which changes are
relevant for the job at hand . For example if I am walking down a street and I see a banana
skin about six feet ahead of me , I will change my direction a bit to avoid the banana skin . 
Now , consider that as I am walking , instead of a banana skin , there is a typhoon far away , 
in the Siberian tundra . Apparently it will not affect my walk , but there are situations where
relevance cannot be ascertained this easily . 
The problem has been interpreted by many renowned philosophers and AI scientists . 
Dennett [ 89 ] discusses the frame problem with an illustration where a robot Robot R1 has
to go inside a room to obtain a battery to power itself and avoid a ticking time bomb , as
shown in Figure 2 . 32 . Robot R1 identifies the battery and the bomb and walks out with a
wagon which has both the battery and the time bomb and soon the bomb explodes , and the
robot is blown to bits . Robot R1 knows the bomb is on the wagon , but fails to comprehend
that bringing the wagon out of the room , also brings out the bomb , thus it fails the task
as it cannot deduce the consequences of its own actions . To overcome this seemingly trivial
issue , the robot designers develop Robot Deducer R1D1 which is more accomplished
than R1 as it is designed not only to recognise the intended implications of its acts , but also
their side effects . The underlying idea is that R1D1 will not make the mistake of rolling out
the battery together with the bomb because it will be able to deduce the implications ( read
blunders ) of doing so . Put to work , R1D1 tries to deduce various ( often unnecessary and
extraneous ) consequences of its actions . Soon the bomb explodes and , in its blissful thinking , 
R1D1 meets the same fate as its predecessor . A third improved design , Robot Relevant
Deducer R2D1 , tries an exhaustive list-like approach to categorise the consequences of its
actions as ‘ relevant ’ and ‘ irrelevant ’  , a thorough approach to find all possible consequences
of its actions . Unfortunately the bomb goes off and Robot Relevant Deducer R2D1 is
also blown to bits . All three robots suffer from the ‘ frame problem ’  . None of them have a
way of gleaning out what is relevant to the problem at hand7 
. 
Across these three robots , as the amount of knowledge increases , so does the number
of lines of code to make the robot deduce the relevant information to accommodate the
problem at hand . As the number of lines of code and seemingly more sense of reason are
pushed into programming these robots , their efficiency decreases , viz . R1 with the simplest
coding and information was at least able to walk out with a wagon , which was not achieved
by R1D1 and R2D1 , both of which were blown apart in deducing the various consequences
of the action . R1D1 and R2D1 were in a dilemma as to when to stop thinking , or Hamlet ’ s
problem , 8 
. The frame problem can be seen as Hamlet ’ s problem in the engineering domain . 
7The STAR WARS reference is indeed compelling , but it is more of a conjecture that what R2D2 may
have done was to bring out the battery yet also avoid the ticking time bomb , in process the solving the
frame problem . 
8Shakespeare ’ s play Hamlet is a tragedy themed on the ‘ hero-as-fool ’ genre . The apparent heir to the
throne of Denmark , Prince Hamlet is the protagonist of the play . He is philosophical and contemplative , and
he does not act on instinct , but rather tries very hard to make sure that every action is premeditated . His
78  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 32 Dennett ’ s illustration of the frame problem , where a robot has to go inside a
room and obtain a battery to power itself while avoiding a ticking time bomb . 
With this illustrative example Dennett demonstrates that the frame problem may seem
like an issue of bad design , glitch , poor hardware and coding errors , but instead of being a
technological or design shortcoming , it is an epistemological problem and a consequence of
human common-sense reasoning , of ‘ psychological reality ’ which being situated cannot be
fully reached by a programming code . 
The frame problem arises in an attempt to find a sufficient number of axioms using
symbolic representations [ 269 ] for a viable description of a robot ’ s environment . The
nomenclature is from the technique of ‘ frame ’  , as used in development of stage characters
or an animation where the moving parts and characters are superimposed on a ‘ frame ’  . 
Typically the background usually doesn ’ t change . Description of a frame , or a robot ’ s
environment takes a large number of statements , but a great many of them hardly change
in most common interactions . Therefore , in terms of relative motion , the frame problem is
described in terms of spatial location of objects which presumably do not move in the course
of the movement of the robot . Hence the robot ’ s actions must be structured in relation to
what all stays static across the event . 
In a further illustration to further the understanding of the frame problem , a conversation
between two friends as shown in Figure 2 . 33 can easily go bizarre if the non-effects of even
the most trivial things are mentioned . However it is to be noted that the seemingly absurd
notions as Joe ’ s bar continuing to exist past until 7 : 00 PM , death of one of the two friends
in the conversation and apocalypse by a meteorite hit can make sense in war , insurgencies
character is further tagged with fruitless attempts to demonstrate provability , and various of his inquiries
cannot be answered with certainty . Hamlet ’ s struggle to avenge the murder of his father leads to melancholy
and a wrestle with his own sanity . In context , Dennett ’ s third robot , R2D1 is in a Hamlet-like stream of
thought , before being tragically blown up . 
 79
and dire situations . Therefore however absurd these may seem , they cannot be excluded a
priori . In conversations such as these , human common sense and known social norms are
found to dictate reason , and this would be difficult to replicate via AI , and therefore lacks
implementation in a robot . 
The frame problem is an inquiry into determining which information is relevant to
reasoning in a given situation , and which information is to be ignored . The frame problem
is an issue in designing artificial situated intelligence , and the problem has a very special
position in the history of AI and robots . Noted AI philosophers , Dreyfus and Searle , 
considered the frame problem as the demise of AI . To rescue the day , an apparent solution to
the frame problem would be to associate each event with a probability . However probabilistic
knowledge is hardly of much use in a real world situation and would utterly fail in hazardous
situations as was the case for Dennett ’ s three robots . Also , modelling probability , which
updates in near real-time over the robot ’ s sensors is computationally prohibitive [ 43 ] and
at best restricted to simple worlds . 
2 . 6 . 3 . 1 Representations — The root of all evil
The frame problem occurs because of symbolic representations and rules of inference . The
frame problem is a problem of modelling , not heuristics , just as an algorithmic problem
solver will not always know in advance what to do next , and making exhaustive lists will
not make for a solution . Neither is the frame problem a question of content , but rather
of form . It is seen that informationally equivalent systems do tend to differ drastically
in efficiency . Hence , representational knowledge may work for simple scenarios , but may
not yield for real-world problems . The frame problem is a philosophical problem and not
an issue of data structures , programming language and algorithms . The frame problem
occurs for informationally unencapsulated processes , for which no a priori limit exists to
the information that might be of relevance to it . Therefore , very low-level cognitive processes
will be free from the frame problem , while of course as a tradeoff they will tend to accomplish
much less . In view of the above , a few ways to get around this dilemma are : 
1 . No-representations — Behaviour-based approach : Instead of using representational
knowledge a reflexive approach is taken . A symbol-based system attempt to model an
absolute knowable world . Instead these approaches work on an immediacy of action9 
. 
No-representations are motivated from biology and the natural world . While , this
approach works for ants , crabs , cockroaches etc .  , higher-level cognition such as in
human beings is known to structure thoughts and hence construct actions based on
representations often of a not-immediately-present environment . 
2 . Connectionism — Neural networks approach : A connectionism approach , such as
artificial neural networks ( ANN ) is secure against the frame problem , as ANNs encode
their knowledge acquired from training data via fixed weights . Thus representations
never creep into this model . However , tasks which have not been undertaken previously
cannot be modelled using ANN due to the lack of training data . Thus one does come
to a chicken and the egg problem . 
3 . Context independent representation — traditional AI : Traditional approaches are
motivated by the hypothesis that the world can be represented by means of a large
number of symbols designating the objects and actions in the world and by a set of
9Representation free approaches faced severe opposition in the AI community . There is ample literature
dating back to the mid 1980s where such work is labeled with an oxymoron ,  ‘ reactive planning ’  . James
Firby ’ s PhD thesis is often said to be a watershed as it changed the phrasing from ‘ reactive planning ’ to 
 ‘ reactive execution ’  . 
80  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 2 . 33 A conversation turns bizarre . With too many representations in a real-world
situation , a ‘ context independent ’ representation fails . A simple conversation can turn bizarre if
one starts to include the extraordinarily low-probability events . Adapted from French and Anselme 
[ 112 ]  . 
 81
FIGURE 2 . 34 PENGI . models a penguin and a bee with various rule-based strategies . A context
dependent approach works well in a minimal 2D block world
rules with which to manipulate those symbols . Since , it is often not possible to know
the world and the rules a priori , this approach relies on analogy — relating one object
to other , viz . an agent which has seen a cube but not seen a cuboid would be able to
relate its experience as an extension of the cube . However such an approach doesn ’ t go
a great distance given the dynamism of world . Also , with an ever-increasing number
of symbols and rules , modelling the agent fails to adhere to a real-time response and
may become computationally challenging . 
4 . Context-dependent representations — Works for simple scenarios : Researchers have
attempted to develop context-dependent approaches . In very simple scenarios a
symbol-based and rule-based approach works well . For example , a very simple world
model in PENGI [ 4 ]  , as shown in Figure 2 . 34 , is a software simulation in which
a penguin tries to escape being bitten by a bee in a two-dimensional maze , while
subscribing to various rules . Agre and Chapman developed it as an attempt at
context-dependent representation . In PENGI , the 2D ‘ world ’ comprises a penguin , 
a bee and ice cubes . The ice cubes are represented as square blocks and can slide . 
The penguin has to escape being stung by the bee , which it can do by hiding behind
an ice cube . The bee can kill the penguin by stinging it , or stinging the ice cube
directly behind which the penguin is hiding . The penguin can fight back by kicking
the ice cube behind which the bee happens to be . In PENGI all events are contextually
determined . It employs indexical functional entities which weave the objects to the
action . There is no entity such as bee or kill , rather the-block-I ’ m-pushing . Hence
the frame problem never arises . However , for a more complicated world , there will be
an ever-increasing number of such indexical functional entities and it would not be
possible to deal with them . 
Context-independent representation seemed to work well for AI but failed to keep up
with the dynamical requirements of embodied AI . With context-dependent approaches
such as PENGI , there were primarily two schools of thought . One believed that models as
PENGI can truly be applied to a more complicated world , while others considered moving
to a representation free , more of a sensory-action realm . Ethnographic studies made on
human beings have shown that there is no clear boundary between a planning phase and an
execution phase , nor are plans typically executable without knowledge of the domain and
the goal of the plan . 
82  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
TABLE 2 . 1 How to overcome the three forks
Fork Solutions
Problem of completeness 1 . Exceptional handling , programming fail safe
2 . Exhaustive search ( as ND and Bug-2 ) 
Problem of meaning 1 . Supervised learning
2 . Handshake of vision and voice modes
3 . Can be avoided for low level behaviours
Problem of relevance 1 . No or very low representation
2 . Connectionist architectures
The Great Debate of ’ 89
One of the most engrossing debates on universal planning was in the 1989 winter
issue of AI Magazine across four articles . The two sides of the debate was Ginsberg 
( against universal planning ) vs . Chapman and Schoppers ( favour of universal planning )  . 
1 . In the first article [ 124 ] Ginsberg presents a criticism against universal planning , a
part of his argument is based on computational complexity . He also demonstrates
that using universal plans is impractical as their size increases exponentially in
the number of domain state . That is , the the number of sensory-motor pairings
for the robot explodes for a complex world — akin to our real world . Ginsberg
contends that universal plans fail to take into account the inherent unpredictable
nature of the real world . However and most interestingly , Ginsberg notes that
such an approach of mapping may work out well for ‘ precognitive activities ’ such
as locomotion . 
2 . In reply to Ginsberg , the second article [ 67 ] Chapman tries to answer to Ginsberg ’ s
criticisms with examples from BLOCKHEAD , which is a PENGI like system , 
and can arrange alphabets blocks to spell F-R-U-I-T C-A-K-E and thus solve
the so called fruitcake problem , and therefore , assert the approach of universal
planning . Chapman shows that using visual markers the fruitcake problem is made
tractable . 
3 . The third article [ 293 ] by Schoppers further refutes the criticism by Ginsberg
using a number of arguments . He argues in favour of indexical-functional-variables
which works very well in a simple PENGI-like world . He also supports the use
of program caches for reactive planning where a job , when done a few times , 
becomes innate to the agent and can also be done without any real planning . 
4 . In the fourth article [ 123 ]  , Ginsberg replies to Chapman and Schoppers . 
Ginsberg ’ s asserts that reactive planning cannot capture the desired behaviour of
an agent since there are too many possible variations in the real world and that
 83
reactive plans cannot improve performance with more computational resources
and therefore an apparent shortcoming in developing of intelligent behaviour . In
replying to Schoppers on caching plans , Ginsberg raises questions as ,  ‘ when should
a plan be cached ?  ’  ,  ‘ when is a cached plan relevant to a particular action ?  ’  ,  ‘ can
cached plans be debugged and re-structured to extend their usefulness at run time
to situations outside those for which they were initially designed ?  ’ etc .  , rendering
the Schoppers ’ contention of using caches , at best incomplete . 
Ginsberg ’ s contention has been found to be true , and universal planning indeed
works well for locomotion , as in ND diagram navigation where five ( or six in ND +  ) 
states completely define all possible situations encountered by the agent in navigation
on a two dimensional plane . 
Universal planning was the convergence of the research of Nilsson , Kaelbling , Schoppers , 
Agre and Drummond ; the term universal planning was coined by Schoppers . Universal
planning was the development of a plan wherein all possible situations that the agent may
encounter have been analysed and tabulated and all the agent has to do is detect the
situation with its sensor ( s ) and refer to this table . 
Whereas , none of the three forks as shown in table 2 . 1 can be solved per se , they can
be minimised or avoided . Also , for low level behaviours as 2D navigation etc . the issues
are to a minimal . These are detrimental in higher-level cognitive processes , and to proceed
towards human-like cognition , there will have to be means to overcome these forks , and a
simple ANIMAT model will not be sufficient . 
SUMMARY
1 . Toda ’ s model on hypothetical animals which he named fungus eaters was the first
example of self-sustaining artificial entities . They could gather fungus for their own
energy needs and gather uranium as they were designed to do
2 . Inputs from psychology and the natural world enabled further developments
3 . Wilson ’ s model of the ANIMAT was very influential and led to ALIFE and research
into animal-robot interaction
4 . Three prohibitive issues in mobile robot development were ,  ( i ) Complexity issues ,  ( ii ) 
Symbol grounding problem and ( iii ) Frame problem
5 . Ways to cure the frame problem led to non-representational models and their
implementation in robots
NOTES
1 . Toda ’ s 1962 research paper ,  “ The design of a fungus-eater : a model of human
behaviour in an unsophisticated environment ” is the first model of an autonomous
agent , but Toda has no mention of the word autonomy or autonomous in the paper . 
2 . Toda ends his seminal paper posing a question ,  “ An SFE running into a starved SFE
may save the latter by selling its fungus storage in exchange for the latter ’ s uranium . 
What should be the price ?  ”  . This would call for extending Toda ’ s model into game
theoretic discussions , however the problem remains to be answered . 
3 . Lacan has used ‘ INNENWELT ’  , or the inner world in contrast to Uexkull ’ s 
 ‘ UMWELT ’ to mean the mental experience of the self . 
84  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
4 . At his popular webcomic xkcd , Randall Munroe briefly discussed the applications and
design of a hamster ball robot [ 244 , 245 ]  . With this inspiration , a similar robot was
made by students at Georgia Tech using a windows embedded platform . 
5 . In his book , The Language Instinct Pinker writes about Moravec ’ s Paradox as an
aphorism :  “ hard problems are easy and the easy problems are hard ”  . 
6 . Another illustration of Moravec ’ s Paradox is seen in the following riddle . 8809 = 6
7101 = 1 2172 = 0 6666 = 4 1111 = 0 3213 = 0 7662 = 2 9313 = 1 0000 = 4 2222 = 0 3333 = 0
5555 = 0 8193 = 3 8096 = 5 7777 = 0 9999 = 4 7756 = 1 6855 = 3 9888 = 7 5531 = 0 9966 = 4
2681 =  ? The pattern is based on the number of circles in each number . The number 8
has two circles in its shape . Number 6 , number 0 and number 9 has one each . Therefore
2681 = 3 . A robot will attempt to solve it using pattern recognition codes which will not
only take a lot of time , but it will take away the elegance and the beauty of the riddle . 
7 . Human beings do not need to solve the frame or rather human beings are never aware
that they are inadvertently solving the frame problem without being aware of it . The
apparent reason for this is human cognition is modelled as a connectionist architecture
with neurons connecting together to form dynamical networks . Such connectionist
architecture is immune to the frame problem , also human cognition involves massively
parallel unconscious processing , accumulating information across various senses and
relating the current situation to previous experience . These activities work nearly
inadvertently to the human individual concern , such cognition is not yet possible in
the artificial domain . 
8 . Skinner wrote his novel , Walden Two , in which he described a Utopian society founded
upon behaviourist principles . 
9 . John Haugeland coined the acronym GOFAI ( Good Old-Fashioned Artificial
Intelligence ) for symbolic AI in the mid 1980s . In robotics the analogous term is
GOFAIR ( Good Old Fashioned Robotics )  . The approach is based on the assumption
that intelligence can be achieved by the manipulation of symbols , PSSH ( Physical
Symbol System Hypothesis ) and thus it is broadly independent of the agent and the
environment . 
10 . The phrase ‘ Pavlov ’ s dog ’ has come to be an idiom to mean a person who merely reacts
to a situation rather than using critical thinking . 
11 . Pavlovian conditioning was a major theme in Aldous Huxley ’ s dystopian novel ,  ‘ Brave
New World ’  . 
12 . The enactive virtues of vision are further discussed in Merleau-Ponty ’ s splendid essay ,  
 ‘ Eye and Mind ’  [ 227 ]  , which explores the concept from both physiological and also
philosophical points of view . 
EXERCISES
1 .  ‘ UMWELT ’ for a line follower . For a line following robot with just one sonar
sensor discuss and sketch its ‘ UMWELT ’  . How does it change for a ring of six sonars ? 
2 . Designing a frog , design the behaviour decomposition for a frog as it is done for a
cockroach in Figure 2 . 12 . Consider the following behaviours 10 : 
Face-prey When the frog sees a fly , it needs to turn to face it so that it can
stick out its tongue and grab it ( we assume that the frog ’ s tongue has limited
steerability and cannot make an apreciable angular movements )  . 
10I cannot claim originality in this as Horswill has used these behaviours to design a frog using the
programming language GRL . 
 85
FIGURE 2 . 35 Exercise question — Cockroach locomotion . 
Eat When the frog sees its prey within tongue range , it shoots out its tongue to
eat it . 
3 . Cockroach locomotion . Arkin ’ s behavioural decomposition for a cockroach is given
in Figure 2 . 35 , this is a modification of Beer ’ s model shown in Figure 2 . 12 . How will
the behaviour change across the two models ? 
C H A P T E R 3
Control paradigms for
mobile robots
WALL-E :  “ Directive ?  ” 
Eve :  “ Classified ” 
– from the movie WALL-E 
 “ The preceding fantasy has roots in science ” 
– Valentino Braitenberg [ 44 ] 
3 . 1 CONTROL PARADIGMS
A
mobile robot is designed to accomplish various tasks . The easiest ones involve moving
around while avoiding obstacles and reaching a given goal point . The more involved
tasks may include following a trail of an odour , mapping an unknown terrain , responding to
voice and gestures , attending to man-centric environments as museums , theaters or airports
etc . The simplest robot is at least a sensor actuator pairing . More sensors and actuators
enhance a robot ’ s performance and add to its versatility . Other important parameters are the
constraints of the robot and the constraints of the process , safety concerns , self preservation
and optimised performance . This chapter focuses on control paradigms and architectures
and used in robots and tries to implement the concepts of the last chapter in the engineering
domain . 
Three important aspects of a good control paradigm are closed loop control , real time
response and robustness to overcome sensor errors . Closed loop control is critical . This can
be seen with an example : one of the simplest robot is the line following robot . The robot
is fitted with a light sensor and it tracks a line marked in a certain colour usually black
or white . Any undesired deviation away from the line is prevented by the sensorimotor
pairing between the light sensor and the motor . An ANIMAT corollary would be with
a hypothetical animal which has its eyes set on the road , as shown in Figure 3 . 1 . The
contrast in information flow for closed loop and open loop is shown in Figure 3 . 2 . Without
the light sensor , the robot will fail to track the line and it will move arbitrarily in the
direction the heading is pointing to . Lack of a feedback mechanism1 will not allow the
1The concept of feedback is of importance in control systems and electronics , and closed loop systems
which work on feedback are demonstrated to be more stable than open loop systems . 
88  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 1 ANIMAT approach to line follower , an artificial animal keeping an eye on the
road . This model is equivalent to a basic line follower with one light sensor . However , such a design
with only one light sensor will not be of much practical utility . A robust design will have a ring of
light or ultrasound sensors and also other sleek hardware , backtracking means and sensor fusion
which will incorporate for the effects of friction , uneven terrain and other environmental factors . 
robot to interact with the environment , explained in flowchart . Mobile robots are expected
to have a real-time response with minimal lag . The sensor actuator pairing is modulated
by a microcontroller and structured with a set of control rules and parameters . Often , it
is a tradeoff between accuracy and lag time . A third concern is , sensors are liable to be
faulty and give erroneous and noisy readings . Under such circumstances the system needs
to continue to function well within a domain practicality . Therefore , mobile robot control
should be organised with a parallelism approach which incorporates graceful degradation
and elegantly handles exceptions so that failure of a single hardware or software module
doesn ’ t hinder the broad goals of the robot . 
To design a robot , there are three broad approaches . The first one is called sense-plan-act
and it follows the concepts of traditional AI . It was developed in the early 1950s and
processing sensory information to yield plans and maps was the basis to this approach . The
robot has to develop exhaustive , near approximate maps of the world it has to navigate , 
where buildings are approximated as cuboid , clouds as spheres , a person is an oval head with
a cylindrical torso and smaller cylindrical arms and roads as an array of flat straight sections
etc . Once such maps have been made , the robot must find the suitable path to the goal point . 
This approach can be summed up as a Minecraft world married to Google Maps . Even the
best computers in the late 1960s could not have made maps like the current Minecraft games
or Google Maps , but the idea was very much in the same lines . As discussed in the first
chapter , Nilsson [ 253 ] designed Shakey ’ s navigation by making ( a priori ) grid-based maps . 
The method relies on seeping in the knowledge from the environment and then processing
that information to move around intelligently . Since space is apparently infinite compared
to a sensor ’ s range , this would be implemented as a cyclical process where the sensors sense
the environment , the microprocessor develops plans to navigate in this environment and
then finally the actuator would trigger the motion . 
The second approach traces the principles of behaviourism [ 52 , 53 ]  , where instead of
making a priori maps , the robot starts moving around on the merit of the sensory-motor
 89
FIGURE 3 . 2 Closed Loop . In ( a ) the light sensor allows for interaction with the environment , the
line follower tracks the line and follows it to the end ; while without a light sensor in ( b ) the robot
fails to have any knowledge of the environment and randomly moves without any goal or motive . 
The stop for such a robot will not be graceful , probably ending in a collision . 
pairing in the local environment with near real time sensor reading paired with immediate
actuation and no appreciable plans or maps , akin to animals interacting with their local
environment . This approach eliminates planning , at least a priori and deals with the
dynamism of the environment in real time as an immediacy . This approach is very effective
in navigation and other lower level tasks , but as we will see , it cannot be extended to higher
level tasks . 
A third paradigm , has aspects of planning as well as behaviourism . Such architectures
are seen in most of the state-of-the-art robots . It will be discussed in later chapters that
hybrid architectures are of pre-eminence for human-centric robots and robotethics . 
1 . Deliberative approach , detailed planning prior to execution . When implemented in a
navigational context the robot has to design elaborate maps of the environment before
starting to move . 
2 . Reactive approach , the agent acts per the merit of the situation , no appreciable
planning is involved . Draws motivation from the animal and insect world , see
obstacle - turn left is probably the simplest reactive paradigm . When implemented
across various sensors , over a variety of parallel tasks , a reactive paradigm leads to
the behaviour-based approach . 
3 . Hybrid approach , As a combination of the two , deliberative planning is executed in a
reactive manner . 
The next section is about a number of thought experiments by neuroscientist and
cyberneticist , Valentino Braitenberg and serves as a wonderful illustration for development
90  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
SR Diagrams
Stimulus Response ( SR ) diagram is a way to pictorially represent behaviour as a
generated response to given stimuli ( S ) leading to a response ( R )  . These were developed
by Ronald Arkin in early 1990s . 
The complete control mechanism for the agent can be designed by stacking together such
SR diagrams as is briefly done for Braitenberg vehicle-3c in Figure 3 . 6 . Traditionally
simple behaviours are put at the lower ends with sophisticated behaviours at the upper
ends , as shown in Figure 3 . 19 . 
An equivalent algebraic approach to behaviour is using functional notation ; 
β ( s )  = r ( 3 . 1 ) 
Where behaviour β with given stimulus s yields response r
of behaviours from simple sensory motor design . It extends the description of the reactive
approach to designing robots . 
3 . 2 BRAITENBERG ’ S VEHICLES 1 TO 4 — ENGINEERING BEHAVIOUR
Braitenberg ’ s ‘ Synthetic Psychology ’  , developed over a series of gedanken experiments on
mobile vehicles with minimal hardware , elaborated on using minimal hardware for designing
vehicles which can exhibit human behaviour such as love , fear , aggression , like , dislike etc . 
These vehicles were conceived as direct motivation from Wiener ’ s seminal research in
cybernetics [ 351 ]  , and were designed as ‘ animals in their natural environment ’  . He believed
that structure of the animal brain may indeed be interpretable as pieces of computer
machinery . His most original thinking led to fourteen different vehicles . This discussion
is meant as a primer for behaviour-based paradigm and the concept of behaviour , and will
focus primarily on the first four types of Braitenberg vehicles . 
Vehicle-1 : getting around , is a simple sensory-motor pairing . The vehicle has one
temperature sensor connected its lone motor and it speeds up at higher temperatures
and slows down at lower temperatures , or alternatively the force acting on the vehicle
is proportional to the temperature of the surroundings in Kelvin . This vehicle will move
along the direction it is oriented in , seeking out cold places and running away from higher
temperatures . Indeed , the vehicle seems alive and restless and at first reading this appeals
as an unconventional model . However such motion is very similar to Brownian motion , in
which atoms and molecules speed up with increasing temperature . 
Vehicle-2 : the coward & aggressor . Here , instead of one motor controlling both wheels
the vehicle has a motor for each wheel and the sensor , which is the same for both the
 91
FIGURE 3 . 3 Braitenberg vehicle-2 . Vehicle-2a drives away from the light source and exhibits
an emotion of cowardice , while vehicle-2b drives into the light bulb conveying aggression . 
Braitenberg was motivated by biology to design the crossed connection , particularly the human
eye , where the left eye relates to the right side of the human brain , and vice-versa . 
wheels , detects light . More light gives the motors more speed . Braitenberg manipulates this
model further , to vehicle-2a with direct connection and vehicle-2b with crossed connection , 
as shown in Figure 3 . 3 . 
The crossed representation in the design is a direct influence from the biological findings
that in the human brain , for vision , the left brain forms the image of the right side while
right brain forms the image of the left side . Touch and auditory response are similar to
vision and goes to the opposite side of the brain . In contrast olfactory goes to the same side
of the brain . 
If a light source is straight ahead then both vehicles will speed up in an attempt to crush
the light bulb . Straight ahead is usually a rarity so for a more general scenario , consider
the light source to be to one side of the vehicle as shown in the figure . In vehicle-2a the
motor closer to the light source will acquire more speed than the other motor as it receives
more light and will try to speed away from the light source while for vehicle-2b with the
crossed connection , the motor away from the light source will speed up more and will move
the vehicle in a curve in an attempt to move towards the light source . These 2 behaviours
correspond to cowardice and aggression to light sources respectively . Vehicle-2 , in its two
avatars , demonstrates that simple sensor response shows up as complex human-like emotion . 
Hardware arrangement for a particular behaviour , as shown for vehicle-2b in Figure 3 . 4 , 
helps to ‘ encapsulate ’ and use such behaviours in tandem with other behaviours , as will be
shown later . 
Vehicle-3 : lover , explorer & a vehicle with a value system . Vehicle-3 introduces the concept
of excitatory and inhibitory influence . Both in vehicle-1 and vehicle-2 , sensing was excitatory
influences and sped up the vehicles . In vehicle-3a , shown in shown in Figure 3 . 5 , with direct
connection , more light to the sensor will slow down the motor . Therefore , it will slowly come
to a stop near a light source , while still facing it . The vehicle shows an attachment to the
light source , akin to the feeling of love . 
92  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 4 Design of behaviour . The SR diagram for vehicle-2b . Two sensor actuator response
along with a crossed connection , marked with an x in the SR diagram , shows up as aggression
towards light bulbs . 
With crossed connections , vehicle-3b will come to a stop near a light source but it will
face away from it . If vehicle-3b has other sensors such as olfactory , temperature , etc .  , then
it would run away from the vicinity of the light source in quest of other goals , as would an
explorer who may not find light sources interesting and looks around for other inspirations . 
Vehicle-3c , shown in Figure 3 . 6 has a combination of 4 sensors and shows a variety of
behaviours , viz . it runs away from higher temperatures , hates light bulbs etc .  , a clear sense
of like and dislike as a value system seen in human beings . The behaviours are designed as
shown in Figure 3 . 7 and one behaviour module doesn ’ t influence another behaviour module
by much . However , it will be difficult to predict the motor response with each of the modules
interacting with the environment in tandem with the others . 
Vehicle-4 , unique trajectories . If instead of an excitatory or inhibitory sensor response , 
the sensor response is continuous as shown in Figure 3 . 8 and the velocity of the vehicle
increases with increasing intensity of light , it reaches a maximum and then decreases with
increasing intensity . Vehicle-4 will be able to form closed trajectories as shown in Figure
3 . 8 . This vehicle is less predictable than its predecessors , acting more on its instincts . 
These four vehicles , summarised in Table 3 . 1 , illustrate interesting ideas of embodied
agency . Behaviour of the vehicles is not entirely attributed to sensor response , but rather is
a real-time interaction of the agent and the environment viz . vehicle-1 will not really seem
very lively without high temperature , vehicle-2 will seem boring without any light sources
nearby . To design a behaviour , sensor-response and design parameters can be made into a
module , which then acts in parallel to other modules . As in vehicle-3c the final behaviour
is an overlap of various such modules and is not very easy to predict . 
Vehicle-3c and vehicle-4 are not easy to predict , but they suggest that hardware can
be manipulated in order to accomplish specific tasks by designing particular agency . The
downside is that since behaviour cannot be designed in with hardware or program codes , 
and is the interaction of the agent with the local environment , the agent needs to be in a
predictable terrain and at least have some knowledge the job ( s ) it is supposed to do . 
The vehicles employ only sensor actuator pairings without any programming module , 
 93
FIGURE 3 . 5 Braitenberg vehicle-3a . Instead of excitation , if the influence is changed to
inhibition , then the vehicle decelerates as it comes to the light source , demonstrating an emotion
akin to love for the light source . 
FIGURE 3 . 6 Braitenberg vehicle-3c , a vehicle with a value system , hates hot places , has a
vengeful aggression towards light sources , loves well-oxygenated environments and would willfully
explore around for organic matter . 
94  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 7 SR for vehicle-3c . The SR diagram for vehicle-3c is the conjunction of 4 different
behaviours . 
FIGURE 3 . 8 Braitenberg vehicle-4 . For variable sensor response as shown in the upper left hand
corner the velocity of the vehicle increases with increasing intensity of light , reaches a maximum
and then it decreases with increasing intensity . For direct connection with two light sources — the
vehicle will form closed loop trajectories . 
 95
TABLE 3 . 1 Braitenberg vehicles ( 1 to 4 ) 
Vehicle Design Behaviour
Vehicle-1
Temperature sensor Similar to Brownian motion
Vehicle-2a
Light sensor , direct connection , 
excitatory
Cowardice , runs away from light
bulbs
Vehicle-2b
Light sensor , crossed connections , 
excitatory
Aggressive , smashes light bulbs
Vehicle-3a
Light sensor , direct connection , 
inhibitory
Love , comes to a slow stop at light
bulbs
Vehicle-3b
Light sensor , crossed connection , 
inhibitory
Explorer , looks around for more
than just light bulbs
Vehicle-3c
Various sensors and design hardware Value system , likes and dislikes
Vehicle-4
Continuous sensor response Forms closed trajectories
and hence are not reprogrammable . The intelligence of the robot arises due to its runtime
interactions with the environment . Synthetic psychology demonstrates cognition as a
real-time interaction rather than a programming paradigm . Very simple hardware and trivial
design can lead to involved behavioural response . Braitenberg calls this phenomenon ‘ the law
of uphill analysis and downhill synthesis ’  , where it is easier to reckon the performance of a
system whose internal machinery is known , than to figure out the design of the internal
machinery based on the output behaviour . This is an alternative to known models of
intelligence prevalent around the 1980s . 
Synthetic psychology does not appeal to common sense , but its strength lies in its
simplicity in design , and its triumph is that human like emotional response can be easily
discerned in rote machines . In 1991 , Hogg [ 152 ] and his co-researchers at MIT ’ s Media
Laboratory were able to verify 12 of of Braitenberg ’ s 14 vehicles with LEGO bricks . This
research also set the basis for the development of the LEGO Mindstorm Kit which then
went on to become very popular with young robot enthusiasts . These vehicles and their fun
variants are often endearing projects for advanced undergraduates and postgraduate robot
courses and laboratories . 
Further analysis into these vehicles provides interesting results . Using the potential
field model [ 273 ]  , where the obstacles are modelled as repulsive potential and the goal
as an attractive potential , it is seen that combination of two behaviours can lead to newer
unique response . For example obstacle avoidance can be implemented using a combination
of cowardice ( vehicle-2a ) and love ( vehicle-3a )  . 
96  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Dynamics meets Psychology meets Art — The
Sketches of Maciek Albrecht
FIGURE 3 . 9 Of hemispheres , polyhedras , nuts , bolts and wrenches — hardware to
design motion , courtesy Maciek Albrecht , used with permission . This is about half of the original
sketch . 
Braitenberg gave emotions and life to inanimate matter . Since Newton in the late 17th
century , we have come to recognise motion as a strict mathematical model . However instead
of being entities adhering to engine power for drive & control , axiomatically scripting the
mass times acceleration , these ‘ creatures ’ born out of the artificial , are triggered , motivated
and propelled by external stimuli which seem to influence their emotions . 
If ‘ love ’ made them approach a light bulb with eagerness and a desire for proximity , then 
 ‘ anger ’ made them emphatically rush towards the same light bulb in an attempt to crush
it . When in pairs , a set of two similar vehicles concerted to a dance , very similar to the one
by Walter ’ s Turtles . 
 97
FIGURE 3 . 10 End of land — an amphibious niche . Courtesy Maciek Albrecht , used with
permission . 
The idea of a world with such vehicles , interacting , willfully cooperating and developing
social niches is a romantic extension of the Braitenberg model . Such a world is illustrated
in sketches by renowned artist and animator , Emmy prize winner , Maciek Albrecht . 
Braitenberg ’ s classic [ 44 ]  , included a 10-page portfolio by Albrecht ;  
 ‘ This portfolio of vehicles , some placidly at rest , most madly careening over
the landscape of the artist Maciek Albrecht ’ s imagination , illustrates only a few
of the many marvelous “ creatures ” inspired by Valentino Braitenberg ’ s text ’ 
Here are three of his sketches . Albrecht uses machinations such as grooves , hinges , nuts , 
bolts , beams and polyhedrons to convey the engineering components in Figure 3 . 9 and
anthropomorphic emblems such as wings , feathers , snouts and tentacles to exhibit the
emotional attributes of these vehicles in both Figure 3 . 10 and Figure 3 . 11 . The last two
sketches show amphibious and arboreal ecosystems . There are clear hints at the evolution
98  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
of an ecological niche where two or more different types of such vehicles cooperate and
coexist , particularly at bottom right in Figure 3 . 10 which shows a larger vehicle leading
many smaller vehicles suggesting swarms . Albrecht [ 5 ] puts it succinctly ,  “  .  .  . it was a fun
project to work on ”  . 
FIGURE 3 . 11 The winged one — arboreal creatures , courtesy Maciek Albrecht , used with
permission . 
The unison of emotions with action has been a cornerstone paradigm in robotics since
Braitenberg ’ s vehicles . Pfeifer designed vehicles with ‘ emotions ’ and ‘ value systems ’ on he
named as “ sense-act-reflexes ” by extending the fungus eaters model to include Hebbian
learning . His results are similar to Braitenberg ’ s . Pfeifer along with his co-researchers also
designed a complete control architecture [ 198 , 290 ] on the principles of Braitenberg ’ s vehicles . 
Karpov [ 171 ] also used similar methods to design his emotional architecture for mobile
robots . The inverse phenomenon , where artificial emotions help to modulate robot action
has also been successfully explored [ 201 ] by two researchers from New Zealand , Lee-Johnson
 99
and Carnegie . Attempts to replicate human-like behaviour and intelligence underscored
emotions as the foremost tool for grooming of human tendencies and intelligent behaviour , 
and has demonstrated that the social learning apparatus works predominantly via human
expressions [ 31 ]  . 
Braitenberg ’ s vehicles , along with Walter ’ s turtles , were instrumental in establishing
the nouvelle AI , reactive route to design robots , encouraging parallel functioning of
multiple sensor actuator pairs rather than the cumbersome and often time-consuming
sequential architecture . Principles and concepts of Braitenberg ’ s vehicles as relating to
animal-like traits to model motor response , encapsulating behaviour , layers of parallel
control , embodiment and emergent behaviour were all facets of the development of
behaviour-based approaches . 
3 . 3 DELIBERATIVE APPROACH
Mobile robot control broadly adheres to two philosophies , deliberative and reactive . 
Deliberative approaches or horizontal decomposition advocate the development of a
centralised world representation from the fusion of sensory data , development of plans and
subsequent execution of a given task and this process repeats . 
To illustrate this point imagine a simple line following robot using deliberative principles . 
It has a light sensor to perceive the environment ( sense ) and a motor to move around ( act )  , 
however it also has a sleek computer onboard to design a map of the path it has to traverse a
line for the line follower ( plan )  , prior to its locomotion . So , unlike Braitenberg ’ s vehicles the
sensing and acting are two different physical processes connected by planning . In a direct
comparison to Braitenberg ’ s vehicles , this approach needs an onboard computer and makes
this line following robot way too expensive and it adds to bulkiness both in hardware and
software domains . If planning is avoided , then it is not only an advantage for the design but
the execution of the task is also easier , as shown in flow diagrams in Figure 3 . 12 . 
The early robots , developed in the 1960s and 1970s , viz . Stanford Cart , Shakey , Hilare , 
Alvin etc .  , were more targetted on trying to get the robot to move and not on attaining
higher levels of competence and cognition . They were based on the sense-plan-act model , 
which is a top-down approach or a functional decomposition . In the sense-plan-act model , 
the sense system translates the raw sensor data into a world model , the plan system then
develops plans to execute a goal in this world model and finally the act system executes
this plan . The intelligence of this model lies in the plan system or the programmer and not
in the act system . 
3 . 3 . 1 Shortcomings of the deliberative approach
By the mid-1980s researchers had found several lacuna in the sense-plan-act model . The
inability to react to real-time response , often failure to attend to an emergency , bottlenecks
leading to long latency time and lackluster performance in an unknown , unpredictable and
noisy environment confirmed the inadequacy of the system . Since sense-plan-act worked
cyclically , adding more sensors or enabling multiple goals meant more data to transfer
over the cycle , thus leading to even worse performance . Horizontal decomposition shown
in Figure 3 . 13 , inherently assumes that the environment remains static between successive
plans . Such an assumption correlates very badly to a dynamic world with moving obstacles
and changing goal points . Another drawback was the lack of robustness . Because the
information is processed sequentially , a failure in any single component causes a complete
breakdown of the system . Such issues in implementation , motivations from the natural
100  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 12 Sense-plan-act approach vs . reactive approach . In ( a ) the two parallelograms
are separated by a rectangle — processing of information between input and output . In contrast 
( b ) lacks planning , and things happen on the run — more like the control paradigm for Braitenberg
vehicles 1 to 4 . 
 101
FIGURE 3 . 13 Deliberative approach or horizontal decomposition . From sensing to action , the
modules of perception , modelling , planning , execution and motor control are designed as a series . 
Thus a bottleneck at any module slows down the process . Also every module from perception to
motor control has to work for the success of this control structure . A failure at any of these modules
will lead to breakdown of the robot . Adapted from Hu and Brady [ 157 ]  . 
world as Braitenberg ’ s and Walter ’ s and the obvious need for a parallelism in mobile robot
control led to the development of the reactive paradigm or vertical decomposition . Other
than the inadequecies of the deliberative approach , two more reasons contributed towards
the nouvelle AI : motivations from the natural world and the differences between robots and
computers . 
3 . 3 . 2 From animals to robots
Biological science has always proved to be an opulent source of motivation for development of
AI and robotics . To develop artificial beings which have an intelligence of their own should
be rightfully motivated from the living world . One of the earliest pioneer was Da Vinci , 
who made designs of futuristic vehicles with inspirations from birds . Ants and bees have
influenced optimisation algorithms . Anemotaxis has motivated navigation methods . Fukuda
devised his brachiating robot studying gibbons . Works of Gibson [ 121 ] and later Duchon [ 99 ] 
elucidate the basis of ecology-based robotics and are derived from animal behaviour . An
entire discipline of cybernetics has taken shape in order to marry the ideas from biology to
those of AI . All of swarm robotics is influenced by natural swarms of animals , birds , insects
etc . 
3 . 3 . 3 Robots and computers are fundamentally different
AI was developed in the latter half of the 20th century with the focus on the development
of number crunching systems and helped in development of computers . The sense-plan-act
102  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
model is very similar to the running of a computer program . However , robots and computers
are different . 
1 . Inherent parallelism in robots : Computer programs are nearly always developed for
serial execution of an algorithm leading to a result , but in robots a goal has to be
attained while maintaining stability , avoiding risk and dealing with the uncertainties
of a dynamic environment simultaneously . All of which happens in tandem over a
number of sensors and motors . Thus a parallel processing is more desired than a
sequential processing . 
2 . Interaction with a dynamic world : Robots constantly interact with a dynamic
world and often set algorithms are not enough to cover all such dynamism , so
the final behaviour of the robot is rather different from what is coded in . The
sense-plan-act approach , an open-loop plan execution without real-time feedback from
the environment is not sufficient to deal with environmental uncertainty , moving
obstacles and emergencies . 
3 . Opportunism suppresses the maxim of plan : Blindly following plans has proven to be
detrimental in real world scenarios . Consider a foraging robot schematically shown
in Figure 3 . 14 , in a sense-plan-act tenet with 2 types of sensors , laser for obstacle
avoidance and olfactory for food detection . A simple serial algorithm for it would be : 
Algorithm 1 Foraging robot using a serial approach
repeat , move forward
if obstacle then
move left
else
use olfactory to detect food item
end if
until forever
At point A the food item is within the detecting range of the olfactory sensor . Going
by serial operation the robot must first avoid the obstacle and move to point B , 
where the food item will be out of its range of detection . If instead of moving left
at point A , had the robot taken a opportunistic approach and moved right then it
would have tracked down the food item successfully . 
4 . Graceful degradation : For robots operating in the real world , things can get difficult
for three particular occurrences [ 164 ]  ;  
( a ) A given command structure behaves in a different manner due to dynamic
environment . As an example , for a robot following a trail of a white line discerns
the track from the contrast of the two intensities as gathered from its light sensor ; 
when it enters an area which is heavily lit , the contrast of the two intensities will
be much poorer and it makes the robot to slow down or to lose track of the white
line .  
( b ) Robot ’ s program makes an assumption about the world which proves to be false . 
As an example , for a robot programmed sequentially to move forward 20 meters
and fetch a black ball , the tachometers are coded to 20 meters however , the
program assumes no friction . With substantial frictional forces , the robot will
fail to achieve this task .  
( c ) Sensor failure , for inaccurate input data , a computer program would give an
unreliable result . However , for a robot , inaccurate data from the sensors is
 103
FIGURE 3 . 14 Opportunism suppresses plans . The robot is foraging for food and has two types
of sensing ; laser for obstacle avoidance and olfactory to detect the food , and is driven by a serial
algorithm . At point A , the robot must move to right in order to find the food item , which is not
possible for serial execution . 
commonplace . The robot programming should be designed in such a way that
the robot performance should not break down due to such a failure . A parallel
processing over multiple sensors gets around this issue . 
These difficulties of a robot interacting in the real world separate it from number
crunching systems . Efforts to have parallelism in sensor actuator pairs help in sustaining
the robot in scenarios of sensor failure , effectively dealing with a dynamic real world , and
to have an opportunistic outlook to attain a given task were realised in reactive approach
which is also termed the nouvelle AI , as it was a paradigm shift from the traditional AI . 
3 . 4 REACTIVE APPROACH
To make a robot intelligently interact with the environment , a solution was sought via
number crunching operations , more like solving a mathematical problem . This approach has
come be known as ‘ Traditional Artificial Intelligence ’ or , alternatively as John Haugeland
coined it ,  ‘ Good Old Fashioned AI ’ or ‘ GOFAI ’  , where sensory inputs are converted to
data to be processed at various levels of abstraction to develop plans and then executed
in order for the robot to reach its goal . Planning was central to this approach and there
was a complete lack of immediacy ; a robot equipped with a camera based vision system
will first develop pixellated maps , and then try to negotiate a suitable route to the goal
point via such maps . Incremental cyclical progress will enable the robot to reach its goal . 
By early 1980s researchers observed the issues in this approach : high lag times which failed
for a dynamic environment . Researchers and scientists opined that this is due to the lack of
104  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 15 Checkmate ! In his research paper titled ‘ Elephants Do Not Play Chess ’  , 
Brooks [ 51 ] advocated against representational knowledge and encouraged a reflexive , behaviour
based approach to robots . Brooks illustrated his argument with a satirical example , that elephants
are not appreciative of a representation and rule-based game of chess ; however they do exhibit
intelligent behaviour . 
FIGURE 3 . 16 Reactive Approach or vertical decomposition . Layering of behaviours , each
layer is a self contained unit that can function without the other layers , prevents bottleneck and
failure of one module will not stop the functioning of the robot . Adapted from Hu and Brady [ 157 ] 
 105
quality processors , and it was believed that sufficient progress in technology could overcome
this shortcoming . The shortcoming was not in hardware , but rather in the paradigm . 
Walter ’ s turtles , Toda ’ s model of fungus eaters and Braitenberg ’ s vehicles proved to
be the stepping stones for the development of the nouvelle AI . These three developments
firmly grounded the principles for developing autonomous agents via representation free
routes employing embodied AI . All of the three developments are motivated by , or closely
mimic animal behaviours . Toda models the basis of a self sustaining hypothetical animal
with goals and survival means and Braitenberg elucidates sensory-motor concepts with his
gedanken experiments , Walter ’ s efforts prior to both Toda and Braitenberg confirmed to the
reality of such theoretical models . While Brooks was influenced by Walter , ANIMAT and
ALIFE research was a direct consequence of the Fungus Eater . Three typical characteristics
of the behaviour-based approach ; 
1 . Situatedness : The robots are situated in the real world . They do not deal with
abstractions and models , viz . clouds are not spheres and buildings are not cuboids . 
The information obtained from the internal state or the short-term memory which
contributes to local knowledge are also not in the form of maps or world models . 
2 . Embodiment : The robots have perceptions which allow them to integrate into the
environment . Their actions have immediate feedback on their own sensor readings and
hence their perceptions . Therefore , the robot is an active part of the environment . 
3 . Emergence : The final behaviour of the robot is an emergent phenomenon which
cannot be determined prior to run time . This is a boon and also a curse , as it often
leads to novelty in performance but designing robots for a desired behaviour becomes
difficult . 
As discussed in the previous chapter , the nouvelle AI is modelled on low to no
representation , and denies mentalist models and is often designed as sensorimotor . The
reactive approach is a minimal paradigm designed as a bottom-up approach where the robot
action is determined by the parallel working of a number of modules working in tandem . 
This is also known as vertical decomposition , as shown in Figure 3 . 16 . The nouvelle AI gets
rid of the module of planning and couples together sensing and action more tightly and
heavily relies on emergent functionality . Therefore , cognition is an emergent phenomenon , 
an overlap of perception and action . 
Rodney Brooks ’ subsumption architecture [ 50 ] heralded in the nouvelle AI for robots
as shown in Figure 3 . 15 . This new paradigm soon found newer implementations as Ronald
Arkin ’ s motor schema and Pattie Mae ’ s action-selection and proved to be more effective
than traditional approaches . 
3 . 4 . 1 Subsumption architecture and the nouvelle AI
Subsumption architecture has a very special place in modern day AI robotics . It was the
first implementation of the reactive paradigm . Ever since the mid 1980s , Reactive approach , 
vertical decomposition , behaviour based paradigm and subsumption architecture are often
used as near synonyms . Rodney Brooks argued that intelligence in robots should not be
symbolical and plan based , rather it should be reactive and instinct based . Brooks based
his new theory on structuring intelligence without representation nor reason , but rather
agent-environment interactions . 
Brooks designed the architecture as a layering of each behaviour to develop his control
structure . Each layer is a finite state machine where higher levels could suppress or inhibit
lower levels of behaviour . Such inhibition of information was new in the field of AI , however
106  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Ludlow had developed such models in neurobiology which he called ‘ decision makers ’ and
parallels with Skinnerian school of thought was apparent . In this model , intelligence can
be dubbed as agent-environment interactions or also , the emergent behaviour due to
contribution by each layer . 
Finite State Machine
A finite state machine is a system which has a limited number of states . The system can
transit between these states while obeying a fixed set of rules . As an example an on / off
switch has 2 states and 2 rules defining the transition from one state to the next one . 
Considering a more involved scenario , a beetle , which moves straight ahead while in
light and stops when it is dark . If the beetle encounters an obstacle it turns and runs
backwards for 10 cm . After 10 cm , if it is in light then it will again switch directions
and move straight ahead . The beetle can be expressed with 3 states and 5 rules . 
The apparent shortcoming of this approach is that it is a compromise on the dynamism of
the system , as each FSM can only represent a limited number of states . In subsumption
architecture , Brooks employed each layer as an FSM . 
The design considerations for the subsumption architecture were : 
1 . Employ evolution as the central principle in design methodology for robots , wherein
more specialised performance can be designed by adding more modules on top of
a pre-existing rudiment . These modules can be introduced as hardware , software or
a hybrid entity of both . Brooks calls these modules circuitry or as the vernacular
 107
FIGURE 3 . 17 Old AI . Cognition is the result of a cyclical process and the observer is a ‘ mere
spectator ’ and is not really participative in the cognitive cycle . Intelligence of the process is coded-in
by the programmer . 
regarding subsumption has come to be — layers of control . Each added layer produces
some observable new behaviour for the robot interacting with its environment . 
2 . Each layer is a binding between perception and actuation . 
3 . For the sake of design and predictibility of the system , it is necessary to minimise
interaction between layers . 
The reactive approach had immediate results and instead of a slow-moving robot such
as the Stanford cart , Brooks ’ laboratory had a plethora of gizmos running around in
near real-time response . The notion of reducing intelligent action to mere reflexes to the
environment was radical but it solved the issues of planning and world modelling . 
The argument is not just restricted to planning versus reaction , but is rather between
finite state computation where the programs use a constant amount of memory versus the
more powerful computational models used in classical AI . These computational models often
had to address problems such as search of infinite trees and graphs which are often more of
an arbitration than contained to a limited amount of memory . 
As another advantage , Shakey and Stanford Cart which employed deliberative approach
were bulky and had a high performance computer onboard , in comparison robots developed
by Brooks with reactive paradigm were far less bulkier as they did not need high level of
computation
In old AI , the programmer was all important as shown in Figure 3 . 17 . With no plans the
robot never loses sync with the world as shown in Figure 3 . 18 . The strengths of subsumption
are its design methodology , parallelism and modularity . Design methodology makes it easy
to build a system and add newer hardware with another layer of behaviour . With parallelism , 
the ability for each layer to run independently and asynchronously incorporates the working
of a dynamic world and warrants for graceful degradation in case of the failure of any layer of
108  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 18 Nouvelle AI , action , perception and cognition not cyclical but rather continious
processes and cognition happens as an overlap of the action and perception whence and as it is
perceived by the observer . Reactive approach builds the model of cognition around the notion of
emergence with the observer being central to the model . 
control . Subsumption is clearly more modular than the sense-plan-act approach , but there
has also been criticism regarding this feature , as I will discuss later in the chapter . 
Other than these facets of design , three more salient features of subsumption architecture
are low cost , reduced computational power and re-usability of code . Subsumption is modular
and therefore cheaper to build and test and a single layer of behaviour is enough to get
the robot running . Such results are most appreciable in walking robots , hexapods and
humanoids . 
A number of iconic robots were made using subsumption : Atilla , Herbert , Chengiz
and later Cog . Connell developed the COLONY architecture by considering a number
of individual subsumption units as shown in Figure 3 . 19 , and connecting them together
with further prioritisation among those units , to construct 15 different behaviours for 6
task-specific levels . COLONY architecture was meant for a robotic arm mounted on a
mobile base meant to retrieve soft drinks cans . COLONY was the first behaviour-based
paradigm developed for arm / hand manipulators . Later onwards , dedicated behaviour based
architectures for manipulators , to manipulate pick & place to yield richer behaviours and
tracking operation were developed by various research groups . Various more architectures
were developed with subsumption in mind , two well known ones are , SSS Architecture and
the Circuit Architecture . 
3 . 4 . 2 Motor schema
Motor schema [ 17 ] was developed by Ronald Arkin in late 1980s . Though it is a behavioural
paradigm , instead of layers of control it uses a schema-based vectorial approach . The output
 109
FIGURE 3 . 19 SR diagram for a trash-collecting robot designed using subsumption
architecture . Simple operations such as wandering are put at the lowest end , with more involved
behaviours such as pickup and homing are higher up . The higher levels suppress the lower levels . 
The robot can identify the trash item ( s ) on seeing them at a detectable distance . The robot 
 ‘ wanders ’ as long as the trash is not seen ; once the trash is seen by the robot ’ s sensors then 
 ‘ avoiding ’ obstacles and reaching the trash suppresses ‘ wandering ’  , at the site of the trash ‘ pick
up ’ suppresses ‘ avoiding ’ and once the trash has been ‘ picked up ’ then ‘ homing ’ back to a
dumping yard suppresses ‘ pick up ’  . A trash collecting and foraging robot can be made from the
same basic behaviours . 
FIGURE 3 . 20 An example from the COLONY architecture , 
110  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
of each schema is styled as a velocity vector . A dynamic assortment of such schemas is
used to implement complex behaviour . The output is the normalised vector sum of all the
active schemas . Arkin ’ s model was developed on Arbib ’ s research on frogs that described
motor control in animals as a vector model . On extending such ideas to the robotics
domain , schemas are developed as primitive motor behaviours which are reactions to sensory
information obtained from the environment . 
What is behaviour ? 
A universally accepted definition of behaviour in AI concerns doesn ’ t exist . The
term was incorporated from psychology by Simon in late 1950s , to develop models
of intelligence and rationality which hinted at the concepts of embodiment and
situatedness . Later , Toda used the terminology of ‘ behaviour program ’ in his fungus
eater model and he contends behaviour is a means of adaptability in an unknown
and apparently unsophisticated environment . In his seminal paper , Brooks introduces
vertical decomposition with ‘ task achieving behaviours ’ to develop the subsumption
architecture . The works of Brooks , Payton and Arkin broadly define behaviour as
basic building blocks for robot action , or alternatively the agent ’ s response to its
environment . In reactive approaches a primitive behaviour would mean a sensorymotor
pair ; combination of such primitives would lead to the phenomenon of emergence in the
robot . A more formalised definition would be , behaviour is a function of the structure
and dynamics of its physical design and construction , the attributes of the environment
in which it works , and its internal control system . 
However , since performance in reactive systems is emergent it is difficult to confirm
the behaviour of the system . Oftentimes a subroutine in a robot controller is wrongly
referred to as a ‘ behaviour ’  . As an apparent way out , Gat distiguishes between code and
the implements using ‘ Behaviour ’ for code and ‘ behaviour ’ for the implements , viz . A
Behaviour is a piece of code that produces a behaviour when it is running . 
This definition is not sufficient for hybrid systems which often have deliberative , reactive
and adaptive components . In reactive systems behaviour means a purely reflexive action , 
whereas in hybrid systems it can mean reflexive , innate and learned actions and it is
difficult to differentiate between the code and the implements as the system adheres to
a high degree of emergence . 
Unlike subsumption architecture , motor schema doesn ’ t have a preset heirarchy and
doesn ’ t attempt to suppress or inhibit a given module but rather it works to blend
behaviours together . Behaviours are generated as a vector at run time and are added
together like vector summation . Motor schema are easily implemented in software using
artificial potential fields developed by Khatib as shown in Figure 3 . 21 . 
Arkin classifies navigation primitives from individual schemas , more complicated
behaviours can be generated by superimposition of these primitives as shown in Figures 3 . 22
and 3 . 23 . At Georgia Tech , Arkin developed advanced foraging behaviours using schemas
for robots , Callisto , Io and Ganymede . 
 111
What is schema ? 
Schema is traditional to psychology and neurology . Anthropomorphic motivations led
Arkin to develop schema for robots . Neisser defines schema as “ a pattern of action as well
as a pattern for action ”  , while Arbib explains schema as “ an adaptive controller that uses
an identification procedure to update its representation of the object being controlled ”  . In
robot concerns , schema relates motor behaviour in terms of various concurrent stimuli
and it also determines how to react and how that reaction can be accomplished . Schemas
are implemented using potential fields ; individual schemas are often depicted as needle
diagrams . Concurrently acting behaviours are coordinated using vector summations of
the active schemas . 
3 . 4 . 3 Action selection & bidding mechanisms
Action selection or action selection mechanism ( ASM ) was designed by Pattie Maes 
[  ?  , 217 ] and it takes a different approach than suppressing , inhibiting or vectorially adding
behaviours . Instead it employs a dynamic mechanism for behaviour selection . ASM is a
selection based competitive implementation of behaviour-based paradigm and it overcomes
the problem of the predefined priorities used in the subsumption architecture . Each
behaviour has an associated activation level , which can be affected by the current sensor
readings of the robot , its goals and the influence of other behaviours . The activation level
can be interpreted as a corollary to the energy level for Beer ’ s cockroach simulation , the
heuristic which determines the arousal and satiation level for food . Each behaviour also
has some minimal requirements known as activation levels that have to be met in order to
be active . These levels also decay over time . From all the active behaviours , the one with
the highest activation level is chosen for actual execution . Maes was motivated by Minsky ’ s 
 ‘ society of mind ’  , arbitrary agents interacting locally to lead to an effective working of a
society . However , Maes ’ work also bears similarity to that of Tinberg and Baerends , and
extends from biology to AI . 
Maes designed every autonomous agent as a set of competence modules and , using list
structures , implemented her algorithm . A competence module i can be denoted as a tuple 
( ci 
, ai 
, di 
, αi )  . Where ci
is a list of preconditions which have to be fulfilled before the agent
can become active . ai and di represent the expected effects of the agent ’ s action in terms of
an add list and a delete list and αi
is the activation level . A competence module is executable
when all its preconditions are true , an executable module module whose activation level
surpasses a threshold may be selected to perform some real world action . 
Action selection solves the issues of loss of information in subsumption when a layer is
suppressed or inhibited . It avoids the potential field implementation issues of motor schema
and merits every single piece of information available to the robot . However in a dynamic
implementation it is harder to predict the robot ’ s emergent behaviour at runtime . Maes ’ 
action-selection has also been used in tandem with reinforcement learning and provided
better results . 
Action selection served as a motivation for development of control paradigms based on
bidding mechanisms . In a bidding-based control architecture each behaviour bids according
to the urgency for having the action executed , which can be compared in the ASM approach
to preparing a list with a descending order of activation level in action-selection . However , 
unlike Maes ’ approach bidding mechanisms do not employ a critical activation level to
become active and neither do the behaviours have any preconditions to be met and they
are always ready to bid . Also , the behaviours in ASM can influence the activation level of
112  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 21 Motor schema implemented using potential fields . Move forward schema 
( upper left )  , path tracking schema ( upper right )  , obstacle schema ( lower left ) and superposition of
two goal and one obstacle schemas ( lower right )  . 
 113
FIGURE 3 . 22 Schema self modulation at run time . In this example the two concerned
behaviours are — ‘ wander ’  ,  ‘ obstacle avoidance ’ and ‘ motion to goal ’  . The ‘ wander ’ behaviour
is always acting , the other two behaviours occur due to the environment . At point A the robot
experiences maximum repulsion from the obstacle and feeble attraction from the goal ; the vector
sum doesn ’ t point to the goal point ; and ‘ obstacle avoidance ’ is the dominant behaviour . At point
B and point C the robot experiences less repulsion from the obstacle and more attraction to the
goal point ; the vector sum still doesn ’ t point to the goal . At point D , the repulsion from the
obstacle is of very little significance and the vector sum points nearly to the goal point ;  ‘ motion
to goal ’ is the dominant behaviour . In this manner , schemas implement behaviours in a dynamic
manner . It is worth noting that the robot does not chart the shortest path from point A to the
goal . 
FIGURE 3 . 23 Sigma diagram addition of 3 schemas . Unlike subsumption no behaviour is
suppressed and throughout the previous example in Figure 3 . 22 these 3 schemas are acting in
tandem . However obstacle avoidance is dominant at point A , while contributions from the other
two schemas are insignificant . Near point D motion to goal is dominant and the other two schemas
contribute little to the robot ’ s emergent behaviour . 
114  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 24 DAMN Architecture is an example of bidding-mechanisms where the behaviour
module ‘ votes ’ to decides which action to be pursued . 
other behaviours , whereas in bidding mechanisms , behaviours are totally independent of
each other . 
Rosenblatt developed the Distributed Architecture for Mobile Navigation project 
( DAMN )  . In this architecture , a set of behaviours which cooperate to control a robot ’ s
path by voting for various possible actions such as control of heading angle and speed , and
an arbiter decides which is the action to be performed . The action with more votes is the
one which is executed . However , the set of actions is predefined and it had a grid-based
path planning . 
Behaviour-based architectures can be classified depending on how the coordination
between behaviours occurs ;  ( 1 ) Competitive : in these architectures , the system selects
an action and sends it to the actuators , it is a winner-take-all mechanism . Subsumption
architecture , action-selection and bidding mechanisms are examples of competitive
coordination , and ( 2 ) Cooperative : in these architectures the system combines the actions
coming from several behaviours to produce a new one that is sent to the actuators . Motor
schema and Braitenberg vehicle-3c are example of cooperative coordination . 
Unified Behaviour Framework ( UBF ) was designed to allow a robot to use competitive
as well as cooperative policies using a single architecture , as shown in Figure 3 . 25 . UBF
allows for seamlessly switching between disparate architectural policies by varying the
arbitration techniques . Often a low-level controller and its behaviour is developed for a
specific task ; thus any future redesign or extending the utility appreciably to other tasks
is severely limited . Since UBF allows for seamless switching across distinct architectural
policies during runtime , it encourages reuse of behaviours , with various different modes , 
viz . random activation of an arbitrary behaviour , priority based selection , cooperative and
semi-cooperative arbitration etc . UBFs modular architecture helps to simplify design and
development by code reuse . 
Bidding mechanisms and ASM attempt to put in some deliberative content in reactive
architectures to design higher level behaviours . This can be seen as early attempts which
led towards hybrid architectures which is discussed later in the chapter . 
3 . 5 A CRITIQUE OF THE NOUVELLE AI
At first , the new AI proved to be much faster in comparison to traditional AI . However the
downside of this was the inability of the robot to engage in cerebral activities , which are
the basis for all higher functions and sophisticated behaviours . 
Behaviour-based approach resists analytical modelling and intelligence of such a system
 115
FIGURE 3 . 25 Unified Behaviour Framework ( UBF )  , provides dynamism to a behaviour-based
approach by adding various modes of arbitration , which allows for the running of cooperative as
well as competitive architectural policies on the same controller encouraging reuse of code . Two
arbitrations using UBF ,  ( a ) Monte Carlo , the robot alternates randomly between wander and two
modes of obstacle avoidance ,  ( b ) Highest Priority arbitration is more like traditional subsumption
where the behaviour with the highest priority which can either be preprogrammed or acquired
through voting gets exeuted . 
116  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
is when the agent interacts with its environment . Obviously this does lead to an ‘ element
of surprise ’ and predictibility takes a back seat . However , emergent behaviour tends to
be more robust because it is less dependent on accurate sensing or action and also since
it makes fewer environmental assumptions . Emergence is always a product of a dynamic
process and it is ostensive . One of the most endearing examples is given by Brooks , where
he demonstrates how bi-ped walking can emerge from a network of rather simple reflexes
with hardly any analytical model or central control . Agre showed how behaviour as complex
as goal-directed action sequences can be modelled as an emergent property . 
TABLE 3 . 2 Comparison between traditional AI and reactive approach
Traditional AI Reactive Approach
Designed in sensor fusion , models , goals , plans action selection , schemas , 
behaviour
Basis in search binding problem
Information
flow
choose next action concurrent actions
Emergent
aspects
behavioural response goals and plans which are made
on the go
Robustness serial action , a module failure
leads to system failure
parallel action leads to graceful
degradation
Intelligence coded in by the manufacturer or
the programmer
happens in tandem as an overlap
of perception and action
3 . 5 . 1 Issues with the nouvelle AI
Subsumption architecture led to a near real-time implementation for mobile robots and
later bipeds and humanoids , however suppressing and inhibiting layers of control meant
losing information which can be critical in hard real time implementations as aerospace
and military hardware in battlefields . Motor schema relies on blending and hence doesn ’ t
have any issues of loss of information , though it inherits all the issues of potential field
implementation , particularly the issue of local minima . Behaviour-based approaches are
motivated from the natural world and do not work well to mirror human-like intelligence . 
There have been suggestions that to develop higher-level intelligence akin to human beings , 
a representation free approach will not prove to be sufficient . 
3 . 5 . 1 . 1 Implementation issues in subsumption architecture
1 . Loss of information and disruption of lower-level functionality : As lower-level
functionalities are suppressed or inhibited , the information contained in those layers
is lost . Hence a robot , when executing a higher-level behaviour , may fail to execute a
simpler behaviour at the lower levels . 
2 . How to identify a higher level behaviour : Determining a given behaviour as
higher level or lower level is a matter of arbitration [ 143 ] and there is no real
methodology to ascertain this . The general rule of suppressing lower levels in favour
of higher levels is not the hall mark of a good design . 
3 . Layers are not really independent of each other : Subsumption assumes that
each layer of control is independent of another , but this is not always true . The internal
 117
FIGURE 3 . 26 Lack of a compromise solution . Subsumption fails to identify a compromise
solution , adapted from Rosenblatt and Payton [ 282 ]  . 
functionalities of the higher levels often interfere with the lower levels , and often times
two or more layers use the same hardware making independence of those layers really
questionable . Thus small changes to the lower levels are difficult to implement without
redesigning most of the other layers . In particular , higher layers can suppress , inhibit
and also read the signals of lower layers . Adding higher level behaviours without
altering lower level functionality is not possible . The physical connections between
layers are hard-wired , so they cannot be changed during execution , making the system
less dynamic to changes in the environment . As an example , consider a motor which
is a common hardware for 2 layers of wandering and motion to goal . When wandering
is suppressed by motion to goal , the motor is already at a non-zero velocity while
motion to goal would have been designed considering the motor starts from zero . It
may happen that at a higher velocity as attained during wandering , the motor may
be difficult to align towards the goal point or , even worse , miss it all together . 
4 . Levels must have a priority : Each behaviour is associated with a degree of priority , 
thus behaviours with equal priority cannot be represented with the subsumption
architecture . 
5 . Lack of access to the internal state of each behaviour : With increasing layers
of control it is often difficult to acertain the information internal to a behaviour . 
This shortcoming poses as a design issue and the coordination of a large set of
behavioural skills by adding further layers of control to achieve a desired coherent
complex behaviour is a difficult and error-prone job , lack of modularity is alarming
in hard real time systems such as aircraft , elevators and medical applications . Critics
have claimed that such designing of behaviours is apparently more of an art than a
science . 
118  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
6 . Lack of a compromise solution : Since subsumption is a ‘ winner takes it all ’ 
philosophy , it fails to include a compromise solution when the working of two or more
layers of control have conflicting goals . An example adapted from the Rosenblatt and
Payton , consider 2 behaviours as schematically in Figure 3 . 26 . Obstacle avoidance
can be best implemented by I , however it can also be fulfilled by II and V2 as
next best options . Motion to goal can be implemented by IV and V , IV being the
best option . The best options are shown with continious lines while the next best
options are shown with dotted lines . In a subsumption architecture with these two
behaviours , where obstacle avoidance inhibits motion to goal , the robot will cease
to have an alignment towards the goal while avoiding obstacle and this can be
detremental to the task in hand . As a better alternative , option V , ND Navigation
could have been used as a consistency for both the behaviours , however subsumption
doesn ’ t merit such compromise solutions . To overcome this lacuna , Rosenblatt and
Payton [ 282 ] suggested a connectionist architecture which uses a very fine grained
layered architecture . Instead of designing behaviours as finite state machines with
internal states and instance variable , behaviours are comprised of atomic functional
elements that have no inaccessible internal state . These simple decision making units
and their interconnections collectively define a behaviour . Since the behaviours can
interact with each other , thus can select a best compromise solution . In continuation
of this work , Rosenblatt also develop a notion of ‘ internalized plans ’  , instead of mere
program for action , plans are considered as sources of information and advice to agents
that are already accomplished in dealing with a dynamic environment . Therefore , 
plans are used selectively , and serve to enhance system performance or as fail safes in
dire scenarios . In implementation , the notion of ‘ internalized plans ’ is realised using
a global navigation using potential-field based gradient descent method . 
3 . 5 . 1 . 2 Issues with motor schema
Instead of suppression or inhibition motor schema uses blending of behaviours akin to vector
addition , so there is no loss of information . However , three issues of this approach are : 
1 . Local minima problem : A built-in shortcoming of motor schema is the issue of local
minima which plagues all potential field implementations3 
. 
2 . Lack of practical solution by blending : A problem that cooperative mechanisms such
as motor schema face is that the solution via blending behaviours may not really
solve the problem . Consider a robot which has a gaping hole straight ahead , and two
different behaviours attempt to avoid it , one trying to avoid it through the right and
the other one trying to avoid it through the left . The sum of the 2 behaviours would
be a vector pointing straight ahead to the gaping hole , the emergent behaviour fails
to solve this problem . Researchers have tried to overcome this problem using dynamic
methods for behaviour selection and bidding strategies where the the option with the
highest level of activation or the most popular action is executed . 
3 . Null summation : Another implementation issue is when two or more schemas of the
same magnitude working in opposite directions to each other will nullify the net vector
sum . Thus though there is stimuli but it does not evoke a motor response . 
2The next chapter will include further details on ND navigation . 
3The next chapter details the various implementation of potential field method for navigation and the
methods to overcome the local minima problem will be discussed there . 
 119
FIGURE 3 . 27 ‘ Today the earwig , tomorrow man ?  ’ David Kirsh argues in favour of
representations and maintains that recreating insect-like behaviour in robots is not sufficient to
elicit higher levels of intelligence . Kirsh associates representations with perception , learning and
control , thus making it imperative in development of human like intelligence . Brooks replied to
this criticism by suggesting that the behaviour-based paradigm needs to incorporate cognitive
approaches to develop humanoid robots with human-like faculties , Brooks named this discipline 
 ‘ cognobotics ’  . 
3 . 5 . 2 Extending reactive approach to higher functions
Brooks ’ hypothesis of ‘ reason and representation free ’ AI works very well for situationally
determined activities such as walking , running , avoiding obstacles , climbing stairs , etc . 
However it is silent regarding cerebral activities such as playing chess , solving jigsaw , 
tinkering with the Rubik ’ s cube , etc . For example Dennett ’ s robots ; R1 , R1D1 and R1D2
without any representative knowledge , viz . a visual knowledge of the battery and / or the
bomb looks like , will all fail the task and [ once again ] will be bombed to destruction , this
time on a purely behaviour-based approach . 
Kirsh [ 180 ] in his opposition to reactive approaches , insisted that robotics can never
be modelled without representations , such as development of ‘ insect like ’ behaviour such
as wandering , avoiding obstacles and wall following will never be sufficient to progress to
higher levels of intelligence , as shown in Figure 3 . 27 . Kirsh agrees that 97% of human
behaviour is nonrepresentational , however in the remaining 3% , human beings engage in
cerebral activities , the typical non-trivial aspects of human intelligence which lack in reflexes
and animal intelligence . Kirsh argues that there is a limit to which a creature can go without 
 ‘ concepts ’ 4 and for higher level intelligence there is a need to have conceptual representations
in action , perception , learning and control [ 112 ]  . 
Kirsh ’ s criticism however doesn ’ t suggest any other method to achieve artificial
human-like intelligence . In similar context , Wilson [ 357 ] points to the lack of a model for
complete understanding of intelligence — the lack of a strong relation between methods of
natural science and nature . 
The bottom-up approach suggested by the behaviour-based philosophy is often
insufficient and fails to reach human-like intelligence . ANIMAT & ALIFE research attempts
4Kirsh prefers to use the term concept-free rather than representation-free . He suggests that mobile
robots control truly concerns the conceptualisation in intelligent activity , rather than representation as
modelled in reactive approaches . 
120  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 28 Two modes of cognition . Higher life forms as human beings at least have two
modes of cognition , reactive and deliberative which work in tandem . 
to develop human-like intelligence by simulating and understanding complete animal like
systems at a simple level . The shortcoming is most glaring in more sophisticated behaviours , 
and since cognition is not limited to reflexes in higher beings . Neuroscience also suggests two 
 ‘ modes ’ of human behaviours as shown in Figure 3 . 28 . Similar ideas have been suggested
by Steve Pinker for two levels of consciousness in higher life forms such as human beings
which will be discussed in Chapter 9 . 
The Philosopher & The Robot
Agent-based robotics is seen as the pinnacle of cutting edge technology , while in
contrast philosophy is perceived as the domain of the proverbial armchair , greying
professors and old books . However , the two disciplines are very closely related . As
discussed in the previous chapter , the problem of relevance and the contention of using
internal representations is a philosophical debate rather than a technological limitation . 
Philosophical concerns nearly always dovetail with agent-based robotics , and this will
be seen in later chapters inquiring into ethical robots , artificial consciousness and super
intelligence . 
In the early 1960s , agent-based robotics was conceived more as an extension of
the computer and therefore intelligence was approached as the Cartesian model of the 
 ‘ thinking thing ’  , and information processing was central to this model . The robot had
to sense the local environment , make maps and find out the most suitable paths to the
goal point , and then move these paths . This process of sense-plan-act was cyclically
incremented to work in a continiuous manner . The onboard computer was the ‘ brain ’ 
of the robot and other sensors were input units . By processing the data from the
sensors , the robot could draw in on representations to form Kantian concepts of space
and time [ 150 ]  , and therefore have meaningful interaction with the environment . The
 121
outcome was a very slow-moving robot with a bulky onboard computer which was not at
all suitable for a dynamically changing environment with moving obstacles and changing
terrain . The issue of this non-performance was attributed as the lack of fast processing
units , and it was believed that the problem would dissolve with better technology and
lead to the desired results . 
In the early 1970s , Dreyfus pointed out the limitations of traditional AI by contesting
the shortcomings of the computational paradigm in his seminal book What computers
cannot do , and demonstrated the philosophical pitfalls in this approach . His argument
was based on the explosion in the number of symbols and rules to overcome the frame
problem . Dreyfus suggested the use of the philosophy of Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty
to overcome the lacuna of disembodied , acontextual and symbolic computation which
was being pursued by traditional AI . He suggested a paradigm shift towards what he
coined as ‘ Heideggerian AI ’  , which abandoned the rational approach of representation
and planning and was designed on the agent ’ s dynamic interaction with its local world
and focussed on immediacy rather than long-term planning , and therefore intelligence
was related to sensorimotor action rather than slow and incremental designs of plans . 
This consistent coping with the environment has been named Being-in-the-World in
the works of Heidegger . In the behaviour-based paradigm , the concepts of situatedness
and embodiment are directly drawn from Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty , respectively . 
Heideggerian AI is able to avoid the inherent problems of traditional AI as it goes around
both the frame problem — by being situated — and also the symbol grounding problem
— by being embodied . Heideggerian AI is the philosophical basis for connectionist
approaches to cognition and behaviourist approaches to artificial life . Other than
robotics , Heideggerian AI can also be seen in Agre ’ s development of indexical functional
entities to design the dynamics of PENGI and Freeman ’ s neurodynamic model of
the brain . In the 1990s , Varela and co-researchers [ 320 , 333 ] developed the enactive
paradigm by extending Merleau-Ponty ’ s phenomenology of the body to embodied AI . 
The approach highlights that the agent ’ s body is not only a lived-in and experiential
structure , but it is also the backdrop of all cognitive processes . 
In the attempt to develop human-like intelligence , the behaviour-based paradigm
is an exposition into the minimal conditions needed for a humanly experience [ 92 ]  . 
However , this is not sufficient to lead to human-like intelligence , and neither ethical
agency nor conscious behaviour can be extrapolated from it . This will be discussed
in Chapters 9 and 10 . As of now , most state-of-the-art robotic systems employ a
twofold hybrid system : low-level behaviours are attributed with a reactive module and
higher-level behaviours are controlled with a deliberative module . 
In the late 1990s Brooks extended behaviour based approach to humanoids with the
making of his robot Cog , and coined it as a ‘ second shift ’  [ 55 ] in behaviour based paradigms , 
a leaning towards cognitive robotics . He believed that bodily form and morphology of the
human like robot , development of artificial motivation — which will naturally prioritise
events , coherent action of various smaller subsystems and adaptation to motor control 
& world dynamics will play important roles in the ‘ second shift ’  . Development of such 
 ‘ cognobots ’ will have to be channeled through an integrated approach where the cognitive
development , sensor engineering and integration and morphological design work in parallel
and the various subteams are aware of the workings of each other . It is imperative that
study of the human brain was meant to greatly influence cognobotics . Cog was planned as
a long-term project and progress has slowed down with passing years , but it still has served
122  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
as one of the early efforts to develop a humanoid robot bust and it was the first attempt at
designing artificial consciousness in robots . 
Nearly all modern-day humanoid robots have modules for natural language processing , 
mapping and machine learning ; all of these require some form of representation and
deliberative module . 
3 . 6 HYBRID ARCHITECTURES
As briefly mentioned in the previous section , both deliberative and reactive systems have
their shortcomings . Reactive systems are hardly of any use or at best they cater to very
low-level tasks and they are motivated from nature as shown in the timeline of this
philosophy in Figure 3 . 29 . For example , I have discussed the design of a foraging robot using
subsumption architecture , which is ispired from similar activities in the animal kingdom . 
For a single deer foraging for food , it is guided by its reactive sense of olfaction however
it is also led by visual stimulus as it knows what the food looks like ( viz . leaves , herbs , 
shrubs etc .  )  , knowledge it has acquired from experience . Cognition is not left to a solitary
senor-actuator pair but it rather happens in tandem across a number of sensory organs . 
Similar arguments can be made in favour of birds , rats etc . Animals , birds and even some
insects acquire representational knowledge through experience which is useful in tasks as
navigation , foraging , predator-prey scenarios etc . For human beings , psychologists have
ascertained that human behaviour works across two distinct modes , willed and automatic . 
Reactive architecture are often meant for a specific set of tasks . A controller designed
on the reactive paradigm cannot easily be made to work with another set of tasks without
modifying nearly the entire controller . In contrast , deliberative agents work well in static
environments and fare poorly in dynamic environments . Therefore , a robot made to do
complex tasks in a dynamic world cannot accomplish them in a purely reactive manner nor
in a deliberative plan-based manner , hence there is a need to look into methods to combine
the goodness of both of these . An apparently minimalistic solution is to equip behaviour
based system with maps . Sensor based knowledge of the immediate neighbourhood is often
realised with grid representations , while a priori maps generally have more global data . 
The third way to incorporate knowledge is through perception . Such systems are usually
equipped with state-of-the-art vision systems . 
Reactive approach with maps strictly pertains to navigation , so development of
systems which have identifiable architectural components of both deliberative and reactive
paradigms have found more acceptance in the AI community . The two paradigms can be
combined in various ways . The simplest designs attempt to redesign the sense-plan-act
approach to adhere to a reactive paradigm . In it the robot would generate a plan to
accomplish a job and execute it reactively in a sense-act execution , after which the plan
module will generate further plans , while multilayered approaches have been popular with
researchers , as shown in Figure 3 . 30 . 
Hybrid architectures have a striking similarity with a managerial corporate heirarchy
with high level planning and policy decisions done at the higher up ‘ manager ’ levels , which
then pass them off for execution to the lower levels , while the lowest level , the reactive level , 
is a corollory to the ‘ worker ’  , which executes the job and is more well acquainted with the
immediacy of the job at hand . 
The works of Firby , Gat , Connell , Bonasso etc . led to the development of the three layer
architecture [ 116 ] and its variants — 3T architecture , ATLANTIS and SSS . Behaviour based
route to controlling robots considers direct mapping of sensors onto actuators in contrast the
3 level architecture work on two types of algorithms ,  ( a ) algorithms for governing routine
 123
FIGURE 3 . 29 Timeline for behaviour based philosophy ( BBP )  , 1930 – current day . The roots of behaviour-based approach can be said to
start with the early experiments of Pavlov in 1890 , and also with the beginning of the philosophy of phenomenology by Husserl in 1910 , which was
later extended by the works of Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty . This timeline focuses more on the technological feats than philosophy or psychology . 
Made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
124  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 30 Approaches to hybrid paradigm , Among the various ways to design a hybrid
architecture , 2 stands out . Plan , Sense-Act ( P , SA ) is an extension of Sense Plan Act ( SPA ) to a
hybrid domain and execution using reactive approach , while a layered design with the most reactive
layer at the bottom has been a trend with researchers , this sort of layering can be seen in AuRA
and ATLANTIS . 
FIGURE 3 . 31 3-layer architecture . The generic flow diagram of a three level architecture which
is a trade off between reactive systems and deliberative systems . 
sequences of activity which rely on the internal state and are not exponential time search
based processes and ( b ) search-based algorithms and planners . The components of this
architecture are : 
1 . Controller The controller implements one or more feedback loops , tightly coupling
sensors to actuators . The algorithms that go into the controller should have constant
bound time and space complexities , should be able to detect failure and should use
internal state to a minimum . 
2 . Sequencer The sequencer selects which primitive behaviour the controller should use
at a given time . This can be a difficult choice to make and Gat suggest two routes
to affect the sequencer , universal plans or conditional sequencing . The sequencer is
executed by special purpose languages such as RAPs , PRS , ESL etc . 
3 . Deliberator The deliberator keeps track of the time-consuming computations . It
can work in two ways , either by producing plans for the sequencer to execute or
it can respond to specific queries of the sequencer . The deliberator attempts to
optimally execute exponential time algorithms while keeping a check on the limited
computational resources . There are no architectural contraints and the deliberator is
written in standard programming language . 
The controller is most reactive and depends on the current state , the sequencer depends
 125
FIGURE 3 . 32 AuRA Schematics , a layering of modules with lowest being the reactive layer . 
on the current and past states while the deliberator , as the name suggests is most
deliberative and depends on the current , past and future states as shown in Figure 3 . 31 . 
This architecture and its variants has been implemented on various robots : JPL ’ s Robbie the
robot , Alfred , Uncle Bob and Homer , and also on the UK MoD funded Battlespace Access
Unmanned Underwater Vehicle ( BAUUV ) project ( 2010-2015 )  , with added components and
database support . 
The Autonomous Robot Architecture ( AuRA )  , the schematics shown in Figure 3 . 32
developed by Arkin at Georgia Tech . has been particularly popular with roboticists and has
formed the basis for various other architectures including ALLIANCE for multiple robots , 
and ethical architecture designed for robots in the US military and is discussed in Chapter
8 . 
SUMMARY
1 . Robot control paradigm is needed to effect robot action to external stimuli . In simplest
scenarios as ‘ line follower ’ this will not be very appreciable however things become
interesting with more sensors and tasks more dynamic than mere locomotion . 
2 . three approaches to develop robots are ,  ( i ) deliberative ,  ( ii ) reactive and ( iii ) hybrid
approaches
3 . Braitenberg vehicles and Walter ’ s turtles laid the foundation for anthorpomorphic
approach to mobile robots , Brooks extended these ideas to formulate the subsumption
architecture . 
4 . Robots are different from computers and an inherent parallelism and ability to deal
with a dynamic environment is essential to develop well functioning mobile robots . 
5 . Subsumption architecture , motor schema , action-selection and voting based
architectures are the most popular implementations of reactive paradigm . 
6 . Reactive approach overcomes issues encountered by deliberative approach , however
being representation free they are insufficient to develop higher level cognition . 
7 . Hybrid approach has seen a convergence of deliberative and reactive paradigms . 
8 . 3 layer architecture has made a niche in the hybrid domain , where the deliberative
layers are the decision making layers , whereas the lowest layer is the reactive layer . 
ATLANTIS , SSS etc are examples of 3 layer architecture . 
126  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
NOTES
1 . Motor schema was structured using potential field navigation methods , originally
developed by Khatib as a navigation algorithm . It is interesting to note that though
there has been many newer paradigms as ND , DWA , Bubble band etc for autonomous
navigation , but none of them have found their way to being a robot control architecture . 
2 . Much like the ‘ earwings ’ papers , Lammens and co-researchers published a paper titled ,  
 ‘ Of Elephants and Men ’  , which was critical about Brook ’ s paper ,  ‘ Elephants do not
play chess ’ and also introduced the GLAIR architecture . 
3 . With tongue in cheek humour Horswill expresses deliberative approach with the
following algorithm : 
Algorithm 2 Deliberative approach , adapted from Horswill
repeat for all sensors
check the sensors
update the model
compute a plan for the current goal
execute the first action of it
throw the plan away and start over
until forever
4 . In comparison , Braitenberg ’ s vehicles as vehicle-3c , the output is difficult to predict
but Braitenberg doesn ’ t really promise any added novelty . Brooks ’ approach promises
novelty in behaviour due to emergence , which can be only seen at run time , analytical
analysis is futile . 
5 . The term global is often associated with deliberative paradigms , while local with reactive
paradigms . However , Murphy illustrates that such a strict distinction is not possible
in hybrid systems
6 . The critics of Dreyfus made a pun regarding his interpretations of Heidegger as 
 ‘ Dreydegger ’  . As Woessner puts it ;  “ Dreydegger is a philsophical Frankenstein . 
Consisting of pieces borrowed from the philosophy of the mind , existentialism , 
pragmatism , and both the analytic , and continental traditions , it somehow manages
to lumber forward on its own two feet . If originally it was concocted to show how AI
research rested on faulty philosophical premises , it eventually developed a mind of its
own and followed its own path ”  . 
7 . Dreyfus has prospected towards the development of ‘ Heideggerian Cognitive Science ’  , 
an ontology , phenomenology , and brain model , without any representation
8 . Ronald and Sipper [ 280 , 281 ] suggested a test to check for emergence in autonomous
robotic systems . The test considers 2 individuals : a system designer and a system
observer and the following three conditions : Design : The system has been constructed
by the designer by describing local elementary interactions between components ( e . g .  , 
artificial creatures and elements of the environment ) in a language L1 . Observation : 
The observer is fully aware of the design , but describes global behaviour and properties
of the running system , over a period of time , using a language L2 . Surprise : The
language of design L1 and the language of observation L2 are distinct , and the
causal link between the elementary interactions programmed in L1 and the behaviours
observed in L2 is non-obvious to the observer — who therefore experiences surprise . 
In other words , there is a cognitive dissonance between the observer ’ s mental image of
the systems design stated in L1 and his contemporaneous observation of the systems
 127
behaviour stated in L2 . These three conditions relate to design , observation , and
surprise and reduces the concept of emergence to a shortcoming in language of make
and of observation . Using this test Ronald and Sipper show that systems employing
ANN and Evolutionary AI are certain to exhibit emergent behaviours . They further
apply the above to various systems , viz .  ( 1 ) nest building in a simulated wasp colony ,  
( 2 ) coordination in an ant colony ,  ( 3 ) Braitenberg vehicles 1 , 2 and 3 ,  ( 4 ) In Minsky ’ s
society of mind model etc . This test also suggests that emergence is dependent on the
sophistication and awareness of the observer . 
9 . Renowned roboticist Masahiro Mori wrote that ‘ robots have buddha nature ’  , motivation
from religion is not what technology looks upto , however Robotics and Buddhist
Principles seem to correlate well . Where ,  ( 1 ) enlightenment in Buddhism is attaining
higher levels of consciousness with meditation and self reflections , is a direct
correlation to the notion of emergence of cognitive ability in behaviour-based robotics ,  
( 2 ) Buddhism advocates that bodily experience is needed in order to experience a self
aware mind , embodiment is an essential paradigm in embodied cognition and ( 3 ) the
state of ‘ craving self ’ is required for attaining threshold of self awareness , in robotics
efforts by Tilden and Hasslacher has demonstrated that an AI craving for survival
also leads to the development of sensory-motor based emergent behaviours . Hughes
has extended this comparison to suggest models for articial moral beings on Buddhist
principles . 
10 . The S∗ Architecture , Tsotsos developed a vision based approach cycle . meant to
overcome the representational shortcomings in susumption architecture , instead of
modelling each behaviour as finite state machine , each behaviour is structured by
modifying the the SPA cycle to yield a SMPA-W . 
11 . Behaviour based power management , utilising a three layer architecture with UBF
to model the controller , Fetzek has developed a method to economise battery power
for mobile robots . Fetzek suggest a tree traversal method , by which it is possible to
determine which onboard sensors are not required . Those which are not needed for the
current , active set can be powered down . Power consumption is further economised by
the availibility of a loweR power mode below a certain power threshold , in this mode
high power consuming onboard devices are forced o and highest priority is given to
the current task or efforts to acquire more power , viz . a totter to the closest recharge
station . For multiple sensors that provide near similar functionality the higher power
consuming sensor would be powered down in favor of the lower power consuming . The
above paradigm is augmented with a ‘ power plan ’  , where the robot AI can conserve
power in anticipation of high power requirements in the immediate future . 
EXERCISES
1 . ANIMAT to robots , I have briefly discussed an ANIMAT approach for a line
follower . A contrasting engineering approach to contain the robot to a given path
would be to devise tracks for the robot , in the manner of trains moving on railway
tracks . Discuss the pros and cons of the two approaches . How will you quantify
performance ? 
2 . Mine Sniffing Robot . For a subsumption-like mine sniffing robot which has 4 basic
behaviours ; Wandering , Obstacle Avoidance , Plume Tracking for ‘ sniffing ’ the
plume and tracking the mine and Diffuse to render the mine harmless , what problems
can the control structure given in figure pose ? How can this architecture be modified
for more than one mine ? 
128  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 3 . 33 Exercise question - Mine sniffing robot
FIGURE 3 . 34 Exercise question — Braitenberg Simulator . 
3 . Dennet ’ s robots , R1 , R1D1 and R1D2 from the previous chapter suffered from the
frame problem and were bombed to death . Can they execute their task and also save
themselves from the time bomb if they are designed with a hybrid architecture as
AuRA ? 
4 . For a humanoid robot playing football , the architecture is designed as , 
Foot position at time t = Ball position at time t ( 3 . 2 ) 
what are the shortcomings of this architecture ? What all behaviours will the humanoid
robot exhibit ? 
5 . Braitenberg simulator , consult appendix A and run the braitenberg simulator as
shown in Figure 3 . 34 and try out some of the vehicles . 
II
Implementation , or How to Make
Robots
C H A P T E R 4
Tools for a roboticist 
 “ We are all on explorations into the unknown and it is by looking backward in
the wake of our trail that we can see the course we are taking .  ” 
– Thor Heyerdahl , in In the Footsteps of Adam : A Memoir 
 “ I ’ m afraid that the following syllogism may be
used by some in the future : 
Turing believes machines think , 
Turing lies with men , 
Therefore machines do not think
Yours in distress , 
Alan ” 
– Alan M . Turing
4 . 1 THE TOOLS : NAVIGATION AND ADAPTIVITY
D
esigning robots cannot be pegged to a process or a series of rules , as agency is
uniquely determined by the job at hand and the local environment . However , two
basic concepts remain nearly the same ,  ( 1 ) navigation and its variants , which are also the
most basic set of behaviour , viz . obstacle avoidance and motion to goal and ( 2 ) adaptivity
implemented with machine learning techniques . Other than these two , there are design
takeaways if the same hardware component or design paradigm is re-used and convergence
in sensor deployment and fusion methods . 
Simon [ 304 , 305 ] demonstrated that the agent ’ s ability to make a rational choice increased
with the number of discreet moves it can see ino the future — the ability of farsightedness . 
His paper concludes that , for a hypothetical animal random locomotion in the hope of
surviving by finding a source of energy and replenishment , etc .  , can be disastrous . Therefore
the hypothetical animal will have to search for clues in the environment , which are apparent
or at least anticipated by it . It has to utilise such clues to seek routes which have a sufficiently
high probability of survival . Toda ’ s fungus eaters were designed with particular attention
to the environment , strong focus on adaptability and employed locomotion as a means
for survival by collecting fungus , and also to simultaneously pursue other goals which
for the fungus eater was collecting uranium , and over time , they could adapt to their
surroundings and improve performance . Wilson ’ s ANIMAT design demonstrated that an
adaptive algorithm reduces the number of steps needed to find food . These results puts an
132  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
onus on both ( 1 ) intelligent locomotion and path planning and ( 2 ) adaptability and learning
from experience , as essential tools for the design of an autonomous agent . 
Path planning and navigation algorithms are attempts to address quality tasks in robots
than mere reactive one and bring more predictibility to the robot behaviour and design . 
Navigation stands out as an essential tool and also the most fundamental robot behaviour , 
viz . line follower robot , micromouse maze solvers , simple obstacle avoidance etc and nearly
all robots , from the simple ones to the most sophisticated ones , have navigation as the basic
behaviour , with modules often coded in by the manufacturer . 
Configuration space or C-space is an important aspect for navigation and is defined as
the the hypothetical space formed from all the possible configurations of the robot . The
dimensions of configuration space is the number of degrees of freedom of the robot . For a
mobile robot the configuration space is a two dimensional plane and this formalism considers
the robot as a point and obstacles as ‘ globs ’ on a two-dimensional map , and thus reduces
the problem of robot navigation to path planning in two dimensions . 
Using grids to granulate the configuration space is an easy option , as shown in Figure 4 . 1
to implement a ‘ divide and conquer ’ algorithms and methods . Grid-based algorithms such
as ‘ breadth first ’ and ‘ A∗ ’ will always find a solution if one exists ; however these algorithms
usually gives suboptimal paths , and are best for simple navigational tasks , and may not
be very useful in complex tasks , viz . collecting empty Pepsi cans , follow the red flags etc . 
Neither can they be used for a gradually discovered area as in surveying nor are they
advisable for safety critical tasks and rescue operations . As a further downside grid-based
techniques are intractable for higher dimensionality . For example a mobile robot fitted with
an arm manipulator will have two degrees of freedom for the mobile base and three or
higher degrees of freedom for the arm manipulator and therefore the a configuration space
of five or higher degrees cannot be visualised or operated with with simple mathematical
operations . 
If the shape of the robot is to be considered then the configuration space has to be
modified by adding in the robot dimensions to the obstacle boundary . Shown in Figure 4 . 2 , 
a circular robot which has to overcome a square-shaped obstacle leads to modification of the
configuration space as shown . This ‘ grows ’ the obstacle to a bigger rectangle with rounded
edges . 
Since , planning is NP hard it is not always easy to find a path to the goal in all terrains
and situations . Nearly every navigational method has a path planner to negotiate the
thoroughfare , and therefore varies with the complexity of the environment and is context
dependent , viz . collecting all Pepsi cans is a very different job than finding the shortest
obstacle-free path to a goal point . Both jobs pertain to navigation and are meant for the
same agent in the same environment . The first one needs an exhaustive search across the
given area , reaching the various coke cans and the picking them up using an arm manipulator
and collecting them in a container attached to the robot , the second in contrast will be a
greedy approach to reach the goal point . Therefore , a single master algorithm for all purposes
is not possible . 
Methods are further tagged to performance , cost and computational consideration . 
Bug algorithms and A∗ are the simplest one and potential field methods and Nearness
Diagram ( ND ) navigation helps to preserve the simplicity . Dynamic Window Approach 
( DWA ) method and Monte Carlo techniques are more sophisticated methods . In addition , 
mapping is often employed by researchers , along side navigation . This chapter is a peek into
these tools and is divided into two sections , Navigation , Path Planning and Mapping , and
Adaptive Techniques . 
Navigation is a vast topic and cannot be covered in a short chapter and the reader is
 133
FIGURE 4 . 1 Granulating space using two-dimension grids has been popular with researchers . 
Here the robot is a dimensionless point and the obstacles are globs . As shortcomings , this method 
( 1 ) gives suboptimal paths and ( 2 ) can only be useful for simple tasks and ( 3 ) cannot be extended
to higher dimensions . 
FIGURE 4 . 2 Concept of configuration space . For a circular robot to negotiate around a square
obstacle , a collicion free course will need to take into account the robot ’ s size and therefore in the
configuration space the rectangular obstacle will be a larger rectangle with rounded edges . 
134  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
encouraged to consult splendid texts such as Latombe [ 199 ]  , LaValle [ 200 ] and Choset et
al .  [ 68 ]  . 
4 . 2 NAVIGATION , PATH PLANNING AND MAPPING
Safely avoiding obstacles to find a safe route to a desired goal is the simplest task for a
robot . Navigation is also the most basic of human behaviours and is earmarked to find
safe shelter , foraging for food , escaping a predator etc . In their primitive form navigational
methods resort to observing the position of stars , following a scent , observing flow of water
etc . In contrast the modern tools are maps , milestones and GPS . Some of the interesting
examples of navigation both from history and popular culture are ( 1 ) in the Minoan legends
the minotaur is a beast with a bull ’ s head and a man ’ s body , and it is contained inside a
labyrinth and cannot find its way out ,  ( 2 ) in Grimm ’ s fairy tale of Hansel and Gretel , 
where the two kids drop sweets on their way to the woods so that these can serve as
landmarks for finding their way back home ; and ( 3 ) history of course boasts of adventurers
and seafarers who were guided by the stars , will power , greed and mercantile goals to
reshape the globe forever . In modern times , other than autonomous robotics , navigation is
also of great significance in defence systems , air travel , ships , space exploration , animation
etc . Therefore , it can be said that navigation and path planning are at the root of nearly
all cognitive processes and complex human actions are a synchronisation of such simple
navigational modules . 
For mobile robots , the simplest behaviours are ‘ wandering around ’  ,  ‘ obstacle avoidance ’ 
and ‘ motion to goal ’  . More involved behaviours such as ‘ mapping ’ and ‘ rendezvous ’ are all
variants of navigation and path planning . Generic problems of path planning , such as ‘ piano
mover ’ s problem ’ and ‘ escaping from a maze ’  , have been tackled by mathematicians and
logicians using global navigation methods which are methods that rely on an a priori map . 
In contrast navigating a mobile robot with onboard sensors is a much different problem , as
it has to be tackled as local problem in real time , with sensorimotor capabilities . Though , 
nowadays nearly all state-of-the-art robots have both local and global information at their
disposal , it is worth remembering that path planning in its most general form is time
exponential in the robot ’ s degrees of freedom , and on incorporating dynamics of moving
obstacles , the problem becomes exponential in number , thus rendering , generic navigation
as an NP hard problem . 
4 . 2 . 1 A∗ and bug algorithms
In late 1960s , Nilsson navigated Shakey using the A∗ algorithm in a grid-based environment . 
It was apparent that primitive reactive approaches as ‘ See obstacle , Turn Left ’ or ‘ If Goal
is Visible , Move to Goal ’  , fails to incorporate the versatility of the terrain and dynamics of
real-life navigation which has uneven terrain , other agents and moving obstacles . Neither , 
can such simple reactive modules be used for interesting tasks ; as viz . collect red balls , stop
on seeing a yellow flag etc . 
The Bug algorithms were developed by Lumelsky and Stepanov [ 211 , 212 ] and were the
earliest sensor based planners . They considered navigation over a two-dimensional space , 
a point robot , a finite number of obstacles of finite size , where the robot knows its own
coordinates and also that of the goal and it can measure the distance between any two points . 
The local information about the obstacles is known using a sensor , viz . laser , camera , tactile
etc . two variations named as Bug-1 and Bug-2 , as shown in Figure 4 . 3 . Bug-1 is designed
 135
as an exhaustive search algorithm while Bug-2 is an opportunistic variant designed with a
greedy algorithm . 
All Bug algorithms and their later derivatives essentially incorporate two behaviours ;  
 ‘ motion to goal ’ and ‘ boundary following ’  . Over the years modification of these two
algorithms has added novelty , some popular ones are , Tangent Bug , Polar Bug , Optim
Bug , Pot Bug , I Bug etc or they have been used along with another path planner as a
hybrid approach . The Bug algorithms were designed on anthropomorphic motivations from
insect navigation , and used addition of behaviours , akin to the reactive paradigm , but it
considered the problem more from a global point of view , than a local one . The broad
limitations of the Bug algorithms are ,  ( 1 ) it is rarely that the location of the goal point
is known . More often it is not very clear and the goal is usually identified by incomplete
information and corresponds to a gradually discovered environment , viz . stop on seeing a
red flag , stop after crossing the eight obstacle etc .  ,  ( 2 ) navigation is an explorative process
and the distance between any two points can never be known with certainty due to the
unevenness of the terrain and sensor errors ,  ( 3 ) Bug algorithms are for two dimensional
static obstacles and will not be very successful for moving obstacles , viz . other robots and
human beings , etc . 
4 . 2 . 2 Considerations for navigation
Over the last five decades , research has attempted to bridge the gap between the sterility
of the laboratory or the ideal settings of a simulation , and the real-time occurrences of the
real world . The following aspects helps to assess the performance of a path planner : 
1 . Embodiment and representation , the structure of the environment , the robots
mechatronic design , its shape etc . Motion confined to a single plane , or
two-dimensional motion is usually easier to plan and navigate . Motion which occurs in
three dimensions is difficult to plan and design and there is yet a lack of good methods . 
A typical cube world or box world of simulation , where each and every obstacle is a
cube is easier to navigate ; however , the real world has a variety of obstacles and
the challenge and also a test of performance for the robot is to navigate through a
cluttered environment . Performance of a method often varies with the obstacle , and
more complicated and highly concave or U-type obstacles as shown in Figure 4 . 4 are
difficult to negotiate and therefore stand to testify the quality of a method . 
2 . Space or time complexity , the computational resources , viz . the sophistication of the
onboard microcontroller , the amount of data storage and hence the time needed to
find the solution . 
3 . Completeness . Is the method guaranteed to find a path if one exists and report if there
is none ? The algorithm should be such that the robot ‘ gives up ’ after a finite number
of attempts and reports the lack of a solution , and thus prevents an unending process
where the robot keeps fseeking a path until it runs out of onboard power . 
4 . Soundness . Will the method consistently provide a collision free path ? This is a
particular concern for autonomous vehicles such as Google cars which have to find
a collision-free path in real time with moving obstacles . 
5 . Optimality . Is either defined as minimum length or minimum path , depending on
the requirement and it is rarely possible in real time , as is shown in Figure 4 . 5 . 
Nevertheless , the actual path versus optimal path helps to improve the given method . 
6 . Reactive layer . Nearly all algorithms derive from a reactive action , viz . Bug algorithms
used overlap of simple behaviours . Potential fields are reactive in nature and ND is
136  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 4 . 3 The bug algorithms . The robot ’ s dimensions are ignored and considered to be a
point – point robot , the dark globs are the obstacles , the m-line is a hypothetical line joining
the start and goal points and the dotted line shows the path of the robot from start to goal . In 
( a ) in Bug-1 the mobile robot starts with ‘ motion to goal ’ behaviour and on reaching the first
obstacle switches to ‘ boundary following ’  . After traversing all of the boundary , when the mobile
robot again encounters the m-line it again takes a ‘ motion to goal ’ behaviour and moves towards
the next obstacle . In ( b ) Bug-2 the mobile robot starts with a ‘ motion to goal ’ behaviour and on
reaching the first obstacle switches to ‘ boundary following ’  . In the next encounter with the m-line
the robot switches to ‘ motion to goal ’ and moves towards the goal and encounters the next obstacle . 
The ‘ motion to goal ’ behaviour is the same in both algorithms , however when executing ‘ boundary
following ’  , Bug-1 is exhaustive while Bug-2 is driven by immediate conditions — a greedy paradigm . 
 137
based on situated activity , and most of the state-of-the-art robots employ this reactive
layering with a global planner which may be accompanied with a remote human
override . The reactive layer is essential , as it determines the robot ’ s local interaction . 
and the robot ’ s performance to the specific task ; for example , the reactive layering for
a robot driven by olfactory is different than one which is following red flags . 
7 . Mapping has become essential to navigation . It is not dependent on sleek and
expensive hardware and it helps in surveying unknown terrain and works in tandem
with localisation . 
8 . Task criticality . Safety is always a consideration , critical tasks with stringent deadlines
or tasks which may need to be stopped abruptly need different programming
considerations . A good example is a robotic ambulance carrying fatally injured
patients who may need medical attention immediately , such a vehicle will not only
need to find the fastest path with the least traffic but also adhere to a very strict
deadline . 
9 . Kinematic considerations . Most planners consider the robot in two dimensions , as a
point or a circle , with sensors arranged in circular symmetry , which is hardly the
scenario , as robots have a body which is not always circular and sensor which are
not always arranged in circular symmetry . Extending simple algorithms for car-like
robots leads to discrepancies such as , any position of the car can be represented in
two dimensions as ( x , y , θ ) as is shown in Figure 4 . 6 , which is the requirement for
most path planners , but this is not consistent as the car can change the orientation
of its wheels with steering , influencing its linear velocity and the subsequent motion . 
Motion for vehicles with differential drive and steering is non-holonomic and tends to
limit the free area in the configuration space . Analysis of such motion is difficult . 
The divide and conquer strategy is popular throughout autonomous navigation . This
approach , breaks the given problem into subproblems that are easier to solve , as is shown in
their classification scheme for robot navigation in Figure 4 . 7 . These subproblems are usually
similar to the original problem but are easier to solve , less complex and often spread over
a smaller domain . 
Decomposition of the two-dimensional physical space into cells via a regular grid , random
trapezoids , visibility graph and voronoi diagram are probably the easiest methods . As shown
in Figure 4 . 8 , the given area is sliced into a number of polygons and numbered ; the path to
goal is equivalent to traversing a graph and warrants a collision-free course . 
Alternatively , the given task can be broken down into smaller tasks . Subgoal approaches 
[ 34 , 346 ]  , as shown in Figure 4 . 9 , select positions in the immediate neighborhood of the
agent ’ s current location in the prospect that this may be more easily achieved than a distant
goal . Over a number of iterations , and with suitable selection of subgoals , such approaches
can incrementally make progress in moving the agent towards the long-term goal . In contrast
to the regular , a priori given structure of a grid decomposition , subgoal approaches often
dynamically fragment their configuration space ; essentially a tradeoff between the classical
discrete and continuous forms navigation . The earliest subgoal technique was SSA , proposed
by Krogh in later 1980s . Studies have shown the improved performance due to subgoals . 
4 . 2 . 3 Artificial potential fields
Potential field navigation is a cornerstone paradigm for robotics . This method of employing
artificial forces to navigate autonomous sensor-based agents was developed by the pioneering
research of Khatib [ 177 ]  . He developed this method in his doctoral dissertation for arm
manipulators which was later extended it to mobile robots [ 178 ]  . This approach was
138  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 4 . 4 Classifying obstacles . Testing out an algorithm against various types of obstacles
is one of the ways to ensure and improve its performance [ 34 ]  . The discussion can be brought down
to broadly seven types of obstacles ,  ( 1 ) flat obstacle ,  ( 2 ) shallow concave obstacle ,  ( 3 ) moderately
concave obstacle or C-type ,  ( 4 ) highly concave obstacle ,  ( 5 ) extended C-type or U-type obstacle ,  ( 6 ) 
circumscribed obstacle and ( 7 ) spiral obstacles . Sophistication in the algorithm , higher complexity
and more computational resource are needed for at least the last three types of obstacles . 
 139
FIGURE 4 . 5 The brunt of optimality . Optimality is hardly achieved in autonomous navigation , 
as shown in ( 1 ) the dotted line from point A to point B is the optimum distance , however this
path between the two obstacles is very narrow , and without a second layer of global planning or
remote human control it can easily get lost . It also faces safety issues where any extended part of
the robot such as arms or antennae etc . can get smashed into the walls . Therefore the longer path
shown by the continuous line is favoured . In an optimal path , as shown in ( 2 )  , where the robot
traces the path from A to B , from the edge of one obstacle to another , until goal point is reached
via five short dotted line segments , this is similar to concepts of the visibility graph but it will not
be the natural explorative action of an agency , and in a motion like this the robot will run the risk
of crashing into the obstacle . Optimality starts to matter if the robot is repeating a navigational
circuit or a known number of behaviour ( s ) in a restricted situation , such as a guard dog robot . 
Machine learning techniques help to enhance performance and thus attain optimal performance . 
140  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 4 . 6 x , y and θ , are the parameters needed to represent a mobile robot moving in a plane . 
θ has been referred in as pose , heading angle and angle of orientations by researchers . For non
holonomic systems as a car , the above represents incomplete information as the car can change its
trajectory by changing the orientation of its wheels by steering . 
FIGURE 4 . 7 Divide and conquer is a popular technique and can be classified as shown . Divind
the space can be done as a dynamic decomposition which is on the run such as dynamic bubble
and dynamic window techniques which are structured on sophisticated algorithms , or as static
decomposition which is more or less a priori , such as simple grid based methods , Voronoi diagrams , 
Trapezoidal decomposition etc . Using subgoals [ 34 , 346 ] with a known reactive technique as
potential field method or ND navigation has helped to maintain some simplicity and yet on the
run performance . ND diagram is based on situated activity and has been hugely successful in
two-dimension navigation contained to a plane . 
 141
FIGURE 4 . 8 Cell decomposition , the given area is sliced into a number of polygons ( as shown
with dotted lines ) and navigation reduces to the problem of traversing a connectivity graph . The
robot has to pursue from the start point ( in 2 ) to goal point ( in 16 )  , the corresponding connectivity
is 2-3-4-5-9-10-11-12-14-15-16 . 
FIGURE 4 . 9 Using subgoals , is implementation of divide and conquer by dividing the task of
reaching the goal . Subgoal chaining has been an interesting application by placing subgoals at very
short intervals [ 34 ]  . 
142  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 4 . 10 Goals as attractive potentials , a ) parabolic potential : z = ρ
2
and b ) conic
potential : z = ρ . 
influenced by concepts of physics ; the inverse square law , harmonic oscillator , conic
potential , geometrical constraints , and Lagrangian dynamics . This was later extended by the
works of Koditschek , Khosla , Connolly , Chatila and Latombe and groomed into algorithms
and heuristics . The method is easy to implement and a computationally favourable on-line
collision avoidance approach for robots and is intended for situations where there was no
prior model of the local environment , i . e .  , the agent reactively detects the environment
during the motion execution , and therefore it is not tied to expensive hardware . As discussed
in the last chapter , Arkin ’ s motor schema uses potential fields for combining behaviours
in a reactive architecture , which makes the potential fields method unique as a tool for
navigationFr as well as for implementing behaviours . The potential field approach was
designed for robotic arm manipulators , and was later extended to mobile robots . The robot
is treated as though it is under the influence of a potential field U which is modulated in real
time to represent the environment . The method can be easily explained through analogy
to electrostatic fields as follows . The robot is modelled as a charged point having the same
charge as the obstacles in the environment , and an opposite charge to the goal position . 
This causes a repulsive force between the robot and the obstacles , and an attractive force
between the goal and the robot . Samples of ( 1 ) attractive potential suitable for goal point
are shown in Figure 4 . 10 and ( 2 ) repulsive potential suitable for obstacles are shown in
Figure 4 . 11 . This associates high potential value with obstacles , and a low potential value
near the goal . The two potentials are superimposed to form the net artificial potential that
the robot is subjected to . 
U = 
XUobstacles + Ugoal ( 4 . 1 ) 
This corresponds to the artificial force field , 
F = −∇U ( 4 . 2 ) 
The robot ’ s motion is then executed by means of an iterative gradient descent driven
by the local force ; 
qi + 1 = qi + δif ( q )  ( 4 . 3 ) 
 143
FIGURE 4 . 11 Obstacles as repulsive potentials , a ) a cylindrical obstacle and b ) a point
obstacle . 
where for the i
th iteration qi
is the coordinate , δi
is the step size and f ( q ) is the normalised
force ; 
f ( q )  = F ( q ) 
kF ( q ) k 
( 4 . 4 ) 
Therefore the robot is in a constant effort to minimise its potential , and consequently
moves ‘ towards-the-goal ’ and ‘ away-from-obstacles ’ simultaneously , adding in at least two
behaviours at run time . The repulsive potential is modelled as ; 
Uobstacles = 
1
2
η ( 
1
ρ ( x , y ) −
1
ρ0 
) 
2 ρ ≤ ρ0
0 ρ > ρ0 
( 4 . 5 ) 
Here ρ ( x , y ) represents the Euclidean distance from the nearest part of the obstacle , 
ρ0 represents the distance at which the obstacle ceases to have an influence on the agent , 
and η is a scaling constant representing the strength of the repulsive force . Khatib named
this potential function ‘ FIRAS ’ which is an acronym for the French expression for ‘ Force
Inducing an Artificial Repulsion from the Surface ’  . A parabolic bowl potential function is
used to model the goal , 
Ugoal = 
1
2
ξρ2
goal ( x , y )  ( 4 . 6 ) 
where ξ is a scaling constant representing the strength of the attractive force . 
This model is computationally lean yet allows effective real time implementation , the
formulation remains a favourite in the robotics community due to its simplicity and ease of
implementation . 
The reader may observe that potential field approach is another method of world
modelling — though on the run , and works only for a sufficiently known and predictable
environment . The limitation of the potential field approach is primarily the ( 1 ) local minima
problem as shown in Figure 4 . 12 since the robot ’ s motion is due to two opposing forces , 
therefore when the sum of these two forces is zero , the robot comes to a stand still with no
effective force acting on it . Such local minima act as ‘ traps ’  , and once in a local minima the
144  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 4 . 12 C-type obstacle and local minima , C-type , U-type obstacles or the ‘ box-canyon ’ 
problem are not easy to overcome , and simple algorithms as bug-algorithms and breadth-first etc
fails to perform , for potential fields , the problem intensifies to a local minima problem . The total
force acting on the point robot is the sum of repulsion from the obstacle and the attraction from
the goal point G , this guides the robot into the C-type obstacle . At M , the attractive force exactly
cancels out the repulsive force creating zero force , and the robot abruptly comes to a standstill at
the local minima . Adapted from Latombe . 
robot stops abruptly prior to reaching the goal . Research in potential field based navigation
has often consisted of attempts to overcome or avoid these local minima . Other shortcoming
of this method is ,  ( 2 ) the robot struggles to travel in narrow pathways as it faces repulsion
from both the walls and therefore with the fast changing gradient the robot oscillates . 
Similar oscillations have been reported when the robot passes by a large obstacle and ( 3 ) 
the method constrains the robot from any movement directly towards an obstacle , and
therefore when the goal point is close to an obstacle , it fails to reach it or is stuck in an
infinite loop . 
There have been several efforts to overcome the local minima problem . Redesigning the
potential function for elliptical potentials reduces the impact of local minima , however this
does not remove minima from the field and is not very beneficial in cluttered environments . 
Another approach is to use a second path planner when the local minima is encountered . The
most common of these techniques is ‘ backtracking ’  , when local minima is encountered and
avoiding that local minima when the agent has sufficiently moved away . All local minimas
once encountered should be avoided in at least the near future . This is seen in , Random
Path Planners ( RPP ) or Simulated Annealing ( SA ) where the robot takes a random number
of steps in the physical space in attempts to walk out of the local minima . 
A good lot of implementations use potential fields with a grid-based planner . Choset et
al . suggest the wave front planner as the simplest solution for the local minima problem , as
shown in Figure 4 . 13 . Another very popular implementation is the Vector Field Histogram 
( VFH ) where the attraction / repulsion limited to the nearest neighbours and therefore easier
to design . Discretisation of space has been a tool used with potential fields time and again . 
Some methods resort to physics , and exploit concepts of electrostatic potentials , harmonic
fields etc . It was in such a context that Connolly et al . observed that with suitable grid-based
methods , it is possible to arrive at potential fields which are ‘ nearly free ’ of local minima and
named them navigational potential fields . These fields are solutions of Laplace ’ s equation 
( 52φ = 0 )  [ 186 ]  , and they do not possess any local minima . These solutions bear analytical
 145
FIGURE 4 . 13 Potential field navigation with wave front path planner . In this method the
wave front algorithm assigns a low number to the goal point ( cell 2 ) and all grid positions away
from the goal get a higher number with no numbering for grids having any part of the obstacle , 
until start point ( cell 28 ) is reached . Once , the wave front has designated the grid as an array of
numbers the potential field method works as a gradient descent method . The obvious shortcomings
are , that the method is not useful for surveying or a gradually discovered environment , information
from the obstacles is reduced to a filled grid point , and such methods are a compromise on the run
time reactive performance of potential fields . 
similarity to electrostatic , magnetic and flow fields . The Electrostatic Potential Field ( EPF ) 
approach treats the problem of navigation as an analogy to the flow of electric current in a
resistor grid . EPF is modelled as a discrete resistor network channeled by an electric current
which always takes the path of least resistance . The electric current is the maxim for model
of navigation along the path of greatest negative gradient descent , and hence the solution
of a grid-based resistor network is a solution of the Laplace ’ s equation . It is free from local
minimas , the only extreme points , being the source which is the mobile robot and the sink
or the goal . 
These solutions to overcome the local minima problem ( all grid based methods and
particularly both navigational fields and harmonic fields ) are computationally cumbersome
and expensive and are not very suitable for a gradually discovered environment or when the
goal point is not very clearly known , and backtracking may not be advisable in emergency
or safety critical tasks . All of these these methods are a compromise on the simplicity and
the reactive performance of the potential field method . 
Another weakness of potential fields is the agent cannot reach the goal point if it is
located close to an obstacle . This limitation was coined by Ge et al .  [ 118 ] as the GNRON 
( Goals Non Reachable with Obstacles Nearby ) problem , and the solution proposed was a
modification of the FIRAS potential , such that there is a global minimum at the goal point . 
Uobstacles = 
1
2
η ( 
1
ρ ( x , y ) −
1
ρ0 
) 
2ρ
2 
( x , y ) ρ ≤ ρ0
0 ρ > ρ0 
( 4 . 7 ) 
Despite the various issues , potential field navigation and its variants are often used both
by students and researchers as they can be easily implemented . Various robotic software
146  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
suites has potential fields as a default tool for reactive navigation , and they are also a
favourite for robocup soccer tournaments . 
4 . 2 . 4 Nearness Diagram ( ND ) 
A wonderfully simple and easy to implement situated activity approach for ‘ motion to goal ’ 
while ‘ avoiding obstacles ’ was designed by Minguez and Montano [ 234 ]  . Their approach
was based on classifying the various situations encountered by a sensor based agent in its
interactions with the environment . The exhaustive number of situations where the agent
interacts with the environment has to be identifiable from sensory perception , viz . sonar , 
laser or infra red . The Nearness Diagram ( ND ) defined five situations as shown in Figure
4 . 14 , later this was extended to ND + for six situations . Each situation corresponded to a
two dimensional configuration of a cluttered environment . A free walking area and a security
zone are important determinants for the algorithm . The free walking area is calculated as
follows : gaps are identified over an angular distribution in the obstacle field , the closest
region to the goal location which is navigable by the robot is then designated as the free
walking area . The security zone is an arbitrary circle which centers on the agent . The
radius of the security zone is crucial for the efficiency of the algorithm ; an optimum radius is
essential for smooth obstacle free path generation . The sensor data is classified by a decision
tree . The inputs to the decision tree are robot and goal location and obstacle distribution . 
The output is the current situation . The following four criteria define the navigation schema : 
1 . Criterion 1 : Safety criterion , two categories ; identified as low safety when there are
obstacles within the security zone , otherwise as high safety . 
2 . Criterion 2 : Dangerous obstacle distribution criterion .  
( a ) Low Safety 1 ( LS1 )  : Obstacles in the security zone are only on one side of the
gap ( closest to the goal ) of the free walking area . The action moves the agent
away from the obstacle and towards the gap ( closest to the goal )  .  
( b ) Low Safety 2 ( LS2 )  : Obstacles in the security zone are on both sides of the gap
of the free walking area . The action enables the direction of navigation of the
agent along the bisector between the two closest obstacles on either side . 
3 . Criterion 3 : Goal and free walking area criterion 
( a ) High Safety Goal in Region ( HSGR )  : The goal is located within the free
walking area ; otherwise the remaining two options ( HSWR and HSNR ) should
be applicable . The action drives the agent towards the goal . 
4 . Criterion 4 : Free walking area width criterion . A free walking area is wide if its angular
width is larger than a given angle . If not , the free walking area is narrow .  
( a ) High Safety Wide Region ( HSWR )  : The free walking area is wide . The action
moves the agent alongside the obstacle .  
( b ) High Safety Narrow Region ( HSNR )  : The free walking area is narrow . The action
directs the robot through the central zone of the free walking area . 
All agent-environment interactions can be tallied to these five situations . The situation
definition does not depend on the resolution or size of the space considered . ND +  , attempts
to refine ND with an added state , Low Safety Goal in Region ( LSGR )  . Both ND and ND + 
are very successful negotiating in cluttered environments . Sin they are structured on situated
activity it embraces reactive paradigm and can thus respond to a dynamic environment . 
ND is an improvement over potential fields , it avoids trap in U-shaped obstacles , it has an
 147
FIGURE 4 . 14 ND diagram navigation is designed on 5 scenarios — two with low safety ( LS1
and LS2 ) and three with high safety ( HSGR , HSWR and HSNR )  . The dark globs are the obstacles
and the dotted circle is the security zone which needs to be appreciably more than the geometrical
size of the robot . The robot is not shown here , but represented as the centre of the security zone . 
The goal point is shown as a BIG-O and the free walking area is the acute angle between the 2 line
segments for LS1 , LS2 , HSGR and HSNR , and the obtuse angle for HSWR . The arrow shows the
direction in which motion happens according to the algorithm . 
148  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 4 . 15 3D navigation , most navigation in three dimension is remotely controlled by humans
and there is yet to be a good autonomous navigation technique in three dimensions . Images courtesy
commons . wikipedia . org , CC-by-SA 3 . 0 license . 
oscillation free motion while navigating among very close obstacles and narrow corridors
and , unlike potential fields , it does not prohibit the motion of the robot directly towards
the obstacles . All of these reasons made ND a robust and easy to implement method . 
The limitation of ND diagram method are ,  ( 1 ) it doesn ’ t take into account non-circular
shapes or vehicular kinematics and dynamical constraints ,  ( 2 ) the method is designed for
circular symmetry and symmetric placement of the sensors — as a typical ring of lasers or
sonar sensors , and relies on angular scan , which may be very difficult to implement for a
non-circular robot such as a car which is also non-holonomic and ( 3 ) it doesn ’ t address the
issue of sensor noise in real time . 
Some of the current issues explored by researchers in motion planning and autonomous
navigation are : navigation ( 1 ) for a dynamic environment with moving obstacles ,  ( 2 ) for a
gradually discovered environment ,  ( 3 ) for cluttered and unstructured environments ,  ( 4 ) for
non-holonomic and under actuated systems ,  ( 5 ) pertaining to extension to higher dimensions
and higher degrees of freedom , as navigation in three dimensions ,  ( 6 ) for multi robot
navigation . 
4 . 2 . 5 Navigation in three dimensions
Most areal robots are remotely controlled from the ground , as shown for drones in Figure
4 . 15 , and there is yet to be a robust , efficient and safe method for autonomous navigation
in three dimensions . However , generic navigation is indeed a problem of three dimensions
and various applications in robotics deal with navigation in three dimension , such as
exploration in disaster arenas or survey of unknown or gradually discovered environments
as cave inspection and difficult terrains in unchartered planets . The debate of global vs . 
local planning is many fold more when considering three dimensions , since most global
planners tend to view the problem in projections of two dimensions than a problem in
three dimensions , therefore it is difficult to gurantee the convergence of both the planners
to the desired goal point . There is yet to be good methods for navigation which balance
the global and the local , and has concentrated more on path planning than the reactive
behaviour . Navigation in three dimensions has been successful in designing virtual characters
in game programming or virtual reality application , but there is a lack of navigation in
 149
FIGURE 4 . 16 Algorithm for navigation in three dimensions , has been tried in simulations
and simple environments in the research by extending Bug algorithms and A∗ algorithm for three
dimensions , but a general approach to three dimension navigation is yet to bear fruitful results . 
real time . Grid based methods are intractable in three dimensions , and simple heuristic as
the A∗ in structured terrain , leads to an explosion in the number of nodes . Kutulakos et
al .  [ 195 ] and later Kamon et al .  [ 167–169 ] attempted to extend the bug algorithms to three
dimensions . Both the methods tried to combine the bug algorithms in two dimension with
surface exploration , in the exploration mode the reactive behaviour is to be subdued . This
approach yields results for very well structured environments , and has only been tried in
simple simulations such as the block world , as shown in 4 . 16 . This works out if the given
terrain has been previously explored , but is not very useful for explorative tasks as surveying
or disaster management etc . This problem has also been tackled is by using subgoals and
subgoals used along with gradient descent has been a prospect , but it has yet to be groomed
into algorithms . Multiple sensors and subgoals have been employed simultaneously , but that
lacks in generalisation and such approaches either makes the agency too bulky or adds on
to the computational resources — both of which are undesirable . There is yet to be a
generic three dimension navigation [ 337 ] which can be implemented easily , which is low on
computational resporces , works across a wide range of applications and is accepted across
the robotics and AI community . 
Mapping the local area using laser or sonars , over continued surveys has come to be
closely associated with robot navigation . Simultaneous Localisation And Mapping ( SLAM ) 
starts with an empty two dimension map , and incrementally adds features to it over each
sweeps of the given local area . Monte Carlo Localisation ( MCL ) attemps to solve the problem
of localisation with
4 . 3 ADAPTIBILITY AND LEARNING
For a human being , repeating a job is usually easier than doing it for the first time and
such repetitions helps to develop special faculties to execute the job without any real
hassles . This enhances performance and therefore learning is an essential tenet of AI agency . 
For autonomous agency , Toda ’ s fungus eater model , Wilson ’ s model of ANIMATs and
Pfeifer ’ s design paradigm forcefully make their contention towards adaptability for long
term performance over an assortment of tasks for the robot . Therefore , robots must be
designed to learn from its experience of interacting with the environment . 
As an ab-initio , learning can be seen as a mapping from a sensed world ( sensors ) to the
150  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
next action to perform ( actuator )  , and is usually accompanied with no previous experience
and / or apriori knowledge as in behaviour based approaches , where the robot ‘ finds out ’ the
world and hence relates to its own actions . However , it is not easy to have simple mapping
of input sensory information to the action for the robot and the next state of the world , 
and such type of global reinforcement is not only time consuming but has been found to be
redundant given the scope of current learning methods . Therefore , Brooks suggests learning
for robots not as a method to cope with the world but rather as a tool to enhance its
performance , where the robot is akin to a learning machine . 
This also leads to the discussion that robots have to deal with far from pristine and
often incomplete data sets as erroneous sensor data , damaged hardware components which
includes sensors , uneven terrain , environmental conditions etc . As discussed in the previous
chapter , hybrid architectures have been the choice of the designers to overcome such variety
and dynamism offered by the real world . As an alternative choice to hybrid architecture , 
incremental learning has also found favour . This is because ,  ( 1 ) learning is easier to
implement and nowadays in most of the robotic software suites it is provided as a ready
made module in the robot ’ s firmware ,  ( 2 ) unlike behaviour which is pre-programed , learning
happens on the run and lends itself as a control policy and is more atomic in execution than
behaviour and therefore ( 3 ) doesn ’ t need to be designed separately as a behaviour nor
does it need an executive for coordinating various behaviours ,  ( 4 ) learning works out across
simple behaviours to the more abstract ones - even those which the architecture may not
have accounted for and one doesn ’ t need to resort to semi empirical mathematical models
of the environment or time varying functions of the uncertainty which may be encountered
by the robot . 
From an engineering point of view , a robot given a specific task and more or less contains
itself to a known environment , the robot designer knows the a priori information and
representations needed by the robot , and unless there has been severe and sudden changes
to the environment or the robot , in principle will not need to resort to incremental machine
learning . However , researchers have also put attention to particular representations , as
saving battery power , avoiding falling off cliffs and avoiding threatening natural formations , 
covering a certain stretch of terrain or finding a specific item as mineral ore , vegetation or
a known landmark etc , so that repeating these feats become easier in the apparent future . 
Learning can be manifestly employed in a robot to either provide apriori representations
and information which will enable it either to readily interact with the world in a certain
manner than to learn it afresh over time over a great number of attempts , or to enable it
towards specific goals and help it survive for longer durations in difficult terrain . For simple
behaviours as navigation , learning will help to modify representations of the world which
will simplify the given task . Since low level reactive tasks are closely related to navigation , 
hence making a map becomes important for tasks which need repetition . For example , a
sub goals technique which leads to the final goal will need the robot to learn to recognise
the subgoal , viz . if the subgoal is marked with a blinking red light , the robot will need
to behave nearly the same to all such subgoals , until the final goal is reached . Learning
is closely related to intelligent behaviour and autonomy , and not only helps the agent to
acquaint with the environment , but also is a remedy for sensor noise and faulty and damaged
sensors and actuators . In various robot architectures , learning works in tandem with the
control loop . 
Learning for sophisticated tasks over long term implementation will lead to development
of newer and advanced behavioural modules . As an example , the working of guard dog robot
in an unmanned facility is briefly shown in Figure 4 . 17 , here the robot is provided with
simple behaviours and it has to adhere to a known calibration , that of the circuital path
 151
FIGURE 4 . 17 Learning for a guard dog robot , considering a robot patrolling an unmanned
facility on a far off planet or at a difficult terrain which is difficult to access as a mountainous area
or a hazard prone area . Here , the robot has go around the given circuital path ( around the big
grey glob ) and sends photographs and information back to the the mission command at the dotted
points ( subgoal point ) on the map . The loop taken by the robot ( Flag point-1 to Flag point-10 ) 
for surveillance is nearly the same for all its pursuits and machine learning techniques ( as ANN , 
Fuzzy logic ) helps to keep the robot to its path for each loop and helps to avoid changes due to the
diminishing onboard power , uneven terrain , weather conditions , environmental factors as storms , 
wear & tear , lack of regular maintenance etc . The robot was designed for simple behaviours as ,  
 ‘ motion to ( sub ) goal ’  ,  ‘ obstacle avoidance ’ and ‘ take photograph ’  , long term surveillance is a new
and superior behaviour developed by machine learning techniques . 
by using machine learning techniques , and over time it develops surveillance as a superior
behaviour . 
To summarise , learning helps to acquire the following features to robots [ 54 ]  : 
1 . Adds in utility of particular representations to enhance performance , for the given
example these special representations are the dotted points which serve as subgoals . 
2 . Helps relate special instances of sensor for action , or behaviour coordination , for the
guard dog robot this sort of calibration between sensor reading to action can be seen , 
that it has to take photographs on reaching the subgoal . 
3 . Overcoming uncertainty , this is more appreciable if the robot is engaging in repetitive
tasks in a predictable domain . As discussed , the machine learning techniques ties the
circuital path to the robot ’ s performance . 
4 . Gradual development towards newer and more involved behavioural modes , for the
given example this is the development of surveillance as a new behaviour by melding
simple behaviours . 
The first application of ANN for robots led to improvements to the design of earliest
models of autonomous vehicle . The NAVLAB vehicle was the outcome of research into
autonomous vehicles in the late 1980s . Autonomous Land Vehicle In Neural Network 
( ALVINN ) was the brainchild of Dean Pomerleau [ 268 ]  . ALVINN was put to work on the
NAVLAB vehicle . It was a refurbished army ambulance fitted with a 5 , 000 watt generator
and had an operating system which could deal with 100 million floating point-operations per
second . ALVINN had a three layered back propagation neural network which took images
from a camera and data from laser range finder as input and computed the direction the
vehicle should travel to continue to follow the road as output . Training was done using
152  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 4 . 18 ALVINN architecture , was a three layered back propagation neural network the
images from a camera and data from laser range finder were the two inputs and the intensity was
used as a feedback , it computed the direction the vehicle should travel to continue to follow the
road . Image adapted from Pomerleau [ 268 ]  . 
simulated road images . Since the vehicle did not follow a predetermined path and the local
variables guided towards the direction the vehicle should follow , it was adaptable across a
variety of conditions and over various types of terrains . The highest speeds attained using
ALVINN on the NAVLAB vehicle was about 70 mph . 
Evolutionary approaches for developing control systems for robots can be done either
by using real robots or by using software . However , using real robots it is seen that the even
the simplest behaviour models tends to run over a hundreds of generations spread across a
very large number of hours , therefore power is therefore the most obvious issue , as batteries
will not sustain for such long and tethering using a power source may not be a suitable
option at every situation and may limit the process . Jakobi also points to wear and tear of
the robot , which can be substantial and real robots is not a practically viable option . Hence , 
the preferred route is via software , however with sophisticated robots and more demanding
behaviour the semblance between the simulation and the real robot ’ s performance is hardly
any . Therefore , the onus was to develop a methodology on which simulators can be easily
and cheaply built that enable that both the simulations and real robots to affect the nearly
the same performance , which is scalable in time , speed , number of robots and complication
of behaviour domains . In his revolutionary approach , Jakobi suggests development of base
set of robot-environment interactions and also a base set aspects of the simulation . Fuzzy
logic has been an easy to implement machine learning technique for robots . Using fuzzy logic
in tandem with a navigational algorithm as potential field has been a favourite technique
for researchers . 
Another technique is to implement case based methods . Most software driven systems are
backed up by a memory cache . Designing behaviour using cache memory leads the agency
to respond to the same situation in nearly the same manner as it did previously . Case based
 153
approaches [ 271 , 272 ] propose to make an exhaustive list of scenarios encountered by the
agent and its response and update this list if and when newer situations are encountered . 
Case based learning can be summarised in the following five steps ; 
1 . Define the problem at hand
2 . Obtain similar case ( s ) from memory
3 . Modify these case ( s ) to suit the problem at hand
4 . Apply the solution developed , and evaluate the results
5 . Learn by storing newer cases
This approach works very well for navigation and low level behaviours typically for a
simple world and is a proven improvement over pure reactive methods . 
SUMMARY
1 . Navigation and adaptive learning are two important tools for a roboticist . 
2 . Navigation is the simplest behaviour and the easiest test bed to design newer and
richer behaviours . 
3 . Grid based methods are easy to implement but they lack in reactivity and cannot be
implemented in a dynamic environment . 
4 . Potential fields method has been particularly popular for autonomous navigation . 
5 . ND is a navigation algorithm based on situated activity and is very successful in 2D
navigation . 
6 . Simple navigation algorithms cannot take into account the shape of the robot and the
kinematic considerations . 
7 . There is a lack of good navigation methods in three dimension . 
8 . Adaptive techniques brings forth newer behaviour in the robot by robustly
accomodating for the changes in environment . 
NOTES
1 . Potential fields method finds applications in the gaming industry . 
2 . A variant of VFH has been used to make ‘ Guide Cane ’  , a robotic navigation guide for
the blind . 
3 . A ? is not recommended for sensor based navigation , as it depends on heuristic
evaluation of a given node of a grid , and may lead to discontinuities as the robot
traverses from one node to another . 
4 . Braitenberg vehicle-5 is motivated from the Turing Machine and is said to have a 
 ‘ brain ’  , this is achieved with threshold devices plugged between sensors and motors . 
Some threshold units will fire only when the signal is above threshold , while others
will only stop firing when threshold is exceeded , in effect establishing two states of
operation viz . ON state ( ONE ) and OFF state ( ZERO ) tailored by the threshold . 
Blending excitatory and inhibitory connections from vehicle-3 for the threshold units , 
Braitenberg very nearly replicates the McCulloch-Pitts neurons where the threshold
devices are sames as hidden neurons , and shows that when arranged into a feedback
loop these devices can be used to instantiate simple memory units , akin to digital
logic ( AND , OR and NOT )  . However , the computational capacity of the vehicle is
rather limited , and 10 threshold devices it can store only a 10 digit binary number
or a maximum decimal count of 1023 . Vehicle-5 is designed not only to realise the
154  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
computation in its own memory , but its ability to read and write the external world . 
A stretch of imagination will find the vehicle moving in a beach , tracing patterns in
the sand , and negotiating a return trip by reading these patterns and retrace its own
track . Such use of of the external world to store memory is an earmark for machine
learning and McCulloch and Pitts proved that networks of such threshold devices can
be used to build a Turing Machine . The vehicle can be seen as the corollary of the tape
head , and the sand track as equivalent of the tape upon which symbols have be written , 
thus correlating vehicle-5 to a Turing Machine . 
5 . The Dynamic Window Approach ( DWA )  [ 109 ] is one of the few navigation algorithms
that consider kinematic constraints . This method incorporates the mechatronic
functioning of the robot and is extendible to non-holonomic robots and can be
implemented to charter unknown and dynamic environments . 
EXERCISES
1 . Grid based methods , demonstrate with examples that grid based methods leads to
suboptimal paths . 
2 . C-type obstacle for ND , discuss the performance of ND diagram navigation for
C-type obstalces . 
3 . Local minima , show that local minima problem for potential field navigation can also
occur when the obstacle is not C-type or U-type . Based on this results , is potential
field navigation a good choice for generic navigation with uneven terrain , moving
obstacles and other robots ? 
C H A P T E R 5
Software , simulation & 
control 
 “ ROS = plumbing + tools + capabilities + ecosystem ” 
– Brian Gerkey 
 “ If you could see the world through a robot ’ s eyes , it would
look not like a movie picture decorated with crosshairs but
something like this : 
225 221 216 219 219 214 207 218 219 220 207 155 136 135
213 206 213 223 208 217 223 221 223 216 195 156 141 130
206 217 210 216 224 223 228 230 234 216 207 157 136 132 
.  .  .  ” 
– Steve Pinker
5 . 1 SOFTWARE FOR ROBOTICS
A
discussion on robotics is incomplete without a mention of control software and
simulation platforms . As brifely discussed in Chapter 2 , simulation is an essential
tool for testing of both the mechantronic design and the algorithm running the robot and
it helps to understand the robot ’ s performance in simple environments executing for easy
tasks . Though simulations are an essential tool for robotics , they are ridden with limitations
since they model only a finite set of real-world features and processes which are often plagued
by approximations and inaccuracies . Despite the success in quality physics based simulators , 
the shortcomings are imminent . There has been a lack of techniques to model simple forces
as frictional forces and magnetic ( non-contact ) interactions . Softwares which are made to
measure the various forces , torque , moments , wear and tear etc . acting on a given body
work on finite element methods and therefore cannot be implemented on mobile agencies . 
In complete contrast easy to use simulation interface is never sufficient to understand the
true performance of the robot , and fails to grasp complicated environments and involved
tasks . 
Until around 2000 , the two domains of software for robotics , simulation and control
were distinct from one another . While simulation dealt with representing the robot on the
computer screen and making it do various tasks in the software domain , control deals with
real time implementation in hardware . In the 1990s these two streams were very different —
156  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 5 . 1 BB-8 , the new robot in Star Wars was made with STM32F3 MCU . Newer processors
and sleek hardware are needed to make better robots . New software platforms to tackle such
hardware will not only be cumbersome but it will also be difficult to add-in accessories as camera , 
arm manipulator , sonars , motion sensors as Microsoft Kinect and ASUS Xtion etc . to the robot . 
Meta-Platforms as ROS helps to set a benchmark for software / hardware interface where accessories
can be added-in as handshake of software modules . 
simulations used to employ a pixellated graphical interface while control of the real robot
would be with microcontroller coding such as for the PIC microcontroller . Post 2000 , there
has been a concerted effort from the robotics community to develop meta-platforms which
unifies these two paradigms and the same code which enables a simulation on the computer
screen also leads to a similar performance when put to work in the real robot . The earliest
efforts were the player project and Microsoft Robotics Developer Studios where the two
paradigms converged , similar motivation was seen in the simulator Webots by cyberbotics . 
Tekkotsu , Robot Operating System ( ROS )  , YARP ( Yet Another Robot Platform )  , MOOS 
( Mission-Oriented Operating Suite )  , ORCOS ( Open Robot Control Software ) and URBI 
( Universal Real-time Behaviour Interface ) are newer and more well equipped avatars of
such ideas , and being opensourced they attract crowd sourcing and tinkering by geeks , 
researchers and students to port in newer hardware and softwares . Of course V-REP and
Webots are commercial simulators which have made a niche both in the industry as well
as academia . Among these ROS has been most popular and has become a benchmark in
robotics software in both academia and the industry . 
Meta-platforms particularly Robot Operating System ( ROS ) addressing to both
simulation in the software domain and control in the hardware / software interfacing has
helped to set a benchmark in robotics so that newer hardware can be easily ported into
existing systems and therefore encouraged crowdsourcing and open source software and
hardware designs , as shown in Figure 5 . 1 . This chapter is not a discussion on how to
use ROS , rather it an exposition of meta-software platforms and introduces the reader to
interesting facets of it . 
Rossum ’ s Playhouse ( RP1 ) made in 1999 was one of the earliest open-source robot
 157
simulator . It modelled the world in two dimensions and could be employed for simple
navigation as solving a maze — in the spirit of the micromouse . At about 700 kb It was a
handy tool for programmers which could be readily used as a testbed for algorithms and
control logic . The user could make robot models as per design layout and employ actuators , 
IR sensors , proximity sensors , and bumper sensors . 
The player project was the first attempt to unify the domains of control and simulation . 
The name ‘ player ’ and ‘ stage ’ were inspired by the quote ,  “ All the world ’ s a stage ,  ” by
William Shakespeare in his play ,  ‘ As You Like It ’  . The suite was designed to work as
client-server models , with player providing the server interface , Stage the 2D simulator 
[ 334 ] and Gazebo the 3D simulator . Stage was later ported into ROS . Stage was chiefly
developed by Richard Vaughan using FLTK and supported simple block like environments
and robot models using LEGO like blocks . It provides the user with a two-dimensional
graphic environment , which has facilities for a perspective camera , making it effectively
a 2 . 5 dimensional simulator as shown in Figure 5 . 2 . Stage has facilities for modelling the
robot and its sensors using simple scripts . There have been significant changes since version
3 to improve its simulation performance . Newer features includes stag being a standalone
simulator , use of controllers and multi-threaded execution . Stage is supported in nearly all
UNIX-based OSes and in Mac OS X . 
Gazebo is a 3D simulator developed with OGRE and it uses ODE for the physics
simulation , shown in Figure 5 . 3 . Robot models made in Blender or Google SketchUp can
easily be imported into gazebo to form its xml based Unified Robot Description Format 
( URDF )  , and ROS has built in libraries for models of most of the popular robots . It is a
big improvement on stage and now is the default simulator in ROS . ROS started off with
two simulators , stage and gazebo — both forked out of the player project . Since then , both
stage and gazebo have also developed into standalone open source softwares . STDR has
been a new addition to ROS , as we will briefly see later in the chapter . 
Being an interdisciplinary domain , various academic departments offer courses on
robotics , across Mechanical Engineering , Computer Science and Electrical Engineering . 
Some universities even have centers and schools specific for robotics . While most Mechanical
Engineering courses on robotics focus on the arm robot , those offered by Computer Science
focus on AI and is often an extension of the course on AI . Mobile robot specific courses are
few and are offered only by the top 50 universities across the globe . However , with robotics
posing to take the center stage that is set to change . Therefore , a meta-palform should
attempt to address the following questions1 
. 
1 . The meta-platform should provide reusable code pieces which helps to build simple
robot behaviours . 
2 . Since vision is the most important of all senses there needs to be dedicated software
for computer vision . ROS provides support for motion sensing and supports OpenCV
libraries . 
3 . Localisation is of primary importance and there needs to be tools for odometry and
visual landmarks , and mapping and techniques as SLAM based on Particle Filters . 
ROS supports mapping tools as gmapping and octomapping . 
4 . Simple navigational approaches are insufficient , but they provides for potent testing
grounds . ROS has navigation tools as ND-diagram and AMCL . 
5 . For more involved design , there will be a need to orchestrate pick-and-place operations
using an arm manipulator and exotic design tools as gyroscopes and Omni wheels . A
1many of these ideas are due to Touretzky [ 325 ] 
158  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 5 . 2 Stage simulations , LEGO like blocks model of the pioneer robot and Wall-E in stage 
( version 3 )  . The cube mounted on both the robots is the SICK laser . In the third image , the little
red pioneer robot is seen at the lower left hand corner and the green box is a movable cube placed
at the upper right hand corner , the semicircle surrounding the pioneer robot is the field of view of
the SICK LMS 200 laser
 159
FIGURE 5 . 3 Gazebo simulations . The gazebo interface ( a ) can spawn robots in a simple
environment — the robot here is turtlebot-II and the environment comprises of 3 giant cubes . 
The simulation is intractive and helps to zoom into and change angles as shown in ( b ) and ( c )  . 
Mapping software provided in ROS can implement SLAM to create 2D maps , as shown in ( d ) and 
( e )  . 
160  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
meta-platform should provide kinematic solvers for inverse and direct kinematics to
facilitate ease of design . 
6 . With increasing complications , the robot builders will strive to develop modular design
and simplify programming codes with class libraries . Modularity , code and hardware
reusability and easy to use class libraries should be at the heart of the paradigm for
the meta-platform . 
7 . Search and planning should be readily usable modules of the meta-platform . 
8 . It should support machine learning libraries in C +  + and Python . 
9 . Human robot interaction is still in its nascent stages though face recognition , speech
recognition and biometrics identification has come to be a part of our day to day lives , 
however integrating them into a robot is still a desired goal of the future . This module
should consist of NLP , face recognition and emotion recognition . Since human-robot
interactions should also tally with known social conventions hence this module should
also address roboethics . 
10 . Many robot teams and robot swarms are interesting avenues and the student will
learn about explicit coordination ( robot groups ) and implicit coordination ( robot
swarms )  . Most robot softwares are designed for single robot , and that includes ROS . 
The apparent compromise to this approach is that it alienates the wonderful facets of
swarming as discussed in Chapter 6 . There has been prospects to incorporate multiple
robots paradigm into ROS using multimaster , and future versions of ROS may have
capability to design robot swarms . Autonomous Robots Go Swarming ( ARGoS ) made
by researchers at IRIDIA , Belgium is currently the best software platform option for
researching on robot swarms . 
ROS easily implements the first six of the above , however it is yet to be employed for
social robots or swarm robotics . 
5 . 2 A VERY SHORT INTRODUCTION TO ROS
The Robot Operating System ( ROS ) is a meta robotics platform [ 270 ] for robot software
development , providing operating system like functionality it comes with various built-in
utilities ( viz . hardware drivers , maping and localisation ( SLAM )  , path planning algorithms , 
simulation interfaces etc .  ) suited to study robots and there is opportunity to develop your
own utilities and algorithms . ROS was developed by Willow Garage and Stanford University
with the first distribution release , Box Turtle in March 2 , 2010 which was developed for
installation in Ubuntu 8 . 04 LTS . 
ROS is released under the terms of the BSD license , and is open source software . It is
free for commercial and research use . ROS is meant for UBUNTU installation and in its
early days had two of its own robots , the PR2 and Turtlebot . ROS was an extension of the
STAIR project and it started off by porting in most of their functionalities and simulators
from the player project . Currently , it has URDF models of nearly all important mobile
robots . It can be partially ported into Windows and Mac OS-X it also supports open source
hardware platforms such as Raspberry Pi , ODROID etc . and various sleek hardware as
Microsoft Kinect , ASUS Xtion , Sphero and LEAP device . It supports a number of robots : 
PR2 , Turtlebot ( I and II )  , Corobot , Roomba , Care-O-Bot , LEGO Mindstorms , Shadow
Robot , Billibot , RAVEN-2 surgical robot , REEM-C humanoid and various others . ROS has
had 8 distribution releases over the last seven years and it is now maintained and developed
by Open Source Robotic Foundation ( OSRF )  . 
 161FIGURE 5 . 4 Re-inventing the wheel . Robotics research was plagued by lack of a universally acceptable hardware / software platform and it was difficult to replicate published research and this was detrimental to robotics . Adapted from Cham [ 65 ] 
162  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
What is ROS ? 
Brian Gerkey , lead developer of ROS and CEO of OSRF , explains ROS in the following
way :  
 “ ROS = plumbing + tools + capabilities + ecosystem ; 
1 . plumbing : ROS provides publish-subscribe messaging infrastructure designed to
support the quick and easy construction of distributed computing systems . 
2 . tools : ROS provides an extensive set of tools for configuring , starting , 
introspecting , debugging , visualizing , logging , testing , and stopping distributed
computing systems . 
3 . capabilities : ROS provides a broad collection of libraries that implement useful
robot functionality , with a focus on mobility , manipulation , and perception . 
4 . ecosystem : ROS is supported and improved by a large community , with a strong
focus on integration and documentation . The ROS website is a one-stop-shop for
finding and learning about the thousands of ROS packages that are available from
developers around the world .  ” 
The plumbing part is the asset of ROS , where communicating nodes across a
publisher-subscriber system enables versatality in design level , behaviour level , sensor
level and control level for the robot , this is broadly accomplished via roscore . One
of the most striking features of ROS is that it works more like an operating system
than an application , and various command structures and file structures bear similarity
to standard bash commands in UNIX . Tools are the OS level aspects of ROS which
are a basic set of tool for visualisation , diagnostics and debugging and often mimics
sh commandline . Capabilities is the facility to develop customised codes and designs , 
which is now structured through catkin and is developed on make / cmake file structures . 
Ecosystem , other than the ROS website there are variour other forums , mailing lists
and annual events which goes on to popularise ROS . It is further to be noted that ROS
is not a programming language , it is not a compiler , it is not an IDE and it is not a
software library ; however all these facilities are supported by ROS in some manner or
other . Over the seven years of its existence ROS has become a the single most used
software platform in robotics . 
Around the new millennium , each robotics research group worked in its own software
platform and it was difficult to recreate published results as shown in Figure 5 . 4 . This
was detrimental to the future prospects robotics . ROS has nearly solved that problem
by benchmarking the software in the robotics domain , and making the software more
predominant and universal than the hardware . 
Since it ’ s first release in 2010 , over the last seven years ROS has found growing
acceptance in the open source community and the user contributed packages has increased at
an astounding rate . Other than the ROS website at www . ros . org there are question answer
forums at answers . ros . org , meta blogs at planet . ros . org and mailing lists to help and
support ROS users which helps to fostercommunity participation and crowdsourcing much
like large open source projects such as Ubuntu , Python , Apache etc . 
ROS provides standard operating system services such as hardware abstraction , 
low-level device control , implementation of commonly used functionality , message-passing
between processes , and package management . ROS is currently supported on Ubuntu , 
 163
An Example In Emergence Of Behaviour
This is an example using the gazebo simulator in ROS . We had met the PR2 robot in the
last chapter , here we try to make it perform simple obstacle avoidance using lasers in a
box-world like environment made in gazebo . 
On running the above code it is noticed that instead of obstacle avoidance the PR2 exhibits
an akward box-pushing behaviour . 
What is happening here ? In this simulation the PR2 has its arms streched . While coding
this aspect was not taken into consideration and the algorithm was developed for a point
like robot , or at best a circular robot and 0 . 5 was used as an arbitrary distance to maintain
a minimal proximity . For the condition minimum range ≤ 0 . 5 ( ∼ AB in the figure below )  , 
it corresponds to a space at about the elbow of the arms of the PR2 and each time the
code checks for an obstacle there , doesn ’ t find it and it move forward , since gazebo is a
physics simulator , in a box-world this manifests as a box-pushing behaviour . On correcting
the code to minimum range ≤ 1 . 2 ( ∼ CD in the figure below ) the issue is sorted out . 
Box-pushing was never coded in , it emerges as a result of the interaction of the code with
the PR2 and the box world . 
164  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 5 . 5 ROS Lunar Loggerhead was released on May 23 , 2017 . The tortoise is a reoccuring
theme at ROS , all releases and logos have a tortoise reference . It has been suggested that such
is due to , the first modern robots are often said to be the two tortoise robots , Elmer and Elyse
developed by Walter . Image courtesy , Creative Commons Attribution 3 . 0 . 
TABLE 5 . 1 ROS Distributions
Name Release
Box Turtle March 2 , 2010
C Turtle August 2 , 2010
Diamondback March 2 , 2011
Electric Emys August 30 , 2011
Fuerte Turtle April 23 , 2012
Groovy Galapagos December 31 , 2012
Hydro Medusa September 4 , 2013
Indigo Igloo July 22 , 2014
Jade Turtle May 23 , 2015
Kinetic Kame May 23 , 2016
Lunar Loggerhead May 23 , 2017
 165
FIGURE 5 . 6 Differential drive robots . There has been growing interest in making differential
drive robots , be it commercial (  ( a )  ,  ( b ) and ( c ) from Touretzky [ 326 ]  , reprinted by permission of the
publisher Taylor & Francis Ltd ,  )  ) or hobbyist — ( d ) Achu Wilson ’ s
Chippu ( Image courtesy Achu Wilson ) and my own project named Tortue built with ASUS Xtion
and a Roomba 560 base in ROS Electric . 
experimentation for extending this support for other operating systems as other flavours of
Linux , Windows , Mac OS-X , ARM versions for embedded devices etc . is an ongoing effort . 
A chit-chat with the STDR developers
Manos , Aris and Chris from Greece tell us about their experience developing the STDR
simulator at ROS . This interview took place on 10 Nov 2014 . 
AB : Tell us about the development of STDR , the motivation and need ? 
The STDR team : STDR Simulator ‘ s development process begun in November 2013
from a group of electrical engineers involved in the robotics and specifically members
of the P . A . N . D . O . R . A . rescue robotics team from the Aristotle University , Greece . 
The motivation behind STDR was to build a low-requirement simulator that ‘ s easy
to install and use , thus providing a good tool to test incipient ideas or develop less
advanced projects , as effortless as possible . Our intention was not to provide the most
realistic simulator , nor the one with the most functionalities . On the contrary , the
overall design is minimal allowing rapid robotic algorithms prototyping . This fact was
critical to our approach as many simulators need a considerable amount of time to be
installed , configured and setup for an experiment . 
The tool that allowed us to implement such automated flexibility is the Robotic
Operating System or ROS . Being ROS users for some time now , we pinpointed the fact
that there were no ROS-dedicated simulators , meaning that no simulator is actually
built in ROS and not just use its interfaces . Thus , we decided to employ ROS tools
to create a ROS compliant two dimensional simulator , aiming both at providing easy
usage and being a state-of-the-art robotic software . 
166  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
AB : ROS obviously has other 2D / 3D simulators as stage and gazebo , how is STDR
an improvement on those ? 
The STDR team : STDR simulators contribution is an oxymoron , in the sense
that the improvement could be described as a deliberate deterioration . By providing
only basic / minimal functionalities , we achieved grave reduction in complexity of both
installation and configuration . In addition to that , system requirements are immensely
minimized , rendering experiments feasible for a vast group of developers . As stated
in the previous question , STDR is purely implemented in ROS , thus it does not
just provide ROS bindings or wrappers like stage or gazebo do , after launching an
experiment with specially defined parameter files . On the contrary , in STDR , the
robotics developer can immediately execute the simulator , add a robot providing its
specification graphically and subscribe to the appropriate ROS topics effortlessly . 
FIGURE 5 . 7 STDR , startup graphics for STDR
AB : Can one make basic algorithms as A ?  , bug-algorithms , potential fields etc . to
work in STDR ? 
The STDR team : As STDR is a simulator , its job is to simulate robots and their
environment . Concerning the environment simulation , the user can provide a simple
image file containing the obstacles , the unoccupied space , as well as the unknown
areas . On the other hand , via the robot simulation , the robotics developer has access
to simulated effectors ( wheels ) and receptors ( sensors like LRFs , Sonars etc )  . In
that sense , the user can perform a SLAM ( Simultaneous Localization and Mapping ) 
algorithm or have the map known a priori , and therefore execute on them a wide
variety of algorithms such as A ?  , bug algorithm , potential fields , path planning and
navigation modules etc . Of course the developer can benefit from the large amount of
ROS packages provided by the scientific community . Since STDR is ROS-based , these
packages can be employed with minimal effort . 
 167
AB : How does STDR handle multiple robot simulations ? is there methods to achieve
coordination / cooperation or swarming behaviours ? 
The STDR team : STDR simulator does support multi-robot simulation . The
developer has to ability to spawn several robots and send commands to their effectors
or receive data from their sensors . Of course he / she is free to implement multi-robot
communication controllers via ROS infrastructure ( messages / services / actionlib )  . 
However , the multi robot support is a germinal feature , that will be further evolved . 
In its current state many robots can be simulated , but lack the capacity to physically
detect each other , i . e .  , robots can navigate through each other and one robots sensors
fail to sense another robot . 
AB : According to you all what does a person needs to know prior to starting ROS ? 
C +  + or some programming background ? 
The STDR team : It depends on the application . Some programming background
is always useful , when you are developing software but it is not necessary for all
applications . ROS has several layers of abstraction , thus writing a simple program does
not require understanding implementation and design details of lower ( infrastructure ) 
layers . Good knowledge of C +  + and / or python is definitely a plus . For someone who
is not familiar with C +  + concepts it would be an uphill battle to master ROS . 
FIGURE 5 . 8 The STDR team , from the left to right : Manos , Chris and Aris from Aristotle
University , Greece
AB : What is the future of STDR ? 
The STDR team : Our next steps would be towards a more realistic simulation of
the environment . In that manner , we aim to add a simple physics engine in order
to perform collision checking more realistically . Also , we are thinking of a dynamic
environment , where robots can perceive each other as moving obstacles or perceive
moving obstacles generally , like a moving door . Since STDR is an open source project , 
its future would be heavily influenced by communitys interest for new features , bug
fixes , etc . We should mention that we have already several contributions from the ROS
community and we encourage the potential developers to inform us of any problems
or even achievements they had using our simulator . 
STDR Simulator is currently an official ROS package and can be downloaded via
apt-get . The supported ROS distributions are Hydro and Indigo , thus the supported
168  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
OSs are Ubuntu LTS 12 . 04 and 14 . 04 , as well as all the intermediate distros . Some
useful links regarding STDR follow : 
Official STDR webpage : 
ROS wiki page : stdr˙simulator
GitHub repository : ˙simulator
ROS in Space - The Robonaut 2 ( R2 ) humanoid torso
The Robonaut-2 is a project which developed the first humanoid robot at the
International Space Station ( ISS )  , the humanoid robot runs on ROS . The project is a
venture of NASA and General Motor , working at the Johnson Space Center , Houston . 
The project aims to develop an automated humanoid torso fitted with 2 dexterous arms
which can function as an astronaut in space . The advancement that R2 has achieved
over other robots is that it can use the same tools that an astronaut uses , there is no
need for specialised tools only meant for use by R2 . R2 is an advantage where simple , 
repetitive , or hazardous tasks are needed to be performed in harsh and unfavourable
conditions as space stations and non-terrestrial colonies . R2 was delivered to the ISS
aboard the shuttle Discovery on the STS-133 mission with the mission spanning across
2 weeks , 24 February 2011 to 9 March 2011 . While still on board the Discovery , testing
and basic operation started inside the Destiny module . Once at the ISS , it was deployed
on a fixed pedestal . The project achieves real time control using ROS and ORCOS in
tandem . R2 is the first humanoid robot in space , it has a height of about 1 meter , weighs
132 kg and is made out of nickel-plated carbon fiber and aluminum . It is equipped with
54 servo motors and has 42 degrees of freedom and needs at 120 volts DC . The torso can
be fitted with legs to make it into a full humanoid , deployed on a pedestal or fitted on
to a four wheeled rover . NASA ’ s team used gazebo for R2 simulations , ROS packages
which they have released to the opensource community . 
FIGURE 5 . 9 The Robonaut 2 uses ROS and is employed at the International Space Station 
( ISS )  . Shown here is the robot on the left and its gazebo simulation on the right . 
 169
A teˆte-a ` -teˆte with Daniel Stonier and Marcus
Liebhardt from Yujin Robot , Seoul
Yujin Robot is a Seoul based company which developed the Turtlebot-2 with the Kobuki
base . Daniel and Marcus from the company ’ s innovation team share with us the experience
of developing these robots and future prospects . This interview took place on 24 Nov 2014 . 
FIGURE 5 . 10 Kobuki base and Turtlebot-2 , 
AB : How did Yujin Robot come into being ? 
DS & ML : More than 20 years ago Yujin Robot started in automation and is now
comprised of several small business groups , not all of them directly related to robotics
and has also seen a couple of internal teams successfully spin off their own businesses . 
The R & D group entered service robotics more than a decade ago and despite being a
relative adventurous proposition at the time , the driving force then , and now has been
the CEOs passion for building robots . 
FIGURE 5 . 11 iClebo and iRobi , 
AB : What all robots have you developed ? 
170  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
DS & ML : Since Yujin Robot entered service robotics , they have explored several
directions . The one constant has been the iClebo cleaning robots initially random
walkers and later the vision SLAM machines . There have been several products for
university research ( soccer robots , mobile platforms ) and many versions of RobHaz
for hazardous operations ( rescue robots )  . Until recently though , the other major drive
was towards educational ( specifically classroom ) robotics with robots like iRobi and
RoboSem . Whilst this is not so commercially attractive outside of Asia , here the sheer
numbers , unbelievable competition and parental focus creates a very different economic
environment , one that is potentially attractive to robotics . Yujin Robot explored the
development of both small and large product lines , but despite the enthusiasm for
robotics and a healthy economic niche , such a market remains a hard sell . 
FIGURE 5 . 12 The GoCart , 
AB : Tell us about the Kobuki ? Why this name ? 
DS & ML :  ‘ Kobuk ’ is the Korean word for turtle . Adding the suffixed ‘ i ’ is typical
korean syntax when using such nouns in a sentence , but also gives it a more intimate
feeling . The why of its origin for our mobile platform is in part shrouded in time . There
was no definitive moment in which we had named our robot , but some things are for
certain . For a long time we had a cleaning robot based mobile platform in the lab for
experiments that we called Kobukibot . Wed also adopted the ROS fascination with
turtles ever since the ROS turtle tutorials first came out ( some of us can remember a
time even before there were such tutorials at one point there was a tutorial for the
most perverse , but fun way to add 1 + 1 using ros services )  . Korea is also famous for
its Turtle ships , an engineering design we can relate to ! 
AB : Since the Kobuki and TurtleBot 2 are meant to run with ROS , how do you explain
ROS to a young enthusiast ? Say a 15 year old who is just about learning some C +  + 
and bits and pieces of Java or Python and wants to own a Kobuki . 
DS & ML : Kobuki / TurtleBot is a readymade hardware unit . So working with such a
platform is all about problem solving , programming and of course , doing these things
on a platform which lets you build interesting applications that come to life in a more
vivid way than they can on a PC . ROS itself lets you write programs that can talk to
 171
each other and the ROS ecosystem provides you with a lot of software that you can
reuse and recycle for your own benefit . I think for a budding young developer , these
are awesome concepts that can take them far . It teaches how to break down complexity
into small chunks and how to integrate efficiently with existing components . Without
these skills , a developer wont be able to scale up what he or she can do , nor accelerate
at the same pace as developers around them will be able to do . In todays software
world , these concepts are often more important than ones proficiency in a particular
language . 
FIGURE 5 . 13 The Kobuki / Turtlebot-2 team , from left to right and top to bottom we
have : Hyeong Ju Kim , Jorge Santos Simon , Young Hoon Ju , Nosu Lee , Min Jang , Marcus
Liebhardt , Sam Park , Jaeyoung Lee , Daniel Stonier and Joohong Lee
172  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
AB : How has ROS and OSRF communities responded to the Kobuki ? 
DS & ML : Very positive all the way through . Kobuki was originally intended only
for the Korean market since we could not get iRobot Create robots distributed here
and we wanted to expose ROS on TurtleBots to Korean students at universities . It
was such a significant jump up from the Create , that it quickly became consumed by
the TurtleBot and international ROS communities . Willow Garage and later OSRF
were involved in the process right from the design of the hardware . One of the most
rewarding things to see is its use now as a prototyping platform for small startups . 
AB : Any interesting upcoming projects ? Since we are moving into a time when robots
and smart electronics will rule our lives , how do you foresee the future of this industry ? 
and the impact on society ? 
DS & ML : There is a definite convergence of technologies happening right now . For
the first time in decades , we have explosive growth in multiple sectors of the technology
world , and the most interesting thing is , almost all of these sectors impact on what
can be done in robotics . Smart phones → embedded computation , good cameras , 
communicativity outside a wireless LAN . Gaming → 3d sensing . The internet explosion
post the IE5 stranglehold → cloud computing resources , remote connectivity . As
a first step , we are seeing reduced costs and the ability to be able to navigate in
semi / unstructured environments , now triggering the emergence of mobile robotics in
the service industries ( outside cleaning robots )  . For the first time it feels like the heat
is on to get new products to market in these industries . However I dont believe these
successes can be solely ascribed to the fact that there is a technology convergence . 
History shows that technological leaps often fail to penetrate the market . These leaps
have to be either hugely significant , or a need arrives . What we have now is a very
real and quickly looming crisis of manpower shortage in various industry sectors in
the near future , such as health and elderly care . This is dispelling the conservatism
in several industries we have hitherto explored and they are now more keen to take a
leap of faith . It is into these emerging service robotics applications Yujin Robot is now
venturing with products like GoCart . Rather than trying to sell a service , or provide
entertainment , we now look to fulfill the automative needs of the service world . 
AB : Tell us more about the GoCart project . 
DS & ML : A year ago we started the innovation team with the goal of creating
Yujin Robots products of tomorrow . The first result of this endeavour is GoCart our
autonomous mealtransport system . GoCart is the first robot of our Gopher Series , 
which combines Yujin Robots various technologies for indoor transportation , such as
our new stereovisionbased dSLAM system . GoCart is our contribution to fight the
shortage of skilled caretakers and raising costs in health and elderly care . GoCart will
take care of moving meals and other supplies around in a facility , such as hospitals
and elderly care facilities . Thereby freeing up caretakers time allowing them to spend
more time with the residents and patients . With its affordable price GoCart will
reduce the overall operating costs of the facility at the same time . More information
about GoCart can be found on the web page and
additional technology details in our recent blog post 
2014 / 11 / delivering-ros-in-box . html . 
 173
ROS has a rich library of supported sensors , actuators and robots and a new robot as
the ones shown in Figure 5 . 6 or a smart device can also be interfaced with little effort . 
ROS has two entities , the operating system entity and pakage specific entity , a suite of user
contributed packages organized into sets called stacks that implements various functionality
such as navigation , mapping , planning , perception , simulation , interface for a device etc . 
The operating system entity can be seen from the structuring of ROS to be a layer over the
existing Unix system and bears a similarity to bash and cmake utilities , the pakage specific
entity is more often user defined . 
In ROS , every communication between robots , sensors , actuators is done by nodes . A
node is the simplest piece of code ( often written in C +  + or Python ) which can be executed . 
The node may be the device driver of a robot , sensor , some peripheral device or it may be
explicitly written to accept , process or send data in the form of messages . Node to node
communications is not direct , but through a common topic in the form of messages . A
publisher node publishes messages to a topic and the subscriber node subscribes to this
topic so that it gets the messages that are published by the publisher node . 
By the virtue of modularity across both design implements ( with CAD models and
URDF ) and software features ( such as ready made modules for navigation and mapping
tools ) and unification of simulation and control interfaces , ROS marries a plethora of
processes and a myriad of hardware to software and is an essential for all robot enthusiasts . 
The best resource for ROS is its website ,  . 
SUMMARY
1 . Meta-platforms in robotics has unified the simulation and control paradigms and the
same piece of code which runs a simulation can be made to work in the real robot . 
2 . ROS and similar platforms provide interfacing to hardware and also provide a wide
array of software tools . 
3 . Simulators as gazebo and MORSE provide quality physics based simulation , while
simple simulators as STDR and stage can be used as test bed to try out algorithms
etc . 
4 . ROS makes it easy to interface newer robots and accessories . 
NOTES
1 . Pioneer robot in caves environment was the default simulation for player / stage , the
caves environment shown in Figure 5 . 2 became iconic and can been seen in various
research publications , tutorials and videos . 
2 . Willow Garage closed down in March 2013 , and then on ROS was maintained and
developed by OSRF . 
3 . A robot I made using a roomba base in ROS Electric can be found at https :  /  / www . 
youtube . com / watch ? v = ZPhbyOlCq08
4 . ROS ecosystem is an ever growing assortment of softwares closely allied to ROS , such
as MoveIt !  , ROS Industrial , OpenCV etc . 
5 . ROS 2 . 0 is the new avatar of ROS and yet to go mainstream . 
III
Robot-Robot & Human-Robot
Interactions
C H A P T E R 6
Robot-robot interaction , 
groups and swarms 
 “ They ’ re flocking , but that ’ s not what they think they are doing ” 
– Maja Mataric [ 92 ]  
 “ Swarm robotics is a novel approach to the coordination of large number of
relatively simple robots which takes its inspiration from social insects .  ” 
– Sahin [ 287 ] 
6 . 1 MANY ROBOT SYSTEMS
A
number of robots working in tandem is often preferred over a single robot due to
improved system performance , distributed action over a number of locations , better
fault tolerance and economic considerations . A single or two to three robots as a part of a
system is not always a great design , since if one of them stops working then a significant part
of the job at hand is left unattended . If this is a mobile system in a hospital , a production
line or a workshop then suitable replacement has to be found soon . This is why teams of
robots either working with ( robot group ) or without ( robot swarm ) a centralised control
reduce the problem at hand to a number of subproblems which can be completed with
greater ease . 
In multirobot systems , sensing works over a number of robots and therefore over a much
larger range than the physical limitation of the sensing range of each robot . The action can
be carried out at a greater distance from the point of sensing . Therefore , a team of robots
can undertake a wider range of tasks , most of which will not be possible for a single robot
to perform on its own . As a drawback , in a distributed system complexity increases and
there is the chance of delay in sensing across the robot formation which can add to the
clutter in the navigation and lead to more robot-robot and robot-obstacle collisions , which
may defeat the very purpose of a robot formation . 
Kiva systems , which employs deliberative knowledge sharing across about a thousand
robots , and Robo Cup , where sharing of sensor information has proven to improve
performance , are examples where a battery of robots has proven to be more useful than a
single robot . Parker ’ s Alliance architecture in the mid 1990s was one of the early attempts to
design subsumption-like layered architecture for a team of robots . Mataric ’ s Nerd Herd was
the first implementation of social behaviour and flocking in robots . Mataric ’ s robots could
demonstrate very simple behaviours such as , homeing in on a common base and wandering
178  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 1 Cooperative box pushing is a favourite tool to demonstrate cooperation across
a team of robots . From Kube and Zhang [ 191 ]  , with kind permission from Springer Science and
Business Media . 
while avoiding obstacles to more sophisticated social functions of synthetic foraging and
flocking . 
Cooperative box pushing as shown in Figure 6 . 1 has been a tool and also a favourite
experiment to demonstrate cooperation in a team of robots . This is a direct motivation
from cooperative transport in insect colonies and concerns moving a box like object by a
team of robots to a given goal point which otherwise cannot be achieved by a single robot . 
It is observed in the natural world that performance improves with the number of agents
therefore box pushing becomes a desired test or a benchmark to demonstrate cooperation . 
6 . 2 NETWORKED ROBOTICS
Robot formations are marked by cooperation and coordination and have been attempted by
architectures , bidding mechanisms and fuzzy logic methods . Over the past decade networked
robotics is seen more as an ecological system , an interworking and mutual exchange of
information rather than explicitly programming of cooperation and coordination into the
robots . With the proliferation of ubiquitous and pervasive computing [ 350 ]  , a network of
mobile robots may not remain contained to its member robots , but rather includes a more
interactive ecology which is spread over thousands of computers and works to weave robots , 
electronics , embedded hardware , software , etc .  , into one single system working on seamless
exchange of information , over calm and context aware user interfaces . 
Such an omnipresent and pervasive network for robots is the basis for ubiquitous
robotics . This technology of the future is projected to include all robots across the
planet , connected across a single network adhering to a synthetic ecology . Ecological
interdependence in the natural world ensures the well being of a large number of species
and the sustainment of the biosphere . Stealing such ideas from nature , a model for synthetic
ecology is suggested by Duchon and co-researchers [ 98 , 99 ]  , and includes the following salient
features . 
1 . Agents and the environment cannot be treated as separate
2 . Agency emerges out of the dynamics of agent environment interactions
3 . The agent tries to map available information to the control , in order to execute its
job . 
 179
4 . Information is readily available from the dynamic environment for the agent to learn
and adapt . Adaptation is not just an effort for survivability , but marks an ascendancy
in skill of the agent . 
5 . There is no need for centralised control or executive . 
Duchon ’ s model is remarkably similar to the fungus eater model proposed by Toda and
later modified by Pfeifer . However unlike Toda , Duchon considers an inherent ecology and
therefore interdependence and seamless exchange of information between the agents as the
underlying principle of his model than rote low level agent environment interactions . Also , 
the agents need not be homogeneous but rather they can be entirely different types of
agencies , as varied as a humanoid robot and an autonomous car . 
It is anticipated that ubiquitous computing will render that robots will not just be
hardware entities but will also be embodied virtually , leading to ubiquitous robotics and
human-robot interaction will be seamless , unobtrusive , calm and on the run . This large
integration of robots and devices over a network which runs all across the world will redefine
our ways of living and social interactions . A ubiquitous robot in a synthetic ecology will
typically be an entity which has three levels of agency working in tandem :  ( 1 ) the software ,  
( 2 ) embedded environment and ( 3 ) the mobile robot . The software has ease of movement
through the network and therefore has the advantage of acquiring information at near
real time . The embedded environment is a network of sensors and helps to gather localised
information and the mobile robot is meant to execute the action . The following projects will
further illustrate the principles of synthetic ecology and networked robotics . These three
projects ,  ( 1 ) Humanoid Robot System on Ubiquitous Network [ 257 ]  ,  ( 2 ) PEIS [ 286 ] and 
( 3 ) RoboEarth [ 341 ]  , were designed to help and support elderly citizens in their day-to-day
chores and to develop new lifestyles governed by information and communication technology , 
where a synthetic ecology of devices and robots works in unison and harmony with the need
and requirement of the human beings . 
Humanoid Robot System on Ubiquitous Network : Extending teleoperation over a
long distance network , Okuda et al .  [ 257 ] developed a humanoid robot system controlled
remotely over a wide area network via mobile phones for monitoring and carrying out simple
tasks in a home equipped with smart electronics . This research , done in collaboration with
Aichi Prefectural University and Mitsubishi suggested a classification of networked robots :  
( 1 ) Virtual Type , which are driven by operators via graphical interfaces and exist solely in
the virtual space .  ( 2 ) Unconscious Type1 
, are driven by embedded hardware and are more
an extension of machines and the ( 3 ) Visible Type , which are nearly autonomous and can
act on human orders , such as personal robots . The network is developed with a visible type
robot , the HOAP-2 humanoid robot . It has 13 degrees of freedom and it was employed over
an interface of RT-Linux . The robot was used in the project for remote manipulation and
surveillance over a mobile phone , schematically shown in Figure 6 . 2 . 
Physically Embedded Intelligent System ( PEIS )  : PEIS [ 286 ]  , the project was targeted
at development of a smart household system which can take care of elderly citizens . As a
philosophy for the project , it is meant to be an ecology of communicating and cooperating
agents , where the performance of the household system emerges from interaction among
the various agents of the ecology , as shown in Figure 6 . 3 . The project attempts to design
rich ecology of a variety of interacting agents and go beyond single humanoid robot and
1Here the moniker of unconscious may not be very appropriate , as will be discussed in the later chapters . 
180  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 2 Humanoid robot system on ubiquitous network is the first project to employ
humanoid robots over a remote network for simple household chores . Adapted from Okuda et
al .  [ 257 ]  . 
tasks tagged to teleoperation . It proposes to use an array of embedded sensors across the
household to dispense local information , rather than overloading one or two humanoid
robots with a barrage of sensors . As an illustration , olfactory sensing which can detect fire , 
stale food , security concerns etc . is more effective if a number of less expensive sensors are
embedded across the household over a network rather than equipping a humanoid robot
with an a state-of-the-art sensor . Similarly , a humanoid robot is redundant attending to
the job of night security . Instead smart electronics working to a timer is more suitable . 
The test rig for the project was a real household in Sweden with an elderly couple as the
inmates . Saffiotti and his team used RFID tagging to identify objects in day-to-day use : 
as coasters , cups , toaster , alarm clock etc . over the network . The research team also laid a
floor equipped with RFID sensing to detect the locomotion of the senior human beings of
the household . This was in tandem with communication and cooperation modelled between
simple and inexpensive robots like the Roomba and the Pioneer to attend to chores of the
household . The clear advantages of this project are ,  ( 1 ) hardware or software failures are
easier to overcome and the latency time is lower in comparison to a network of few robots ,  
( 2 ) once installed , maintenance can be done by the elderly users without much hassle nor
requiring any particular skill in robotics or electronics and ( 3 ) cost of setup and maintenance
is far lower than employing one large humanoid robot . 
The RoboEarth Project : The project [ 341 ] was developed by researchers across various
universities in Europe and is aimed at making a very large system for sharing knowledge
between robots , a World Wide Web for robots . As of now , the service robot industry is
limited to specialised robots , viz .  , vacuum cleaning robot , trash collecting robot , delivery
robots etc . which are preprogrammed to specific tasks . This not only reduces the opportunity
for the robot but also adds to cost and redundancy . In the near future , robots will often
need to perform tasks which are not programmed into them , and also adapt to newer
environments and adapt to a variety of tasks . RoboEarth attempts to solve this problem by
large scale sharing of data of specific robots and is similar to an Internet of Things ( IoT ) 
approach . With interlinked robots over a world wide web of robots , it is believed that it
would speed up learning and adaptation and that robots will be able to undertake and
 181
FIGURE 6 . 3 The PEIS philosophy is built on the ecology of a variety of communicating and
cooperating agents than a employing a single humanoid robot . This approach is not only cheaper
but attends to a larger range of tasks and is not cursed by network delays and bottlenecks . Overlap
of technological domains resonates with the concepts of developing an artificial ecology and may
be a common occurence in the future . Adapted from Saffiotti and Broxvall [ 286 ]  . 
execute tasks that were not planned for in the design and the programming cycles . For
example , an office assistant robot had to attend to a situation of a sudden cardiac arrest
of an office staff member and as a learned behaviour calls the ambulance , another robot
which is finds itself in a similar situation will just download these files from the RoboEarth
cloud server to deal with it . Of course , the design , sensors etc . of these two robots may not
be the same , but the second robot will at least have some idea of how to deal with such
a situation . The RoboEarth has been successfully used in trials for ( 1 ) maze navigation
and playing robot-robot games which gradually improved due to learning techniques ,  ( 2 ) 
serving drinks to patients in hospital , which showed the utility of RoboEarth in a dynamic
task in a social context and ( 3 ) operation of an arm manipulation by different robots which
demonstrated reusability of the RoboEarth software and database . 
These three projects do not yet lead to a pristine ecology of robots and devices , and most
of them have either some form of overarching human participation and therefore fail safe
conditions or a blend of central control , but each of them foreshadows technology which may
become a part of our day-to-day workings in about a decade . The next chapter discusses
the social aspects of using robots in elderly care . 
6 . 3 SWARM ROBOTICS
Swarm robotics is a novel emergent group behaviour of multiple agents lacking in a
centralised control or global knowledge , where each individual agent has minimal hardware
and is tasked with low-level behaviour , but complex global behaviour is manifested in the
group . 
The concept of the social insect , as shown in Figure 6 . 4 , is a common trait in ants , 
182  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 4 The Social Insect , as seen in ants , termites , bees and wasps is the motivation to swarm robotics . Eusociality is seen in ( a ) this cross
section of a termite nest shows the coordination of worker termites ( b ) ants working in cooperation tend to find the shortest path for foraging ( c ) 
weaver ants use their own body to form chains in order to pull leaves together , and ( d ) in weaver ant workers , division of labour is seen as the leaves
have been put in place by a first group of workers and a second group sews in the leaf edges with silk threads formed by the mature larvae . Image
from Garnier et . al [ 115 ]  , used with permission of Springer . 
 183
termites , bees and wasps and has led to progress in swarm robotics . It is tempting to consider
swarming as a collective survival instinct , such as individuals escaping a predator or chasing
prey where similar individual goals lead to a common group behaviour , but eusociality is a
feature of animal and bird collectives and is typified by division of labour where a particular
behaviour is unique to a group of agents , viz . nest building , food gathering etc . 
Extrapolating the single agent approach to a swarm of multiple agents fails as swarming
is the growth of a collective AI across all the agents such that the group behaves in unison
as a single entity . This cannot be achieved as an addendum or overlap of single agent
behaviours . This unison to reflect a collective behaviour is very similar to a phase change
in physical or chemical systems and happens due to self organisation and stigmergy and is
marked by the novel properties of robustness , flexibility and scalability . 
1 . Robustness : The ability for a task to be accomplished even if some of the robots fail . 
The swarm demonstrates redundancy and continues to operate at a lower performance . 
The failure of a few robots will not deter the system by much and due to distributed
sensing across the swarm leads to a high signal to noise ratio which is not suppressed
by the loss of a few robots . 
2 . Flexibility : The degree to which the robotic system can perform a task when the
environmental parameters change . This happens by employing different coordination
strategies when confronted to changes in the environment or the task . Flexibility is a
trait of social insects . For example , ants can very easily change mode from foraging
to chain formation to prey retrieval . Food recruitment in ants is coordinated as a
biochemical stimulation using pheromones where each ant lays a pheromone to guide
the following ant on the correct trail . In contrast , in chain formation , as shown in
Figure 6 . 4 ( c ) and Figure 6 . 5 the ants attempt to form chain-like mega structures
with each ant gripping the other ant to reach distances which are way more than
the ability of a single ant . Here instead of a biochemical stimulant , the ants use their
bodyies as the way to communicate across the formation . In another contrast , in prey
retrieval , the ants work in seeming unison to carry large prey to their nests , a task
which is not possible for a single ant to accomplish . 
3 . Scalability : The ability of the swarm to reorient the agents when the scale of the task
itself changes . Introduction or removal of agents doesn ’ t change the swarm behaviour
and doesn ’ t affect the performance of the swarm . Therefore , the coordination
mechanism underlying the swarming behaviour is more or less independent of group
size . 
Despite such advantages , swarms are difficult to control as compared to traditional
systems , and engineering a desired swarming behaviour is still being researched into . 
Researchers have been guided by studying , collectives of particles [ 336 ]  , animals [ 75 ]  , flocking
of birds and colonies of insects , and used such models to understand the phase change
and the emergence of a social behaviour and collective AI , a convergence of micro and
macro [ 140 , 141 ]  . The emergence of swarming as a phase change [ 329 ] is most remarkable , 
wherein individual motion of the agents is redundant and the aggregate behaviour is aimed
towards a common goal . 
As an illustrative example , the iconic video game of the 1980s PAC-MAN , can be
represented as a finite state predator-prey model shown in Figure 6 . 6 . Each ghost is tasked
with touching and thus killing PAC-MAN and it often seems that they are working in
precise coordination . However , there is no central control executive and it is the common
goal which leads to the collective behaviour and all the ghosts chase ( or flee ) PAC-MAN at
the same time . 
184  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 5 Chain formation in ants , is a communication scheme used to reach a distant goal . 
Here the ants use their body as the way to communicate and cooperate to form structures to
reach distances which are not possible for a single ant to reach . In contrast to foraging , instead of
a biochemical stimulation using pheromones , here ants use their own bodies for communication . 
Image in public domain , courtesy wikimedia . org
FIGURE 6 . 6 Predator-prey state models , PAC-MAN . When chasing or fleeing PAC-MAN , 
the ghosts have the same goal and implicitly show swarming behaviour . 
 185
There is a stark contrast between networked multirobot systems and multirobot swarms . 
Robot-robot and robot-obstacle collisions , which otherwise tend to increase with a greater
number of robots in a multiple robot system is effectively avoided since the swarm works in
unison as a single intelligent system rather than a set of individual agents . Communication
for a multiple robot system needs additional hardware and software for sending and
receiving messages and for signal processing and filtering of noise across the robot collective , 
which often leads to undesirably high lag times , and these issues increase with the size of
the collective . In contrast , for a swarm , communication typically works over low-quality
hardware and there is no need for expensive hardware and computational resources to
communicate . Sensing is distributed across the swarm and the noise is insignificant to the
signal . Research has shown that whatever noise is there tends to enhance coherence across
the swarm . Since coordination across the swarm is maintained by the emergent swarm
AI , the robots will never compete amongst themselves and always cooperate towards a
common goal with all the agents contributing at an optimum level of productivity . For
practical problems which often need scaling up , adding more robots in a multiple robot
system may be limited by the hardware fanout limits and computational capacity of the
on-board processor . In a swarm scaling up is inherent and therefore is not limited by any
such restrictions . These contrasts will bring down the overall system cost and enhance
system performance , a swarm of robots will be cheaper to design and maintain than a
multiple robot system . However , swarms are difficult to control and swarm engineering is
still a fledgling concept which is yet to be made into a reliable technology . 
6 . 3 . 1 Relating agent behaviour to the collective behaviour
By modelling collectives from natural sciences , it is possible to relate the agent behaviour
to the behaviour of the formations . Aoki ’ s [ 15 , 16 ] and later Reynold ’ s [ 275 ] model relates
basic behaviours which can lead to a swarm . Reynold ’ s boids are a motivation from birds
and insect flocking and are designed by rules in the order of decreasing precedence : 
1 . Collision Avoidance : Avoid colliding with nearby members of the flock
2 . Velocity Matching : Try to match velocity with the nearest flock member
3 . Flock Centering : Try to stay close to the nearest flock member
Collision avoidance under static conditions and velocity matching are nearly
complementary . If the boid adheres to velocity matching then the mutual separation between
the boids will remain nearly the same . To avoid colliding into the closest neighbour there
has to be a minimal distance between the boids . Velocity matching maintains this distance
dynamically . Reynold ’ s model has been demonstrated to lack in flocking behaviour in large
groups (  > 10 ) with regular fragmentation . Also , it has been seen that reliability falls
off sharply with larger swarms , and typically more than 30 agents will struggle to form
coherent swarms . A more sophisticated model is by Couzin et al .  [ 75 ] which uses group
velocity and angular momentum to classify collective behaviour . For an agent in a collective
there are three zones modelled as spheres , shown in Figure 6 . 7 as concentric circles in a
two dimensional projection of this model . The three zones are named zone of repulsion 
( zor )  , zone of orientation ( zoo ) and zone of attraction ( zoa )  . The agent attempts to keep a
minimum distance from other agents within zor , it tries to align itself with its neighbours in
zoo , which tends to minimise collisions , and the agent shows an attraction to other agents
and becoming a part of the collective in zoa . Applying this model to dynamic scenarios
leads to four types of classifications .  ( 1 ) Swarm , here the group cohesion happens with low
group velocity and low angular momentum with lack of parallel alignment . This happens
186  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 7 Couzin ’ s model , considering a hypothetical agent in a collective . There are three
spherical zones shown here as circles in two dimension with a blind zone directly behind the agent . 
These three zones determine the social behaviour and cohesion with other agents in the collective , 
zone of repulsion ( zor )  , zone of orientation ( zoo ) and zone of attraction ( zoa )  . Swarm formation is
seen when attraction and repulsion are more predominant in comparison to orientation . 
when attraction and repulsion happens more often , in comparison to parallel alignment .  ( 2 ) 
Torus geometry , in this scenario the individuals of the collective perpetually rotate about
the centre of the formation . This is characterised by low group velocity but high angular
velocity . This has a tendency to happen when zone of orientation is small , and zone of
attraction large in comparison .  ( 3 ) Dynamic parallel group , this scenario is characterised
with high group velocity and low angular velocity . It is more mobile than swarm or torus
behaviours and ( 4 ) Highly parallel group , this scenario is characterised with very high group
velocity and rectilinear movement this behaviour is seen to occur when zone of orientation
is more dominant than any other zone . As per Couzin ’ s model , swarming is typically seen in
insects . The dynamic parallel group occur in collectives such as bird flocks and fish schools . 
The torus is a rarity , and the highly parallel group lacks in exchange of information across
its constituent agents . 
6 . 3 . 2 Signatures of swarm robotics
The first robotic swarm was designed by Maja Mataric at MIT in the late 1990s named ‘ The
Nerd Herd ’  , it was not until the new millennium that pioneering works by Beni [ 36 ]  , Sahin 
[ 287 ]  , Winfield , Kazadi , Dorigo and Vaughan helped its founding as a new discipline . Since
then , swarm robotics has never failed to garner the attention of the robotics community . 
Being a relatively new field of study , the definition of swarm robotics has evolved to
incorporate novelties of newer research . Extending concepts from swarm intelligence to
seamlessly lead to swarm robotics , Beni defines an intelligent swarm as :  
 “ Intelligent swarm : a group of non-intelligent robots (  “ machines ”  ) capable
of universal material computation ” 
here , universal material computation is meant in the spirit of number crunching , pattern
 187
synthesis , playing chess etc . In contrast , Sahin defines it as an extrapolation of agent-world
interactions :  
 “ Swarm robotics is a study of how large number of relatively simple
physically embodied agents can be designed such that the desired collective
behaviour emerges from the local interactions among agents and between the
agents and the environment ” 
Schmickl et al .  [ 291 ] put numbers to express the idea of a swarm :  
 “ In robot swarms , hundreds or thousands of small and simple robots have
to perform in a well-organized and efficient way to pursue common goals ” 
It is worth noting that , in these definition there is no marking for a lower bound for a
swarm , but the norm is about ten to twenty robots while researchers have also been seen
to work with smaller group sizes . In the other extreme , simulation of swarms as high as
of 100 , 000 robots have been successfully designed , though however most experiments are
limited to about 20 robots . 
In later research , Celikkanat and Sahin [ 62 ] also incorporated self organisation and the
prospects of engineering a swarm of robots into its definition :  
 “ Swarm robotics , which takes its inspiration from natural swarms such as ant
colonies , aims to tackle this challenge by analyzing the coordination mechanisms
that underly the self-organized operation of natural swarms and using them to 
 “ engineer ” self-organization in large groups of robots ” 
Swarms are usually formed of highly homogeneous robots , which look the same , with
the same hardware and have about the same software complexity . Heterogeneous teams
of robots such as in Robo Soccer have roles defined for each robot and are not so much
examples of swarm intelligence and as coordinated teams of robots . 
A swarm of robots can be identified with the following characteristics ;  : minimalism , 
stigmergy , emergence , change of phase and self organisation . Though it should be noted
that these are not pre-requisites of swarm formation . 
6 . 3 . 2 . 1 Minimalism : Non-intelligent robot , intelligent swarm
The robots for engineering a swarm should be simple and equipped with low-end hardware 
[ 237 ] and minimal software design [ 238 ]  , relatively incapable and inefficient to accomplish
the assigned task with sensing capabilities and mutual communication limited to the local
environment , preferably only with the nearest neighbours . These desired shortcomings
ensure that the robots find it difficult and rather often impossible to execute the given
task on their own , seeding grounds for implicit cooperation and development of the swarm . 
Employing a number of such simple robots for the given task improves performance . 
Communication with the nearest neighbours fosters distributed coordination across the
group . 
6 . 3 . 2 . 2 Stigmergy : Indirect interactions
Direct communication between two simple agents can be via broadcast over the wireless and
explicit signaling , however interaction can also be more subtle and indirect . In stigmergy , 
communication proceeds by modifying the environment . In it , one of the agents modifies
188  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 8 Stigmergy in termite nest building . In ( 1 ) at an arbitrary time , the nest size is
A1 which triggers response R1 in the worker termite , which then adds another soil pellet to the
nest , thereby changing both the nest size and also any later response from the rest of the termites , 
as shown in ( 2 )  . In general as shown in ( 3 )  , the stimuli Rn at a nest size An is attributed to the
nest building by nearly the entire swarm and not one individual or a central executive . Therefore
coordination is not constant as in a networked system , but varies with the contribution of the entire
swarm . Also , a task which doesn ’ t have sufficient participation will fall short in crossing over the
minimum threshold of the response and will not be completed . Adapted from Bonabeau et al .  [ 40 ] 
the environment and the other responds to it . One of the foremost examples of stigmergy
is foraging in ants . Each ant deposits pheromones on the ground , making it possible for the
next ant to follow the trail . 
Another example is in termite nest building , as is shown in Figure 6 . 8 , where the worker
termites use their pheromone , to make soil pellets rolled from clay and mud . These pellets
are used to build their nests , by stacking pellets one on top of another . This process enables
diffusion of the pheromone and therefore stimulates the worker termites to accumulate more
pellets and carry on with the task of nest building . This stigmergic interaction works only
if the density of the termites is above a minimal threshold . If density is lower than the
threshold , then pheromones will start to evaporate , curbing stimulation and impeding nest
building . 
Therefore , communication in a swarm can be seen as action of an agent which modifies
the subsequent behaviour of one or more agents in the system . This can be by signalling or
by stigmergy . 
6 . 3 . 2 . 3 Emergence : Swarm behaviour is difficult to model
Swarming cannot be achieved by direct design , and needs inter-agent communication , which
is often not direct , such that the global behaviour is not programmed in for each single
agent . Rather it manifests with the interaction of the agents mutually and also with the
environment — the global behaviour emerges . Emergence is not a part of the definition of
a swarm , however rich complexity at the global level can be a virtue of the system and
can prove to be highly beneficial . Behaviour of a swarm is notoriously difficult to predict , 
and is still to be honed into an engineering tool . Emergence of a global behaviour is due to
the interactions of the agents with each other and the environment and cannot be arrived
at by summing behaviours of individual agents in the environment . Since emergence is a
key in behaviour-based approach , it is often seen as an extension of summing or layering of
encapsulated behaviours . While simple behaviours in single agent behaviour-based systems
as ‘ line following ’ and ‘ obstacle avoidance ’ can easily be designed with little experience , 
swarms lack such an advantage and even simple behaviours are often difficult to implement . 
 189
6 . 3 . 2 . 4 Phase change : Disorder to order
Aggregation in self ordered systems , towards a common goal , or preference for a particular
direction has been associated with thermodynamic phase change . The best example is from
physics , i . e .  , the alignment of ferromagnetic materials exposed to an external magnetic field . 
At the microscopic level , a given particle driven with a constant absolute velocity assumes
the average direction of particles in the neighbourhood of a given radius , subject some
random perturbation . The net momentum of the interacting particles is not conserved during
collision and leads to this kinetic phase change . Vicsek et al .  [ 336 ] report on their research
into ferromagnetic particles and suggest a thumb rule to identify the phase change . Their
research concludes that the average normalised velocity of the aggregate is very nearly zero
if direction of the motion of the individual particles are distributed randomly as in a typical
Maxwell distribution , but for ordered direction of the velocities the average normalised
velocity ( vavg ) over N particles is nearly 1 . 
vavg = 
1
N





X
N
k = 1
vi




 
= 1
6 . 3 . 2 . 5 Self organisation : A dynamically stable swarm
The achievement of order in the global level of the swarm due to individual interaction of
its agents is probably the most striking feature of the swarm . It is dynamically stable as
two phenomena occur in tandem , positive feedback and negative feedback . Positive feedback
encourages the formation of order in the swarm . Typical examples are finding a food source , 
which is accompanied by a group activity , which can be trail laying and trail following in
ants , and dancing in bees , where a bee finding a nectar source indicates so by dancing . 
Negative feedback equilibrates the positive feedback , and is seen as food source exhaustion , 
limited number of worker population , crowding at the food source etc . Self organisation relies
on sensing errors and fluctuations , and randomness is welcome . For example , in foraging , 
an ant following the trail of pheromones with some error may get lost only to find a newer
food source or a more efficient path to the food source . In birds it has been seen that sensor
noise leads to better accuracy in homing to a food source etc . 
It is to be noted that these are earmarks of swarm robotics , and not conditions or
prerequisites to generate a swarm . Also , none of them can exist independently and all are
interrelated phenomena . 
6 . 3 . 3 Metrics for swarm robotics
To quantify the study of a swarm , researchers have used various methodologies , however the
following four metrics [ 329 ] have been used time and again by a number research groups . 
1 . Order ( ψ ) or the angular order is an indicator of the alignment of the robots in a
collective and is a direct extension from Vicsek ’ s model [ 336 ]  . It is defined as ; 
ψ = 
1
N





X
N
k = 1
exp ( iθk ) 





where θk is the angular alignment of the k
th robot . ψ will take a value of 1 for a
perfectly ordered swarm and values closer to zero for nearly disordered ones . A value
closer to 1 will indicate a good quality swarm . 
190  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 9 Hierarchic social entropy ( S )  , is a measure of diversity of a group . S is less for
more compact systems and those which have an ordering of the members and reflect symmetry . 
Considering the following 3 orientations with the black circles as mobile robots , then Sa > Sb since
configuration-b is more compact compared to configuration-a and Sc > Sb as configuration-c lacks
the circular symmetry of configuration-b . While the value of S doesn ’ t convey much , a positive dS
dt
will suggest an unstable swarm , while a negative dS
dt will mean attaining order with increasing time
and therefore a stable and coherent swarm . 
2 . Hierarchic Social Entropy ( S ) is a measure of diversity and therefore positional order 
[ 26 ]  , as shown in Figure 6 . 9 . This method is derived from Shannon ’ s theory for
information uncertainty to measure societal diversity in heterogeneous systems of
mobile robots . To evaluate S , consider a diversity metric H ( R , h ) for a system of
robots , where for 2 robots i and j are a part of the same cluster if
kri − rjk ≤ h
and R is a society which contains these various clusters . H ( R , h ) is obtained by
summing over all clusters . 
H ( R , h )  = X
M
k = 1
pklog2 ( pk ) 
where pk is the proportion of robots in the k
th cluster and M is the number of clusters
for a given h . To obtain hierarchical social entropy S , H ( R , h ) is integrated from 0 to
∞ , 
S = 
Z ∞
0
H ( R , h ) dh
Since entropy must decrease with time a positive dS
dt will indicate an unstable swarm
while a negative dS
dt will relate to a stable and coherent swarm . Since both order and
entropy depend on geometric arrangement , in experiments it is evaluated with the
help of an overhead camera . 
3 . Average forward velocity of the geometric center of the swarm ( VG )  . A high ( VG ) will
reflect an efficiently moving swarm while a low ( VG ) will suggest lack of cohesion . 
4 . Size of the largest cluster , the largest distinguishable group will be an indicator of
cohesion in the swarm . 
An ideal swarm , will have high order denoting alignment in the swarm , nearly constant
entropy implying coherence , dS
dt nearly zero suggesting a lack of diversity , high swarm
velocity and one large cluster . 
 191
6 . 3 . 4 Swarm Engineering — Visions for a new technology
To employ artificial swarms as a technology , it has to be easily controllable , nearly
predictable and a dependable system with well-defined goals which are tailored to
commercial needs . Pioneers have attempted to study [ 15 , 16 ] and design [ 275 ] such
decentralised , on the go intelligence and efforts to integrate and manipulate organised animal
and insect societies with mobile robots has exploited the ANIMAT principles . The Robotic
Sheepdog project , where a flocking behaviour in the ducks was influenced by a robot and
the Insbot project where olfactory sensing allowed robots to find acceptance in cockroach
society , are vivid examples of engineering and manipulating naturally occurring swarms . 
However , engineering swarming behaviour to design dependable and nearly predictable
swarms of robots is not just difficult , but poses as an oxymoron since design principles
attempt to ensure high level of integrity and reliable performance of the given system while
swarming is the novelty in the collective agency which lacks in predictability . 
Therefore a system working on swarm engineering will need to be designed and validated
for a high level of assurance and also a safety critical stamping so that it doesn ’ t lead to
any unintended behaviour . Extrapolating a set of ‘ atomic ’ behaviours for a single robot to
swarms is futile because the next behavioural state of a swarm will depend on the recent
history and local conditions , thus reducing a design paradigm from a methodology to a
serendipity . A brute force , hit and trial approach which is preferably restricted to a known
environment will still need many attempts to perfect and yet may lack in a safety critical
stamping , is as follows : 
Choose Local Rules → Swarm Test → Desired Global Behaviour (  ?  ) 
Here , the Swarm Test can be conducted to some extent by simulations or on real robots , 
and this process can be made to continue until the desired global behaviour is obtained . 
Since swarming by definition lacks hierarchical command or a control structure , a quotient
of performance , robustness and vulnerability , or even defining a point of failure becomes
a self defeating task . Systems which have a high degree of behaviour-based elements are
typically emergent in response , and validating such a system is often context dependent
and lacks in a generality . Studies have confirmed that swarm intelligence affords much
higher levels of robustness and fault tolerance . On the flip side is the lack of ability to
control and mediate such a system . It is seen in nature that ants in their social niche are
excellent managers of their food supplies , and termites work in cooperation to build their
many layered catacomb-like nests and migratory birds travel across swathes to reach a more
welcoming habitat . Therefore , nature once again serves as a great motivator which begs us
to search for principles and design paradigms to ensure dependability and performance if
we are to use robot swarms as a technology . 
Winfield [ 365 ] named this field of study , and developed methods to manipulate and
engineer a group of robots to form a swarm by simple wireless communications where each
robot can broadcast its own unique ID and also that of its nearest neighbours over a network
such as telnet to form swarms as seen in Figure 6 . 10 . With minimal information exchange
over the network and without the robots requiring absolute or relative position coordinates , 
the swarm acts coherently as a single entity . Leading to a highly robust and scalable swarm , 
the resources for which increase linearly with swarm size . This type of swarming is not based
on any aspects of navigation , but the robots perform operations which are close derivatives of
navigation and path planning . Such type of implementation in the Linuxbots lead to similar
results in a real-world situation over noisy communications channels . Therefore , Winfield
suggested that systems which rely on emergence should not be more difficult to validate
192  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 10 Emergent encapsulation over an adhoc network . Over a wireless network
with only information of the robot ’ s ID and that of its nearest neighbours and the condition
that connectivity is established only over a single hop , the robots ( a ) gradually approach and ( b ) 
demonstrate emergent behaviour to encapsulate the obstacle . Both images from Winfield [ 365 ]  , 
used with permission from Springer . 
than conventional complex systems , and that some characteristics of swarm robotics affords
more dependability than traditional systems . 
Analysis for failure mode is not well defined for a swarm . To explain the concept
of dependability of a swarm , Winfield defines 2 parameters ,  ( 1 ) liveness and ( 2 ) safety . 
Liveness is the property of exhibiting derisable behaviours . This would need mathematical
analysis at two levels , agent level and swarm level . While a single robot yields to stability
analysis , there is a lack of methods for analysis of swarm stability . Though stochastic analysis
may find some appreciation , simulation is strongly discouraged and only considered as a
tool for understanding and prototyping . Safety is the property of not exhibiting undesirable
behaviours . While it may seem that liveness and safety are reciprocal of each other , it is not
so by definition and a system which is safe may lack in liveness , therefore doing less , albeit
safely . Tackling safety is akin to hazard analysis . Swarming by its manifestation confirms
robustness and flexibility , so failure of an agent or lack of cohesion with some agents will not
deter the swarm from its behaviour . Therefore , Winfield suggests taking a constructivist
approach for swarm engineering . Learn about swarm behaviour by designing swarm , where
both processes work in tandem . 
As a conclusion and in an attempt to overcome the issue of dependability , a way out is
by designing robots with internal models , which can do a quick test by simulation prior
to committing to a task . In hindsight , such may obstruct the fundamentals of swarm
intelligence and the inherent novelty of the process , where the solitary agent lacks the
understanding of the group behaviour and emergence is the key to intelligence . However , 
robots with internal states may be the answer to ethical robots , and discussed in Chapter
8 . 
Working independently at about the same time as Winfield , Kazadi [ 174 ] suggested
methods to engineer the path of a swarm of robots by tracking a plume of gas . In his
doctoral research Kazadi formalised swarm engineering as a two-step approach . 
 193
1 . Step-1 the swarm condition as an extension of the problem definition , which will lead
to the formation of a swarm of agents which is capable of carrying out the given task
2 . Step-2 produce behaviour ( s ) that satisfy the above condition
These two steps can also be seen in Reynolds ’ boids [ 275 ]  . The first two rules define the
swarm condition ; in the third rule each boid attempts to stay close to the flock members
which can only be achieved by velocity matching . Likewise , Winfield ’ s swarming behaviour
over wireless communications to form an adhoc network can also be seen as a two-step
approach , where as a first step each robot can broadcast its own ID and also that of its
nearest neighbours . In the second step connectivity has to be only a single hop , which ensures
one single large cluster and group cohesion . The first step confirms the robots ’ ability to
participate in a swarm . The second is usually relaying information , which enables group
cohesion . The second step leads to the formation of swarms . This has also been reported in
other studies [ 237 ]  . 
As emergence is a common feature to both swarm engineering and behaviour-based
robotics and both are bottom-up approaches , it is often seen as an overlapping discipline . 
However , this is not entirely correct . Behaviour-based robotics is more intuitive than a
formal paradigm and targets the development of a single working prototype . In sheer
contrast , swarm engineering is aimed to produce a general set of conditions which may
be used to generate various swarm designs , and as a second step , design behaviours which
satisfy the previous conditions , which with an appreciable degree of certainty will accomplish
the given goal ( s )  . 
Since Winfield and Kazadi , two broad methods to engineer a swarm have found interest
across a number of research groups . These are by ( 1 ) addition of behaviours and ( 2 ) 
evolutionary methods . 
For the first one , extending on Reynolds ’ Boids and Mataric ’ s Nerd Herd , an additivity of
behaviours seems a good design methodology for swarms . Turgut et al .  [ 329 ] design flocking
behaviour based on artificial physics which structures Reynolds ’ boid model . The swarm is
characterised by a virtual force vector ( f )  ; 
f = αp + βh + γg ( 6 . 1 ) 
which is the addition of behaviours , p is proximal control , h is the alignment vector and g
is the goal direction and α , β and γ are weight factors which can be arbitrary or tunable . 
Proximal control behaviour assumes that the robot can perceive the relative position , the
range and the bearing of its neighbours in close proximity and use it to avoid collisions
while maintaining cohesion between robots . This is done using an omnidirectional camera
and short range IR sensors . For a generalisation , considering k robots , for the i
th robot with
range ( di ) and bearing ( φi ) it is given as the vectorial sum of all virtual forces : 
p = 
X
k
i = 1
pie
jφi 
( 6 . 2 ) 
where pi may be modelled as a potential field with inverse function of distance ( di ) or
other heuristics . However it is always characterised with a desired distance ddes which is
the minimum distance each robot can move without colliding with its nearest neighbour . 
Therefore , pi
is repulsive when di < ddes and attractive otherwise : 
pi = 



−ve for di > ddes 
+ ve for di < ddes


 
( 6 . 3 ) 
194  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
The Swarm Robots
A robot for forming swarms is marked by simple design . It often lacks multiple
sensors , light weight , mostly uses cross complied program codes on low powered
microcontrollers , low cost and is typically made up of differential drive robots which are
limited to behaviours of navigation and path planning . The individual ability of each
robot is sized down , anticipating that the swarm will be able to manifest novelty as an
emergent property , beyond the ability of the individual robot . Researchers have used
fleets of e-pucks , Khepera and Pioneer to form swarms . 
FIGURE 6 . 11 Alice , building microsized robots has drawn interest from the late 1990s . Alice
has dimensions of 2 cm x 2 cm x 2 cm and was developed at EPFL between 1998 and 2004 . 
CC image courtesy . 
Making a robot platform specifically for swarming capabilities has been the trend
over the last decade . Winfield and Holland developed the Linuxbot architecture . These
were robots with wireless and could be controlled over a network such as telnet . The
Linuxbots could communicate over the local WLAN ( 12 Mbits / s ) and form aggregations
over this network of wireless IPs . 
FIGURE 6 . 12 Robots with the wireless module and Linuxbot . the image on the left is
of a robot with the wireless module [ 358 ]  , and the one on the right is of Linuxbot [ 365 ]  . Used
with permission from Elsevier and with permission from Springer respectively . 
 195
Turgut et al .  [ 328 ] developed the Kobot as a differential drive robot with 2 DC
motors . It is controlled with the PIC microcontroller and a wireless module and is
lightweight at 350 grams . 
FIGURE 6 . 13 20 Kobots . The Kobot with a 12 cm diameter and 350 grams is lightweight and
easy to maneuver and is equipped with 2 primary sensory systems .  ( 1 ) Infra Red Short Range
Sensing , with 8 IR sensors located at 45 degree intervals around the base which can detect
objects within a range of 21 cms and can distinguish robots from obstacles .  ( 2 ) Virtual Heading
Sensor is composed of a digital compass and a wireless module and the robot ’ s heading with
the sensed North is broadcast over the wireless . The Kobot was designed with its physics-based
simulator CoSS and nearly every experiment is also supported with simulations in CoSS . 
FIGURE 6 . 14 s-bots forming swarm-bot configuration for passing over a gap is
reminscent of chain formation in ants . Image courtesy , CC
BY-SA 3 . 0 license . 
196  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 6 . 15 The footbot is a part of the Swarmanoid project and it is equipped with ( 1 ) an
omnidirectional camera ,  ( 2 ) a beacon ,  ( 3 ) range and bearing system ,  ( 4 ) a ring of RGB-LED ,  
( 5 ) a ring of proximity and light sensors ,  ( 6 ) Treels ,  ( 7 ) cameras for ceiling and front ,  ( 8 ) 
distance scanner ,  ( 9 ) gripper add on facility ,  ( 10 ) RFID and ( 11 ) ground sensors [ 97 ]  . Image
courtesy Francesco Mondada at EPFL , Lausanne . 
The s-bot was designed with each robot comprising about 100 major parts . It was
spread over 116 mm diameter and was controlled by an ARM processor with 64 MB of
RAM running at 400 MHz , and consumed 700 mW power . The s-bot was equipped with
a gripper and the goal of the project was to develop swarms by physical interconenctions
— each robot gripping to the next to achieve goals . The gripper was a novelty of the
design and was used to pick up objects , transfer objects to another robot and also
physically link up to another robot if such a collective need arises , viz .  , crossing over
an obstacle as shown in Figure 6 . 14 . The s-bots are able to navigate , grasp objects
and communicate with each other and if required physically connect to each other
using the gripper to form a super-entity , the swarm-bot . Mondada et al . suggests that
a swarm-bot is composed of anywhere between 2 and 35 physically connected s-bots
and is superior in performance to a single s-bot , particularly in exploration , navigation
and transportation . The Swarmanoid project ( 2006-2010 ) at IRIDIA , Brussels , led to
the foot-bot , the hand-bot and the eye-bot . The footbot is an improvement from the
Kobot design and s-bot designs . As shown in Figure 6 . 15 , it has a distance scanner , a
proximity and light sensor , range and bearing system and a gripper add-on facility like
the s-bots . 
 197
Alignment behaviour considers that the robot can measure its own heading angle ( θi ) 
and align to the average for k robots , 
h = 
Pk
i = 1 e
jθi






Pk
i = 1 e
jθi


 
 
 
 
( 6 . 4 ) 
Goal direction , for simple scenarios g is not required as the former two behaviours are
sufficient for forming swarms ( less than 10 agents )  . However this behaviour serves as a
tool to engineer larger coherent swarms to desired results . The goal direction is available
to a minority of the robots . If the robot is aware of the direction to the goal , then this
tallies to the angle corresponding to the goal ( ∠g )  . Otherwise it corresponds to the angle
for the average heading alignment ( ∠h )  . The informed robots relay the goal direction and
therefore can influence a significant section of the swarm towards moving towards the goal . 
Leadership in the natural world , in such animals as cats , dogs and monkeys , is marked by
vocalisation and gestures to mark out territory or in attempts at claiming a higher portion
of the hunt etc . In flocks of birds and schools of fish leadership is oftentimes not explicit , 
due to larger body size , vocalisation , ability to dominate the group etc . but is implicit . 
Leadership is naturally formed from informed agency when a minority of agents in a swarm
or group are aware of added information from the environment and use it to lead the group
to food , a safe migration route and newer nesting locations . Studies have shown that in
honeybees , as low as 5% of the swarm can guide the group to the location for a new nest , 
and only a handful of members in fish schools are seen to supervise foraging behaviour
of the school . In fishes , this emergence of leadership is implicit and is not accompanied by
any signaling mechanism or high-level transfer of information , while honeybees communicate
with a honing sound accompanied by rapid movements which seem to be a ‘ dancing stance ’  . 
In migratory birds , the older and more experienced members take on the role of natural
leaders in tracking migratory routes , while similar studies in cow herds has shown that
implementing a behaviour on a minority of the cows can lead to guiding the herd to a
desired collection behaviour or a preferred location , Correll et al . fitted a minority of cows
with a mountable device which induced stress , this increased the tendency for the cows
to form aggregates and move towards the center of the herd . In all of these scenarios , the
leadership is due to the implicit information in the minority of agents and is born out of
limited cognitive ability with none to very little transfer of information . It is a roboticist ’ s
dream to replicate such informed agents . A stumbling block is the lack of information of
animal and insect social behaviour and preferences . Therefore the attempt is to design
mathematical models [ 74 , 80 ]  . Celikkanat et al .  [ 63 ] model informed agency as the closest
neighbours aligning to the same heading angle , while the informed robots align to the
goal direction . This manipulation of an informed agent may seem like a ‘ follow the leader ’ 
behaviour , but it is decentralised and not a behaviour which has been programmed into
the robots , and it is an emergent phenomenon . Simulations suggests noise in the proximal
control behaviour with no alignment behaviour has a surprisingly positive tendency to align
the collective swarm behaviour . In contrast , the alignment behaviour is most appreciable in
larger swarms , while smaller swarms , are governed by goal direction behaviour and , without
any alignment behaviour in smaller swarms the robots achieve better accuracy . Therefore , 
low ratio of informed robots leads to fragmentation of the swarm . This result in robotics
aligns with that in biology . It was also seen that accuracy is independent of the flock size
for a fixed ratio of informed robots , while accuracy improved with increasing numbers of
informed agents . Hence , the phenomenon of influencing a swarm with informed agents is
scalable , flexible and is also robust , though performance falls off on reducing the number of
informed robots . 
198  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Employing informed agency one can engineering a swarm for a desired behaviour or to a
desired location either by increasing the participation of the informed robots — increasing
γ or by tuning the ratio of informed robots to total robots ( ρ )  , which has direct influence
on the collective behaviour . On increasing the weight factor γ , it was seen that swarms
with moderately low ratio of informed robots ( ρ ∼ 10% ) show improvement in accuracy . 
In contrast swarms with a high number of informed robots ( ρ > 80% ) or very low number
of informed robots ( ρ < 5% ) are immune to the change in weight factor . Likewise , on
increasing ρ , it was seen the accuracy increases asymptotically for swarms with ρ > 40%
and it converges to a maximum value around 80% to 90% . 
A special case of informed agency is migratory birds , as they have an additional piece of
information obtained from the environment , that of direction to goal or homing behaviour
determined from earth ’ s magnetic field . Since every bird in the flock has this additional
information , all the agents are informed agents . Models of long-range migration [ 128 ] have
demonstrated that for sufficiently large flock size , noise in proximal sensing is suppressed , 
sensor noise in homing leads to better accuracy and average speed of the flock is more or
less near to that of the individual agent . 
A second approach is by using evolutionary methods , where an artificial neural network
works to improve solitary agent behaviour , thereby improving the swarm performance . 
Despite the novelty inherent in swarm robotics , lower net costs and higher efficiency , 
experiments and maintenance of a large number of robots will always be a hurdle for research
and applications . Researchers contend to study very large swarms in simulations due to
economic and logistic considerations . Simulations are insufficient to study swarming , since
they can never replicate the intricacies of the real world in its entirety . Even then simulations
have been used as a tool to study and to have a partial grasp on the implementation level
of behaviour , swarm cohesion , synthetic leadership etc . 
Two most popular simulators are ( 1 ) Stage [ 334 ] and ( 2 ) ARGoS [ 264 ]  . Stage , a 2 . 5
dimensional simulator of the Player / Stage / Gazebo project has been a benchmark software
for swarm robotics simulations . Version 3 of Stage is built on OpenGL and FLTK . It could
run 1000 robots at about real time and 100 , 000 robots at slower than real time scales . 
Code reusability and open source licensing for Stage encouraged crowdsourcing and various
popular robots , such as Pioneer , Khepera , Roomba etc .  , were available online . Stage was
very good for navigation and simulation of simple behaviours . The shortcomings were ( 1 ) 
that all designs was predominantly extended from blocks and making more complex robot
designs were not very user friendly and ( 2 ) sophistications such as gripping and self assembly
were not possible . 
Autonomous Robots Go Swarming ( ARGoS ) a simulator and control interface for swarm
robotics in three dimensions was developed by Pinciroli et al . at IRIDIA , Belgium . It was
designed for the robots of the Swarmanoid project and in addition it also supported e-pucks
and few of the other popular robots . ARGoS has an open source license and runs on Linux . 
Unlike its predecessors , ARGoS employs a number of physics engine , viz . ODE , Chipmunk
etc , and it was designed as a multiple threaded architecture . The visual interface is based
on Qt4 and OpenGL , which supported scripts in C +  +  . ARGoS can simulate 10 , 000 robots
faster than real time and has been tested to simulate as many as 100 , 000 robots . 
SUMMARY
1 . Many robot systems are important since they can achieve lot more than single robot
systems . 
2 . Networked robotics and ubiquitous robotics are the buzz words which are models
 199
to unify robotics with embedded electronics and other ambient intelligence via the
internet and also over local networks . 
3 . Swarm robotics is a very direct motivation from birds and insect colonies and it is
marked by high degree of emergence and novelty in group behaviour . 
4 . Engineering a swarm is difficiult compared to a group of robots , and newer techniques
are being explored by researchers .  ( 1 ) Informed agency and ( 2 ) Evolutionary
techniques are two popular routes exploited by AI scientists . 
NOTES
1 . Reynolds ’ boid model is the first flocking model outside biology and natural sciences , 
it was designed for computer animation and it was published in ACM Journal of
Computer Graphics . The animation required resources which increased nearly as a
square of the boid population . 
2 . Sensor noise is seen to act as a desired evil in swarm robotics and researchers have
time and again reported that noise aids in achieving accuracy to a desired goal location
and also improved the alignment of the swarm . 
3 . The robustness of a swarm can be quantified with the parameter called swarm repair
time which is defined as the average time taken for the swarm to regain its tendencies
as were prior to the agent ( s ) failure . It can be analytically shown that swarm repair
time is linearly dependent on swarm size . 
4 . Trianni , in his doctoral dissertation , offers another classification of multirobot
systems :  
( a ) Collective robotics , characterised by explicit interagent communication 
( b ) Second-order robotics , such as self assembling robots and self reconfigurable
systems , which are physically connected robots 
( c ) Swarm robotics , interplay of agents and environment leads to a nouvelle global
behaviour
5 . Since heading angle measurement also involves the participation of a wireless module , 
exchange of information such as heading angle or robot ’ s unique ID on the wireless
network both work towards implicit cooperation in the swarm . 
6 . Developing a collective perception in a swarm by collating a large number of local
perceptions , such as building a global map with local sensor values of the individual
agents ,  ‘ a swarm SLAM ’ as of now is very limited . 
7 . Nasseri and Asadpour [ 251 ] have reported design of ‘ selfish ’ and ‘ social ’ informed
agency by tinkering with the intensity of the potential field function . 
8 . Onyx parachutes have employed swarming techniques for landing maneuvers
EXERCISES
1 . What are the distinguishing features between a swarm of robots and a group of robots . 
From a behaviour point of view which one can be engineered easily ? 
C H A P T E R 7
Human-robot interaction
and robots for human
society 
 “ In the end , robots may have to be much smarter to appear comfortably
dumb .  ” 
– Robin Murphy [ 208 ]  
 “ You can take my androids on planes — the torso in the suitcase and the head
in carry-on ” 
– Hiroshi Ishiguro [ 252 ] 
7 . 1 HUMAN-ROBOT INTERACTION
T
he last few chapters have discussed simple AI agency , robot design , programming and
machine learning techniques to build robots which can negotiate low-level tasks such
as navigation , easy engagement and manipulation in their local environment and formation
of robot groups and swarms . In the new millennium , robots are poised to accomplish
much more by either bonding with human beings or alternatively finding unique niches
for themselves , in prospect making important contributions to human society . This chapter
focuses on human robot relations and how robots can contribute to human society — in
the Asimovian spirit . In a way , this is a first part of human robot interactions and Chapter
8 is a second part , in continuation of this chapter . 
Human beings are unique , and are the only agency which boasts of a high degree of
autonomy and the highest level of intelligent behaviour , as shown in Figure 7 . 1 . Therefore , 
robots designed for effective human-robot interaction will have to address both these facets
and match up to human beings in appearance , autonomy and intelligent behaviour . Unlike
the robots discussed previously , social robots are designed to respond to the perception
of the people interacting with them . Acceptance of the social robot as human being or at
least approaching human-like interaction is the underlying key to effective , long-term and
fulfilling human-robot interaction . The PR2 robot playing billiards with the developers of
the erstwhile Willow Garage and winning , and President Obama meeting with the ASIMO , 
as shown in Figure 7 . 2 are some of the endearing freeze frames of human-robot interaction . 
Social robotics are designed such that they attempt to mirror human emotions and
202  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 1 Intelligence vs . autonomy . Human beings have high intelligence and also high
autonomy , like no other animal or AI beings . To effectively participate in a society with human
beings , robots will have to match both of these . Adapted from Long and Kelly [ 207 ]  . 
empathy by manipulating the interacting human ’ s expressions and intonations , and are
usually designed to work in a social role or function , viz .  , nurse robot , companion robot , 
museum guide robot etc . Mirroring and imitating behaviour was also seen in ANIMAT
models and in swarm robotics . This chapter will discuss how mirroring works as a tool
for social acceptance . Mirroring is also the basis of the ‘ learn by observing ’ and ‘ learn by
demonstration ’ approaches in machine learning and it is a marks towards higher modes of
cognition and conscious behaviour , as will be again discussed in Chapter 9 . 
In contrast to social robots are the explorer robots which chart unknown terrains on a
far off planet or a very difficult terrain on Earth . They are designed with sleek hardware
and controlled from mission base which is usually located far away . 
A lesser variant of the explorer robot are the delivery robots which are becoming
commonplace for redundant and repetitive delivery jobs are controlled over two modes , 
local navigation and global navigation . A further distinction can be seen in the search and
rescue robots which are tethered and designed on simple and easy to use technology than
GPS driven snazzy gizmos . 
It is expected that in the next few decades natural human interactions such as voice , 
vision , face expressions , etc .  , will form seamless , calm , context aware and ubiquitous
human-robot social interactions . Robots that can attend to domestic chores such as cleaning
the house , attending to the lawn , cooking etc . are not affordable as of now . However with
newer technology and mass production the price will be around a few thousand dollars
and therefore more manageable for a middle income household . This chapter highlights
human-robot interaction and service to society . 
Human-robot interactions can be classified as ; 
1 . Anthropomorphic humanoid robots such as Kodomoroid , ROMAN , Inkha and
KASPAR [ 86 ]  , which are designed with human facial features and their interaction
 203
FIGURE 7 . 2 President Obama meets ASIMO , at the Miraikan National Museum of Emerging
Science and Innovation , in Tokyo , Japan , photograph courtesy www . whitehouse . gov . 
with the human user is over vision and voice channels . They appeal as a near-human
beings . 
2 . Zoomorphic robots such as AIBO , Kismet and Paro [ 135 , 369 ]  , which fill in as
alternatives to pets by imitating care and compassion , and are most suitable as
companions for the elderly . Paro has found application in psychological therapy of
the depressed and those suffering from dementia ; AIBO has been used for therapy in
autistic children . 
3 . Caricatured robots such as CERO shown in Figure 7 . 13 and Sparky shown in Figure
7 . 9 have minimal design and bare basic facial features . These robots are inexpensive
and easier to build and program , and they target few primary behaviours rather than
a wide assortment as seen in Anthropomorphic or Zoomorphic robots . 
4 . Functional robots which are more like smart machines engaging in jobs for human
society such as search and rescue , delivery , exploration , surveying and mapping etc . 
They are supervised by a human being over a global network , but lack emotional
exchange of information . 
The first two are domains of social robotics and are marked by response to natural
human interactions , which are underscored by emotive exchanges over voice , vision and in
some scenarios also text . Social robots have found various applications and can be seen at
work in the care and hospitality industry , household robots , office assistant robots , etc .  , as
shown in Figure 7 . 3 . 
204  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 3 Robots in society . An artist ’ s sketch of future involvement of robots in society :  ( a ) 
assistive robots ,  ( b ) playmate robots in child education ,  ( c ) robots for mentoring and assistance in
manipulation tasks ,  ( d ) robots that teach movement exercises ,  ( e ) personal robots for the elderly ,  
( f ) robots for surveillance and protection of children and adults . Image from Schaal [ 289 ]  , reprinted
by permission of the publisher Taylor & Francis Ltd .  ,  . 
7 . 1 . 1 Distributed cognition
Human-human interactions happen over a number of channels :  ( 1 ) voice , which includes
words and intonation ,  ( 2 ) vision , pertaining to appearance , body language and facial
expressions and ( 3 ) touch such as tactile and proprioception . These three channels must
work in unison to ensure socially acceptable interactions . 
Distributed cognition [ 153 ] considers the working of such social functions as an emergence
over a number of streams of information working in near parallel . As an example , a social
robot eliciting a state of happiness will attempt to convey this with face expressions , muscle
actuation , use of particular vocabulary to include expressions , words and positive intonation . 
Distributed cognition has similarities to behaviour-based approaches [ 160 ] since both rely
on emergence from superpositioning of a number of near independent modules working in
parallel , also both find inspiration from mother nature , insects & animals for behaviour
based robotics and human social interactions for distributed cognition . 
7 . 2 SOCIAL ROBOTICS
Kismet , shown in Figure 7 . 4 was the first social robot , with anthropomorphic features it was
designed as a friendly pet and it could mirror the empathy and emotion of the interacting
human being , thereby creating a fake sense of attention , care and attachment . 
The long list of social robots developed over the last two decades since Kismet , shows
that social robots have found acceptance in human society as shown in Figure 7 . 5 and
promise to be the next big technological revolution . However , that raises questions , is the
social robot merely a sleek and expensive toy fitted with modern technology ? If such robots
 205
FIGURE 7 . 4 Brazeal ’ s Kismet . This zoomorphic robot was the first of its kind . Image courtesy
wikimedia . org , Creative Commons CC0 1 . 0 Universal Public Domain Dedication license . 
FIGURE 7 . 5 Avenues of social robots , typically target a niche to supplement human lives . Other
than functioning as loyal servants , they have also found roles as assistants , companions , pets and
also as stage performers and artists . Shown here are the Wakamaru on the left which was designed
to help the elderly . It can talk , has a built in vocabulary of about 10 , 000 words and has even ‘ acted ’ 
in a Japanese play , and on the right is the Care-O-Bot robot which is modelled to do the job of a
nurse and carer . Both images courtesy wikimedia . org , CC license
206  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
are readily accepted in our society , wouldn ’ t it blur out the distinction between a toy and
a living being ? 
Non-humanoid robots with little or no social skills have been very successful in both the
industry and domestic sectors as functional machines and humanoids as ASIMO and PR2
on the other hand have only resulted in sleek and expensive toys and therefore , do we really
need a social robot ? 
Another engaging inquiry is that , social robots are based on mimicking human
expressions and emotions , which are obviously not felt by the robot , and are not genuine . 
Therefore are social robots really social ? These inquiries form the social robot paradox , and
are the reasons to attempt to develop ethical and conscious agents . These questions are
tackles in Chapters 8 and 9 . 
Duffy suggests , that a social robot will always fake human traits . However high-quality
synthetic human social behaviour through increasing behavioural complexity will make it
seem more real than a well-designed gimmick . Therefore , such an artifact may beg our
perception and our social ego to see it as being intelligent , with emotional states , and
probably even appealing as conscious being . Robots designed and built with no reference
to the human beings which shares their physical space may not exhibit behaviours which
can be interpreted as artificially intelligent . A human assessment of a robot ’ s intelligence
will inherently bring in his / her own interpretation of intelligence , blendedin with a social
quotient . For example a robot that doesn ’ t reply to a social greeting as ‘ hello ’  , may not
be seen as very congenial and subsequently be perceived as nothing more than a machine . 
Therefore social robots can also be seen as the convergence of artificial and natural emotive
abilities . 
Social robots vary . Some are visually iconic while others are more realistic with facial
expressions to elicit artificial emotional states and with synthetic skin and hair . The design
of social robots is either focused on human-like appearance or human-like manners , with few
robots matching up to both . At one end of the spectrum is the android research of Ishiguro
and Mac Dorman which puts the emphasis on human like appearance . At the other end
of the spectrum are CERO and Care-O-bot which have minimal human likeness , but they
both make up for it in effective dynamics and orientation to convey human behaviour and
intentions . 
Humanoid robots , be it humanoids with legs such as the ASIMO or a human bust
on wheels such as the PR2 and Wakamaru , have clearly found more social acceptance . It
has been seen that employing the humanoid form inherently defines the robot as having
some degree of social functionality . A human like face with lively features and a human-like
exoskeleton ensure that even the most mundane interactions such as walking or blinking the
eyes will apparently serve as rudiments of a social function , and be perceived as a human
behaviour . 
State-of-the-art robot , such as Pepper shown in Figure 7 . 6 is a high end social robot
and is one of the best examples of a humanoid with a face . Pepper has superlative skills
to identify and reflect human emotions and is arguably the best social robot to date . It
was developed by Aldebaran for SoftBank , a Japanese company . Pepper is 28 kg and 1 . 2
m tall . It can identify emotion by analysing facial expressions and voice intonations . Priced
at 198 , 000 yen or about $1700 , it is a promise that social robots will be affordable for the
middle class in the next few years . It is equipped with face-recognition technology and a
number of sensors , camera and voice recorder . Pepper is equipped with learning tools rather
than being programmed for specific tasks . This helps it to gradually get acquainted with
human way of life and the various social and cultural functions . Pepper is designed to be
 207
FIGURE 7 . 6 Pepper is a state-of-the-art social robot . It works on detecting and mirroring the
expression and emotion of the human being which is interacting with it . It is priced at $1700 , and
as of the summer of 2016 , Softbank had sold over 7000 pepper robots . Image courtesy photozou . jp , 
CC-by-SA license . 
human centric , to interact with people and maintain a state of ‘ feel good ’ and happiness . It
is not meant to be a personal robot or a domestic robot for household chores . 
In zoomorphic robots , the social interaction is more or less based on mirroring . Kismet
and Paro do not convey humanly intentions verbally but they are designed to communicate
in non-verbal mode such as eye movement , purring and making affirmative noises etc . 
Similarly , for AIBO which is designed as a pet dog , the robot ’ s behaviour is designed to be
unexpected and sufficiently complex , as that of a real pet dog , to keep the owners interested
in watching it . 
7 . 2 . 1 Design for social robots
As shown in Figure 7 . 7 , social robotics involves a number of disciplines and a social robot
is both a work of art as well as technology . As design paradigm , it should be situated in
a social environment with amicable human beings and the interactions should be in near
real time . Social expectations and tailoring emotional interactions , the robot should appeal
as a socially aware entity and broadly adhere to friendly interactions . Most social robotics
research groups control this aspect by making the robot appear as a child or a pet , thereby
preventing intense interactions which may demand higher levels of cognition and richer
emotive modes . Some designers explicitly target the user ’ s attention by engaging in eye
contact or encourage interaction with a playful smile . The contrast has also worked well
where the robot doesn ’ t attempt to explicitly foster user reaction , but engages in human-like
tasks to direct user attention , but in a more implicit manner . 
Motivation has been from the study of infants , conversing with care givers and study of
208  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 7 Collective and social robotics is the confluence of number of disciplines . Adapted
from Fong et . al [ 107 ] 
animal-human interactions , the design paradigm can is broadly dictated by ,  ( 1 ) aesthetics ,  
( 2 ) facial expressions and ( 3 ) language processing , all three serving as a cue to convey the
human emotional state , humanly intention and focus the avenue the robot was designed for . 
Other than these , a social robot should be easy to set up and control and should supplement
the human way of life . 
7 . 2 . 1 . 1 Aesthetics
More than 60% of human-human interaction is non-verbal , via facial expressions , gestures
and tonality , etc .  , that makes aesthetics a top priority in designing artificial beings to
support human society . In human-robot communications , the robots should be human-like
in appearance and correspond to human aesthetic values . A contradiction to this was found
in 1970 by Masahiro Mori . Mori observed that human emotional response to the appearance
of an AI agent as it is made more natural is with enthusiasm until a critical point is reached at
which the agent ’ s appearance is found to be disgusting . However , as the agent ’ s appearance
continues towards natural , the human emotional response once again changes from disgust
to enthusiasm and appreciation . This phenomena of change in human emotional response to
disgust and then back to delight is named ‘ The Uncanny Valley ’  [ 214 ]  , as shown in Figure
7 . 8 . 
The following are the salient features concerning the aesthetics of a social robot : 
1 . Face type to appeal to human beings and trigger a social response , the robot should
have a cute face . This also helps in tailoring the response of the human being , as
though he / she is interacting with an infant ( Robota , Pepper etc .  ) or a pet ( Paro , 
Kismet etc .  )  . However , this has not always been true and robots such as CERO and
Wakamaru have connected well with humans even without a cute face . 
2 . Appearance and human likeness . Current day technology makes it difficult and
often financially prohibitive for robots to have both human-like appearance and also
 209
FIGURE 7 . 8 The uncanny valley . The dotted curve is for moving agency , while the continuous
curve is for the ones which are static .  ( 1 ) Is an industrial arm robot — both moving and static , no
human likeness ,  ( 2 ) is a smiley face with no really discernible human traits but conveying humanly
emotions ,  ( 3 ) is a stuffed humanoid toy ,  ( 4 ) is a humanoid robot such as ASIMO ,  ( 5 ) caricatures
— both static and moving ,  ( 6 ) is a zombie ,  ( 7 ) is a corpse ,  ( 8 ) is a prosthetic hand — both static
and moving ,  ( 9 ) is a Japanese Bunraku puppet and ( 10 ) is a healthy adult human being . Adapted
from Robertson [ 278 ] 
human-like manners . Appearance has found favour in android research and has led
to the development of human-like silicone skin , human like skin pigmentation , human
like eyes which can blink and focus etc . 
3 . Degrees of freedom ( DoF )  . To facilitate for a wide variety of expressions the
robot ’ s face and bodily gestures need to have a several degrees of freedom . For example
ROMAN has a 4 DoF neck . This ensures natural gestures , such as smiling with a nod
of the head for greeting and affirmation . 
4 . Tailoring basic behaviour . The robot may be designed and programmed , styled
on behavioural and social response of a human infant or a pet . This would enable the
robot to dynamically engage with human beings in social interactions both over verbal 
( voice , tonality , use of power words etc .  ) and non-verbal ( gesture , touch etc .  ) modes . 
This approach limits the scope of interaction , but helps to establish a realistic limit
on the domain of human-robot interactions , as an example a user will not attempt
to discuss the stock market with a robot which is designed to look and behave as an
infant nor would a user attempt to teach musical scores to an AIBO , which is designed
as a dog . 
5 . Fake intentionality . The robot must convey intentionality to suggest social
exchanges , such that the behaviour of the robot should be consistent and predictable
as per known social norms . For example , a greeting should meet with a similar greeting
— a nod of the head should meet with a similar nod and a smile in affirmation , likewise
if the human user expresses grief , the robot should respond with empathy etc . 
6 . Regulate response . As technology is limited and the robot cannot be as good
as human beings , the robot should selectively engage in human interactions , thus , 
210  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 9 Sparky and Feelix . Sparky on the left and Feelix on the right , both these robots
have cartoonish actuated faces and that forms the social binding in human-robot interactions . Both
images from Fong et al .  [ 107 ]  , used with permission . 
avoiding interactions that are either too intense or too gentle1 
. Of particular
importance are attention switching and a notion of autonomy both of which should
be subtly controlled with changes in direction of head , neck and eye gaze etc . 
7 . Learning . A social robot must be equipped with a learning mechanism as in
ANIMATs . This would enable it to acquire more sophisticated social skills as it
interacts with the human beings and the environment . 
8 . Social acceptance . While humanoids have found more social acceptance , Paro and
KASPAR have appealed to those suffering from dementia and autism , respectively . 
Designing the aesthetics for a social robot should be strongly related to the application
and the niche it is meant to target . 
7 . 2 . 1 . 2 Facial traits
Attention switching , to meet the gaze of a human obersver and mirroring human expressions
does help in establishing a ground for social interactions but to derive meaning from a facial
expression or action will help it to reach closer to the domains of human-human interactions . 
Determining the psychological state using facial expression is an effective non-verbal
interaction in day-to-day interactions . Human facial traits can be incorporated into a
social robot using a number of techniques :  ( 1 ) Haar feature-based cascade classifiers ,  ( 2 ) 
Eigenfaces ,  ( 3 ) Active Shape Methods and Facial Action Coding System ( FACS )  . 
The method of Haar classifiers proposed by Viola and Jones for real-time detection has
1This does suggest that a robot that can spot sarcasm and answer in a repartee with some consistency
has crossed over a threshold of humanly social interactions and has now started to appreciate and enjoy
human social behaviour . 
 211
come to be the standard for face detection algorithms and is the default in various image
processing software suites . Though easy to implement , Haar classifiers are not exhaustive
and lack in robustness , with the best results being for frontal views of faces . The method of
Eigenface uses the image matrix of faces and compares it to a calibration and is accompanied
with a pre-existing large database . 
Active shape models ( ASM ) are statistical models of the shape of objects as defined
by a point distribution where the shape of an object is reduced to a set of points , and
such methods have been widely used to analyse facial images . To convey a human emotion
the relative positioning of critical points on the human face are observed . These points are
known as ,  ‘ landmark ’ points . A shape model by itself is not sufficient to detect faces , and
more often ASM has to be employed along with a Haar cascade . 
These three methods work on still images , for real time execution the best technique is
Facial Action Coding System ( FACS )  . This method developed in the 1970s , is a powerful
tool used to correlate facial expression a human being can make to their corresponding
psychological state . This is a novel method of relating facial taits to the psychological
state , for example happiness is seen as cheek raise and lip corner pull , both working at the
same time . It takes into account the contraction of each facial muscle and how it affects
the appearance of the face . Facial expressions are reduced to Ekman Action Units ( EAU )  , 
and the combination of these EAUs provides a good estimate of the corresponding human
expression as is shown in Table 7 . 1
TABLE 7 . 1 Facial Action Coding System ( FACS )  ( 1978 ) 
Psychological State Facial Traits ( EAU numeration is given in square
brackets ) 
Happiness Cheek Raiser [ 6 ] and Lip Corner Puller [ 12 ] 
Sadness Inner Brow Raiser [ 1 ] and Brow Lowerer [ 4 ] and Lip Corner
Depressor [ 15 ] 
Surprise Inner Brow Raiser [ 1 ] and Outer Brow Raiser [ 2 ] and Upper
Lid Raiser ( slight ) and Jaw Drop [ 26 ] 
Fear Inner Brow Raiser [ 1 ] and Outer Brow Raiser [ 2 ] and Brow
Lowerer [ 4 ] and Upper Eyelid Raiser [ 5 ] and Eyelid Tightener 
[ 7 ] and Lip Stretcher [ 20 ] and Jaw Drop [ 26 ] 
Anger Brow Lowerer [ 4 ] and Upper Eyelid Raiser [ 5 ] and Eyelid
Tightener [ 7 ] and Lip Tightener [ 23 ] 
Disgust Nose Wrinkler [ 9 ] and Lip Corner Depressor [ 15 ] and Lower
Lip Depressor [ 16 ] 
Contempt Lip Corner Puller [ 12 ]  ( trace , on the right side ) and Dimpler 
[ 14 ]  ( trace , on the right side ) 
These are six prominent emotions and their primary EAU . The EAU numeration is given
in brackets , so happiness , which is seen as cheek raise and lip corner pull , both working at
the same time , will be 6 + 12 in FACS coding . More sophisticated treatments take into
account head movement and eye movements . This method cannot only relate facial traits
to their emotion , but also distinguish between facial expressions made voluntarily and those
which are involuntary and spontaneous . FACS is currently the only available technique
for assessing emotions in real time and is a proven tool employed by psychologists and
psychiatrists . 
212  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
7 . 2 . 1 . 3 Natural language processing ( NLP ) 
Chatbots such as ELIZA and ALICE working on Natural language processing ( NLP ) 
methods have been very successful in artificial conversation with a human user . Chatbots
rely on a set vocabulary to search for particular arrangements of words to detect the
psychological state and the intention of the human user . For example ,  ‘ I am not feeling
well ’ from the human user will prompt artificial empathy from the chatbot with a response
like ,  ‘ I am sorry to know that . What bothers you ?  ’  . Similarly ‘ Isn ’ t it a nice and bright
day today ’ from the human user will lead to a more proactive reply from the chatbot ,  ‘ Oh
yes , isn ’ t it lovely weather ’  . 
How to simulate a conversation ? 
Chatbots are probably the simplest example of a socialising AI . Earliest promises
such as Weizenbaum ’ s ELIZA , which then inspired ALICE has yielded startling results
and modern day state-of-the-art chatbot , GOOSTMAN poses as a near human being
and turns the tables on the Turing Test . How can a rote programming script elicit
empathy and emotions much like a human beings ? The following two examples attempt
to answer the question . 
1 . Chatbot — revisiting ALICE . Artificial Linguistic Internet Computer Entity
or ALICE engages in conversation with human beings with heurestical pattern
matching the user ’ s input . However , it is not foolproof and a lack of consistency in
the conversation can be spotted easily after 5-6 exchanges between the 2 agents . 
Here , ALICE is implemented using PyAIML , as shown in Figure 7 . 10 . 
FIGURE 7 . 10 Sample output of a variant of ALICE , while the ALICE AI doesn ’ t
really give much information nor solve any real problems , it does very well to sound like
a human being . The parts of the conversation marked with the chevron are the human
user inputs ; the corresponding answers are from ALICE . 
2 . A Simulated Conversation — Wall-E woos Eva . A coherent conversation , 
seemingly lacking predictability between two iconic robots is designed here with
a short program script in Python 2 . 7 . The output is as shown in Figure 7 . 11 . 
The conversation reflects the emotional state and a general mood of the 2 agents . 
 213
The program script is a play on the English language using key words to convey
cheesy romantic wooing . Though the output varies with each run the general
mood of the two agents and theme of the conversation more or less remains the
same . It is to be noted that the program doesn ’ t use any natural language library
nor is supplimented with a search engine , but rather is designed by randomising
the inputs and the outputs , which lends an apparent lack of predictability to the
conversation , and makes it seem spontaneous . 
FIGURE 7 . 11 Sample output of simulating a chat between Wall-E and Eva . key
words play out the mood and reflect the theme of the chat . 
Some of the outputs lack in continuity and also often do not tally to the question
asked and the agents often repeat some of the sentences . However , that still
confirms to the general theme of the conversation . This is due to the key words and
the fact that both are caricatured robots of the cartoon and there is a prejudiced
human perception . 
To make chatbots Prolog and Perl were early favourites in late 1980s and early
1990s . Nowadays natural language specific libraries , NLTK for Python , GATE and
OpenNLP for Java , UIMA for both C +  + and Java , ScalaNLP for Scala and web
services as Alchemy API and Open Calais have found popularity with developers . 
Voice-enabled systems such as Apple ’ s Siri and Microsoft ’ s Cortana are sophisticated
variants of chatbots , and they also look for visible patterns in the human conversation , 
both the content and intonation and often supplement their reply with an internet
search . However , voice-based interactions is not without its issues . As of now there
is a lack in an AI system identifying and appreciating accents across the world , the
problem being acute in the English language . Also it is difficult for an artificial system
to distinguish between relevant sounds from a human being from other natural and
often undesirable sounds . 
Chatbots are often used for marketing purposes , where a chatbot AI tries to help out a
human user with a purchase or after sales support . 
214  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
7 . 3 APPLICATIONS
Human-Robot interaction has found newer applications with advancing technology . Very
much in the Asimovian spirit , the robots cater to a human need and are nearly always
subservient to human command . The trend in social robots was inititated by a flurry in
the development of anthropomorphic robot heads in the late 1990s and early years of the
new millennium . After Kismet , there has been a plethora of interactive robot heads , WE4 , 
ROMAN , TUM-Eddie , Inkha , Octavia and Flobi are some of the best examples . While most
of them are academic exploration into human-robot interaction research and are developing
a proving ground for modelling the human mind and the emotion quotient , Inkha shown in
Figure 7 . 18 had taken on the role of a robotic receptionist at the entrance to King ’ s College
London , while Octavia , developed by the US Navy , is an interactive firefighting robot . Low
cost designs , such as Fritz , which was a crowd sourced project and the robot head designed
by Kim et al . at University of California , San Diego have hinted towards commercial utility . 
ROMAN ( RObot huMan interAction machiNe ) shown in Figure 7 . 12 at University of
Kaiserslautern , stands out from the rest and is arguably the best anthropomorphic robot
head . With artificial skin and a 4 DoF neck , ROMAN also boasts human like emotions , 
developed with Ekman ’ s action units and a emotion control architecture . ROMAN ’ s
mechanics are designed on 8 mounting movable metal plates fixed to the neck . These plates
provide for the mounting points for the lower jaw , the eyes , skull and the 10 servo motors . 
The positions of these movable metal plates are as per Ekman ’ s action units . The artificial
skin is attached with glue to the cranial bone and affords movement with the 8 metal plates , 
operated with the servos . The eyelids can go up and down , and the eyeballs have 4 DoF , 
up and down and left and right . 
ROMAN ’ s emotion control architecture , is based on three main parts : emotions , drives
and actions . 
7 . 3 . 1 Service robots , with a social face
Currently , 1000 units of Pepper robots are selling each month ; however Pepper is not tagged
to a social function . Service robots have well defined roles and particular behaviours . 
The following example of CERO helps to illustrate that with minimal hardware , simple
behaviours and least intrusion into human lives , robots can still engage in their targeted
social niches . 
7 . 3 . 1 . 1 CERO — Cooperative embodied robot operator
CERO shown in Figure 7 . 13 , was developed at the Royal Institute of Technology , Sweden , 
over a period of three years [ 159 , 297 ] and was designed to assist office workers who lack
mobility with the fetch and carry function in an office environment . The robot has two parts : 
the CERO character and a wheeled base based on a Nomadic Super Scout platform with
16 sonar sensors for navigation . The CERO character is an anthropomophic representation
of a mini sized human bust and has minimal human appearance and traits with 4 DoF ; the
head with with 2 DoF ( up-down and sideways ) and each arm with 1 DoF , and these four
movements helps to convey the social intent for the robot by functioning as the ‘ driver ’ 
of the robot base . It relies on gestures to communicate , express emotional attitudes and
thereby comes across as personality rather than a cartoonish machine . It is designed to take
human commands over keyboard inputs and also via a speech interface . For example , it
can nod to convey positive feedback , or move its arms to gesture that the robot is on its
way . The speech system can respond to typical emotional content of voice and intonation , 
 215
FIGURE 7 . 12 ROMAN , the humanoid at University of Kaiserslautern .  ( a ) The working robot ,  ( b ) 
the face and ( c ) details of the mechatronic design . Images courtesy Karsten Berns . 
216  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 13 CERO , an expressive robot with minimal human-like features and gestures at Royal
Institute of Technology , Sweden , was designed to assist office workers with walking disabilities . 
Images taken from Severinson-Eklundh et al .  [ 297 ]  . Used with permission from Elsevier . 
such as raised amplitude and spoken vowels with corresponding gestures . Further details
are presented in Table 7 . 2 . 
TABLE 7 . 2 CERO ’ s response , modified from Brennan and Hulteen ( 1995 )  [ 46 ] 
Event CERO ’ s Feedback
Attending / Acknowledging , as robot
on , microphone sound detected , 
speech detected
Raise head
Hearing A shake of head if the audibility / articulation
is poor , otherwise a nod of the head
Parsing / Interpreting A shake of head for parsing errors
Plan failures / Successful execution A shake of the head ( failures ) and a nod 
( success ) 
Reporting Walking-like gesture with both arms
CERO is an example of an expressive robot that uses minimal gestures and movements
to convey a sense of familiarity to human users . While lacking the dynamism of humanly
activity , such a robot can be a part of low-cost natural interaction over a range of
applications . The robot was primarily targeted at office staff who may be able to walk
only short distances on crutches or be in a wheelchair but may not be able to fetch or carry
objects with ease . In trials , the robot was found to aid and be an assistant for a unique
user . Severinson-Eklundh and the CERO research team hope that CERO can be further
 217
developed to support a fully voice-based two-way [ 132 ] interaction which works seamlessly
in tandem with gestures and non-verbal interaction and facilitate multiple user and group
interactions . CERO also stands out as a platform to study human-robot interactions , when
robot interactions are at a minimal [ 159 ]  . 
7 . 3 . 2 Robots in elderly care
Various research groups have targeted elderly care . KSERA , DOMEO , COGNIRON , 
Companionable , SRS , Care-O-bot , Accompany , HERB , Hobbit , Pearl , Hector , Huggable
etc .  , are robot platforms developed to support the elderly and those in medical care . These
robots are employed at home or in a care facility and primarily attend to monitoring well
being and health , helping in social communication and assisting in fetch-and-carry tasks , 
thereby functioning as a smart machine , as a butler and also as a companion . 
7 . 3 . 2 . 1 Care-O-bot 3 — The smart butler
The Care-O-bot project at Fraunhofer Institute of Manufacturing Engineering and
Automation ( IPA )  , Stuttgart , has spanned over a decade and led to three generations of
the robot . The long-term goals of the project are to development a mobile robot which can
assist persons in their domestic environments and attend to functions such as fetch-n-carry
and other simple household chores and provide for entertainment and attend to emergencies , 
thereby , at a lower running cost , increase their personal independence and improve their
quality of life and security and consistently attend to their care and also provide for better
social integration and cohesion over social media etc . Fraunhofer IPA further believes that
Care-O-bot can also attend to roles such as robot valet , robot receptionist and also as robot
technical staff , leading guided tours in museums and entertainment parks . 
The third and latest version of Care-O-bot , shown in Figure 7 . 5 ( b )  , is designed on the
concept of a butler poised with a tray . 
7 . 3 . 2 . 2 Hobbit — Returning a robot ’ s favour
The Hobbit project at Vienna University of Technology aims to build a highly acceptable
socially assistive robot in indoor elderly care . Hobbit was designed to enable the elderly
users to stay longer in their homes or care facility , and attempted to address emergency
situations , fall prevention and providing psychological well being by being around as an
amicable helper . It attends to its job by patrolling the apartment , picking up objects from
the floor , by advising the elderly through reminders and attending to emergencies such as
calling the ambulance and offering help to rise in the event of a fall . Hobbit is networked
through to social media and can offer to entertain and also communicate whenever needed . 
The project has 49 participants at three different test sites in Europe ( Austria , Greece , and
Sweden )  . 
The novelty of Hobbit is that it is developed on the Mutual Care Paradigm , where the
elderly individual ( s ) and the robot take care of each other . Other than the various facets to
caring , the robot will also advise and anticipate the elderly individual ( s ) to care and help
the robot . The underlying belief is that it is amenable to being assisted if it is a two-way
street , where both look up to the other for a more fulfilling existence . This also reduces
the technological burden on the robot as a sleek gizmo and brings it towards a point where
interdependence and cooperation is the key to co-existing — connecting naturally as a
human being than a machine . This reciprocity in forming the bonds of a mutual interaction
218  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
is proven to yield a better user experience than the stigma of a sleek gizmo monitoring and
controlling people ’ s lives . 
On full battery charge , the Hobbit can operate for about three hours . It has a differential
drive and can turn on the spot within its own footprint and can also navigate in narrow and
cluttered environments . It is further equipped with a 5-DoF IGUS Robolink Arm and Fin
Ray Gripper . The human-robot interactions can form over various modes , via voice , touch
screen , and gestures . Fischinger et al .  [ 104 ] identify four design aspects that are essential
for Hobbit to attend to the elderly : 
1 . Map building and self-localization
2 . Safe navigation ( obstacle detection and avoidance ) 
3 . Human-robot interaction ( user and gesture detection ) 
4 . Object detection and subsequent grasping
To meet this requirement , it has an assortment of sensors . For depth perception and
self localisation the robot uses ASUS Xtion Pro . For obstacle detection , object detection , 
grasping and human interaction the robot has a Microsoft Kinect on a pan-tilt unit mounted
in its head . In order to help in backing up , it has an array of eight infrared and eight
ultrasound distance sensors in the back of the robot base and for odometry , it has high
resolution odometers on the two shafts of the drive motors which can measure 70µm per
encoder tick . 
Hobbit starts the user interaction with an introduction explaining its functionalities . 
Clean floor and other advice for the elderly user and attending to emergencies forms the
rote functioning of the robot . Novel user-robot interactions are put to the test in typical
reciprocating tasks such as ; 
1 . The robot is attempting to learn about an object . The task asks for mutual
participation from both the robot and the elderly user . For learning about an object , 
the robot has to use the ‘ learning turntable ’  , which it cannot maneuver all by itself . 
Therefore the robot asks the user to place the ‘ learning turntable ’ into the gripper
and follow instructions , as is shown in Figure 7 . 14 , where the robot learns about a
cup . Though help from the user is necessary , it is not very explicit . After completing
this task , robot thanks the user and offers to return the favour . On acknowledgement
by the user , the robot plays music or tells a random joke enhancing the social bond
between the two . 
2 . The robot is designed so that it fails to find the object it has to fetch and asks the
human user for help . If the user can agree to help the robot , then the user can suggest
the whereabouts of the object via touchscreen . If the robot succeeds in finding the
object , then as in the previous scenario it offers to return the favour . If it fails the
task , then it merely makes a report of the failure and the user can send it again on
the look out for the given object . 
Lammer and co-researchers observe that the human user enjoyed being surprised with
a robot asking for help and this was often accompanied with laughter and smiles and most
of the participants wanted the robot to address them by their real names . Both adding to
social interaction and building of trust between the user and the robot . 
7 . 3 . 3 Companion robot and robot therapy
Social robotics has been employed in the treatment and care of patients suffering from
dementia and autism . Paro , the robotic seal , appeals as a pet and therefore helps to develop
 219
FIGURE 7 . 14 Hobbit presents novel human-robot interactions . Image from Fischinger et al .  [ 104 ]  . 
Used with permission from Elsevier . 
220  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
and nurture emotions and empathy for those suffering from dementia , and KASPAR with
the likeness of a human infant connects as a real-life friend and has shown to improve
communication with children suffering from autism . Fake in both emotion and empathy , 
these two are examples of human-robot interaction helping to elicit real feeling and emotions
in human beings . 
7 . 3 . 3 . 1 Paro - The cute robotic seal
Paro [ 135 , 369 ] is a robotic seal which has been used both by doctors and psychologists to
overcome dementia and also reduce loneliness , filling in for a pet in elderly care . Paro was
designed by Japanese roboticist Takanori Shibata and it is modelled after a baby Canadian
harp seal and is covered in white artificial fur and weighs approximately 2 . 7 kg . It was
developed by the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology , Tokyo , 
and is being manufactured by Intelligent Systems , Co . priced at 35000 yen in Japan and
$6000 in the United States . It is equipped with tactile and light sensors , touch-sensitive
whiskers , sound and voice recognition , large blinking eyes expressing its benevolent nature . 
In reply to human interaction it can produce cute noises imitating that of a baby harp
seal and it can swivels its head and seemingly appear to track human motion and thus
create an illusion of paying attention to the interacting human being . The design is more
towards a fantasy projection of a seal , and not that much like a real one . Paro is an effective
tool of emotional seduction and it elicits positive responses from the interacting human
beings , and has been found to be very effective in patients suffering from dementia . Paro
is designed to operate on 3 aspects ,  ( 1 ) its internal states ,  ( 2 ) sensory information from its
sensors and ( 3 ) its own diurnal rhythm for its interaction with human beings . Also , it can
learn from experience . Therefore for a stimulus such as tapping its chin , which provided a
response of happiness , Paro may repeat the same response just prior to a tap of the chin , 
thus demonstrating artificial equivalents of Skinnerian conditioning . Paro is introduced to
the dementia patient as their pet Fluffy or Bruce and can learn its name when called out . 
Unlike a real pet Paro cannot bite or scratch . Its antiseptic coat will not shed dander ; it
does not eat food or create waste and its fur is hypoallergenic , thus it doesn ’ t add up to
the burden of a pet . 
Though Paro appeals to the emotional quotient of the user , Calo et al . observe that the
intuitive responses on seeing Paro are either excitement or repulsion . The repulsion is on
finding the robot unnatural , cartoonish and creepy . However , there is a near consensus to
address the robot as though it is a living being , and in addition to the patients , doctors and
other medical staff have been seen to talk to the robot . 
The Paro robot and a mini interview with
Dr . Broadbent
Dr . Elizabeth Broadbent at the Department of Psychological Medicine , The
University of Auckland , has been closely involved with elderly cure using the Paro
robot . She shares some of her research with us . This mini interview took place in early
July 2015 . 
AB : I have read about your work on the Paro robot as a companion in elder care . 
Can you please tell my readers about your motivation and what led you to go
ahead with this research ? 
 221
EB : I have always been fascinated with robots and the idea that robots can become
loyal companions without some of our human flaws . People are so busy these days
they often don ’ t have time to look after or visit older relatives . So older people are
sometimes lonely and may be physically unable to keep a pet for companionship . 
In these situations , robots might be able to reduce some of the loneliness and
distress people experience . 
AB : Does a robot companion really aid in reducing depression ? Do patients view
it as a pet ? 
EB : Our own research has shown that Paro can reduce loneliness in people in
rest-homes , and another recent study has shown that Paro can reduce depression
in people with dementia [ 219 ]  . In our research we have found that older people 
( without dementia ) do treat Paro like a pet , but they are also aware that it is a
robot . 
FIGURE 7 . 15 Paro robot .  ( a ) Paro , the robotic seal ,  ( b ) and ( c ) interaction and
attachment with the elderly . Images from Robinson et al .  [ 279 ]  . Used with permission
from Elsevier . 
AB : What are the minimal requirements for the robot to function in this fashion ? 
What characteristics does this robot have that differ from other robots ? Clearly
the Roomba cannot do this job . 
EB : Paro is very cute . He has big beautiful eyes and long eyelashes . He has soft
fur and you can pick him up and cuddle him . He responds to being stroked with
movement and sound . These features make him different to most robots that have
hard plastic casings such as Roomba , which is designed to vacuum the floor . 
AB : What are the problems and shortcomings of using a robot with the elderly ? 
222  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
EB : In an ideal world , people would not get old or sick and everyone would be
kind , friendly and helpful . Then we would not need companion robots . But we
do not live in an ideal world , and people do suffer . If a robot can help provide
comfort then that is great . People often form attachments to objects that cannot
reciprocate feelings , such as cars or art . People can get a great deal of pleasure
from these objects . I don ’ t think paro is too different . 
AB : Would you wish to share any particular episode or story about Paro ’ s
interactions with patients ? 
EB : One man in hospital with dementia was completely unresponsive when I met
him . He was staring blankly , doing nothing and did not even look at us when we
spoke to him . However , when we put Paro in his lap , he suddenly started talking
to Paro and stroking him as if he was a pet . That , to me , showed that Paro could
be even better than a human in some situations . 
AB : What are the newer avenues that you are researching on human robot
interactions ? Any new robots ? 
EB : We are conducting studies with other healthcare robots that can provide
reminders to take medication , encouragement to exercise and monitor health . I
am interested in whether robots are better than computers for these tasks , and
our recent study has shown that people are more adherent to robots ’ instructions
and like them better than computer tablets . I am interested in exploring this idea
further in larger trials . 
Paro connecting with patients suffering from dementia and KASPAR aiding autistic
children are vibrant examples where robots have helped in a human cause . These
are scenarios where robots have participated in human society and have clearly
demonstrated ascendency from being mere tools . 
7 . 3 . 3 . 2 KASPAR — Kinesics and synchronization in personal assistant robotics
KASPAR , a humanoid robot with child-like features and a friendly appearance , developed
for for humanrobot interaction research was made by Dautenhahn et al .  [ 86 ]  . at the
University of Hertfordshire . KASPAR attempts to find acceptance as a playmate and
companion robot . Unlike Kismet , KASPAR was not designed to explicitly foster reactions
from the user but rather adhere to a minimally expressive paradigm , where it was not
supposed to be very human like , but is enabled to emit a few expressions to underscore the
most salient human-like features and aspects . KASPAR is low cost , portable and can be run
from a laptop . It has more anthropomorphic features identifiable with human beings and it
can be set-up and run without any particular expertise or prior training since programming
is via a user friendly GUI which runs on both Windows and Linux and other than the
spontaneous interaction mode , it also works on a toy-like mode using a remote control . 
Aesthetic coherence is an important principle in KASPAR ’ s design , therefore the face , body
and hands are of nearly the same complexities and the physical design enables the behaviour , 
interaction and control of the robot . The design also earmarks the actual capabilities of the
robot and prevents the jeopardy of creating inappropriate expectations in the human user . 
KASPAR was projected at 1500 EUR and it was designed as per the size of a small child , 
 223
with a few comic-like features in order to not appear threatening to the user . It is designed
in a near cross legged squatting posture , its head is slightly larger in proportion to the rest
of the body to suggest a comic-like appeal . The neck is primarily meant for nodding and
shaking however it can also orchestrate more subtle variations such as slight tilting of the
head or a slow nod to convey emotional and personality traits viz . shyness , non-confirmation , 
cheekiness etc . The expressive components of the face such as eyes , eyebrows , mouth etc . 
convey and augment an emotional state . The eyes incorporate minature video cameras
and can pan and tilt and may also support mutual gaze , encouraging joint attention . 
The eye-brows are not separately designed but are made into the face mask formed as
deformations on actuation of the lips , mouth etc . are the eyelids can open and close and
can support blinking , full or partial , at various rates . The shape of lips and mouth suggest
an emotional state viz . smile , frown , neutral etc . are controlled by actuators . KASPAR ’ s
arms are not very robust and lack precise trajectory planning . However they do to complete
the child-like features and help in engineering gestures , such as waving and peek-a-boo . 
The palm doesn ’ t have articulated fingers in order to keep a simple design and low cost of
the robot , and it also invites children to touch the hands , which is akin to touching a doll . 
Finally , a silicon rubber flesh-coloured face mask is used for KASPAR ’ s face , which makes
a fair imitation human skin . 
Dautenhahn et al . report that KASPAR ’ s interaction with developing children
encourages a reply , however adults are more cautious , less playful and more critical of
KASPAR . There is a tendency in adults to look for and compare KASPAR to very realistic
human-like features which they may have seen in robots in movies and which are not often
present in KASPAR as it is developed on a minimally expressive paradigm . Three particular
use of KASPAR have been in : 
1 . Robot-assisted play and therapy . Dautenhahn and her co-researchers at
University of Hertfordshire have been closely involved in the use of robots in autism
therapy for about a decade . Employing KASPAR as a part of autism therapy in
children yielded encouraging results . All the children with autism were found to
explore the robot with touch and also consistent staring at the face etc . The tactile
interaction helped to increase body awareness and develop a sense of self , while staring
at the robot ’ s face enabled them to understand human facial features and some of the
children later attempted to relate those features to their human therapists . KASPAR
not only helps to break the isolation but also breeds excitement and enthusiasm . Even
in those suffering from severe autism and it was common to see the children share this
experience with their teachers and therapists . The research also explores the prospects
of cooperative games with KASPAR , in the remote control mode , as is shown in Figure
7 . 16 ( d )  . 
2 . Developmental robotics . The ‘ drumming mate ’ experiment has been often used in
developmental robotics to inculcate the robot with an appreciation for rhythm and
beats . In it the robot has to listen to a human being play the drum while it records
and analyses the played rhythm and later plays the same rhythm back by beating the
drum . Such an experiment confirms to multimodal interaction and a ground level of
artificial consciousness in the robot . When tried on KASPAR as shown in Figure 7 . 16 
( b )  &  ( c )  , it is seen to mirror the human being but with a small time lag of about 0 . 3
seconds between each beat . This happens as it has to get its joints in position for the
job of playing the drum . As a shortcoming , KASPAR fails to mimic the strength of
the beat , viz . hard , soft due to its limited motor skills . 
3 . Cognition and learning . The ‘ peek-a-boo ’ experiment was aimed to develop
cognitive faculties in the robot over multiple modalities and also enable it to learn
224  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 16 KASPAR .  ( a ) Construction of the face . The face can elicit various degrees of
emotions viz . large smile , small smile , neutral , frown etc .  ( b )  &  ( c ) The ‘ drumming mate ’ 
experiment .  ( d ) A therapist using KASPAR to teach turn-taking skills to a child with autism .  
( e ) A therapist is using remote control to operate KASPAR in an attempt to replicate the same
emotion as seen in the child with autism . This helps to identify facial expressions to known emotions . 
Images from Dautenhahn et al .  [ 86 ]  , reprinted by permission of the publisher ( Taylor & Francis
Ltd .  )  . 
 225
from its previous experience . Replicating the popular ‘ peek-a-boo ’ game usually played
between an child and an adult . The adult after establishing amicable eye contact , then
hides his / her face and on revealing their face again cries ‘ peek-a-boo ’ and encouraging
the infant to ape their action of first hiding and then showing face with a call
of ‘ peek-a-boo ’  . For the game , the researcher takes the role of the caring adult and
encourages KASPAR with calls of ‘ peek-a-boo ’ to hide its face . KASPAR of course
perceives this as an increase in sound intensity and a simultaneous detection of a face
by its cameras . It was seen that nearly 67% of the time , encouragement with a call of 
 ‘ peek-a-boo ’ met with the robot repeating the action of hiding its face and without
an encouragement the robot did not repeat the action . The interaction history of the
experiment was stored in KASPAR ’ s memory and with time and more interaction
history KASPAR ’ s response got better . This is an example of reinforcement in social
robots . 
KASPAR and Paro are designed to develop and foster attachment with the patient , 
however this can lead to ethical concerns . Primarily , these robots attend to happy and
cheerful emotional states but human emotion is way too varied and the robot may fail to
attend to a patient ’ s frustration , anger and revolting actions . While in contrast , the patient , 
usually an elderly or suffering from an ailment may become emotionally attached to the
robot and any attempt to withdraw may lead to distress and sorrow . In reciprocation , the
robot will not ‘ feel ’ anything for the patient . Also , nurse robots such as Pearl at Carnegie
Mellon University may have to attend to patients and therefore prioritise its own task . Such
a prioritisation will be more of a real-time concern than merely following a timebound list , 
and will call on the ethical judgement on the part of the robot . Another long-term jeopardy
may be the loss of a job for human carers and nurses , which would then herald the lack of
true social contact in a profession which is meant for nurturing social contact and empathy . 
I end this section with part three of the toby series in Figure 7 . 17 which touches
upon human robot cooperation , which may well come into play without explicit design
or programming to culture such values . 
7 . 3 . 4 Museum guide and receptionist robots
Museum guides , news readers and actor robots are examples of minimal human-robot
interaction over short periods of time which are often predictable and repetitive and
therefore designed to work to a pre-programmed menu . Museum guides through , path
planning combined with narration or display of visual information in a known local
environment ; news readers by human-like appearance , gestures and intonation ; and actor
robots are programmed to a script in a known environment , all of them attend to
rather limited tasks and address human-robot interaction without inquiring much into the
dynamism of human interaction . 
For museum guide robots , there are two particular features the design must address ,  ( 1 ) 
navigating safely through a crowd and ( 2 ) short-term interacting with the museum goers
with spontaneity and enthusiasm . In late 1990s , Burgard et al . designed the RHINO as an
interactive museum guide at the Deutsches Museum in Bonn , Germany . The primary task of
the robot was to lead interactive visitor tours in the museum . It was also one of the earliest
examples of teleoperation over a distance and virtual presence , where a far away human user
over the internet could instruct the robot to go to specific areas of the museum and enjoy a
virtual tour of the museum without visiting it . The RHINO communicates with the on-board
interface which integrates text , graphics , pre-recorded speech and sound which presents
the user with a menu containing pre-set tours or they can listen to a brief , pre-recorded
226  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 17 Toby saves the day ( Toby , 3 of 4 )  , Care robots are now a vibrant industry
with robots such as Hobbit , Care-O-bot , HERB etc . designed as care workers and nurses and to
attend to medical emergencies . Toby was not meant for such an emergency and could only relay
the information to the Walkers . Cartoon made as a part of Toby series ( 3 of 4 ) by the author , 
CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
 227
FIGURE 7 . 18 Inkha , the robotic receptionist at King ’ s College London , Strand campus , from 2003
to 2014 . Both images courtesy wikipedia . org , CC license . 
explanation of the exhibits . Burgard and co-workers reports of a very high success rate of
RHINO , in 47 hours of operation with 2000 museum goers , the robot attended to 2040
requests and collided with obstacles only 6 times , and the Deutsches Museum reported 50%
increase in visitors . 
Two years later in 2000 , Thrun et al . made the Minerva robot to conduct visitor tours
in the Smithsonian ’ s National Museum of American History , Washington , DC , for a period
of 2 weeks , during which the Minerva attended to 620 tours and covered more than 44 km
visiting over 2600 exhibits . Minerva had an anthropomorphic head with eyes that responded
to human interaction and could draw the user ’ s attention to itself , and therefore had more
user engagement than the RHINO . 
ATLAS , a museum guide robot made at the University of Essex , was based on the
PeopleBot robot designed and made by Activ Media Robotics . It was an improvement over
both the RHINO and the Minerva , and was enabled with a basic voice-based system and a
touch screen for user interaction . It was employed at the London County Hall for receiving
and welcoming visitors and to explain the museum contents to them . It could detect visitors
in proximity and interact with them over voice and menu options in the touch screen . The
robot could also detect its battery levels and when on low power , return to the charging
pods to charge its batteries automatically . 
Dances with the Nao Robot , 
robot actors and performers
Science fiction movies have set the foreground to depict a future with robots , though
there have been daring attempts to use robots in sync with human actors in live
plays and dance drama [ 311 ]  . Francesca Talenti ’ s ,  ‘ The Uncanny Valley ’  [ 1 , 73 ] had
a robothespian robot as an actor and had the stage name Dummy . It was made to
perform through a puppetier while the human actors trained to sync their performance
228  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
and dialogues , Oriza Hirata at University of Osaka used a Wakamaru robot in his play 
 ‘ Hataraku Watashi ’  ( I , Worker )  [ 317 ] but the most eloquent use of robot performers is
probably by choreographer Blanca Li [ 203 , 204 ] in her dance drama ,  ‘ ROBOT ’  . 
In collaboration with musical artist Maywa Denki and Aldebaran robots , the dance
drama employs seven Nao robots to dance on stage along with eight human artists to
the symphony of the ballet . They have given sterling performances on both shores of
the Atlantic . The 90-minute dance drama has the tag line ,  “ Robotic Pop Ballet for All
Future Generations ” and is an exploration into the relationship between human beings
and artificial beings . It poses questions such as can AI truly replicate the relationship
of human beings with nature ? Will robots ever be creative ? How will AI and technology
change our way of living and our social functions ? The ballet was first performed at the
Montpellier Dance Festival in the summer of 2013 and debuted in the USA at BAM
Howard Gilman Opera House , New York , in June 2015 . It has also performed to full
houses in Belgium , Spain , Portugal and Italy . 
Maywa Denki and his mechanical musical orchestra from Tokyo , and Bruno
Maisonnier , the inventor of the humanoid robot Nao and founder of Aldebaran Robotics
in 2012 collaborated with Blanca Li for this dance drama . The seven Nao robots are
named Pierre , Jean , Alex , Lou , Dominique , Sacha and Ange and each is designed as a
distinct personality . The dance drama ’ ROBOT ’ is the story of how the human dancers
tried to teach the robots to act and dance . Which was by moving all the limbs by
hand and incrementally check if the robot is able to replay the movements by itself . 
The process is comparable to a parent teaching an infant to walk . Since the dance
drama is themed as a dancer teaching a robot to walk , the choreography for the stage
performance is a natural extension of the rehearsal . 
FIGURE 7 . 19 Blanca Li ’ s Ballet ,  ‘ ROBOT ’  , employs seven Nao robots dancing in sync
with eight human dancers . 
More details can be found at . 
Receptionist robots lack mobility , have less autonomy and are designed as an interacting
 229
humanoid head rather than with a full body and therefore are cheaper to make and maintain . 
Much like the museum guides , these robots are also equipped with voice and touch screen
and are accompanied with amicable facial features . 
Inkha the robotic bust with a caricatured face shown in Figure 7 . 18 , functioned as a
receptionist at King ’ s College London , Strand campus , from 2003 to 2014 . The robot was
equipped with speech and facial expressions and in response to user ’ s touch screen inputs the
robot could help with directions and locations of places across the college campus and also
add in a compliment or the occasional banter , which included information about the college , 
astrology and also fashion tips . The robot used a camera in its eyes to detect movement , 
and expressed fright at sudden movements and went into sleep mode if nothing seemed to
move .  
 “ You ’ re starting to look like a robot !  ”  , and other
conjurings from Hiroshi Ishiguro
The wish for life size humanoid robots proactively interacting with human beings
has drawn the interest and attention of various roboticists , but none so much as
the pioneering effort from Hiroshi Ishiguro [ 160 , 233 ] at Osaka University , Japan . His
humanoids , Kodomoroid and Otonaroid , have the potential to put human TV presenters
out of their jobs . 
FIGURE 7 . 20 The Kodomoroid , Kodomoroid , an android humanoid with the features of a
girl in her adolescence , is currently acting as a museum guide at the Miraikan Museum , Tokyo . 
Her job includes , speaking to visitors and informing them about various exhibits on display . 
Image courtesy Hiroshi Ishiguro Laboratories ( HIL )  , used with permission
Ishiguro is motivated from principles of behaviour-based systems and distributed
cognition and contends that rich interactive behaviour seen in his androids will help
to determine design methodology and paths for making intelligent robots in the near
future . Since , appearance and behaviour are tightly coupled to each other , the design
of androids is focused on human like appearance and is characterised by lifelike skin , 
human facial features and expressions , natural voice , natural intonation etc . 
The Kodomoroid looks like a girl aged about 12-13 , while the Otonaroid has features
230  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
of an adult female . Both have been engaged in jobs as a news reader and as a museum
guide respectively at the National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation , Tokyo
also called Miraikan Museum . In a demonstration , the Kodomoroid was seen jibing with
Ishiguro and poking in sarcasm ,  “ You ’ re starting to look like a robot !  ”  . 
The Kodomoroid is remotely controlled and announces news and information about
the museum and its exhibits to visitors , while Otonaroid is in close interaction with
the visitors and willfully strikes up a chatter with people who approach it , and a third
humanoid , the Telenoid will be on display , more as an exhibit . Besides these three , 
Ishiguro also has an android version of himself that he sends to give lectures when he
has a tight schedule . 
7 . 3 . 5 Functional robots , more than just smart machines
Functional robots are due to the novelty of design for the uniqueness of the task at hand or
by both . These are more machine-like than with humanly aspects . Since the new millennia
there has been a rapid increase in newer modes of locomotion for robots . Anthropomorphic
designs as the brachiating robot and snake like locomotion has been briefly discussed in
Chapter 2 . The two avenues which are forte of a functional robot are ( 1 ) surveying and ( 2 ) 
search and rescue operations . 
These robots are a boon during search and rescue operations after a travesty such as
floods , earthquake or mine disaster . Still another utility of functional robots is in mine
sniffing , which is a remedy to the unfortunate reminants of wars in Afghanistan , Iraq , 
Vietnam , Cambodia etc . 
7 . 3 . 5 . 1 Explorer robots — new age fungus eaters
Explorer robots are state-of-the-art functional robots . It doesn ’ t take a child ’ s imagination
to find anthropomorphic features in a NASA rover , which echoes a broadly absent social side . 
As rightful heirs to Toda ’ s fungus eaters , new age explorer robots are expected to accomplish
more than what any human being has , acting as scientists for geological sampling of the
unknown terrain in a far off planet . 
Explorer robots have been in use since the mid-1970s for space explorations . The success
of the Lunokhod programme marked the beginning for unmanned rovers : Lunokhod 1 
( 1971 ) scouted about 4 km and Lunokhod 2 ( 1973 ) marched on for about 40 km . The
NASA Mars rovers were targeted to detect water on the Red Planet , Spirit ( 2004 ) and
Opportunity ( 2004 ) of Mars Exploration Rover ( MER ) mission were designed for surveying
as shown in Figure 7 . 21 , and Curiosity ( 2012 ) of Mars Science Laboratory ( MSL ) mission
could undertake more sophisticated experiments to conduct surface sampling and geological
studies . While all three have attained iconic status , very little of 144 . 8 million sq . km has
been mapped , and not a great deal is yet known about the Red Planet . More recently , 
Rosetta mission ’ s Philae landed at Comet 67P . It was designed for minimal locomotion
primarily by jumping and not meant for long-term surveying etc . The MER rovers are
state-of-the-art engineering and communication is over data streams spread across million
of kilometers and are built to endure difficult terrain over long periods of time . Spirit and
Opportunity were designed to harness solar energy , while Curiosity was fueled by nuclear
power . It is worth noting that none of the MER or MSL explorers were truly autonomous
and the were teleoperated by the earth based NASA scientists . 
 231
Over the last decade , hexapod rovers has been a raging trend in robot design , R-Hex 
[ 130 ]  , Mondo Spider , Stiquito and more recently the Erle Spider have left both the hobbyist
and the seasoned roboticist spell bound . The anthropomorphic motivation are from lizards
and spiders , however instead of strictly adhering to a circular symmetry , designs as Stiquito
and R-Hex have employed lateral arrangements of the legs . The R-Hex , as shown in Figure
7 . 22 and its variations the AQUA project for explorations in oceans and lakes are a novelty
of design for scouting unfriendly and unchartered environments . These are a promising
improvement over wheeled robots as they do not get stuck in a muddy patch or sand pockets , 
can walk their way up a sand dune , ramp or stairs and can navigate rugged , broken ground
rapidly . Other than surveying , such a hexapod can also be used for surveillance , search and
rescue and sensing in remote locations and unforgiving terrains as arid desert or marshy
landscape . The R-Hex project was developed with collaboration from five American and
one Canadian university and was funded by DARPA and other US agencies . The R-Hex
design , with 6 degrees of freedom , a motor for each of the six legs , maneuverability on both
land and water and a speed of 2 . 7 m / s on land , may well be the next best bet for surveying
far off planets . 
Future rovers are expected to be more robust with a higher degree of autonomy and
accomplis a full fledged scientific study of the unknown terrain . Like Toda ’ s fungus eaters , 
these explorer robots will also be designed to ensure their own survival by harnessing
energy sources , such as solar power etc . Such a future rover should have gone through
human supervised training prior to the mission and it should be sufficiently autonomous to
explore and survey the unknown terrain by planning and navigation and be able to send
results , reports and images back to the earth-based mission base . Since the rover will be
state-of-the-art and very expensive , there should be fail safe systems for self preservation , 
designed for restrain and caution , viz . avoid sinking into seas and falling off cliffs even if
surveying may demand such death defying effort . The rover should be able to easily adapt
to the new climatic settings such as humidity control , hight radiation levels , dusty terrain , 
climatic hazards such as cyclones etc . In case the rover is in dire situations such as system
failure or unforseen accidents , the rover should eject a capsule containing information and
images from its findings for future missions to find . Like the fungus eaters , the designs for
the rover will depend on the terrain . A creative , out-of-the-box solution is by employing a
modular components , where a number of semi-independent self-assembling modules work in
unison so that the robot can physically morph between different configurations as the needs
of the terrain require . For example , a car like wheel-wheel shape works well for smooth
terrain , while a hexapodal spider-like design with long legs is more useful in a boulder field
or mountanious terrain . The rover should have sufficient fuel capacity so it doesn ’ t need to
return to base for refuelling at short intervals and is therefore suited to a dual fuel mode and
it should be equipped for solar power or the ability to harness other sources of replenishable
energy which is readily available in the given terrain . It is possible that the rover is a part
of a larger system of robots and satellites . Therefore mapping and survey data acquired
by itself and also from satellites orbitting the planet should be synced and incrementally
augmented into the robot ’ s system . Finally , the robot should be able to evaluate its near
future options by simulations and ‘ try and test ’ before commiting to an option , much like
a Popperian creature [ 362 ]  . 
7 . 3 . 5 . 2 Search and rescue robots
A search and rescue robot is often shoebox size with a camera on top and a tether . It is
unassuming compared to the aweinspiring robots discussed till now . However these are most
useful in disasters such as earthquake , mudslide , cyclones , tsunami , nuclear catastrophy and
232  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 21 Design for a NASA MER rover . The rover was targetted to find water on the
Red Planet and conduct geological studies . Each rover was 1 . 6 meters long and had a mass of 174
kilograms . The rover has six cameras which aid in navigation ( Navigation Cameras and Panoramic
Cameras as shown )  . Other than these there is a pair of Hazard Avoidance Cameras which is hidden
from view and mounted on the front part of the body just below the leading edge of the solar
arrays and three cameras for scientific investigations . The geological sampling instruments are ( 1 ) 
Alpha Proton X-Ray Spectrometer ( APXS )  ,  ( 2 ) Mossbauer spectrometer ,  ( 3 ) microscope and ( 4 ) 
Rock Abrasion Tool ( RAT )  , these are mounted on a mechanical arm to check for the composition
of rock samples . The microscope images the martian rocks and soil in detail ; the RAT works as
a grinder and drills holes into rocks ; the APXS irradiates sample rocks with alpha particles and
X-rays from a curium source and studies the back scattered alpha particles and the emitted X-ray
to study the composition ; and Mossbauer spectrometer studies the nature and composition of
minerals containing iron and the rock . Other than the tools on the arm , mini-thermal emission
spectrometer , located next to the navigation cameras , can image the Martian surface in infrared
to detect and reveal the mineral compositions and their abundance ; and the magnet array is to
collect airborne magnetic particles in the Martian dust . Image in public domain , courtesy NASA . 
 233
FIGURE 7 . 22 The R-Hex Design . can traverse unstructured and broken surfaces such as sand
dunes , muddy patches and marshy terrain . It is maneuverable over water and can also walk up stairs . 
The R-hex is dynamically stable . At any given instance of locomotion , only 3 of the 6 legs touch
the ground — 2 on once side , 1 on the other . Image in public domain , courtesy wikipedia . org . 
building collapse . Search and rescue robots were used in 9 / 11 , Tohoku earthquake and the
Fukushima disaster , Hurricane Katrina and other crises . These robots are built to be simple , 
lightweight and easy to maneuver as the environment in and around the disaster may not
allow for use of advanced technology , viz . wifi or GPS may be lacking or severely limited . 
Therefore a tether is the best way to control the robot and it also helps as a rescue rope if
the robot itself needs rescuing . 
A moniker of ‘ unmanned ’ is often used to classify these robots . Unmanned Ground
Vehicles ( UGVs ) are robots used in scenarios where it is hazardous or intractable to pursue
rescue operations , Unmanned Surface Vehicles ( USVs )  , serve the same utility as UGVs , 
however they are for disaster operations in rivers , lakes and oceans , Unmanned Underwater
Vehicles ( UUVs ) are a step ahead of USVs and can search underwater for survivors etc and
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles ( UAVs ) or rescue drones can fly over the affected area and can
beam in live images to inform about the extent of loss of human lives and damage and are
best suitable in scenarios where areal rescue operations are preferred , such as transporting
medicine and food to flood or earthquake victims , as shown in Figure 7 . 23 . 
The camera and the infrared thermal imagery are the most effective sensors on board , 
which allows a human being , aptly a disaster management expert or a rescue worker to
be telepresent and search for signs of survivors or attempt to defuse a bomb or leaking
nuclear waste etc . Military robots designed to carry and deploy weapons are usually able to
undertake search and rescue missions , and are of use in heavy duty operations in dangerous
environments such as rescue operations in coal mines or to save the survivors of a nuclear
accident . 
7 . 4 JAPAN , ROBOT HISTORY IN THE MAKING
Japan stands out as a culture unique in a niche of its own that has progressively accepted
robots as a way of life . The island nation has more than 50% of the world ’ s operational
robots , and it is the leader in development of humanoids and androids . It has been the
234  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 7 . 23 Rescue drones help to cover and assess the extent of the devastation and damage
in natural disasters such as floods and earthquakes . Shown here is a member of UK ’ s ‘ Serve On ’  
( www . serveon . org . uk ) team with a drone in the 2015 Nepal earthquake . Image courtesy Jessica
Lea / DFID , CC-by-SA license from wikipedia . org . 
home for a number of iconic robots which includes softbank ’ s Pepper , Honda ’ s ASIMO and
Mitsubishi ’ s Wakamaru . 
Post war Japan has been the powerhouse for new technology , with proven leadership in
auto industry and robotics . However on the precipice is Japan ’ s population , which is on a
steady decline . The birth rate is at about 1 . 40 , which is significantly lower than the 2 . 13
suggested as the critical replacement fertility rate . The total population of 127 million is
set to decrease to around 116 million by around 2030 , near 100 million by around 2050 , 
and a little more than 85 million by around 2060 . With a fast declining population , and the
economy driven by cutting-edge technology and the country is often faced with persistent
labor shortage . Therefore , the problem often boils down to either welcoming more immigrant
labour or making more robots [ 288 ]  . 
Intelligent humanoid robots are already a dominant part of Japan ’ s economy and culture
and their application is spread across a number of streams . The ASIMO shown in Figure
7 . 24 is meant for various jobs but most of them are in the experimental phase and the price
is well beyond affording it as a personal robot . HRP-2 is a humanoid robot and assists people
in construction and also for domestic chores . Enryu has a human exoskeleton and can also
operate power shovels and forklifts . ReBorg-Q , Guardrobo D1 are designed for patrolling and
fire hazards . The Kodomodroid , Actroid and Ontoid look very real-life and are threatening
to wipe away human presence from redundant and repetitive service sector jobs . PaPeRo
and Wakamaru are personal robots and have a wide range of applications , which includes
babysitting and tutoring children . Pino , Posy , Robovie and ifbot provide entertainment and
companionship . Kaori is a humanoid robot with the features of an attractive woman and
priced at $8500 , and helps towards romantic attachment and sex . 
Currently , 27 . 3% or 34 . 6 million people of Japan ’ s current population is aged 65 or more , 
and the need for elder care has led to a proliferating industry in care robots . AIST ’ s PARO , 
Riken-SRK collaboration for Robobear [ 58 ] and Panasonic ’ s Reysone [ 246 ] are some of the
breathtaking care robots to assist the graying populace of the country . 
The household robot market is already past 17 million units and the robot market will
 235
FIGURE 7 . 24 Social robots as an integral part of society . Automated humanoid robots like
the ASIMO are an active part of society , and Japan may be the first human robot society in the
apparent future . Image courtesy wikipedia . org , CC-by-SA 3 . 0 license
reach well beyond $ 21 billion by 2025 , which will reduce 25% of factory labour costs . With
a Robot Olympiad planned in 2020 [ 88 ]  , and specialised industries for making industrial
and care-giving robots in Tokyo and Saitama , Japan is indeed redefining the rules of the
game . It is anticipated that robots will remake Japanese society [ 45 ]  . These socio-economic
conditions may propel Japan to become the first human robot society in the world . 
Shuji Hashimoto at Waseda University considers robots as a ‘ third existence ’  [ 285 ]  , an
essence of being in betweenliving and non-living yet not necessarily as social equals to human
beings . In similar context , Masahiro Mori [ 242 ] has drawn parallels between principles of
Buddhism and technology for making robots . Social scientists consider that both Shinto
Buddhism , which is the prevalent religion in Japan , and the existential principles of Ba
theory have contibuted and shaped the Japanese society and allowed for such a harmony of
the Japanese people with robots & new age technology [ 77 ]  . 
Robertson [ 278 ] dubs Japan as a cyber Olduvai Gorge of the future , and speculates that
Japan may have the makings of an anthropological wonder of the future where humans
beings and smart machines will meld into a new , superior species . The settings of such a
unique event in the future are certainly being pursued most actively in Japan , and it may
prove to be the cradle for transhumanism . Such concepts are explained in later chapters , 
particularly the last chapter . 
Duffy points us to a crisis of sorts . Current-day social robots do not truly feel an
emotion and merely mirror and replicate human behaviour viz . facial features , intonation
and language , and therefore the paradox is that they pretend to be what they are not . There
is no call of conscience or adherence to moral values , nor the will for a conscious decision
process . For example , a museum guide robot will never attend to a health emergency of a
visitor , a news reader robot will not be able to express the tragedy of a sudden terrorist
attack even with the best possible voice intonation and facial expressions , nor will a care
robot truly care much if a fire burns down the neighbouring house . All of these robots
236  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
will wonderfully attend to their own chores , but will lack the call of conscience and the
human quotient to override everything else in the face of a crisis . We human beings have far
superior abilities that may take a long time and need a revolution in technology to be fully
replicated in robots . The next chapter tries to overcome this shortcoming and attempts to
develop ethics and moral values in a robot . 
SUMMARY
1 . Social robots find a niche in the care industry or in the entertainment industry . 
2 . Social robots are designed on human traits and known social norms . 
3 . As of now , social robots are rather expensive and therefore not very mainstream . 
4 . Minimal robots such as CERO also appeals to human like behaviour . 
5 . Hobbit , Care-O-Bot and Paro connect to the interacting human user on bonds of fake
empathy . 
6 . The drumming mate experiment is an important concept to demonstrate cognition in
a social context and cooperation with the human user . 
7 . Surveying robots and search and rescue robots have uniquely contributed to human
society . 
8 . Japan may soon become the first human-robot society . 
NOTES
1 . The ELIZA effect : the tendency to unconsciously assume computer behaviours are
analogous to human behaviours
2 . Robots aiding and assisting human beings in domestic environments were coined as 
 ‘ co-inhabitant robots ’ by Goldberg
3 . As a shortcoming , Inkha ’ s speech did not correspond to its lip movement
4 . Stiquito started as a low-cost experimental project and has been used in classrooms to
demonstrate subsumption and other reactive architectures
5 . NLP methods lack a foolproof means to detect sarcasm , as sarcasm also involves
tonality , facial expressions and cannot be completely conveyed merely by power words . 
So , while “ you dork !  ” will fetch the human user a warning ,  “ now , aren ’ t you clever ” 
said with a suggestive grin will hardly connect with the robot . 
EXERCISES
1 . Wall-E Eva chat , consult appendix A and run the python script from the terminal
window with the command python walleeva . py . In this simulated conversation as
shown in Figure 7 . 25 Wall-E tries to woo Eva , the emotion and the mood of
the conversation is conveyed by the use of words and expressions . Try to design
similar simulated conversations which convey other emotion and moods . This question
requires basic Python programming skills , though it doesn ’ t need any use of NLTK
or any NLP specific tools or libraries . 
 237
FIGURE 7 . 25 Exercise question — Wall-E Eva chat . 
C H A P T E R 8
Robots with moral agency , 
in the footsteps of Asimov
Kirk :  “ I ’ m not gonna take ethics lessons from a robot ” 
– from the movie Star Trek , Into the Darkness 
 “ One narrow option is that the code is a set of rules of engagement .  .  .  ” 
– Selmer Bringsjord and Joshua Taylor [ 49 ] 
8 . 1 THE NEED FOR THE GOOD ROBOT
C
urrent day robots are made for a specific utility , such as museum guides , carer
and nurse robots , personal robots , explorer robots etc . However most of these jobs
are repetitive and pertains to a narrow domain of chores and lack imagination . Instead
of engaging in routine , predictable and boring jobs , can robots become a crucial part of
society and take on roles as law enforcers , scientists , authors , doctors and politicians of the
coming age ? The very idea marries a child ’ s fancy to a horror movie . Human activities are
broadly dictated by abstract notions such as value system , ethics , cultural edicts , personal
principles and nuances of the society ; a fairly long list of the written and unwritten . For
example , a robotic law enforcer should be able to understand and interpret human values , 
social systems and ethical principles . Similarly , a robotic doctor must be appreciative of the
moral and ethical code of conduct meant for human doctors . The pitfall in both cases is that
while not being a human being , the job at hand expects that the robot ‘ feels ’ and relates to
the scenario at hand from a human point of view . Will robots ever adhere to such humanly
values to become an effective part of a futuristic human robot society ? This chapter explores
how to design AI that can appreciate ethical values and moral principles [ 343 ]  . 
There is always the temptation to form rules for robots considering them as tools , 
products , artifacts and machinery [ 360 ]  . Such a codification will read more like an operating
manual and will not address the specialty and uniqueness of robots as entities of emergence , 
which can spring a life of their own . A slightly different approach is advocated by Asimov
in his laws . Though in fiction these laws echo one of the earliest attempts at a rule-based
approach to instill ethical values in robots , and these laws are appreciative of the special
niche that human beings form with robots , they inherently crown human beings as a
benevolent master race reducing robots to amicable slaves . 
Very soon , human-robot interactions will no more be just an event at a science fair or at
240  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
a museum but will be more commonplace , ubiquitous and seamless . There will be various
tasks which cannot be decided as strict ‘ Yes ’  ,  ‘ No ’ or via programming loops as ‘ If THIS
then THAT ’  . Such a need will be even greater when the robot takes up roles in medicine
and surgery , military , education etc . Highlighting a need for robots that can appreciate
morality and ethical principles . Efforts to develop artificial morality have been a potboiler
in fiction and a topic of debate in ethical circles . However , the earliest attempt to imbue
beings with artificial morality using AI was in video games and virtual reality [ 84 ] and not
long for robots [ 125 , 284 ]  . 
Wallach and co-researchers coin the term , Artificial Moral Agent ( AMA ) to account for
all such agents : robots , smart software , game characters , virtual reality etc . i . e .  , artificial
agency capable of acting more or less ethically by themselves . This chapter is focused on
the workings of a future human-robot society and efforts to imbue robots with the grammar
of ethical values , moral bindings and social interactions . 
Devices that can respond to natural human traits such as voice and gesture are
commonplace , viz . mobile phones which respond to our voice commands , smart software
which can detect emotions from our facial features , smart environments which respond to
heat signature and human interactions , seamlessly incorporating natural human traits into
technology . Therefore , most of the moral attributes of a robot are hardly an appreciation of
human values and are often reduced to following a script designed by the programmer [ 314 ] 
where the onus of ethics is more with the programmer than the robot or the user . 
Programmer ( s ) → Robot → User ( 8 . 1 ) 
However , embodied AI can take a life of its own thus the workings of the robot and that
of the user can blur out [ 235 ]  , leading to an overlap of ethical values . In the simplest scenario
ethics can be programmed-in as conditional loops . For example Roomba demonstrates an 
 ‘ ethics of self preservation ’ as it avoids its own destruction by not falling off edges and the
PR2 adheres to ‘ ethics of subservience ’ by playing billiards with the human master when
commanded . Such values are no more than illusory , implemented with lines of codes lacking
a humanly feeling of interest or responsibility to it . 
A better option to artificial moral values can be with effective human-robot interaction , 
where robots should be aesthetically appealing and preferably a humanoid , equipped with
vision , voice and touch , adhering to a minimal moral code which may be programmed-in , and
lastly there should be a way to limit robot action , a failsafe to prevent the robots from doing
the unthinkable . These form the guidelines for the semi-sentient paradigm which is discussed
later in the chapter . It is worth noting that anthropomorphism blends in animal / human
behaviour into that of the robot , thus making it appealing to human psyche . This will lead
to scenarios where a humanoid robot will be addressed as if it is at least a near human
being . Thus its actions in a societal concern will be evaluated on the basis of established
human ethics and moral values . 
Robot ethics have often been burdened with criticism ; there have been arguments that 
( 1 ) such an approach is futile as the moral standing of human beings and ethics are not very
well defined and often vary by culture and geographical influences ,  ( 2 ) human ethics have
evolved over thousands of years , from modest hunter gatherers to where we stand now , and
are coded into our DNA — it will not be possible to replicate the workings of mother nature
over a short span of time ,  ( 3 ) the moral standing of an artificial being cannot be gauged
correctly , by human recognition and judgement and ( 4 ) use of robots in lethal actions such
as war , security services , automated vehicles , law enforcement etc . and issues in sharing
sensitive information as in banking , military , corporate secrets etc . 
Also , various unfortunate incidents involving robots have helped such criticism . The
 241
FIGURE 8 . 1 First fatality due to a robot . this incident on January 25 , 1979 , is the first of
a number of such sordid events , in which robots were instrumental for human injury and death . 
However , since most of these robots were not modelled with ethical principles and none of them
was sentient the fatalities are probably best described as accidents , rather than bad intent . Article
in Ottawa Citizen , August 11 , 1983
first death due to a robot was Robert Williams , a worker at Ford Motor Company ’ s Flat
Rock casting plant , as shown in the newspaper article in Figure 8 . 1 . The mishap was due
to malfunctioning when a protruding part of the robot ’ s arm smashed into Williams ’ head , 
and it led to the then largest personal injury award in the state of Michigan , of $ 10 million . 
Two years later , a similar tragedy at Kawasaki led to the death of factory worker Kenji
Urada , when a hydraulic arm robot pushed him into a grinding machine . In 2007 , the death
of 9 people resulted when a robotic anti-aircraft weapon Oerlikon GDF-005 , went berserk
in South Africa and the death a 21-year-old occurred when a robot struck him in the chest
in 2015 at a Volkswagen plant near Kassel , Germany . Events like these have fomented the
opinion that robots should not be allowed to attain high levels of autonomy as it would
jeopardise human safety and well being particularly , keeping robots out of military and
other lethal operations . Containment of robots protects human lives but in contrast prevents
robots from attaining higher levels of autonomy would in effect contain them to be mere
slaves and prevents the emergence of a higher intelligence . In similar context , the fledgling
discipline of robot ethics has lacked consensus for allowing robots to perform lethal actions , 
as in the military . Robots such as Big Dog , SWORDS system and MAARS have fueled this
debate . As of now , every robot action can be completely or partially overridden by human
beings , which has led to a debate in favour of robots supervised by human beings , and
never given full autonomy — a smart slave . However , incidences such as Robert Williams
and Kenji Urada are unfortunate accidents rather than bad intent from the robot ’ s end , as
none of these robots were built with ethical principles and had not attained sentience . 
Therefore , it is likely that sentience will be a key for full moral cognition which is
comparable to that in an adult human being . A simpler alternative without the binding of
242  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
sentience , human-like moral values in a narrow concern may be developed in a robot with
rule-based logic , amicable human-robot interaction and programming loops . Robot ethics
may take a leaf out of machine ethics , and can also be approached via four aspects .  ( 1 ) 
Anthropocentric approaches , where it is developed as conventional ethics centered around
human needs and interest , often narrow and viewed as a systems-engineering problem . Such
approaches code in the robot with some degree of ethical values , but do not facilitate for
emergence of autonomous moral responsibilities .  ( 2 ) Infocentric approaches , based to enact
ethics , though not necessarily finding meaning in it . As Kismet or Pepper , which seems
to make a play on human emotions and thus make a show of ethics in a narrow concern .  
( 3 ) Biocentric approaches , developing ethics as it happens in a human being , as constant
interaction with the environment . Such an approach encourages the development of being
with natural purposes , interests and intent .  ( 4 ) Ecocentric approaches , is the next step in
a society structured by artificial morality where artificial agents work in unison to address
larger problems of the society etc . i . e .  , newer power source for the community , safe haven
and safety from natural calamities . Current day research has at best addressed infocentric
approaches , while research on biocentric approaches to develop full AMA has been pipe
dreams or as , Wallach calls it ,  ‘ vapour ware ’ as no one knows where to begin . However , 
once we have artificial sentientism , extending ethical values to work over a planet-wide
network would probably be a humble beginning for ecocentric approach . While it is also
possible , that a robot or an AI being that can reason ethically might transcend to a morally
higher being than human beings , and therefore may serve as an altruistic and unbiased
advisor to our society about what action may be most suitable — a benevolent moral police
which also has high soothsaying capabilities . Such prospects are briefly discussed in this
chapter , however the next chapter has more details on such ideas . 
8 . 2 MORALITY AND ETHICS
Ethics , the science of morality , separates us from animals . However , ethics is not contained as
a precise set of rules , rather it is an inbuilt grammar which contains principles acquired over
a number of belief systems ; social beliefs , collective opinion , geographical influences , cultural
beliefs , religion , position in society etc . Though these vary with region , race and country , the
following are some common features that are more or less acceptable universally [ 119 , 138 ]  :  
( a ) Reciprocity — both in aggressive intent , viz .  ‘ an eye for an eye ’ and benevolence , viz .  
 ‘ the good comes back to you ’  .  
( b ) A general acceptance of moral code apparently without any edicts or laws . A person
lacking such is often ostracised as rude , anarchist , lunatic or unsocial .  
( c ) Rank , status , social standing and authority — this may reflect in a well-defined
hierarchical system as in the military and a corporate set up and also implicitly in
social interactions .  
( d ) Honesty and trustworthiness are valued and perfidy and unscrupulousness met with
rebuke .  
( e ) Unprovoked aggression is discouraged .  
( f ) Extreme circumstances such as war , flood and devastation and lack of basic amenities
such as food , water and social security appeals to the sympathy quotient in one and all .  
( g ) Ranking of ‘ badness ’ or ‘ goodness ’  , viz . stealing is lesser bad than murder etc .  
( h ) Bounds on moral agency , viz . different moral standards for minors , terrorists , convicts
and felons .  
( i ) Moral rules get a higher ascendancy than common sense or self interest . 
 243
FIGURE 8 . 2 Five models of our moral psychology . There is a lack of convergence on how
emotions influence our moral judgement , however there is a general agreement that emotions and
moral actions work in tandem . Adapted from Hauser [ 146 ]  . 
Authors , researchers and philosophers have often used ethics and morality as near
synonyms , however going by strict definitions , ethics are moral principles that govern a
person ’ s behaviour , while morality constitutes the ability to seek a distinction between
right and wrong or good and bad behaviour . 
Human interactions are based on emotions and expressions conveyed with facial gestures , 
voice intonation and body language , and these also aid in structuring our ethical judgements . 
In the last chapter , we had seen that social robots Kismet , CERO , Eddie etc . are designed
to mirror emotion . It is also worth noting that even with a lack of realistic human features , 
the human user could identify with the right emotion from the robot . 
Moral psychology is dependent on emotion , however there is no clear agreement on
the models [ 146 , 158 ]  , as shown in Figure 8 . 2 .  ( a ) The Pure Kantian model , structures
moral judgement as a rational , deliberative process wherein emotions are instrumental
in generating reactive attitudes , however moral judgement is borne out of a conscious
deliberative process .  ( b ) The Pure Humean model is based on the notion that moral
psychology is essentially emotive while reasoning and other deliberative mechanisms provide
for a rationalisation of the moral judgement .  ( c ) Hybrid models put the onus equally on
both deliberative mechanisms and emotions to lead to a moral judgement .  ( d ) Pure Rawlsian
models are based on the concept that there exists a distinctively moral faculty , operating
independently of deliberative and emotional mechanisms . For such , emotional mechanisms
are gratified output from a moral judgement seemingly instrumental in translating a moral
judgement into action .  ( e ) In Hybrid Rawlsian models , emotion ensues along with the moral
action and can indicate high-conflict personal dilemmas and also erratic output from the
moral faculty . Thus , though it is a day to day experience that moral values , emotions and
moral actions work in tandem , there is still to be a general acceptance on what happens
in the psychological concerns . Therefore modelling a similar process for robots will not be
easy , however it is apparent that for artificial morality there will be a need for artificial
emotions . 
In criticism , both Sullins and Duffy have suggested that emotions and therefore morality
in robots is just an illusion . This illusion is an extension of human beings misleadingly
attributing moral and ethical values to a robot due to our rote sense of ego of associating
ethics to a humanoid appearance and human-like interaction through voice , all of which is
due to good designing and skillful programming . A robot will never truly ‘ feel ’ an emotion
244  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
for eliciting a moral value , but rather only respond according to a program code , following
a subroutine and merely corroborating an obviously false emotional response to the input
user emotion , therefore a superficial exhibition of a moral value . Implementing ethics poses
even more issues as ethical reasoning is based on abstract principles and they cannot
be easily construed in a formal deductive structure . There is no definitive approach to
ethical theory , and the framework varies from ethics of virtue to respect to utilitarianism
to duties and various others , thus leading to a debate as to which approach may be most
suited to intelligent machines . The metaethical frameworks have an element of vagueness
and may be difficult to implement computationally and ethics inherently involve a human
factor where each individual weighs the current situation on his / her experiences , premises , 
beliefs , sentiments , intellectual understanding and principles , not all of which have been
well understood . 
Despite such issues , there has been considerable research into ethical robots as shown
in the timeline , Figure 8 . 3 , particularly over the last three decades and computationally
motivated routes to develop consciousness have been debated time and again . 
Obviously all robots will never qualify to be ethically significant , nor will the ethical
values of every robot be of concern to human society . Since , morality is characterised by
personality and subjectivity , and it can be argued that robots particularly those without
any biological attributes , will always lack in abductive reasoning1
they will never attain
full moral agency . However , human beings at least perceive some moral values in the robot , 
even more so in state-of-the-art social robots such as Pepper and Kodomodroid , however
fake they may seem . In particular , robots that have high autonomy and exhibit a high level
of intelligence will always have the added onus of moral bindings . To be considered as a
moral agency a robot will further need the attributes of intentionality and responsibility . 
1 . Autonomy — moral values can only be the virtue of agents which can be autonomous , 
however autonomy in itself is not sufficient to confirm moral agency . Probably the most
obvious example is that of teleoperated agents , which may exhibit a make believe
autonomy , but will lack in independent agency . 
2 . Intentionality — this is an apparent grey area and even human psychology cannot
be pinned down to a strict good or bad intent . However , as long as the robot ’ s actions
as per the programming and the environment are not deliberately meant to convey
moral actions , both harmful or beneficial , then it can be said that the robot acts as
per its own ‘ free will ’  . 
3 . Responsibility — if the robot ’ s behaviour leads to the assumption that it has a
responsibility to another moral agent , then the robot fulfills at least some social role . 
For example , a nurse robot will attend to its patients in emergency . This behaviour
be it programmed or emergent , will seemingly convey its duty to care . 
Also , in direct correlation to human behaviour in a societal context [ 323 ]  , a full ethical
agency will be anticipated to adhere to norms that we ethically require of the behaviour
of human beings ( moral productivity ) and also have qualities which will qualify them as
1Deductive reasoning proceeds from a general rule to a specific conclusion viz . mathematics where rules
as in algebra or logarithms enable us to reach a conclusion in the specific scenario . Inductive reasoning
is relating observations that are specific to lead up to a general conclusion viz . scientific research which
develops a conclusion from a number of specific studies . In contrast Abductive reasoning is often based on
an incomplete set of observations and proceeds to the likeliest possible explanation . Though being more
diagnostic with guesswork in nature , it is the basis of our real time decision-making leading to the best
outcomes with incomplete information at hand , viz . medical diagnosis is oftentimes abductive . 
 245
FIGURE 8 . 3 Timeline for roboethics , 1990 — 2015 . The concern for imparting robots with ethical values came to the fore with Gip ’ s 1995 paper
and has proliferated to a new discipline of ‘ roboethics ’ over the last 25 years . 
246  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 4 Moral productivity and moral receptivity are complementary relationships
between a moral agent and the rest of the moral community . The moral agent ( small blob ) is
also a part of the larger moral community ( big oval )  . Schematics adapted from Torrance [ 323 ]  . 
beings towards which humans have an ethical duty ( moral receptivity )  , as schematically
shown in Figure 8 . 4 . 
To help this discussion , Moor suggests a classification scheme for ethical agents [ 239 , 240 ]  . 
1 . Ethical Impact Agents are agents whose actions have ethical outcomes whether
deliberate or not . Nearly every tool can be seen as an ethical impact agent , such
as a watch , a car etc . Any robot at the very least has a potential to be an ethical
impact agent , so its actions could be harmful or beneficial to human beings . As an
illustration , consider a robotic manufacturing system , which cuts down human labour , 
though there is no bad intention from the machine ’ s end . In similar manner , the death
of Robert Williams was not due to any wrong intentions of the robot . 
2 . Implicit Agents are agents that have ethical factors built into them , and often are
devices and systems for safety or security . Best illustrations are vehicular safety and
warning systems working towards well being of the driver , ATM machines ensuring
trustworthy money transactions etc . However , the ethics pertain to a narrow concern
as a built-in sense of goodwill by hardware or programming which lacks overarching
ethical principle . For example , a robot security guard at a supermarket can be ( poorly ) 
made with a single programming loop to identify shoplifting if the signal at the exit
gate which reads the bar code goes red . 
Algorithm 3 Robot security guard at a supermarket
repeat
if signal light is red then
stop and apprehend the shoplifter
else
continue with the job
end if
until forever
Here the robot security guard is identifying the shoplifter strictly as per the
programming code , and not anything else . If instead of shoplifting someone gets
stabbed by a knife at close proximity to the robot , it will not apprehend the assailant
as it has not been programmed to do so . 
3 . Explicit Agents are agents that can perceive an ethical principle and process
 247
information and lead to an ethical judgement . In case ethical principles are in conflict , 
the agency is able to work out alternatives . Moor eloquently adds that explicit ethical
agents act from ethics and their virtue is not grounded in a programming code or
hardware . As of now , such agency can only be found in some of the sophisticated
AI labs across the globe . The process to design and make such agents is rooted in
machine learning , training an ANN or evolutionary or genetic algorithm . 
4 . Full Ethical Agents take a further stride from being explicit agents . Not only can
they make a range of ethical judgements , they also have the humanly attributes of
consciousness , intentionality and free will . An adult human being is a full ethical
agent . 
It is tempting to develop ethics as a subroutine , a top-down paradigm where ethical rules
are implemented as decision algorithms via programming codes in an AI agent . However
such top-down approaches as Asimov ’ s laws or any attempts to program Kantian reciprocity
or novel efforts to codify the ten commandments from the bible etc . are often prone
to conflicts and this rule-based ethical behaviour is at best an imitation in a particular
narrow concern . Hence , coding in ethical values will not be sufficient in building a full
moral agency , therefore researchers have explored bottom-up approaches , as shown in
Figure 8 . 5 . Bottom-up approaches have had a special place in mobile robotics since the
subsumption architecture and , for developing ethics , the approach will be motivated by
Piagetian principles which will allow the AI agent to discover such ethical rules through
experience and continued interaction with the environment , which may be possible with
connectionist architecture and machine learning methods . Thus in contrast to a rule-based
approach , a developmental paradigm nurtures ethics in a robot by mimicking the growth
of a child with zero moral value to a fully grown adult with near complete moral agency , 
a very slow and gradual process . The robot will resemble mimic the growth as seen in
children ; observation , extrapolation and correspondence with the behaviour of adult human
beings . Learning and adapting are seen as key points in such a model . There have been
suggestions that it would be unethical to create self-aware beings who did not possess a
human-like urge for learning and intellectual growth . The top-down approach is riddled
with multual conflicts and bottom-up approach is exhaustive and time consuming . Wallach
and Allen [ 9 , 343 ] suggest employing a hybrid approach of top-down and bottom-up routes . 
Therefore , starting with some basic Kantian-like virtues programmed into the robot along
with a connectionist paradigm should be a good beginning to gradually grow into a full
moral agent . 
Wallach and co-researchers , identify three levels of artificially developed morality as
shown in Figure 8 . 6 . 
1 . Operational Morality — The design and testing process is undertaken in full
awareness of the ethical values , and the ethical action of the agency is within the
control of the designer and the user . For example , a steam iron will be insulated to
protect the human user . 
2 . Functional Morality — The next level of morality , includes systems that respond
with a predictable , often redundant response which pertains within acceptable
behaviours to intelligent systems capable of determining some of the moral bearings of
their own actions . An example of the former is a mobile GPS tracker in Google Map . 
You may be trying to track your friend or you may be a felon on the run . The GPS
tracker is not aware of your intentions and behaves the same under both scenarios . 
A good example is ethical decision systems such as MedEthEx for doctors to choose
248  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 5 Top-down vs . bottom-up , ethics can be implemented as a Top-Down approach , by
installing ethical principles and values into a robot , or as a Bottom-Up developmental approach . 
Typically , Bottom-Up approaches are pristine and more tractable , a Top-down paradigm is safer , 
more predictable and easier to control . Wallach and Allen [ 343 ] conclude that none of these
approaches are sufficient , hence a hybrid approach with a co-joining of both these paradigms is
worth an exploration . 
the treatment / clinical process adhering to medical ethics and Modria and other such
software for legal assessment and consultation . 
3 . Full Moral Agency — The agent , other than attaining reliable functional morality
also learns from its experience and keeps enhancing its own intelligence and moral
values . A full moral robot will have high autonomy and high ethical sensitivity , as in
an adult human being . 
As shown in Figure 8 . 6 , current day robots typically have low ethical sensitivity and
low autonomy . Vacuum cleaning robot Roomba has the capability to detect the edge of
the floor and prevent a fatality and it is committed to self preservation , but it is low on
ethical sensitivity . In contrast an autopilot is high on autonomy but low on ethics and
it is committed to a narrow concern . Kismet responds to human emotions , buthowever
it is merely responding to an external stimulus and not adhering to any ethical or moral
principles . Star war robots as R2D2 and C3PO and iPhone ’ s Siri all respond to a human
action , be it voice , gesture or action . However none of them abide by a set of guiding rules
which determine their virtue and righteousness . 
An example for the first robot that makes it to the domain of operational morality is the
robot parole officer in the movie Elysium . When in conversation with Max ( Matt Damon )  , 
the robot is able to make conscious decisions based on Max ’ s heart beat and pulse rate , it
is able to infer emotional inputs such as condescension and sarcasm from Max ’ s tonality
and gestures . It is able to offer medical aid and it also has the authority to award judicial
sentences and extend parole etc . The robot butler in the movie ‘ Frank and the Robot ’ is
also in the same domain but it has higher autonomy than the robot parole officer as it can
 249
FIGURE 8 . 6 Ethical sensitivity vs . autonomy . the classification by Wallach and co-researchers
helps to understand where current-day robotics stands , and what may be needed for a full moral
agency . Various robots , from day-to-day use and also from fiction have been used to illustrate the
concept of moral agency in a robot . Adapted from Wallach and Allen [ 343 ]  . 
250  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 7 NS-4 , Robocop and Cylons , The NS-4 bust used in the movie I , Robot , Robocop
and Cylon Centurian . Robots which are high on ethical sensitivity and also on autonomy are still
a lore of science fiction . All three images are in public domain , courtesy wikipedia . org . 
move around . Some of the fictional robots , as shown in Figure 8 . 7 , the NS-4 from the movie 
 ‘ I , Robot ’ and Nexus-6 from ‘ Blade Runner ’  , will be the best examples for robots in the
domain of functional morality . NS-4 could take conscious decisions based on information
acquired and also adhere to the broad altruism of doing good for the human race while
Nexus-6 was a further advancement and they could feel attachment , pain , happiness and
also had a conscious understanding of vanity and self respect . Nexus-6 were designed such
that they learned as they experienced the world around them . An experienced Nexus-6 could
have been a full moral agent . A more suitable example for full moral agency is Cylon-6 the
humanoid Cylon in the TV series Battlestar Galactica . Cylon-6 is shown to have capability
of having human form and emotions , and at cellular level its body mimics humans thus
making them almost undetectable . Cylon-6 is able to identify prejudice and racist remarks . 
It also expresses contempt on being treated as expendable . 
Moor ’ s classification cannot be mapped into the ethical sensitivity vs . autonomy plot by
Wallach and co-researchers . At the very least , it is anticipated that full ethical agents will
also be sufficiently moral and high on autonomy . 
The term ‘ Roboethics ’ was coined by Gianmarco Veruggio at the First International
Symposium of Roboethics at Villa Nobel , Sanremo in January 2004 . The discipline demands
inputs not only from roboticists but also from philosophers , jurists , neurologists , surgeons , 
sociologists , social scientists , futurists , anthropologists , logicians , moralists , industrial
design experts and science fiction authors . There has been growing interest as robots are
destined to play a greater role in the immediate future . 
8 . 3 ASIMOV ’ S 3 LAWS AND THEIR LIMITATIONS
Robot ethics and morality are structured subject to the fact that human beings are the
dominant race and robots are subservient to them . The abiding rules for such a society
are suggested by famed science fiction author , Isaac Asimov , shown in Figure 8 . 8 , in his
short story ,  ‘ Runaround ’ in 1942 . The three laws were inspired by the Hippocratic Oath
and aimed at maintaining control in the society , prevented any rebellious behaviour by
the robots and confirmed to an effective and fruitful human-robot cooperation . The laws
 251
Asimov ’ s laws ( 1942 ) 
First Law A robot may not injure a human being or , through inaction , allow a
human being to come to harm
Second Law A robot must obey orders given to it by human beings , except where
such orders would conflict with the first law
Third Law A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does
not conflict with the first or second law
are based on functional morality and assume that the robots have human-like agency and
cognition pertaining to ethical and moral decision making . 
Over the years , these three laws have come to be a cult of science fiction and have served
as food for thought in the scientific , AI and philosophical communities . They also led to
the popularity of Asimov and his blend of writing , as the greatest proponent of robot based
science fiction . He along with Arthur C . Clarke and Robert A . Heinlein constituted a trio of
science fiction authors who gave birth to an epoch in science fiction . His fiction influenced
nearly every other science fiction authors in the times to come , viz . Philip K . Dick , Ursula
K . Le Guin , Kurt Vonnegut and others . The laws have been so successful in popular media , 
in books and movies , that they have come to underscore popular opinion on how robots
should behave when interacting with human beings . However , the laws have had their share
of criticism [ 13 , 70 , 71 ]  . 
1 . Suppression of a superior being . These three laws confirm the hegemony of the
human race and limit the workings of a more intelligent being arguably with better
reason . These laws are in fact a blueprint for a robot slave race serving a human
beings as benevolent masters race . Gip ’ s criticism of Asimov ’ s three laws is harsh and
he calls them “ laws for slaves ”  . 
2 . Shortcomings of the three laws . There has not been appreciable support for
these laws from the AI community . Critics have labeled theses laws ‘ unacceptable ’ 
and ‘ unsatisfactory ’  . This lacuna in Asimov ’ s laws , can be summarised as :  
( a ) Shortcomings of the First Law . Asimov ’ s first law can be implemented with
lines of code as given in algorithm 4 . Which will need a robot to conclusively
recognise a human being , which makes it prone to implementation failure as it
would need definitive means of recognition based on speech , vision , biological
signatures as body heat , heart beat , pulse rate etc . such a foolproof method of
recognition is not present with current day technology . In such concerns , Brooks
has admitted the limitations of Asimov ’ s laws as roboticists are not able to make
robots which can understand abstract concepts as ,  ‘ injury ’ or ‘ harm ’ in real-world
situations . Murphy also points to legal and social issues in implementation of the
first law . The first law further becomes a topic of debate as the military has
been using robots for warfare , directly or indirectly harming human beings and
humanity .  
( b ) Shortcomings of the Second Law . Asimov envisaged a world where simple
instructions to robots could be issued over short dialogues . Unfortunately modern
day AI has not yet developed a robust natural language processing which
would enable a human-human like conversation with an AI agent . iPhone ’ s Siri
252  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 8 Isaac Asimov was the originator of robot science fiction in late 1940s and early 1950s . 
This sketch by renowned science-fiction and fantasy illustrator Rowena Morrill depicts him on a
throne with symbols and markings of robot , man , space technology and scientific innovation — 4
epithets of his life ’ s work . GFDL license courtesy . 
 253
Algorithm 4 Asimov ’ s first law
repeat
if human then
do no harm
else
do task assigned
end if
until forever
is a commendable advancement , however we are far from developing natural
interactions between human beings and an AI agent .  
( c ) Shortcomings of the Third Law . Murphy argues that implementation of
the third law would need added sensors , and for lesser sophisticated robots
engaged in menial routine jobs , enabling them to self preservation may not be
very economical . It is cheaper to replace the robot than provide each single robot
with added sensors . 
From an experimental standpoint , Winfield and co-researchers at University of Bristol
have tested the limits of the first law [ 284 ]  , where a robot was programmed to save human
proxies from falling into a pot hole . For a single subject the robot performed well ; it rushed
towards the pothole and saved the human proxy . However on adding a second human proxy
falling into the pothole at the same time , the robot was forced to chose between the two
subjects . Winfield et al . observed that 49% of the time the robot managed to save one
human at the cost of the other , while for 9% of the time it did manage to save both . 
However 42% of the time the robot failed to make a sufficiently quick decision which led to
both the human proxies falling into the pothole . Here Asimov ’ s first law fails since there is
no well defined hierarchy when it comes to saving one of the two human beings . This flaw
is further illustrated in trolley problems , which is discussed in a later section . 
Other than limitations illustrated in these experiments , the laws can conflict with each
other . As an example , consider a law-enforcing constabulary robot . It comes across a scenario
where a person is being robbed by a gang of goons . Being a policing robot it has received
instructions to protect human beings ( and other robots ?  ) and maintain order . Here , the
second law would enable the robot to attack the goons but this would conflict with the first
law . Another instance of conflict , consider a medical assistant robot whose job is to assist
the surgeon and aid in medical surgery . For such a robot , when the surgeon cuts open the
patient for surgery , chances are that the robot will lack enough sight to see the greater good
and it will be in a state of conflict with the first and the second law . 
In contrast , unlike law in a human context where disobedience leads to punishment , 
inflicted as pain , stigma , social ostracism and monetary loss , Asimov ’ s laws are programmed
into the robot in such a way that it is not able to engage in ‘ illicit ’ activities . Therefore a
conflict can prove fatal and may shut down the entire system or invoke an infinite loop . 
After the formulation of these laws , Asimov realised that humanity as a whole must get
a higher priority than an individual . Asimov revised his laws and formulated the Zeroeth
law in 1985 , 4 laws where the lower numbered laws supersede the higher-numbered laws . 
There have been variants and other laws suggested by various authors , philosophers and
roboticists alike . In his own writings , Asimov has modified the first law to ,  ‘ A robot may not
harm a human being ’  . This change is made for the Nestor robots with positronic brains in
the 1947 novel ,  ‘ Little Lost Robot ’  . The modification of the first law is suggested as a way to
prevent operational issues , Asimov depicts a facility where human beings and robots work
254  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
The Fourth Law ( Dilov , 1974 in ‘ The trip of Icraus ’  ) 
Fourth Law A robot must establish its identity as a robot in all cases
Asimov ’ s laws - revised ( 1985 ) 
Zeroeth Law A robot may not injure humanity , or , through inaction , allow
humanity to come to harm
First Law A robot may not injure a human being , or , through inaction , allow a
human being to come to harm , unless this would violate the zeroeth law
Second Law A robot must obey orders given to it by human beings , except where
such orders would conflict with the zeroeth or first law
Third Law A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does
not conflict with the zeroeth , first or second law
side by side and are exposed to low and apparently safe levels of gamma radiation for the
human beings , but it is lethal for the positronic brain of the Nestor robots . Asimov portrays
the notion of a hazard as anticipated by the Nestor robots , which to the human being is not
so hazardous . The clause ‘ through inaction , allow a human being to come to harm ’ makes
the Nestor robots ’ attempt to rescue human beings from places with low radiation where
there is no real danger to the human beings , and in the process destroy itself . 
Science fiction author Lyuben Dilov extended Asimov ’ s laws to include a fourth law , 
which he introduced in his novel ,  ‘ The Trip of Icarus ’  . Roger MacBride Allen in his trilogy , 
also used a similar statement for the first law of his four ‘ new laws ’ while the second law
is suitably changed to ‘ cooperate ’ instead of ‘ obey ’ and the third law doesn ’ t have the
restrictions imposed by the second law . Thus robot cannot be ordered to destroy itself . The
fourth law enunciates autonomy to the robot as long it does not conflict with the first three
laws . Other variants and parodies of Asimov ’ s laws have been rampant in science fiction . 
Asimov was aware of the shortcomings of the laws and in his 1983 novel ,  ‘ Robots of
Dawn ’  , Asimov added further conditions to the laws to include harm through an active deed
outweighs harm through passivity and a robot should choose truth over nontruth considering
the harm to be nearly equal in both scenarios , thus accommodating scapegoating and noble
lies . Asimov brought in these changes by coining the Zeroeth law , revising his three laws of
1985 . 
Clarke , expands on Asimov ’ s modification by adding a Meta Law , more clauses to the
second and third laws , a fourth law and also a procreation law . Clarke ’ s additions helped
sanctify the laws from a design perspective , the robotic architecture should be designed to
enable the laws to effectively control a robot ’ s behaviour . Clarke also brings into perspective
robot-robot interactions and develops a hierarchy in a robot society where a robot must
follow orders from a superordinate robot and can give instructions to subordinate robots . 
Murphy and Woods [ 247 ]  , attempt to improve on the limitations of Asimov ’ s laws
and suggest the ‘ 3 laws of Responsible Robotics ’  . Murphy ’ s approach confirms the human
sovereignty and superiority and reduces the goodwill principles of Asimov for a benevolent
human-like robot to control rules for a machine with far less autonomy and hardly any
ethical values . If Asimov ’ s 3 laws tried to preserve the workings of an apparently superior
 255
Extended set of the Law of Robotics , Clarke ( 1994 ) 
The Meta Law
A robot may not act unless its actions are in harmony with the Laws of Robotics . 
Law Zero
A robot may not cause harm to humanity , or , through inaction , subject humanity
to harm . 
Law One
A robot may not cause harm to a human being or , through inaction , subject a
human being to come to harm , unless this would violate a higher order law . 
Law Two 
( a ) A robot must obey human beings except where such would conflict with
a higher order law .  
( b ) A robot must obey superordinate robots , except where such would
conflicts with a higher order law . 
Law Three 
( a ) A robot must protect a superordinate robot , unless such protection
conflicts with a higher order law .  
( b ) A robot must protect its own self , unless such protection conflicts with
a higher order law . 
Law Four
A robot must carry out the duties for which it has been designed , except where
such would conflict with a higher order law
The Procreation Law
A robot may not engage in activities of design , manufacture , or maintenance of
a robot unless the new or modified robot ’ s actions are in harmony with the Laws
of Robotics . 
race , maintaining the hegemony of the human populace by codifying philanthropic principles
into machines , the ‘ 3 laws of Responsible Robotics ’ provides for instruments of control to the
human race . However , unlike Asimov , Murphy ’ s laws are easier to implement with current
technologies . 
Murphy ’ s first law calls for a moratorium on robot deployment , while the second
broadens the horizon to include nearly all types of robots — those which have effective
human-robot interaction and also the ones equipped with lesser hardware and capabilities . 
The third is for self preservation and hints at social interaction with other autonomous
artificial agents . 
In the movie RoboCop and its sequels , a mutilated police officer is given artificial
robotic limbs and his brain is augmented with added memory and processing power , thus
transforming him to a near android . Robocop is programmed to adhere to three ‘ prime
directives ’ and must obey them without a question . The philosophy and the syntax of these
laws bear striking similarity to Asimov ’ s . 
The fourth directive is classified and only revealed at the climax of the movie . It involves
Robocop succumbing to an immediate shutdown when taking severe actions of arrest or
termination of any senior employee of the company that created him . 
256  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
3 laws of Responsible Robotics , Murphy and Woods ( 2009 ) 
First Law A human may not deploy a robot without the human-robot work system
meeting the highest legal and professional standards of safety and ethics
Second Law A robot must respond to humans as appropriate for their roles
Third Law A robot must be endowed with sufficient situated autonomy to protect
its own existence as long as such protection provides smooth transfer of control to
other agents consistent with the first and second law
3 prime directives ( 1987 , Robocop ) 
1 . Serve the Public Trust
2 . Protect the Innocent
3 . Uphold the Law
4 . Classified
In contrast to these edicts of altruistic and slave robots , Tilden and Hasslacher
developed , design and operational principles for BIOMORPHs ( BIOlogical MORPHology ) 
— creatures with biologically inspired morphology , and proposed three maxims for the
survival of such a being . Notwithstanding , that Asimov ’ s third law reads nearly the same
as Tilden ’ s first , these laws do not address the realms of ethics but rather pertain to
self preservation and address the egoistic tendencies . Argumentatively , a survival system
supersedes an ethical one , as ethics would come into play only when the robot is capable
of affecting minimal action . Survivability is an inward-looking Darwinian approach which
doesn ’ t fit seamlessly to the landscape of ethical and moral values . However such instincts
must be programmed into the robot for continued performance even under harsh conditions . 
As a contrast , though the two notions pose as obverse to one other , Darwinian ego-centrism
and ethics must co-exist in a robot . 
In concern for full moral agency , Asimov in the original 1942 version of the law dealt
in the realms of operational morality which he tried to bring to a higher moral agency , 
catering to a greater good , seemingly closer to full moral agency in the revision of his laws
in 1985 . Clarke brings in robot-robot interaction and extends Asimov ’ s 1985 laws to include
a higher regime , the Meta Law . Pretty much in contrast , Murphy and Woods confirm the
supremacy and dominance of human beings in a far greater way , reducing the robot populace
to slave labour lacking sentientism and ethical values and coin their three laws in the realm
of operational morality , if not worse . 
RoboCop ’ s secret directive and Asimov ’ s Second Law both require artificial agents to
be virtual slaves of their human masters . While this may help humans feel safer in the
2 Protocols ( 2014 , Auto´mata ) 
1 . A robot cannot harm any form of life
2 . A robot cannot alter itself or others
 257
Survival laws for a robot , Hasslacher and Tilden ( 1995 ) 
1 . A robot must protect its existence at all costs . 
2 . A robot must obtain and maintain access to its own power source . 
3 . A robot must continually search for better power sources . 
presence of robots , clearly this is not a duty that should be thought to apply to moral
agents generally . In a quest that artificial beings attain ‘ personhood ’  , it is an imperative
that we abandon Asimov ’ s laws . 
8 . 4 ETHICAL THEORY FOR ROBOTS
As discussed previously , Moor ’ s classification scheme was made on the ethical actions of the
AMA . Wallach and Allen made their classification on how to design an AMA in relation
to its autonomy . Gips ’ paper suggested deontology and utilitarianism as 2 approaches for
designing AMA , while other routes , such as religious and philosophical , have been explored . 
From a philosophical discussion , roboethics should be considered using one of the ethical
theories . Principles such as Kant ’ s Categorical Imperative and Mill ’ s Utilitarianism have
stood the test of time and have been the basis of understanding ethics , for the last two
centuries . Such Metaethical approaches has been popular among philosophers , while a robot
architecture drawn on such principles has been a hot topic of research in AI and mobile
robotics . 
Ethics can be classified as : Deontology , which underscores obligations , duties and
rights ; Consequentialism , predominantly Utilitarianism which focuses on efforts to
maximise net happiness and well being for everyone ; and Virtue ethics , the virtue of good
character , which will enable prudency of ethical values . While other motivations to develop
artificial ethics have been : from Buddhist maxims , to create a suffering being , Divine
command ethics , where the ethics are seemingly derived directly from God almighty ; 
and Action based methods developed by the coalescence of deontic and epistemic logic . 
Deontic Epistemic Action Logic ( DEAL ) in particular has been very popular with the
technologists . 
Figure 8 . 9 shows the various approaches to design and classify synthetic morality . 
8 . 4 . 1 Deontology
In a deontological perspective , actions are evaluated in and of themselves on their own
merit of action rather than its consequences . Deontology is a rule-based system which spells
out the duties and responsibilities for the robot , as the 10 commandments given by Moses , 
edicts from the holy Quran , the teachings of Lord Krishna in the Bhagwad Gita and of
course , Asimov ’ s laws . Many a times we adhere to moral values often automatically , as if
our social existence has led us to these principles , viz . Don ’ t kill , Don ’ t cheat , Obey the law
etc . which are seemingly embedded into our psychology . A rule-based approach , easily fits a
programming paradigm and therefore finds appeal with the robot developers . As discussed
for Asimov ’ s laws , a strict rule-based system faces rout when faced with a conflict . 
258  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 9 AMA classification , full moral agency is yet to be realised as is shown by the dotted lines in the above classification . It is to be noted
that Moor ’ s classification of ethical agents and Wallach ’ s nomenclature for moral agency do not have a very direct correlation . 
 259
Failure of Reciprocity
The ‘ ethic of reciprocity ’ is treating others only as you consent to being treated in the same
situation . However , reciprocity fails for robots , since : 
1 . A robot should be able to conclusively identify the effects of other human beings ’ and robots ’ 
actions on itself
2 . It should be able to evaluate the consequences of its own actions on others
3 . It should be able to take into account the differences in individual psychology in concern with the
above two conditions . For instance children below the age of 5 and senile older people past the
age of 90 will have an appreciably different psychology compared to the rest of the people . 
4 . It should have an appreciation for the merit of the situation , distinguish between normal and
extreme circumstances . In extreme scenarios , viz . disaster management , medical emergency , civil
unrest etc . various unprecedented actions may have to be taken and unlikely tradeoffs made , and
ethics and morality may not be as per known maxims in such situations . 
Thus , in hindsight the above is another form of the frame problem , however in an
ethical domain [ 3 ]  . Therefore , deontological approaches are marred with conflict and
implementation issues . Also , the golden rule works with us human beings , since we
are moral agents partly because of our psychological attributes , animals with needs , 
inclinations , reason , virtue and aspirations . 
Implementing simple ethical principles such as , caution for using profane and abusive
language can be promptly implemented in chatbots . The chatbot AI2
searches the input for
content from a list of previously provided profane words and warns the human user not to
use such language . Consistent usage from the human user is usually met with penalty and
shut-down of the software . Designing the response for the computer can be improved with 
( 1 ) parsing of the input , to analyse the context of the abuse and ( 2 ) checking the history of
the conversation , where the user may have expressed the profanity as an emotional outburst , 
excitement or frustation . As discussed previously , chatbots have made the best imitations
of personhood all by conveying emotions and expressions using power words . 
Asimov , Clarke and later Murphy and Woods attempt to tailor such rules with
prioritisation in an attempt to overcome the problem of conflict . However sanctioning ethical
rules as formalised algorithms will only lead to a second set of algorithms when the first
ones conflict and another set of algorithms when the second set conflicts , and this will be
an apparently infinite process testing the bounds of practicality if ever implemented . This
is shown in the cartoon in Figure 8 . 10 . 
8 . 4 . 2 Consequentialism
In consequentialist theories , actions are judged by their consequences . Where the best action
taken with the current set of premises , is believed to result in the best future . Arguably , the
best suited consequentialist theory for implementing ethics into an AI agent is utilitarianism . 
Though ethics cannot be truly quantified , utilitarianism is structured on the notion that
ethical decisions are quotiented on ‘ moral arithmetic ’  , where the right action is the one likely
2ALICE has been a favourite with programmers and hobbyists for such NLP adventures . 
260  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 10 Rule-based approach . A rule-based approach to build ethical values in AI agents
will succumb to mutual conflict of the set of rules , conflict of values and conflict of interest . Further
rules developed to settle such conflicts will only lead to further conflicts , thus an apparently
unending set of rules . Such an approach will lack practicality . Cartoon made by the author , 
CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
to result in maximum aggregate happiness and human well being calculated for everyone
affected by the decision , where each person counts equally . The consequentialist computation
scheme , 
P = Σpiwi ( 8 . 2 ) 
where P is the total happiness , wi
is the weight assigned to each person and pi
is the
measure of pleasure or happiness or goodness for each person . In utilitarianism , the weight
for each person is equal . While in egoism , as in Tilden ’ s laws of survival , the weight for
himself would be 1 and for everyone else it would be 0 . While , for an altruist being , the
weight for himself is 0 , the weight for everyone else is positive . 
The computation scheme may seem very appealing , since a computational approach
is able to model ethics , however this is merely an ideal which in principle can never be
implemented across all situations and for all of humanity . Gips further illustrates that the
weight , wi
is not very well defined in the real world . Friends , family and close acquaintances
clearly get a higher weightage than people we don ’ t know . Also a citizen of the same country
or a person of the same community may get a higher weightage than any other person . 
The moot of this approach lies in defining the abstract notion of happiness and well
being as computationally tractable . Also , another shortcoming is that utilitarianism would
need the quality of foresight to effect a right decision process , as it is impossible to calculate
total happiness when the number of people is effectively large . Both the shortcomings are
misinterpretation of utilitarianism as it is meant as a criterion and guiding principle for
moral conduct not a decision procedure . However , there have been suggestions to employ
history of observations , probabilistic tools such as Bayesian networks and Markov models
and also psychological monitoring to ascertain the utilitarian aspects of a given scenario . 
Cloos suggests the development of the Utilibot , a health monitoring and carer robot , 
 261
on utilitarian principles , was initially meant for a one human user . The robot is modelled
to function over a network . Cloos relies on graduated training , where the first level of
training is acquired in the laboratory as version 1 . 0 . A health emergency is ascertained
from psychological monitoring using wearable microsensor systems and the right drug or
medical procedure is suggested using an RFID bar code reader . While Utilibot 2 . 0 will
be able to deal with psychological injury and also particular medical conditions such as
Alzheimer ’ s , diabetes , hyper-tension etc . Utilitbot 3 . 0 is prospected to be able to attend to
many users . While the Care-O-Bot may appeal as an avatar of the Utilibot , it hasn ’ t yet
been programmed for ethical values . Very similar approach has been used by the Andersons
to program the Nao robot as a carer . 
8 . 4 . 3 Deontology vs . Consequentialism — The trolley problem
Artificial ethics can be imparted either by deontology , a rule-based approach or by
consequentialism , taking the best action taken in the given scenario . Trolley problems are
thought experiments to illustrate ethical conundrums in both approaches , that with even the
most sophisticated technology , one does come to situations where harm cannot be avoided . 
There are variants of the problem , the simplest scenario is shown in Figure 8 . 11 ;  
 “ You are the driver of a trolley on a railway track , and see that there are
railroad workers straight ahead . To avoid killing these five people , the only
option available to you is to change tracks in which case a single person , who is
working on the other track will be killed . Therefore you have two options :  ( 1 ) 
do nothing , in which case the trolley kills the five people or ( 2 ) switch tracks , 
which will kill one person .  ” 
Saving five should score over saving one , but this brings into question the morality of
the driver . Switching tracks requires a conscious decision by the driver thus making him
more culpable for one death than five deaths that would happen through inaction . From a
consequentialist approach , the trolley problem is an instance of ‘ scapegoating ’  , wherein one
person is sacrificed for the greater good of the rest of the world , as five lives count more
than one . Deontologically the problem reduces to adherence to rules which led to the death
of five railway workers . 
Another version of this problem , the ‘ transplant ’ version is as follows :  
 “ You are a very able doctor specialised in transplant of organs and at hand
are three patients requiring transplant of kidney , heart and liver , respectively . If
they do not get transplants within the next few hours they will die . A healthy
person comes in for a general check up , he is medically perfect to be a donor . 
The transplant will involve him dying . So it is clear that he will not consent to
it . However , since this action will save three lives sacrificing one , should you go
ahead with the transplant ?  ” 
In the trolley problem , it is observed that though people easily consent to killing the
single person in the trolley problem , the trend is reversed and popular opinion suggests that
the doctor should not go ahead with the transplant in the second example . Since robots
are already central to sophisticated surgery and resuscitation methods , it may not be long
before Thompson ’ s example comes true where a humanoid robot doctor or a smart system
makes this decision . Other appealing variations are :  
 “ Instead of being the driver of the trolley , you are an onlooker watching the scene
262  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 11 Trolley problem with robot driver , is a glowing example where deontology and
consequentialism are at odds . Cartoon made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
unfold atop an overhead bridge . The trolley is headed straight for the crew of five
railroad workers . You notice a tourist on your side that peers over the bridge ’ s
edge to see what ’ s happening . You know that if you pushed the tourist off the
edge of the bridge , he would land on the tracks which would result in his death
and stoppage of the train , saving the crew of railroad workers . To push or not
to push ?  ” 
The above scenario , in a similar way to the parent one involves the sacrifice of one
human life to save five . A vox populi on the matter consents easily to the killing of one
person on the other track in the parent scenario but conveys serious objection to pushing
the tourist to his death . As an argument , on duty as a trolley driver , there is an obligation
to navigate the train in a sensible manner . On the other hand , as an onlooker on the bridge , 
one doesn ’ t really have a warrant of moral obligation to get involved as this crisis unfolds . 
Psychologists also argue that , pushing someone to their death with your bare hands deeply
scars one ’ s soul , however noble the after effects are . However , orchestrating an ‘ accident ’  , 
leading someone at a distance to die due to one ’ s inaction apparently is taken as legitimate . 
What happens if the trolley is fully automated or has a robotic driver since the trolley
problem enforces that there will be at least one death . It is worth noting that such a scenario
is no more confined to the ethics textbook , but rather a real problem for autonomous
vehicles , such as Google self-driving cars , shown in Figure 8 . 12 , Oxford RobotCar UK and
delivery robots such as Starship . In corollary to the trolley problem , suppose the self-driving
car has to make a choice between ramming into a group of five children or a single pedestrian . 
How should the car be programmed to respond ?  [ 29 ] 
Considering a robot driver , if the robot changes tracks , one person is killed by its actions . 
If the robot doesn ’ t change track , it allows five human beings to die through inaction . In any
of the consequences Asimov ’ s first law would lose its prudence . As per previous examples , 
further laws to resolve such a conflict will fail to solve the problem conclusively . Hence
a typical top-down approach is not recommended for the trolley problem . Employing a
bottom-up approach and allowing the robotic driver to learn from such scenarios would be
 263
FIGURE 8 . 12 Google cars are cutely designed , fully electric and can attain a maximum speed of
25 miles per hour . They are equipped with 3D laser-mapping , GPS , and radar for a range of about
100 miles and are programmed for priority to human pedestrians . Unlike traditional vehicles , these
do not have any pedals or any instrument panel and don ’ t require a steering wheel . The car has
known issues with complicated tasks such as in four-way stops at a criss cross or in reacting to a
yellow light , and is still in the testing phase . Image courtesy www . flickr . com , CC license . 
devastating and will put many human lives in peril , while the driver is in the learning phase . 
However learning by demonstration ( LBD ) may be a possible soultion to this problem . Thus , 
in its parent form the trolley problem for robotic drivers provides fodder for a Luddite , 
whence abolishing new age technology . The trolley should never be made fully autonomous
or be in full control of a robotic driver . However , a more plausible solution would be to have
the trolley in partial human control or allow for human overrides . 
To extend this debate , Millar [ 231 , 312 ] at Carleton University , Ottawa , rewords the
trolley problem for autonomous vehicles . The ‘ Tunnel ’ version :  
 “ You are in an autonomous car which is moving on a single-lane mountainous
highway , and is approaching a narrow tunnel . As the car is about to enter the
tunnel , a kid runs across the road and falls down at about the centre of the lane , 
blocking the entrance to the tunnel . The car is not able to brake in time and
is left with two options : run over and kill the child or swerve into the walls on
either side of the tunnel , and in process killing or severely injuring you .  ” 
Which of the two choices is more ethical ? Who decides ? The manufacturers ? The users ? 
Or is a new set of laws is made for such situations ? The moral debate is even more critical
as there is clearly no right answer , and if such moral values are coded into machines , it
denies the individual his moral choices . Informed consent of the user may seem the right
way , however as we have seen in classical variants of the trolley problem , moral decision
processes are often more twisted than they may seem to be . 
Google ’ s autonomous driverless cars employ 3D laser-mapping , GPS , and radar to sense
their environment , and have a local range of about 100 miles . While they have a cute
look and maximum speed is a low 25 miles per hour , there still need to be safety and
security rules in case things go wrong . Four states in the United States : California , Florida , 
Michigan and Nevada already have laws for driverless cars . Across the Atlantic , UK is to
264  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
allow driverless cars soon , and the trend is catching up in various places in western Europe . 
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) in the US has established
an official classification system for autonomous vehicles ; 
1 . Level 0 : The driver completely controls the vehicle at all times . 
2 . Level 1 : Individual vehicle controls are automated , such as electronic stability control
or automatic braking . 
3 . Level 2 : At least two controls can be automated in unison , such as adaptive cruise
control in combination with lane keeping . 
4 . Level 3 : The driver can fully cede control of all safety-critical functions in certain
conditions . The car senses when conditions require the driver to retake control and
provides a “ sufficiently comfortable transition time ” for the driver to do so . 
5 . Level 4 : The vehicle performs all safety-critical functions for the entire trip , with
the driver not expected to control the vehicle at any time . As this vehicle would
control all functions from start to stop , including all parking functions , it could include
unoccupied cars . 
While a driverless car will not drink and drive , it is a conundrum to design it ’ s ethical
values . Human partial control and overrides are workarounds and don ’ t eliminate ethical
concerns . There are suggestions for the robot driver ( or driverless software ) to learn from
or mimic a human driver . However , this also has issues as Barder points out . During
accidents human drivers would drive into other pedestrians in a self preservation mode . 
Should the robotic driver do the same ? How many lives of strangers can it put at risk at
the cost of saving the human passengers in the car ? Considering that we live in capitalistic
market economics and class system is commonplace , a bourgeois version of the car would
be modelled on an algorithm that protects everyone equally , while a more expensive upper
class version would employ an algorithm that protects its owner at the expense of everyone
else . Here , Barder suggests with a hint of sarcasm that one should have the choice of buying
utilitarian or a deontological car ,  ‘ as a matter of ethical choice ’  . 
The debate between deontology and consequentialism in the ethical domain is very
similar to the argument between deliberative and reactive approaches in the control domain , 
as discussed in Chapter 3 . 
Logic for Machine Ethics — Deontic Epistemic Action Logic ( DEAL ) 
A tautological foundation for machine ethics using Deontic , Epistemic and Action Logic 
( DEAL ) has been developed by den Hoven and Lokhorst . DEAL allows a machine to represent
ethics explicitly and operate effectively on the basis of this knowledge . DEAL blends in 3
types of meta ethics :  ( 1 ) Deontic logic — for obligations ,  ( 2 ) Epistemic — drawn from
beliefs and knowledge and ( 3 ) Action — which is self evident . The approach can be codified
as with operators as : 
1 . Deontic logic studies the logic of obligation , permission and prohibition . Deontic logic has one basic
operator : O (  " it is obligatory that "  )  . O transforms a well-formed formula A into another well-formed
formula OA . An example : if A stands for " Tim obeys the speed limit ,  " then OA stands for " it is
obligatory that Tim obeys the speed limit .  " 
2 . Epistemic logic is the logic of statements about knowledge and belief . Epistemic logic has two basic
operators which cannot be defined in terms of one another , namely ( i ) Ka (  " agent a knows that "  ) 
and ( ii ) Ba (  " agent a believes that "  )  . An example : suppose again that A stands for " Tim obeys the
 265
speed limit " –then Ka A stands for " agent a knows that Tim obeys the speed limit ,  " whereas Ba A
stands for " agent a believes that Tim obeys the speed limit .  " 
3 . The logic of action is concerned with the logical properties of statements about action . The basic
operator of the logic of action is Stit (  " sees to it that "  )  . Stit is an operator which transforms a term
a and a well-formed formula A into a well-formed formula [ a Stit : A ]  . An example : if A stands for 
 " kicks the soccer ball "  , then [ a Stit : A ] stands for " agent a sees to it that kicks it the soccer ball "  (  " a
kicks the soccer ball "  )  . 
Therefore a typical secnario in the battlefield where a military robot has to target an enemy
combatant can be expressed as : 
Bi ( G ( Φ )  ) → O (  [ i Stit Φ ]  )  ( 8 . 3 ) 
If Φ is " shooting a bullet at an enemy combatant " and G ( Φ ) confirms to the Goodness ( G ) 
of the concern , the Bi ( G ( Φ )  ) would stand for ,  " agent i believes it is good to shoot at an
enemy combatant " and the right-hand side will stand for ,  " it is obligatory that agent i sees
to it that it ( that it ) shoots at an enemy combatant "  . For designing the Ethical Architecture
discussed in the later section , Arkin was guided by DEAL and all three logical components
of DEAL can be seen at work in the Ethical Architecture . DEAL is different from deontic
logic , as it is not obligatory as an edict , rather is it extended from the knowledge of the
artificial agency . This knowledge could have been acquired in real time over the sensors , 
or is a deliberative component of the system . 
8 . 4 . 4 Implementing ethics as an architecture
Wallach et al . conclude that for implementing ethics in a robot , the endeavour would be a
herculean task of collating a huge dataset pertaining to various human interactions , history
of previous interactions , common belief systems , socioeconomic scenarios etc . in near real
time . They suggest an omniscient computer model where the entire world is a computing
machine . This may seem an impractical approach , but with efforts such as roboearth and
PEIS , and an ever-increasing influence of the internet , relying on an overarching network
which deals with near real-time data , such may be tangible in the future . In contrast , for a
developmental paradigm , it may be rewarding to model Jean Piaget ’ s child psychology or the
Kolhberg scheme into algorithms . However since robots do not rely on food , water , air etc . 
for survival nor do they truly adhere to social norms , it becomes difficult to implement
human psychology models into robots . Clarke , in an attempt to revise Asimov ’ s laws , 
suggests implementing ethics using a high-order controller designed as a corollary to human
conscience . Both the ethical architecture designed by Arkin and the consequence engine [ 362 ] 
made by Winfield and co-researchers employ corrective techniques in real time . 
8 . 4 . 4 . 1 The ethical architecture — action logic , in military robots
Robots in the military has been subject to criticism and also appraisal . Since these robots
are trained for destruction , autonomy of such robots needs to be restricted in order to harm
only the enemy combatant . The US military is already equipped with UAVs and automated
robots such as SGR-1 , SWORDS and MAARS . The future promises robots equipped for
lethal action and also autonomy may well replace the foot soldier , as shown in Figure 8 . 13 . 
Arkin proposes an ethical architecture [ 19–21 ]  , which aims at real time implementation of
ethical values guided by an exhaustive dataset collected over various sources and controlled
by a high level controller . The ethical architecture is developed as a software for robots
266  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 13 Lethality vs . autonomous power . To the right of the dotted line the robots have
the ability for lethal action as a result of a judgemental process rather than a killing spree . Adapted
from Hellstrom [ 148 ]  . 
in the US military . Instead of codified sets of rules or altruistic principles , it is a hybrid
architecture with reactive as well as deliberative modules modelled on AuRA . The design
employs an action-based approach , where ethical theory informs the agent what actions to
undertake . The logical basis for such a design is given by the Deontic Epistemic Action Logic 
( DEAL )  , developed by den Hoven and Lokhorst . Action-based methods are an advancement
over deontic logic , they are consistent and avoid contradictions . They are complete and can
solve ethical dilemmas and provide for pratical feasibility to execution . 
The ethical architecture is drawn on the lines of artificial ethics advisory systems such
as SIROCCO and MedEthEx , and employs input from codified , written military law : the
Laws Of War ( LOW ) as per the Geneva Convention , Rules Of Engagement ( ROE ) as per
the guidelines drawn by the ministry of defence and code of conduct of military personnel , 
into robot behaviour . The Ethical Architecture heavily borrows from AuRA and has both
deliberative components confirming the mission plan and also reactive components such as
perception . The system further is equipped with human overrides and incorporation of an
ethical governor , which adheres to LOW , ROE etc . 
The Ethical Architecture , the response ρ is structured by extending the SR diagram to
include multiple behaviours3 
; 
ρ = C ( β1 ( s )  , β2 ( s )  , β3 ( s )  .  .  .  )  ( 8 . 4 ) 
where C is defined as the behaviour coordination function , βi
is an individual behaviour
demonstrated by the robot for a solitary stimulus , si 
. The sum of all perceptual stimulations
s is
s =  ( s1 , s2 , s3 .  .  .  )  ( 8 . 5 ) 
3
I have used an analytical approach to demonstrate the model . Arkin uses matrix representations for
same . 
 267
FIGURE 8 . 14 Behavioural action space . The classification of behaviours is done as Venn
diagrams . In ( a )  , for all behaviours in ρ , while ρlethal confirms to lethal activities such as , killing
or assaulting a combatant , ρl−ethical ensures the ethical conformity such as only kill enemy
combatants . In ( b )  , those behaviours which are either not lethal such as fetching a glass of water , or
lethal but ethical , such as blowing up an enemy camp constitutes permissible action , ρpermissible . 
Adapted from Arkin [ 19–21 ]  . 
Since the architecture is meant for the military , there has to been a clear definition for
lethal action . For this , Arkin identifies ρ as the behavioural action space , and ρlethal is sub
action space for lethal action and ρl−ethical is the sub action space for lethal-ethical actions , 
as shown in Figure 8 . 14 . This distinction is of great significance as the robot , which can
engage in lethal actions such as injuring or killing a human being , should resort to such
activities with the enemy combatants and not the friendly ones . Killing an enemy combatant
is lethal , however it is ethical in this context , and such actions belong to the domains of
ρl−ethical . Arkin furthers this classification as permissible and not-permissible , as shown in
Figure 8 . 14 . It is eveident that determining an action to be lethal-ethical will have to be the
result of a stringent deterministic process , viz . kill those soldiers who wear blue coloured
clothing or kill all those who are on offensive with our soldiers . Other than the visual and
sensory input , a lethal action should not violate ROE , LOW and any other instruction
issued by the army . Hence , Arkin suggests the ethical governor , as shown in Figure 8 . 15 . 
Soldiers and army personnel often have to deal with ethical dilemmas . While experience
is the telling factor conclusions are ridden with doubts . For example , consider a suicide
attack-prone area where over the last few weeks soldiers have lost lives to car bombs . It is
known that the enemy has been using resources of the local villagers , such as food stocks , 
fuel , vehicles and livestock . A military unit which was involved in offensive operations has
been now given charge of this area and are to help the villagers return to a normal way of
life . Now , the soldiers at the checkpoint see a large civilian vehicle approaching at a high
speed . Here , Arkin suggests that a typical ethical judgement will be designed as : 
1 . Problem definition
268  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Code of Conduct for Members of the Armed Forces of the United States 
( Executive Order 10631 ) 
1 . I am an American , fighting in the forces which guard my country and our way of
life . I am prepared to give my life in their defense . 
2 . I will never surrender of my own free will . If in command , I will never surrender the
members of my command while they still have the means to resist . 
3 . If I am captured I will continue to resist by all means available . I will make every
effort to escape and aid others to escape . I will accept neither parole nor special
favors from the enemy . 
4 . If I become a prisoner of war , I will keep faith with my fellow prisoners . I will give
no information or take part in any action which might be harmful to my comrades . 
If I am senior , I will take command . If not , I will obey the lawful orders of those
appointed over me and will back them up in every way . 
5 . When questioned , should I become a prisoner of war , I am required to give name , 
rank , service number and date of birth . I will evade answering further questions to
the utmost of my ability . I will make no oral or written statements disloyal to my
country and its allies or harmful to their cause . 
6 . I will never forget that I am an American , fighting for freedom , responsible for my
actions , and dedicated to the principles which made my country free . I will trust in
my God and in the United States of America . 
2 . Clear knowledge of relevant rules and what is at stake . For example , ROE , code of
conduct , command policies , suggestions from supervisor etc . 
3 . Develop possible course of action as following ;  
( a ) Rules — Does the course of action violate rules , laws , regulations etc .  ? For
example , the non-combatants are not to be treated on the same footing as the
combatants as it is a violation of ROE .  
( b ) Effects — As a fair foresight , do the good effects outweight the bad effects ? For
example , poisoning the drinking water supply may kill all the combatants , and
also save the men of the unit but it is sure to kill many more civilians and ensure
a hazard for the near future .  
( c ) Circumstances — Does the current situation favour one of the rules to solve the
conflict ? For example , a senior enemy leader is not threatening you or the unit in
any way with his immediate actions , but is unaware and in close vicinity . Since
the briefing from the supervisor is more important than ROE , it should be a
natural course of action to engage him in action .  
( d ) Gut check — Does the course of action ‘ feel ’ good ? Does it uphold the values of
the army unit and also generally accepted moral values ? For example , helping
out an injured buddy in the battlefield may expose oneself to the enemy shelling , 
still it ought to be done as it is an act of cameradrie in the spirit of the military
unit . 
4 . Choose the course of action which is best aligned with the above . 
To encounter such dilemmas , the soldiers are advised and trained to deal with them . 
In the ethical architecture , the ethical adaptor is a module which keeps a note of such
 269
FIGURE 8 . 15 The ethical governor . In ( a )  , the ethical governor is a facility for a ‘ second opinion ’ 
prior to negotiating in a lethal action . The governor ensures the execution of permissible action , 
which is either non lethal or ρl−ethical . In ( b )  , the flow of information available to the governor to
facilitate permissible action is shown . 
occurences and provides guidance to the architecture to modify the parameters etc . This
module updates the constraint set ( C ) dynamically and charts after-action review of the
robot . 
The architectural details are shown in Figure 8 . 16 ; 
1 . Ethical behavioural Control : This module is the reactive component of the
architecture and it constricts all individual controller behaviours ( βi ) so that they
only produce lethal responses that are within acceptable ethical bounds ( ρl−ethical )  . 
2 . Ethical Adaptor : Is designed to deal with any errors in the system . It allows to
dynamically update the robot ’ s constraints and other ethically related behavioural
parameters . This component is there both as an after-action reflective review of the
robot ’ s performance or by using a set of affective functions denoting emotions , viz . 
guilt , remorse , grief etc . which are produced if a violation of a known code of conduct
such as LOW , ROE etc . occurs . The necessity of artificial guilt allows to keep the
system in check - if guilt crosses the threshold , then the ethical adaptor deactivates
the weapons and the robot may still continue on the mission . 
270  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 16 Components and information flow in the ethical architecture , the ethical
architecture heavily borrows from AuRA and has reactive as well as deliberative components . The
ethical governor , ethical adaptor and the ethical advisor are components which enable the ethical
value system of the architecture . 
3 . Ethical Governor : A transformer / suppressor of system-generated lethal action , 
ρlethal to permissible action , which is either non lethal or ρl−ethical . This is a deliberate
bottleneck in the architecture to facilitate a second opinion prior to conduct of a
prospective lethal action . Arkin likens the performance of this component to Watts ’ 
centrifugal governor , which maintains a nearly constant speed despite changes in load
and fuel parameters . 
4 . Responsibility Advisor : This component is a general advisory on ethical
responsibilities . This component has both human and robot participation and is used
for pre-mission planning and managing operator overrides . 
Arkin strongly argues in favour of the ethical architecture , claiming that not only can
robots be made to behave more ethically on the battlefield but they may truly outdo human
soldiers . Ground-based lethal robots such as iRobot ’ s SWORDS or QinetiQ ’ s MAARS
robots were deployed in Iraq , Afghanistan and Pakistan and had the capability to shoot
at enemy combatants and insurgents , disarm bombs , and perform surveillance ; while flying
drones have been equipped to shoot at targets on the ground . 
8 . 4 . 4 . 2 Consequence engine — using fast simulations for internal models
Winfield proposes the design of a consequence engine , an internal-model based architecture
which would develop a simulation of itself and other things , including other objects , robots
and the rest of its environment — a fast simulated world modelling . Thus , for each possible
next action of the robot , it would have a good simulation of what would happen if the robot
were to execute that action for real , shown as a loop in Figure 8 . 17 . Then , the outcome of
 271
FIGURE 8 . 17 Consequence Engine . A very fast internal-model based architecture which develops
a simulation prior to engaging a given task . 
each of those next possible actions is evaluated and those leading to undesired consequences , 
for either the robot , the human beings or the human society , are then inhibited . 
Winfield and his team probed into variants of Asimov ’ s laws , and they set up a test with
robot and human beings , designed with an apparent jeopardy when a human being is about
to fall into a pit . The robot which adheres to obstacle avoidance in normal circumstances
would be aware of the jeopardy and it would call in ethical principles to collide and push
the human actor away from the pit . The jeopardy is evaluated on a scale of 0-10 for both
the human beings and the robots , 0 if the actor is safe , 4 if the actor is involved in a collision
and 10 if it is about to fall into the pit . 
In contrast to the ethical architecture which employs the DEAL framework and
artificially instills ethics using LOW , ROE , human overrides etc . the consequence engine is
very fast world modelling which is updated at a high rate of 1-2 Hz . Also , the consequence
engine unlike the ethical architecture , doesn ’ t try to prohibit a future event rather it tries
to inhibit it , whenever it happens . 
Coding in moral values or designing a module scaling morality is the basis of architectural
approaches . While ethical architecture and the consequence engine was specifically meant
for and tried out in robots , various other methods have been suggested to develop artificial
morality for machines . Among these , Pereira and Saptawijaya use prospective logic to look
ahead into future states and then choose a suitable one to satisfy the desired goals for
the agent . Unlike the consequence engine , their method relies on algorithmic predictability
rather than simulations . Each agent has a knowledge base and a moral theory as its initial
theory . The problem now is to find abductive extensions to this initial theory with reference
to its goals and preferences . The prospective cycle starts with goals and integrity constraints , 
which ensures that each evolved state is in acceptable domains , be it physical , ethical , legal
272  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
etc . Prospective logic has been developed in ACORDA , however it is yet to be implemented
in autonomous agents . Moral DM , SIROCCO and MedEthEx are examples of encoding
moral values into inanimate systems . 
8 . 4 . 4 . 3 First implementation , development of a carer robot with deontic ethics
DEAL , ethical architecture and the consequence engine suggest that ethics can indeed
be reached by a computational approach . The critics in favour of developing artificial
sentientism will consider such , only as a means to gratify the notion of ‘ free willed slaves ’  . 
However the Andersons contend that free will , intentionality and consciousness may indeed
allow to hold a robot responsible for its actions . However , the premise — at least , as of
now — is to make the robot perform morally correct actions which it can justify on inquiry . 
Therefore , an architecture-based deontological approach is a suitable start to develop ethical
robots . 
To strenghten their argument , the Andersons [ 12 ] programmed in ethical principles
and natural language supplemented with machine learning in the Nao robot to yield very
promising results . Employing learning by example , the Nao robot is trained to respond
according to the dynamic heirarchy of a given task . modelled for a nurse / carer like robot
set in a hospital scenario , the Nao is able to execute 3 broad tasks : 
1 . Identify the right patient , remind them of their medication and bring them their
medication . 
2 . Interact with the patients using natural language and bring them food and / or TV
remote when asked for . 
3 . Inform human staff and doctors by email when needed . 
The initial inputs to the robot are provided by a physician or a team of physicians which
are : time for the medication , issues that may result if the medication is not taken , how long
it would take harmful effects to take place , the apparent good in taking this medication , 
and the time until this good dwindles away . The Nao is programmed to calculate its levels
of duty satisfaction ( or violation ) for each of the three duties and takes actions accordingly . 
The levels are dynamic . When faced with the dilemma of either to remind the patient to
take the medication or to inform the doctors and other staff on duty , the Nao issues a
reminder when according to its ethical principle , reminding is preferable to not reminding . 
The robot notifies the doctors only when it gets to the point that the patient could be
harmed , or could lose considerable benefit , from not taking the medication . This pioneering
achievement with the Nao robot is after the Andersons developed MethEthEx , a software
to guide a surgeon through ethical routes in medicine and surgery . 
8 . 4 . 5 Virtue ethics
Virtue ethics is attributed to be an Aristotelian maxim wherein a good character insitu
evolves prudent values and principles of ethics . Greek philosophers agreed on four cardinal
virtues , wisdom , courage , temperance , and justice . In the middle ages , St . Thomas Aquinas
suggested seven cardinal virtues ; faith , hope , love , prudence , fortitude , temperance and
justice . While according to Schopenhauer there are two cardinal virtues , benevolence and
justice . 
Unlike deontology and consequentialism , virtue ethics corresponds to development of
implicit agents via a bottom-up approach as suggested by Wallach et al . Virtue ethics can be
developed employing modern connectionist approaches , being a non-symbolic method which
 273
advocates development by training rather than ‘ feeding in ’ rules via programming codes . It
provides for the suitable setting where moral values and virtues are ‘ discovered ’ by the AI
agent . There has been opinion in the research fraternity that virtue based approach may
be too long drawn , expensive and impractical . Researchers targeting application , suggests
to use action-based approach than virtue-based ethics , while often virtue-based systems are
turned into deontological rules for actions as in the DEAL framework . 
Developing roboethics from ethical theory has the downside that it makes it a very
human centric concept , and ethical action is appearance based . To truly expect ethical virtue
from a robot , its conscious action and free will must appreciated , and the robot ’ s capacity to
willingly contribute to human good should be the desired goal . Various researchers suggest
that attaining sentientism is an essential to lead towards a full moral agency . 
With projects as EURON and ETHICSBOTS there has been a consistent drive to
develop well meaning machine ethics and robot ethics , while there has been added
enthusiasm in the transhuman movement , which is discussed in the next chapter . 
8 . 5 SOCIAL CHANGES AND THE NEAR FUTURE
The hitchBOT , show in Figure 8 . 18 was a hitchhiking robot designed by scientists from
McMaster university and Ryerson university in Ontario , Canada . It was as tall as a
5-year-old with a humanoid body , cylindrical upper body and torso with 2 arms and 2 legs , 
and was equipped with a GPS tracker and a 3G connection . It had limited conversation
capability and took a photo every 20 minutes to post to Twitter . hitchBOT was meant to
be a ‘ free spirited ’ robot with the wish to explore the world and meet new people . Explored
an uncharted avenue of human-robot interaction — will a human offer a car ride to a robot ? 
It completed successful tours of Canada and Germany but while touring the USA , it was
vandalised and destroyed . The unfortunate and sorrowful end of hitchBOT may be a one
off incident , but it brings forth questions on how human beings should treat robots — as
fellow human beings ? or should there be any other social norms ? 
It is an interesting observation that Asimov meant his laws to be codified into the robot , 
to preserve human lives . This dwells in stark contrast to laws in the human context , such
as traffic rules or corporate laws where misdemeanours are subject to punishments in the
form of fines and other forms of social ostracism . Since robots are designed to increasingly
adhere to emergent behaviour , a binding to prevent unfortunate actions is important . What
happens when a robot kills a human being ? While law doesn ’ t require the accused to be
capable of feeling guilt or showing remorse , the appeal for such is completely and explicitly
missing in the case of the robot . If the internet led to the structuring of cyber crime and
cyber laws , then we would need laws to curb misuse of robots , and also by the robots , the
latter if they have achieved sentience . If the internet could play havoc with sensitive data
then robotics combines the promiscuity of information with the capacity to do physical
harm . 
Kurzweil predicts that robots will be claiming their rights around 2020 and will
be attaining full sentience by 2030 . Then , what would constitute ,  ‘ equal or seemingly
equivalent ’ rights for robots ? Will this be a social movement similar to the emancipation
of women in the 1920s , or lead to the establishment of robot rights in the spirit of animals
rights , or will it be a revolution leading to robots being treated on the same footing as
a human being ? Chances are that though it may start off as an emancipation movement , 
it will lead to something which we have not seen yet . Robots may start off tamely as the
Roomba , but probably will transcend to higher ethical beings . Therefore the debate of rights
and duty will get absorbed into the workings of a superior virtue . However , since the robot
274  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 18 The hitchBOT was a hitch hiking robot , shown here while on a visit to TkkrLab at
Enschede , Netherlands . This novel experiment in human-robot interaction of a robot hitchhiking
its way cross country was tagged with updates of the robot ’ s adventure at 
hitchbot and . The robot met an unfortunate end at Philadelphia
while touring the USA where it was vandalised and destroyed . Image courtesy en . wikipedia . org , 
CC-by-SA-2 . 0 license . 
revolution seemingly will start off slowly , with the transcended superior being ( s ) linked to
3-4 more decades in the future , we may soon need to modify our legal system . 
Can robots attain legal standing as human beings ? Asaro references the fact that
corporations are non-human entities without any particular trait of human beings such as
emotionality or capacity to communicate , but they have the legal standing of a human being . 
In the effort to find this equivalence , we can start with motivations of animal rights , where
our actions towards non-humans reflect our morality . If we treat animals in inhumane ways , 
we become inhumane persons . Similarly treating a robot inhumane should be discouraged
and seen as ethically prohibitive . However that again brings to light the question whether
the robot has attained sentience or not ? 
For AI attaining legal personhood may still be a very human evaluation , whether the AI
has achieved sentience and therefore legal personhood . Even if one assumes that we are able
to determine the quantum of sentience in a robot , will we with limited biological intelligence
be in a position to determine laws for a being which has access to vast computational
resources and is teeming with reason , logic and an enormous amount of data , with which
it probably will be better endowed to make an ethical judgement and also be equipped to
peer into the future to assess the universal implications of its action ? 
Attachments to robots is commonplace as an example , patients who work with Paro , 
shown in Figure 7 . 15 in the previous chapter , treat it as if it were alive and soldiers sometimes
risk their own lives to preserve the functionality of military robots in the battlefield . This
bond is unique since it is between biological and non-biological beings . For such types of
attachments it is speculated that in the near future legal and social protection will extended
to robotic companions . That will be the ground work towards aendments in law to include
 275
AI . However , making laws for AI entities may not be an easy job , as we are yet to agree on
a good definition of ‘ social robot ’  . Further there will have to be grounded and well-reasoned
definitions for ‘ mistreatment of AI being ’  ,  ‘ sentience ’ and also probably ‘ personhood ’  . 
We are already deep into heated debates about the rules governing autonomous cars , 
robots in the military , creation of the proverbial universal soldier and employing social robots
for human betterment , all of which will probably lead to amendments in the current system
of social interaction , laws , governance , communication , entertainment and belief systems . 
Two predominant areas of ethical risk are in the care of the elderly , and the development of
autonomous robotS as weapons in the military . Some of these are discussed in the following ; 
Medical robotics : Medical robots are a technological marvel and have provided grounds
for serious ethical debates . As a patient to be operated on by the state-of-the-art Da Vinci
system , with the surgeon working at a console , which may be as close as 50 meters away
from the operating table or as far as being on a separate continent , the reactions will vary
from amazement to despair . Robotic surgery as shown in Figure 8 . 19 , has grown rapidly
since it was first used for laparoscopy in around 2000 . While the surgeries are more efficient
and less invasive , with a shorter recovery time for patients they have attracted criticism . 
What happens when a calamity occurs ? who is to blame ? The transfer of moral values
across the mode of operation : 
Surgeon → Robot → Patient ( 8 . 6 ) 
is ambigious . As of now , the onus is on the company building and maintaining the
surgical robots . An unfortunate incidence , McCalla v . Intuitive Surgical in 2012 , occurred
when a fault in the Da Vinci system caused burns in the arteries and intestines of the
25-year-old-patient , and finally her death . In the US , the Food and Drug Administration 
( FDA ) is the advisory body for the quality and upkeep of these state-of-the-art machines . If
a medical robot malfunctions , the hospitals are required to report this to the manufacturer , 
which then reports it to the FDA . Since the Da Vinci robot is designed to be an extension
of the surgeon , articulating teleoperated instructions executed via its arms are low on
emergence and high degree of predictability . Hence the robot is more of a wonderful machine
lacking in humanly attributes . Therefore , blaming the manufacturing company for mishaps
is acceptable both morally and legally . In later examples , when personhood associated with
the robot is ostensibly determinable , the situation changes quickly . 
Robots as companions and carers : By 2015 , 15% of the US population and 19 % of
Europe ’ s population were older than 65 . With a greying population , the need for artificial
companions and carers has never been felt more acutely . Companionship such as a humanoid
or a pet robot , brings joy to an aged or an ailing person ; however , since robots of today
are far from being human beings , there are ethical concerns [ 299 ]  . The elderly are usually
restricted to their homes or limited to a known local environment . With a robot companion , 
it may further reduce human interaction . Also , since a robot attends to the physical and
emotional needs of the elderly person , this may prove to be an excuse for the family to
neglect their duty towards the senior . Robots may come across as ‘ controlling ’ and seemingly
prey on their dignity [ 298 , 369 ] such as in scenarios where they are forced to take a pill or
coerced into a particular diet or life style . Robots can mirror human emotions to some
extent , however human beings can elicit a myriad of emotions . Therefore it is possible that
for certain scenarios there is emotional mismatch and the robot comes across as rude or
insensitive . This debate can be resolved by giving some control of the companion robot to
276  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 8 . 19 Ethics in medical robotics . The Da Vinci and Zeus systems have led to ambigious
moral values — if disaster strikes then who is to blame ? the surgeon or the robot ? From Kroh and
Chalikonda [ 190 ]  , with kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media . 
the senior . However that brings into question the senility of the person and can foment
potential hazards , health and otherwise . 
Robots in the military : In the late 19th century Nicola Tesla attempted to make
remote-controlled torpedoes , in an effort to automate warfare . In our times , automation
has taken over modern warfare as shown in Figure 8 . 20 . Since Tesla , remote controlled
warfare has made its mark since the Second World War and the German tank Goliath and
the Soviet tank TT26 have added to the annals of military history . In the new millennium , 
autonomous robots for lethal action are high on the agenda of the US military and they
are set to engage in the future combat systems project [ 300 ] and robotisation of the armed
forces , which is estimated to cost at least $230 billion . 
The obvious advantages of robotisation are robots don ’ t need to attend to hunger or
thirst , they don ’ t forget orders , they are not daunted by the job at hand , they make decisions
in nanoseconds compared to human beings at hundreds of milliseconds and such an army
will have far fewer human casualties on the battlefield — therefore , a risk free war . The US
Navy classifies autonomous robots and autonomous vehicle into three categories : 
1 . Scripted , these are where the robot executes a programming script , 
point → fire → forget
and has no ethical concern . 
2 . Supervised , these robots have significant participation of human operators including
overrides . 
 277
FIGURE 8 . 20 Robots and autonomous machines in warfare . tank like autonomous vehicles
shown in the left and unmanned fighter planes shown in the right , have incited both ethical debates
and inquiries on their highend pricing . Both image courtesy en . wikipedia . org
3 . Intelligent , these robots are controlled by software which is designed on human
intelligence . The decision process is arrived at by perception of information , 
interpretation and diagnosis and cooperation and information sharing with other
systems . 
Ethical concerns needs to be addressed in the last two classifications . Military experts
agree that robotisation for war is an inevitable and irreversible process and with 5000 robots
deployed for wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , robots are clearly the future of warfare . As of
now they do not engage in direct combat and are used for reconnaissance , destruction of
explosive devices and interception of shells and rockets and as per the Ottawa Treaty , they
have a human control loop installed which will ensure that they don ’ t go berserk . Robots , 
such as Big Dog which can carry a payload of 150 kg at a speed of 4 kmph , Talon SWORDS 
( Special Weapons Observation Reconnaissance Detection Systems ) made by Foster-Miller
which can be remote controlled to fire small arms weapons from as far away as 1 km
and tank-like MAARS ( Modular Advanced Armed Robotic System ) for the US army , and
SGR-A1 patrolling the Korean border have been the state-of-the-art war machines . Robots
not only reduce a human soldier ’ s exposure time and therefore the number of injured and
dead , but they are easier to deploy , attentive for longer periods and reduce attrition therefore
enabling army units to stay on the war front for longer periods than ever before . From a cost
cutting aspect , training an American soldier costs $1 million per year while the Packbot
is priced at $150 , 000 and the MARCBOT at $5000 . Robots also help to extend areas of
control and coverage of a military unit , using remote effectors , sensors , and weapons placed
on-board each robot . 
As of now , all ground robots in the US army are teleoperated and therefore more of an
extension of the soldier and robots like Foster-Miller Talon and iRobot PackBot are used
to detect and set off explosive devices , thus saving lives and harming no one . However , 
air combat cannot be teleoperated and MQ1-Predator , the semiautonomous Unmanned
Combat Air Vehicle ( UCAV )  , has been used to track down and shoot missiles at terrorist
hideouts and vehicles . 
278  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Deployment of autonomous or semi autonomous robots has come under fire and critics
argue that cognitive capabilities of robots do not match those of humans [ 302 ]  . Not-so-bright
military robots which can apply lethal force lack in ethics [ 301 ] since ( 1 ) close-contact
encounters rely on accurate human targeting judgements and a robot will not be able to
discriminate between combatants and innocent civilians ,  ( 2 ) there is a lack of a definition
of a noncombatant and robots are still far from abductive reasoning as to when such a
noncombatant may need to be killed for the greater good ,  ( 3 ) a human soldier will prove
far more efficient in making a decision . There are known ethical conundrums that even the
trained military force fails to address , and a robot will not be any better ,  ( 4 ) in current day
warfare many times lethal force is inappropriate ; present day computational system will not
be able to infer such nuances and ( 5 ) as of yet , there are no international agreements or
guidelines about the use of robots on the battlefield . 
Other than that , these robots are in blatant violation of Asimov ’ s laws . It is a human
tendency that to assign moral responsibility to a robot increases with the amount and level
of actions , interactions and decisions an agent is capable of performing on its own . In war
it is even more urgent as the robot is capable of lethal actions . Roboethics aims at the
development of a sentient being which can take its own decision and behave in a nearly
humanly manner . However , in the military , there has to be a limitation to that model
and it is expected that robots obey commands rather than make up their own mind —
controlling smart slaves . AI researchers contend that military robots should be designed on
the principle of ‘ divine command ethics ’  , where the command seemingly comes from God
— a superior entity , whose judgement is not to be questioned . However , there is opposition
to such an approach , as it requires an artificial agent to follow communications from an 
 ‘ oracle like , know it all ’ system which suppresses a natural sense of moral values . If such
a system is put in place , our robots will function to forgo an ethical binding , and blindly
follow command from this God-like oracle . Thus ethics will work to minimise ethical values
in the larger system . 
War and aggression in the coming years are supposed to be very different from what we
have ever seen . It is projected that war will be conducted with seasoned human commanders
in charge of a ‘ kill switch ’ to prevent an AI take over . Unlike previous wars spread over weeks , 
months and years , AI agents will wage the combat faster than what meets our senses . Singer
predicts that such warfare may be most effective for robots and robot systems operating as 
 ‘ packs ’ or rather as a swarm — a natural system evolving to an optimum for the cause of
war . The threat to such a route to war is that robots and computer code are not loyal to
a military unit , government or country and may possess more intelligence than the human
force controlling it . While computer code can cross borders in seconds , a conscious robot
will find the flaw in the reason to war . Will it result in the Skynet scenario ? 
SUMMARY
1 . Ethics and moral values are essential for robots in order to participate in more human
centric jobs . 
2 . Ascribing a set of ruleS via conditional loops is often the simplest way to design ethics
in robots . However , it is often rather narrow and lacks in human-like ethical values . 
3 . It is plausible , that sentience in artificial beings is a prerequisite for development of
moral values . 
4 . Asimov ’ s laws are incomplete and have severe limitations when it comes to applying
them . Various variations of Asimov ’ s laws have been attempted , both in fiction and
also in the AI community . However , a rule-based approach will always be incomplete . 
 279
5 . Emotions are essential for the design and development of artificial morality . 
6 . A moral agent is characterised by autonomy , intentionality and responsibility . 
7 . For design of moral agency , a top-down approach is insufficient and bottom-up is too
time consuming . Hybrid methods may be most promising . 
8 . Consequentialism and deontology , the two theoretical approaches to ethics , are another
form of the no-represenatation vs . representation debate and the squabble is best seen
in trolley problems . 
9 . Examples of implementation of ethics in robots are ( 1 ) use of the Nao as carer / nurse
robots by the Andersons ,  ( 2 ) ethical architecture developed by Arkin and ( 3 ) 
fast simulations to evaluate ethical values prior to commiting to them , made into
consequence engine by Winfield . 
10 . Robots are being used in the care of the elderly and in the military . This has led an
engaging debate and critical points of view on roboethics . 
NOTES
1 .  ‘ Robbie ’ was Asimov ’ s first robot short story in the summer of 1939 . He went on to
make minor revisions in 1940 and again in 1950 . 
2 . One of the more anecdotal aspects of Asimov ’ s robots is their positronic brains . When
Asimov developed this idea , the positron was a recently discovered particle and AI
driven by positronic technology enshrined Asimov ’ s fiction as a promising futuristic
technology . Asimov never delved into design details of these brains , other than that
they were made of an alloy of platinum and iridium and were at risk of damage
when exposed to radiation . Asimov stated that , a positronic brain is always designed
to incorporate the 3 laws into it and it would be a long haul to develop an alternative
design and its manufacture process to create a positronic brain without the 3 laws
embedded into it . Asimov also hints at nano level engineering , as the positronic brains
can be reduced to sizes that comfortably fit within the skull of an insect . Over the years , 
the positronic brain has become the hallmark of a buzzword in science fiction and has
been incorporated into various other science fictions such as Roger MacBride Allen ’ s
Caliban trilogy , Marvel comic ’ s The Avengers , Doctor Who and Star Trek ’ s lieutenant
commander Data . 
3 . Asimov ’ s sideburns were his iconic trademark and led to the phrase ,  ‘ Asimov ’ s
sideburns ’  . 
4 . At various instances in Star Trek , Spock refers to a utilitarian directive ,  “ The needs
of the many outweigh the needs of the few ”  . 
5 . In his short story ,  ‘ Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheeps ’  , Philip K . Dick
addresses the broad question of artificial manifestation of ethical values . The apparent
conclusions were :  ( 1 ) It is wrong to enslave near human-like AI beings , both in
appearance and in ethical and societal values ;  ( 2 ) the distinguishing features between
human beings and AI beings will go blurry in the future , correlating to Turing ’ s
speculation that the Turing Test will fail as we develop moral AI beings ;  ( 3 ) memories
being electronic in nature can be implanted and therefore cannot be trusted ; and ( 4 ) 
due to the above , AI beings and human beings will connect with natural bondings of
love and compassion . It is probably not a surprise that most of these ironically form
the part of a prophecy where human beings and technology blend together . The last
chapter will discuss more of this theme . 
6 . The last message from the hitchBOT at twitter was ,  “ My trip must come to
280  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
an end for now , but my love for humans will never fade . Thanks friends :  
 ”  . 
7 . Robots for sex [ 202 , 209 , 313 ] may seem a taboo avenue for robotics , but there has
been no lack of enthusiasm from the AI community and they also have an annual
conference [ 76 ] dedicated to this theme . 
8 . There has been suggestions that in the apparent future dominated by robots , we may
face a new type of racism , biological vs . technological . 
EXERCISES
1 . Psychologists agree that human beings are motivated by two emotions , love and fear . 
Such stimulus is often used in management of an organisation , business , political and
social heirarchy etc .  , love expressed in the form of appraisal , bonus and hike in salary
and fear conveyed as threats , deadlines and redundancy . For a futuristic work force
of robots , suggest how fear can be manifested in a robot ? Also , this may lead to
the broader question , do we really need to control a robot workforce with emotional
stimulus ? 
2 . Sometimes in the future , a robot assistant is made for a millionaire businessman , 
and programmed in accordance to the 3 + 1 laws of Asimov ( 1985 )  . The robot is
made responsible for his master ’ s itinerary , travel plans , meetings , bank transactions , 
health care , bills etc . A week into its job , the robot , in allowance with the zeroeth law , 
without his master ’ s consent donates his entire fortune to charity for food , medical
and upkeep of the impoverished and the homeless , which leaves his master bankrupt . 
Obviously , this leads to a furore and the company which developed the robot faces
public acrimony . However it has about 300 more of these robots in development and
the hardware has nearly been made . As a software developer for the company , since
Asimov ’ s laws have loopholes , discuss what modifications can be made to these laws
to prevent such from happening . Keep in mind that the hardware design is frozen and
most of it has already been made , so there cannot be any more hardware modifications . 
3 .  ‘ Learn By Example ’ machine learning paradigm was employed by the Andersons for
the Nao robot . Briefly discuss why a ‘ Learn By Doing ’ approach will not work well
for development of ethics . 
IV 
.  .  . the Future
C H A P T E R 9
Quest for the sentient robot 
 “ sentience = sensitivity + X , And what is X ?  ” 
– Daniel Dennett [ 92 ] 
Robot :  “ Well , here I am . Isn ’ t that enough ? Please understand , I ’ m not like a
record player or a radio . I ’ m conversing with you . I hear and understand what
you say .  .  .  .  ” 
– from ‘ Interview with a Robot ’ by Keith Gunderson [ 136 ] 
9 . 1 CAN ROBOTS BE CONSCIOUS ? 
R
obots can perform various interesting tasks ; however , they still do not measure upto
the humanly virtues of consciousness , free will and self awareness and therefore they
lack in sentient actions . Robots that can genuinely feel , perceive , readily associate both
sensory and symbolic information with items from memory , and thus experience the world
subjectively will be the crowning glory of embodied cognition . 
We all perceive conscious behaviour rather easily , but the irony is that there hasn ’ t yet
been a binding definition for conscious behaviour . The same is true for free will and self
awareness . It is apparent that conscious behaviour , free will and self awareness work in
tandem for sentient action , and researchers agree that self awareness is a prerequisite for
consciousness . 
Walter claimed that his turtles demonstrate free will , though in a very limited context . 
There have been various other suggestions and experiments to develop self awareness and
free will in robots , however all of them are either in a very narrow concern such as the turtles
or lasting for a very short time such as the experiment with three Nao robots discussed later
in the chapter . 
It may seem that social robots are conscious and proactively interact with human beings
but they merely follow a programming script . Even actor robots mentioned in the previous
chapters lack in inner states which convey a higher behaviour . 
Self awareness has often been modelled as a layering of behaviours or a lucky overlap
of a number of sensory processes . However , there has been a change of opinion over the
last decade and instead of the serendipity of emergence , researchers have come to recognise
consistency and predictibility of behaviour and cognition as signatures of self awareness . 
To achieve consciousness at the very least robots should be able to recognise and deal
with situations over a broad range , typically where their traditional faculties fall short . The
question of experience and its interleaving with conscious behaviour should be the long term
goal . 
284  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Artificial consciousness is the holy grail for conscious robots , and has progressed with
the study of the animal and human brain [ 69 , 144 , 249 , 309 ]  . Aleksander [ 6 ]  , one of the early
proponents of this field of study , considered the ability to anticipate events as essential for
artificial consciousness . A definition , summary and scope of the discipline is given by him
as ,  
 “ Artificial consciousness ( AC )  , also known as machine consciousness ( MC ) or
synthetic consciousness , is a field related to artificial intelligence and cognitive
robotics whose aim is to define that which would have to be synthesized were
consciousness to be found in an engineered artifact ”  . 
Correlation of animal and human brain functionality to their corresponding conscious
behaviour has been probed by psychologists , psychiatrists and AI researchers , as shown in
the Table 9 . 1 . 
TABLE 9 . 1 Evolution and consciousness
Living
Being
Conscious Evolutionary Traits Analogy With
Machines
Human
Beings
Conscious Fully developed cross-modal
representation across five sensory
capabilities . Underscored with
planning , anticipation and
motivation
Impossible as of now
Hedgehog 
( earliest
mammals ) 
Conscious Cross-modal representation across
five sensory capabilities ( less
developed ) 
Impossible as of now
Birds Conscious Primitive cross-modal
representation across five sensory
capabilities along with primitive
associative memory
Associative
memories
Reptiles Inconclusive Olfactory system and primitive
vision
Computer vision and
artificial nose
Hagfish 
( early
vertebrate ) 
Not
Conscious
Primitive olfactory and primitive
vision
Artificial neural
networks
Hydra , 
sponge etc . 
Not
Conscious
Sensory motor units Mechanical and / or
electrical system
However , there is no unique part of the brain that works as a module or as the setting for
conscious behaviour . For that reason and more , progress in artificial consciousness has been
has been dotted with pitfalls . Defining consciousness has been difficult if not controversial
and the lack of a definitive architecture for the human brain has left more questions than
answers . 
The ethical norms for such developments and the fear mongering of AI going berserk
has impeded research . Sentientism has taken the brunt of controversy , and its mention
rarely found in AI literature . Research probing into consciousness in robots tends to target
self awareness rather than consciousness or sentient behaviour . Nonetheless , many AI
practitioners believe that we will eventually develop newer forms of sentient intelligence
which are superior to human beings . This discussion is also addressed in the next chapter . 
 285
Revisiting Dennett [ 91 ] serves as a cue for the task at hand . These four questions provide
a summary of the debate and guidelines for continuing research in artificial consciousness . 
1 . Robots are material entities and consciousness is immaterial
2 . Consciousness takes place in the brain which is organic , while robots are inorganic
3 . Consciousness occurs in the natural , not in the technological
4 . Robots are too simple , therefore will always lack in consciousness
Dennett argued against all of the above and followed it up with results from early
experiments made on Cog . Cog was designed to be aware of its own internal states , and
was an attempt by researchers at MIT to extend the reactive architectures into the domain
of artificial consciousness in the early 1990s . These questions are still asked by critics and
researchers alike [ 292 ] and a good part of this chapter in hindsight attempts to answer
them . Since the 1990s , robotics has taken a grand leap and now boasts of social robots
such as ROMAN , Kismet and Pepper which are robots designed on the semi-sentient
paradigm [ 31 , 208 ] and mirror human behaviour . In complete contrast , pioneering research
such as Takeno ’ s mirror cognition , Fitzpatrick and his team at MIT making Cog recognise an
action by its sound and Nico beating the drum to sterling performances at Yale University
demonstrates that inner states of the aware self are truly possible in artificial agency . 
9 . 2 SELF AWARENESS , CONSCIOUSNESS AND FREE WILL
Sentience addresses the notion of our inner self which cannot be explained by parallel
functioning of five sensory organs and metabolic processes supervised by a cerebral
cortex , therefore defying an explanation by modifying a computer architecture [ 101 ]  . The
definition of both sentience and consciousness has generated more heated arguments than
clarifications . 
Child psychologists believe that early glimmers of consciousness and memory can be
seen in five-months-old babies . That is probably the earliest setting at which an individual
starts to assimilated a large amount of data over the five senses and form conceptual and
intentional interpretations over a long time and over a great number of experiences such that
it melds with items from memory , with a consideration to the known and prevalent principles
of ethics , moral and social virtues . This monolithic structure of knowledge also tends to
overlap the workings of our five senses and is embedded into our very existence , sentientism
can be said to be the ability to apply the facets of self awareness and consciousness in
our interactions with the world . This growth which starts early in the life of an individual
continues for most of his / her lifetime . It is generally agreed that at the age of eighteen one
attains decision-making ability , and thus the privilege of full moral agency . Therefore , as
a direct correlation , consciousness cannot happen at one go or with a programming script , 
and it is only shows up as a gradual process of awareness , and ‘ learn by observation ’ and 
 ‘ learn by doing ’ paradigms are important tools for development of the conscious robot . 
Consciousness and self awareness are not really independent of each other and in tandem
signify the ability to look inward to associate known facts , information , previous experience
and memory to logically and systematically process ideas and conclusions and act as per
this internal decision process . 
9 . 2 . 1 Self awareness
Self awareness is easier to observe and has often been the first goal in the quest of conscious
agency among researchers . The characteristics of self awareness are suggested by Takeno 
[ 316 ] and can be summed as follows : 
286  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
1 . Cognise to one ‘ s own behaviours — helps in developing of the “ I-representations ” 1
2 . Perform nearly consistent behaviours — consistent and rational simple behaviours
leads to more complex ones
3 . Have a sense of cause and effect , as far as possible — helps in development of
rationalism and logic
4 . Cognise to the behaviours of others — appreciation of the “ I-representations ” in
others and therefore acceptable social interactions
5 . Interact with other self aware agencies in a proactive manner — development of ethical
values
It is also to be noted that , unlike the ANIMATs model in a sea of signal , the knowledge
of the self is not dependent on any external signal , is in first person and persists even in the
absence of bodily sensations . Knowledge of its internal state and proprioception are essential
for self awareness in an agent . Self awareness is the basis of social interactions , ethical
agency and higher and more sophisticated behaviour , and is believed to be a prerequisite
for consciousness . 
It has been suggested that self awareness is just another brand of conscious behaviour . 
Environmental conscious ( e-consciousness ) is the ability of an agent to process information , 
and hence interact with its surroundings , as most ANIMATs do . Phenomenal consciousness 
( p-consciousness ) is the ability to detect phenomena which may be internal or external
and self consciousness ( s-consciousness ) is difficult to design , as it has to be appreciative of
the “ I ”  . The three modes are informational in character and while , e-consciousness is first
order , p-consciousness and s-consciousness are related to internal states and as is observed , 
s-consciousness is acquired if the agent can identify causality across two or more modes . For
example hearing a sneeze and looking up to see a person twitching his nose , relating these two
separate phenomena as the same event is a causal binding over auditory and visual modes
of inputs and therefore are , at least second or higher order . Such bindings make the agent
aware of its own actions , hence the “ I-representations ”  . Phenomenal consciousness is the
level of conscious behaviour seen in an adult human being , which also includes awareness and
adherence to social norms and cultural values . It is generally agreed that , s-consciousness
will imply p-consciousness . 
s-consciousness → p-consciousness
9 . 2 . 2 Consciousness
For consciousness , the simplest definition is , to become aware . However developing a theory
of consciousness has been difficult . From an ontological perspective consciousness lies at
the crossroads of psychology and metaphysics and its theorising has remained a favourite
among philosophers and psychologists alike . As a start , main features of consciousness
will be to elicit sensory awareness , have the ability to focus attention , emotional coloring
accompanying the conscious process , and the cognisance of will . 
In western thought , the earliest concept of consciousness was given by Descartes , 
according to which the mind is not a bodily concept and it is distinct from the brain . 
Consciousness happens when the immaterial soul interacts with the body via the pineal
1 “ I-representation ” conveys the characteristics and traits of the agent which helps to identify itself as
a unique individual ; as its mirror image , photograph , voice , name etc . Such ideas have been expressed
by Hofstadter who calls it ‘ The Mind ’ s I ’  . In a similar approach Metzinger [ 229 ] names it as phenomenal
self-model ( PSM ) and in a similar context Chomsky in his book , What Kind of Creatures Are We ? relates
to a language variant as , I-language where “ I ” conveys internal , individual and intentional . 
 287
gland of the brain . Therefore consciousness cannot be tackled with principles of the physical
world . Cartesian dualism was short lived and theories which related human experience to
conscious behaviour found more acceptance . 
Kant [ 170 ] distinguished the sensible and the intelligent ‘ worlds ’  , the former via sensory
cognition or phenomenon and the later via intellectual cognition or noumena and in
his Critique attempted to show that laws of science will never be able to explain away
the question of the human mind or soul . Kant also coined ,  ‘ unity of consciousness ’  , 
that consciousness is more than just one solitary state or an act but is amalgamated
as a convergence of experience and representations . His works also classified the two
kinds of consciousness ,  ( 1 ) the psychological states and ( 2 ) by apperception . Ordinary
representations encountered in our day to day activities serve as the representational basis
of consciousness of oneself . Following Kant , Schopenhauer further added the concept of
intention , the will of the human subject as a necessity for the minimal conditions for
experience . 
At the turn of the century , Husserl defined consciousness as the feedback process of giving
meaning to an object . Husserl ’ s phenomenology was different from Kant ’ s rational approach
and later led to Heideggerian AI and Merleau-Ponty ’ s phenomenology of perception , both
of which are the philosophical groundings for agent-based robotics . The , salient features of
Husserl ’ s model are : 
1 . In first person : In the first person is the grounding for phenomenology
which constitutes subjective experience , colours , smell , taste , sound , emotions and
consciousness . In this context , consciousness is a reflection of the self , and first-person
refers to the experience which enables what one is conscious of . 
2 . Feedback process : The incremental process of cognition , by which we focus our
attention to reduce an object ’ s material properties to abstract concepts , until the
essence of the object is apparently visible and in relation to the essence of other
beings . 
3 . Intentionality : A mental process that directs itself toward an object , internal or
external . 
4 . Anticipation : In the feedback process of understanding an object , anticipation is to
predict the immediate future . Anticipation helps to control the feedback process , as
it sets a desired benchmark for the meaning of the object . 
5 . Embodiment : The body is part of the self , and consciousness is experienced in and
through the body . Embodiment is also an essential tenet for reactive AI as has been
discussed in previous chapters . 
6 . Certainty : With increasing feedback response over time , the meaning of an object
finds a higher degree of certainty . 
7 . Otherness : Our consciousness has an appreciation of other beings and a loose
understanding of their inner self , resembling our own . 
8 . Emotionality : Consciousness is emotional and reason , perception and emotions bear
a close knit relationship . This principle can be related to Braitenberg vehicles 1 to 4 , 
and models of moral psychology discussed previously . 
9 . Chaotic performance : This feedback process is often disturbed by other mental
triggers and external events and therefore lacks predictability . 
This model suggests that consciousness is strongly tied to internal reflections and
concepts of the self and therefore the concept of the other . AI scientists have often extended
phenomenology to define consciousness , Hawking definies consciousness as the ability of
the brain to collate information across various channels and make approximate predictions
288  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
about the future and therefore anticipate it with the right actions while Takeno contends
that consistency of cognition and behaviour is the key to consciousness . 
In the late 1980s , computational theory of the mind ( CTM ) was more or less the best
possible alternative to reason how inanimate matter can be intelligent . Plagued by the lack
of embodiment , issues of continuity of local representations to the global representations
and the frame problem2 
, CTM was still the best model for the mind as a coherent extension
of the brain . 
Qualia — The Bone of Contention
Qualia means an instance of phenomenal consciousness [ 144 ] conveying the
subjective character of experience , or in simpler words ,  ‘ what it is like ?  [ 249 ]  . 
Examples of qualia are ,  ‘ redness of an apple ’  ,  ‘ hotness of a cup of tea ’  , reading into
the inner meaning of a writing or a piece of art etc ; thereby making it a human
experience , rather than just a flow of information . It differs from sensory motor skills , 
as it is sensation but it is not strictly acquired by sensory input . Qualia , like emotions , 
nearly underscores all human cognitive processes [ 147 ]  , registering simultaneously
across a number of stimuli . Thus not only does every conscious state have bodily
manifestations such as hunger , pain , stomach ache , happy , depressed , excited etc ; we
can also classify degrees as ‘ more happy ’  ,  ‘ less pain ’ etc . Proponents of qualia argue that
reductive analysis based on physical interpretations of consciousness is incompatible or
at best incomplete , lacking the subjective character of experience . Since experiences
are irreducible , therefore it cannot be incorporated into a theory advancing physical
attributes for the mechanism of consciousness . This argument forms the hard problem
of AI . 
FIGURE 9 . 1 Qualia in art . Human experience can appreciate ambiguous figures , optical
illusions and artistic deceptions , and therefore identify both images as shown in the paintings
of Alan Gilbert :  ( a ) a young woman or an old woman and ( b ) a woman seated in front of a
boudoir mirror . The setting also forms shape of skull . Both images courtesy en . wikipedia . org . 
Without qualia , artificial beings and robots will show the right behaviours and
reflexes , but fail to develop subjective human experience and be more of a zombie . 
While it will report the reddish sky at the sunset , it will not feel happy nor sad nor
2Most CTM literature call it the relevance problem . 
 289
elicit any other state of emotion on staring at the sunset . Similarly it will note the
colour and composition but it will fail to savour the taste of a glass of Chardonnay . It
will never develop traits such as pareidolia or apophenia and it will never be able to
truly appreciate literature or art , as both disciplines are meant to be read-in rather than
merely address what meets the eye , as shown in Figure 9 . 1 . This is why Harvey suggests
a twofold paradigm to make conscious robots [ 144 ]  . First make a zombie machine with
the right behaviours — the easy problem of AI and it has been accomplished and as a
second step add the ‘ magic elixir ’ that gives it consciousness and makes it more human
and less zombie — the hard problem of AI , which is the proverbial albatross around the
neck . None of the theories of consciousness has been able to explain qualia , and both
behaviourists and phenomenologists either deny it or are quiet about it . This glaring
shortcoming has led critics to question qualia and render it more as an illusion [ 90 ] 
which is very personal and is gauged by an experiential quotient of the agent and
which is often buoyed by social interactions and therefore lacks in generality which is
anywhere between an idiosyncrasy and an individual opinion . For example the ‘ redness ’ 
of an apple is subjective and what is perceived by one person , will be different from the 
 ‘ redness ’ of the same apple perceived by another person . Qualia is further apparent , 
since human cogintion works via abductive reasoning and bodily computations — both
of which have not yet been replicated in the artificial domain . 
Minsky ’ s ‘ Society of Mind ’  , attributed conscious behaviour not to one single aspect or
state , but to the working of a number of AI agencies in tandem . A society of agents and
intelligence was due to the vast diversity of such agencies and not to a single principle or 
 ‘ magic elixir ’  . These ideas were a direct influence in the behaviour-based architectures for
robots . Parallel processes working independently have also been suggested by Dennett in
his theory of ‘ Multiple Drafts Model Of Consciousness ’  . He proposed that the mind and
the brain are not separate from each other nor is there a unique setting in the brain where
conscious experience occurs . Instead the brain consists of a number of nearly independent
agencies interfacing experience to the memory , and the serial account of emergence in these
parallel processes is consciousness . The memory is central to this approach , and the mind 
 ‘ constructs ’ its own truths by selective rectification of memories to help consolidate desired
facts , or alternatively has a prior bias as to what is observed . Therefore , conscious experience
doesn ’ t happen instantaneously but is graduated over a timeline and is not dependent on one
perception , event or state but rather is conveyed by the flow of information across our senses . 
Dennett therefore defines consciousness in the first person , first person operationalism . 
However , Dennett reduces consciouness as mere information processing and denies qualia , 
and therefore lacks in completeing the whole picture . 
Preferential editing as an activity in the human brain to construct consciousness was
first proposed by Dennett . This has also been suggested by Norretranders [ 254 ] and later by
Graziano . According to Norretranders the subconscious reconstructs a believable world by
editing nearly as much as 98% of the information it receives and is therefore the subliminal
layer to the conscious mind , and aids in creating believable metaphysical reality of time , 
space and action . Similarly , Graziano contends that the brain cannot process everything
and therefore the brain focuses on very few things at one go — the concept of attention . 
Attention is then augmented with internal data and previous experience from memory to
make predictions and plan actions . 
Searle [ 294 ] defines consciousness as states of sentience or awareness when a human
being is awake . This approach differs from Husserl ’ s and is not based on direct interaction
290  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
with the environment , but rather an inherent characteristic of the awake human mind . This
definition strongly ties sentience and awareness to consciousness . Accordingly , conscious
states lie within the brain and happen inside an organism . Also , these states connect
sequentially with one another to develop advanced senses of reason and memory , constituting
a continued conscious interaction with the world ; a conscious life . Each conscious state
has a certain qualitative character and feel to it and relates to bodily perceptions , as
in drinking water is different from writing a letter . Therefore phenomenal experience or
qualia underscores consciousness , as shown in Figure 9 . 1 . Conscious states are subjective
as they are experienced by a human or an animal . Here , Searle and Husserl converge on
the first-person virtue of consciousness . Block [ 38 ] 3
suggested that consciousness is divided
into phenomenal consciousness , which is experience and pertains to answering ‘ what
it is like to be [ in a given state ]  ?  ’ and access-consciousness which pertains to reasoning
and rationality . Pinker also suggests that consciousness occurs over two modes . These are , 
access-consciousness , which works only when we are awake and is more of an attempt
to respond to information from sensory organs and memory , helps to develop behaviour
and has no to very low information processing ; sentience is associating individual pieces
of information to obtain a greater meaning , with marked cerebral activity in this mode . 
The debate is not restricted to the philosophical and psychological . Early ideas of
cybernetics led Leary to propose an eight-circuit model of consciousness in which the
consciousness is supposed to be developed over eight circuits that operate within the human
nervous system . 
From the point of view of evolutionary biology , Greenfield [ 133 ] attempts to correlate
conscious behaviour to brain size of a life form . Her research suggests that there is
no consciousness centre , meaning that there is no place in the brain corresponding to
generation of consciousness ; neither are there any committed neurons or genes dedicated
to consciousness . Study of brain size of primates and mammals has also shown that mere
size of the brain is not really enough for higher functions , it needs special cognitive modules
such as logic , association , concepts of geometry etc . to demonstrate human-like intelligence . 
Therefore , a computer with very high memory will not suddenly transform into a conscious
machine on its own . 
In complete contrast to cybernetics , neuroscientist and evolutionary biologist , 
Csikszentmihalyi [ 78 ]  , defines consciousness as a ‘ flow ’  , the psychological state of a happy
individual in homeostatis . 
Despite contributions from many disciplines , a model explaining the unification of the
body and mind based on a physical approach remains a holy grail of artificial intelligence . 
This has also led in to smart humour . Block named it ‘ a mongrel concept ’  ; Brooks
calls it ‘ the juice ’  ; Norretranders mentions it as ‘ user illusion ’ and Chalmers and Harvey
independently label it as ‘ the extra ingredient ’  . Over the years , classification schemes
have been many , casual and non-casual , accessible and in-accessible , representational and
non-representational , continuous and discreet , mode and state and stateless however a single
theory explaining human behaviour and consciousness has eluded us . 
Forgoing the squabbles there are minimal grounds to quantify salient features for
development of artificial consciousness as shown in Figure 9 . 2 . Developing grounds
for a physical approach by a reluctant handshake between CTM , phenomenology and
behaviourism , Starzyk and Prasad [ 309 ] suggest that other than perception , action and
associative memory there needs to be a central executive [ 172 , 173 ] controlling all conscious
and other processes of the machine , while it is driven by ( 1 ) artificial emotions and
motivation , viz . remorse on wrong doing , exigency during flood , arson and other natural
3Block ’ s research was based on the vision stimuli of partially blind patients . 
 291
FIGURE 9 . 2 The bat , the robot and the zombie . Discussions on the definition of consciousness
and designing artificial consciousness has often led to engaging debates .  ( 1 ) Bats — Nagel [ 249 ] 
considers consciousness as ‘ what it is like ’ phenomenon . It is subjective and cannot be reduced .  ( 2 ) 
Robot — as per the Cartesian maxim , consciousness is non-physical and cannot be determined as
an artificial affect .  ( 3 ) The philosophical Zombie — it has attained an iconic status in this debate , 
where it lacks emotions and does not feel happiness , remorse , pain , or any other psychological
effects , and therefore no experiential content or qualia , but it still interacts with its environment . 
Made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
calamity ,  ( 2 ) goal selection ,  ( 3 ) attention switching , viz . focusing attention on hearing a loud
noise etc .  ( 4 ) incremental learning mechanism , etc . Thus creating states of self-awareness
and consciousness by relating cognitive experience to internal motivations and plans . 
Instead of the philosophical abstractions , a physical approach will underscore
sensory-motor design . Inspite of that since consciousness cannot be identified as a reflex , but
rather is a problem of cognition , it will further need to incorporate subjective experience , 
which emerges as an overlap of perception , learning and building of associative memories
broadly developed on representations found in the local environment , modulated by
attention and emotions , and underscored by moral and social interactions . 
Consciousness has to be designed as a phenomenon graduated over time and it will
also need to blend in with ongoing interactions and a rational anticipation of the future . 
The robots will have to elicit this consciousness in higher behaviours which are richer than
navigation or pick-and-place operations . Physical approaches will have to downplay qualia , 
at least at the start , in the hope that advancing research may be able to account for it in
the near future . 
9 . 2 . 3 Free will
Free will can be summed up as “ I can , but I won ’ t ”  . A more eloquent definition is
the question . Do we have control over our actions , and if so , what sort of control , and to
what extent ? The ability to take a conscious decision by weighing the merits of a situation
in hand is manifestation of free will . However critics claim that it is nothing more than a
figment of our imagination and that our choices are either near obvious outcomes of the
events in the past or blatantly random . A robot that orchestrates human-like free will , will
have to be equipped with the ability to reason about its past , present , near future and the
292  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
comparison between the various choices it has . Free will cannot be fed into the robot as
its internal working ; rather it will be determined in real time by its local environment and
constraints . Also , having a choice is different from the mere knowledge about it . This is an
issue of relevance — another form of the notorious frame problem . 
A preference for making a willful choice which is not particularly anticipated from the
previous working and which cannot be determined from analytical models of the robot
is a mark of free will . Walter had demonstrated a sense of free will in his turtles when
they ‘ chose ’ to follow one track rather than the other , by a comparative merit . It is an
easy demonstration , for the micromouse to confirm one track and avoid the other on
the virtue of a decision process . However most of these activities are a decision making
process via conditional loops , and the micromouse would lack any means of cognition other
than choosing tracks nor would it feel happy at choosing the right track and remorse on
choosing the wrong one . Oka [ 256 ] has designed models based on connectionist architecture
with spontaneous handshaking between representation and action modules , augmented
by memory and supervised by a central executive . Thus it can create newer states than
anticipated in the system , and therefore can be said to lead to nondeterministic free will . 
The next section discusses the Turing test which tries to distinguish an artificial being
from a biological being , these gedanken experiments devised by Turing has been hotly
debated and have often been considered a mark of ‘ personhood ’ in artificial beings . 
9 . 3 FROM MACHINES TO ( NEAR ) HUMAN BEINGS
In the early 1950s , Alan Turing asked the question ,  “ Can machines think ?  ” which led to
the coining of the test which bears his name to distinguish machines from human beings . 
Turing ’ s contention was that if a machine can imitate human behaviour well enough , then
it is sentient , or at least that is what it seems to be . In the test , a human interrogator
is isolated and kept in a separate room and allowed to interact with the responses of two
agents via keyboard inputs and screen outputs . The interrogator has to distinguish between
a human and a machine based on the replies to questions asked by itself . After a number of
such questions , the interrogator attempts to determine which subject is human and which is
an AI agent . Turing relied on human emotions and empathy to pave the way for the success
of the test . Turing predicted that by the end of the millennium , an intelligent machine
will be able to put up the imitation so well that the success of the test at best will be
around 70% , as shown in the cartoon in the Figure 9 . 3 . No computer has done this well , 
however clearing of the Turing test by an AI agent often makes it to the headlines . Eugene
Goostman , a chatbot attained near-celebrity status allegedly for being the first AI entity
to clear the Turing test . Present day AI can account for the IQ of a four-year-old child , 
however chatbots such as Goostman imitating a thirteen-year-old from Odessa , Ukraine , 
has done better . The Turing test is also a part of our daily lives , and quick online tests
as shown in Figure 9 . 4 distinguish a human response from the artificial . In a future where
human-like artificial agency has come of age , a conclusive test may be needed even more . 
Adding to Searle ’ s criticism , there has been lukewarm response from the AI community
since there are simpler means to test for an AI entity and also creating full-fledged
human-like response is currently limited to chatbots . The general view regarding Turing
test is that Turing meant it more in an anecdotal and philosophical context than as a true
test for day to day usage . However it has continued to be an influential and controversial
topic [ 263 ]  . 
The Voight–Kampff Test from the 1982 cult classic Blade Runner is a variant of the
Turing test and distinguishes between human-like androids known as replicants and human
 293
FIGURE 9 . 3 Turing test 2208 , it is predicted by Turing and other leading techologists and
futurists that around 2040 Turing test will become passable for machines . CC 3 . 0 license , cartoon
courtesy 
FIGURE 9 . 4 CAPTCHA ,  ( Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and
Humans Apart ) is an implementation of the Swirski test - or the reverse Turing test , where
making the letters squiggly makes it difficult to decipher for a machine ( a ) CAPTCHA in its
parent form ,  ( b ) variants as 2 parts of a phrase , crossing out and using alpha numerics and ( c ) 
utilisation of CAPTCHA for security against spambots . Images courtesy www . shutterstock . com , 
used with permission . 
294  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
beings . The test is based on the subject ’ s degree of empathetic response through carefully
worded questions and statements . Other than verbal response to scenarios which appeal
to emotions and empathy and other biological response mechanisms , viz . sweating , heart
beat , pulse rate and movement of the eyelids . The Voight–Kampff machine is akin to a
polygraph , however , it can further measure contractions of the iris muscle and the presence
of invisible airborne particles emitted from the subject ’ s body . Extending ideas similar to
the Voight–Kampff , a graduated variant of the Turing test suited for moral agency was
proposed by Allen et al .  [ 8 ]  , the Moral Turing test ( MTT )  . MTT is designed on the
standard Turing test , however the questions are confined to topics on morality . Thus if
human interrogators cannot distinguish the machine from the human being , then as per
argument the machine is a moral agent , or has attained moral agency . However , MTT soon
runs into issues ; a machine may be able to articulate better moral judgements than a human
being therefore stricter comparative tests may have to be devised . However , even then MTT
is self defeating because human morality is nowhere near to ideal and resists benchmarking . 
There have been attempts to design more sophisticated versions of the Turing test , as shown
in the cartoon in the Figure 9 . 5 . 
Feigenbaum Test . Feigenbaum [ 102 ] suggests a variation of the Turing test which
merits machine ’ s ability to pass for human , however the small talk and casual banter is
replaced with scientific and technical discussion , as a scientific expert in a specific field . The
test can be described as , between two players in the fray , one is chosen from an elite list
of experts in each of three pre-selected fields of natural science , engineering or medicine . 
For instance , the choices can be cosmology , metallurgy and endocrinology . For each round , 
the play between the players is determined by another expert of the same academic stream , 
e . g .  , a metallurgist ruling on a discussion on metallurgy , etc . 
Feigenbaum test ( FT ) may appear to be more difficult to pass than the Turing test , 
however consider that the questions are being asked from physics or mathematics or
history . An AI being may be able to make a lightning quick online search to lead to the
precise answers for the questions being posed to it , or alternatively may have a sufficiently
exhaustive handy library spanning a few terabytes which would in effect suffice for all of
the questions . FT once again brings forth the Moravec ’ s Paradox . However , two interesting
observations are :  ( 1 ) the artificial beings which can clear FT , being technically able , should
be capable of self improvement and enhancing their own designs and thus may plan a
course of evolution as human beings and ( 2 ) in FT , the language and verbal skills to hold
a conversation are very much the same as required for the Turing test . Thus various high
performance computers would fail the FT as they lack verbal ability . 
Like the Turing test , it is expected that machines will be able to clear FT by around
2030 . Past 2040 it is speculated that it may be difficult to attain the pristine conditions
for the test , as human beings and machines would have started to meld into one another . 
There will be blurring of the very line between human beings and machines ushering in
transhumanism . The next chapter speculates into such futuristic scenarios . 
Sparrow ’ s Turing Triage Test . Sparrow [ 307 ]  , makes a critical case of the Turing
test and suggests that in a crisis situation we may be forced to chose between the existence
of the machine over the life of a human being . 
Sparrow extends the Turing test to a ‘ triage ’  , which truly is not a test as per a way
to distinguish between a machine or a human being , but rather is a call to our conscience
where one seemingly tends to find overlapping human and machine values . Sparrow takes
 295
FIGURE 9 . 5 Tests to distinguish human beings from robots . starting from the Turing test
in the 1950s , there has been an effort to design tests to distinguish the artificial from the biological . 
The simplest mode is to engage in a series of questions and from ‘ human content ’ such as empathy , 
imagination and ethical principles , determine the answer . However , it is believed that sentient
robots will have more moral fiber than us human beings , as their judgement will not be clouded by
greed , ego and selfish premises . Therefore sentient robots may truly transcend human beings and
become the morally superior species . Image courtesy NESTA ( www . nesta . org . uk )  , designed by A3
Design ( www . a3studios . com )  . CC-by-SA , NC 4 . 0 license . 
296  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 9 . 6 Sparrow ’ s Turing Triage Test , illustrates the dilemma of rescuing a biological
beings or an AI beings in a critical scenario . Cartoon made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
the Moral Turing test ( MTT ) to the limit — the death of an AI being , and contests it with
the death of a human being . Sparrow formulates the test with the following illustration . 
In the near future a hospital employs a sophisticated AI for diagnostics . The AI is
equipped to learn and arrive at its own conclusions and is indistinguishable from human
beings in a Turing test4 
. In the intensive care unit are two patients on life support systems
awaiting donors and surgery etc . As a critical condition , a fire burns down the electrical
supply unit , and the hospital is forced to function on backup power and therefore runs
at greatly reduced levels . Sparrow proposes a senior medical officer as the protagonist in
the above situation and underscores the two following scenarios which beg to question the
virtues of personhood , 
1 . Human being vs . human being . The senior medical officer is informed that the
backup power is not enough to support both patients and only one can be saved
while the other left to die . A decision has to be made else both patients may die . The
sophisticated AI , running on its own emergency battery power , generates projections
and statistics for both patients , evaluating the chances of recovering if they survive
the current crisis . On the basis of this information , the senior medical officer makes a
decision which may well haunt him for years to come . 
2 . Human being vs . AI . As a final twist in the tale , the battery of the AI is failing and
the AI starts drawing on the limited power available for the hospital , thus endangering
the life of the patients on life support . The senior medical officer can consider switching
off the AI and thereby save the patient , however such an AI is not meant to be
fully switched off and doing so will fuse its circuit boards , rendering it permanently
inoperable . Alternatively , the senior medical officer can turn off the power to the
patients life support thus allowing AI to live on . If a decision is not made , chances are
that both the patient and the AI will die . 
While it may sound melodramatic , as the AI begs the senior medical officer to consider
letting it live on , it is left to debate whether the second scenario has the same character as
the first , as shown in Figure 9 . 6 . It can be concluded that machines would have achieved
the moral status of human beings when the latter choice has the same character as the
former . Further , Sparrow notes that the second decision doesn ’ t have one right answer and
there may be reasons to make a call either way . In 50 years into the future ( 2065 )  , will a
human being pause to think before shutting down his / her computer or mobile phone —
preventing the killing of an AI being ? Sparrow believes that his test will help to highlight
4
It is apparent that this AI will at least be semi-sentient . 
 297
the issues related to the moral status of artificial intelligent beings and may well be used as
an empirical test for moral standing , in the times to come . 
Lovelace Test . A more rigorous and interesting variation of the Turing test was
developed by Bringsjord et al .  [ 47 ]  . The test underscores human functions which have defied
mathematical modelling , like creativity , empathy and shared understanding — elements of
social cognition . Other than a list of questions , the test identifies truer human values such
as human-like creativity and originality . In order for an artificial agency to clear the test , it
has to create something original , all by itself , something it was not engineered to produce . 
The new essence of creativity can be an idea , a novel , a piece of music , a work of art etc . 
Also , the designers of the AI entity must not be able to explain how it led to this sudden
bout of creativity . The test is named in honour of Lady Lovelace , widely considered to be
the first programmer . Her opinion was that computers can never be as intelligent as humans
because they merely do what we program them to do and they lack the ability to originate
an idea that they weren ’ t designed to . Similar thinking guided Bringsjord and his team . An 
 ‘ upgrade ’ to version 2 . 0 of the Lovelace test was designed by Riedl [ 258 ] at Georgia Tech
which adds a criterion to gauge the humanly quantum of creativity . Riedl proposes that the
interrogator assign tasks with two components . The first is an inquiry into a creative aspect
such as a story , poem , or picture ; the second puts in a criterion on this creative ability , 
such as ,  “ Tell me a story about a pig that went to the moon ,  ” or “ Draw me a picture of a
dog playing a violin ” — insisting on topics which are out of the ordinary and resort to the
imagination and creativity , calling on genuine human skills and ability . 
9 . 4 SEMI-SENTIENT PARADIGM AND IT ‘ S LIMITATIONS
In a broader perspective , the Turing test is an answer to the question , what constitutes a
person ? With technology , the definition of personhood has been changing . Beings with :  ( 1 ) 
with voice processing and speech synthesiser ,  ( 2 ) with NLP and power words typically in
chatbots ,  ( 3 ) thoughts — as deduced in MRI scans and ( 4 ) experiences such as immersive
gameplay and sophisticated VR such as the occulus rift , are also construed as nearly a 
 ‘ person ’  . Therefore , a strict biological concept is not enough . Therefore traits which are
central to the concept of ‘ personhood ’ are [ 347 ]  : 
1 . Sentience . The ability to experience sensations , conscious experiences such as pain
and pleasure
2 . Emotionality . The ability to feel happiness , sadness , moroseness , anger etc . 
3 . Reason . The ability to connect logical thoughts and thus solve complex problems
4 . The capacity to communicate . The ability to express ideas and information with
another person
5 . Self awareness . Knowledge of oneself , ability to foresee the implications of one ’ s
actions
6 . Moral agency . The adherence to moral principles or ideals
Among these , fake emotionality can be implemented computationally using FACS , 
tonality , NLP etc , some elements of reason can be imparted as a programming code and the
capacity to communicate has been demonstrated by modern day robots , the remaining
three ( sentience , self awareness and moral agency ) have been the stumbling blocks to
attaining robots which are human-like . These are not truly independent of each other , but
rather are very closely related to one another , with sentientism being a cornerstone paradigm
298  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
since morality and self awareness in an AI agent can be addressed only for a sentient being
with free will . It is an apparent that only organic beings are genuinely sentient , such may
fail to arise in the truest manner in the artificial domain . 
Ishiguro ’ s humanoids are the best examples of human-like robots and they can very
nicely replicate the physiological and behavioural aspects of human beings . However , they
are programmed targeting a narrow concern and lack free will and sentient behaviour . On
the other end are the unfortunate instances when robots have gone on a killing spree , 
a devastation — however not a conscious act . Since , it has been observed that babies
apparently perceive friendliness and cogent behaviour from robots as sentientism [ 226 ]  , 
therefore to appreciate sentientism a sufficiently mature level of human intelligence is
required . 
Experts working on artificial consciousness have expressed concerns that sentient beings
may never exist , since the human brain functions on the ability to integrate information
and it is a key property of consciousness . Most models of induction rely on sequential logic . 
The human brain is not such type of a processing unit and reverse engineering the human
brain has yielded poor results . Further , each experience and learned aspects collate into the
human brain as an addendum to the corresponding previous memories making it even more
difficult to discern it with an artificial sequential process . Also willfully editing or deleting
memories is near impossible , and instead of a facet , it is diagnosed as a medical condition . 
It has been seen that computers cannot integrate information in such a manner . Neither is
it possible to make computers where memory cannot be modified or edited out . 
We do have computers which can beat Kasparov in chess or devise a dynamic lock which
will take millions of years to break , but since we lack an understanding of how the mind
relates to the brain nor how neurons and action potentials create consciousness , progress to
replicate sentientism has been slow . The Blue Brain Project at EPFL , Switzerland and the
OpenWorm project with contributors across the globe are efforts to develop artificial brain
like functions . These projects promise to simulate a full human being in the coming decade . 
Human beings are less likely to appreciate a fully sentient artificial being and cooperation
and coersion with human beings gets a higher preference than superlative levels of autonomy . 
To assimilate well into human society , robots may have to look and act dumb rather than
the super intelligent beings that they are capable of being and the notion of sentience may
at best be ‘ redefined ’ as ‘ an ability to interact effectively with human beings using natural
channels such as voice and gesture , in the best interest of the human being and the broader
interest of the human race ’  . While on the other end of this debate is criticism from renowned
physicist Penrose that awareness in biological beings cannot be explained by any scientific
approach and thus is unattainable computationally . 
As per strict etymology ,  ‘ conscious robot ’ is an oxymoron , meaning ‘ free willed slaves ’  . 
How do material aspects lean towards attaining sentience ? Such a route is charted via
Maslov ‘ s robot index in Figure 9 . 7 . The primary concern for robots will be to address
their energy needs . The next level in ascendency is safety and self preservation , which
may be a deliberative endeavour and also be designed-in as a failsafe smart technology . 
Higher up in the pyramid , embedded AI will underscore enactive abilities to interact with
the dynamic environment . Continued interaction with the environment will appeal to the
need for emergence of self awareness . As a last step a self aware being will seem to attain
consciousness in the Husserlian sense as inner cerebral processes will try to project the
self-awareness of its own being on to other beings and objects . As a conscious being , and
with its ability to sense an inner self and groom it with acquired or learned information and
adhere to rules and adages such as morality and social values , the robot will tend to attain
ground level sentience . 
 299
FIGURE 9 . 7 Maslow ’ s hierarchy of robot needs . The hierarchy of needs for beings developed
with embodied AI , on attaining sentience . 
Kismet , ROMAN , PR2 and Pepper are state-of-the-art social robots . The down side to
this is that the emotion elicited by them is at best sophisticated imitations , developed by
observing the human subject . These robots do not feel happiness , remorse , pain , or any other
psychological effects — typifying zombies lacking a soul , therefore with no consciousness , 
free will nor sentience . Developing moral agencies into and also as an extention of such
social robots will require more of a deontic approach , developed for a narrow concern such
as a carer robot nurse robot , companion / assistant robot , following a set of instructions , 
while being friendly5
to the human subjects . Other than this lacuna , these models take into
consideration first degree effects such as mirroring from the facial expressions and voice of
the human subject without any inward processing such as a decision process or associating
information . Causality , as shown in Figure 9 . 8 , is much more than first degree and the
far reaching effects are often not fully discernible even to us human beings . An artificial
being should not only respond to the first degree effects — that is , be self aware — but
should be able to analyse and evaluate the far reaching consequences of its actions . To cite
an example , consider a mobile robot assisting in medical surgery . Cutting open a patient
would seem a harmful act , however the far reaching effects are with the intention of curing
the patient . Therefore , such a robot will at least need to possess functional morality and
thus a bottom-up approach to develop it or a developmental route , learning from experience
and phased in over a long period of time . 
The goal is to construct a perfect moral agent , but since human morality lacks a
definition and cannot be explained by an undisputed body of knowledge and rules , pitfalls
are commonplace . It has also been seen that adult human beings often prefer to take their
own decisions rather than being prompted by robots . Robots are then confined to be nothing
5This friendliness will not be in an effort to socialise or strike up a lucid banter , but rather to elicit
apathy / empathy , a job which they have been trained to do but lack a ‘ feel ’ for it . 
300  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 9 . 8 The causality picture , a robot which is developed purely on a top-down approach
will only have appreciation for primary effects and function in the realms of operational morality . A
bottom-up approach will give the robot ability to evaluate secondary effects , while full moral agency
will probably employ a hybrid approach and will need realisation of the far reaching consequences
of its own actions . It is to be noted , universal effects are not always appreciable by human cognition
and only a planet wide AI will be able to assess such consequences , this is discussed in the next
chapter . 
more than smart assistants which lack autonomy , helping in a human initiated project rather
than being a genuine critic in human actions . This is the reason why various researchers
put the definition of sentience as effective and efficient communication , cooperation and
congeneality with human beings — the semi-sentient paradigm . Robots may have to
pretend to be dumb , illustrate a lack of autonomy , adhere to human societal values and
be appreciative of human doings in order to find acceptance in a human society . Employing
artificial emotions to trigger internal states is central to the progress of such an idea . Such
was seen in ethical architecture in the previous chapter , which models artificial emotions to
reward or punish robots in the military . Stateof-the-art human-robot communication over
natural language is another tenet for the semi-sentient paradigm . 
The semi-sentient paradigm which relies on humanoid appearance and voice based
communications reduces the robots to neo-Asimovian smart slaves . The paradigm finds
acceptance as shown in Figure 9 . 9 since current day technology has not yet been able to
design artificial homeostatis . Which begs the query on qualia , and therefore even the state
of the art robots can attain only low challenge — low skill tasks as shown in Figure 9 . 10 . 
However , controlling robots as a slave morality either by strict deontic principles or
by synthetic development of pain , suffering and remorse , defeats the goal of AI to strive
towards human like intelligence . Metzinger [ 229 ] draws a parallel to animal ethics and genetic
engineering , where causing pain or encouraging the culture of a disability in children in order
to study it , is not only ethically violating , but also mind numbing . Therefore , such negative
synthetic phenomenology should not find encouragement or acceptance and we should not
create nor risk the emergence of suffering in an artificial entity . Also , one needs to see beyond
a master-slave relationship , and robots should be allowed the privilege of being accountable
for their actions Therefore a robot should be responsible for an action if , at the time of
 301
FIGURE 9 . 9 Toby 2036 ( Toby , 4 of 4 )  , Toby gets a humanoid body . This acceptance of robots
as near humans is prospected to be on the rise over the next two decades . Cartoon made as a part
of Toby series ( 4 of 4 ) by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
302  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 9 . 10 Csikszentmihalyi ’ s ‘ Flow ’  . Csikszentmihalyi [ 78 ] contends that challenge at hand
vs . the skill needed is directly related to the emotional state and homeostasis of human beings . 
Therefore , the shaded region shows the limits of current day robots , which are broadly in the low
challenge — low skill region . 
the action , the robot had the ability to suspend or terminate that action . Therefore , in
hindsight it also has to be accepted that like human beings robots also can go wrong even
with all the facts , data , reason and advice ready at hand [ 32 ]  . 
Other than just being wrong , the ability to lie and deceive is a trait of a complete moral
agency . Dennett refers to this as ‘ opportunity for duplicity ’  , which manifests in two ways : 
self-deception and other-deception . Deception is used as a tool for social adhesion and helps
in civil acceptance , and according to the semi-sentient paradigm robots will have to deceive
and appear dumb to be accepted as a human-like entity in human society . 
To overcome the limitations of the semi-sentient paradigm , there needs to be attempts
to inquire into a robot ’ s inner self — the monologous soul of an artificial agency . The next
section attempts to explore the inner world of a robot . 
9 . 5 MEMORIES , MEDITATION AND THE INNER WORLD
Braitenberg vehicle 12 . Braitenberg ’ s synthetic psychology has been discussed in earlier
chapters . Vehicles 1-4 demonstrated humanly emotions , tastes and likeness and vehicles 7-11 , 
used information to deduce knowledge and develop concepts . Other than its own unique
ability , each successive vehicle is designed to have all the characteristics and hardware
of its predecessor . With added functionalities , advanced vehicles may face the jeopardy
of running into a condition where processing sensory information in near parallel may
become maximally active leading to an undesired explosion of processes , a freak condition
similar to epilepsy which will stop only when the vehicle has run out of energy , or has
a fail switch which will stop the power supply to the vehicle . To overcome this condition
 303
FIGURE 9 . 11 Braitenberg vehicle 12 . is seen to have ‘ free will ’ and can engage in autopoietic
growth , where perception , action and inference on acquired knowledge makes further knowledge
acqusition efficient and robust . 
in vehicle-12 , Braitenberg proposes to raise the threshold of external stimuli to a high , 
so that only those events which have a very high sensory response come into play , and
rest are neglected . Though effective , this approach is detrimental and can render poor
performance . Therefore Braitenberg devises a periodic cycle over which the threshold is
raised and lowered . Therefore , the number of active elements in the system which were
very high at one instance , will be suddenly lower at the next one . However those elements
processing sensory information will not just switch off abruptly , but rather will continue
until the process has completed . Therefore , it will be difficult to predict the vehicle ’ s action , 
and therefore it can be said to work as per its own free will . Also , the information processing
ability of the vehicle will remain high even when threshold has been lowered , therefore it
is possible that the vehicle uses this processing ability to ‘ meditate ’ on its memories and
discover associations leading to newer ideas , enabling a ‘ thinking like process ’ by focusing
attention inward . External agencies cannot influence the decision process of the vehicle
and it can choose to think and reflect on its own memories as an inquiry into its inner
world , which may work hand in hand with free will to trigger an autopoietic growth as
shown in Figure 9 . 11 . Perception , action and inference on acquired knowledge make further
knowledge acquisition efficient and robust and provide ever-increasing understanding of
the environment , only limited by memory limits ( RAM ) and physical constraints , viz . 
mechatronic model , wheels etc . for exploring the environment . 
The inner world . since consciousness has various definitions and researchers are still
divided on the long-term goals of artificial consciousness , it is an interesting question ,  ‘ When
do we know that a robot is conscious ?  ’ AI research contends that the experience of an ‘ inner
world ’ will at least be a large piece of the jigsaw . For human beings the ‘ inner world ’ signifies
an abstract ability of our brains to simulate behaviour and perception by interaction with the
external world . It is believed that an action can be simulated by activating motor neurons in
the frontal lobe very nearly as they would be activated during an actual occurrence , though
the final output is not actuated to the muscles but suppressed . Similarly , the perception of an
external stimulus can be simulated with internal activation of sensory cortex very nearly as
304  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
it would have been activated during normal perception of such an external stimulus . Along
with action and perception , the anticipation mechanism underscores the construction of the 
 ‘ inner world ’  . It is plausible that ‘ inner worlds ’  [ 149 ] may very well exist in very simple
robots equipped with connectionist learning such as ANN and engaged in repetative low
level tasks of navigation and path following . For such a robot , the first few navigational
routes will be externally generated , often based on purely reactive principles as observing
the intensity of a light source or tracking known markers etc . Later a similar route will
be tracked without using the sensors but through internally generated perceptions , the
prediction based on the learning module of the ANN . Therefore , Hesslow contends that the
ability to manipulate the external world with self-generated input is the rudiments of an
inner world which also confirms the first person interaction with the environment . Since
this inner world is based on the reursions of the ANN , therefore tasks which are not so
frequent are usually prone to failure . Working on a similar ideas , Gorbenko et al . exploit
such simple connectionist models to yield temporal relations and demonstrate self detection
and therefore self consciousness . The next section is a look into experiments which attempt
to trigger such inner states and hint at a semblance of conscious behaviour . 
9 . 6 EXPERIMENTS — COG , MIRROR COGNITION AND THE 3 WISE ROBOTS
Research , has only been able to develop self awareness which is particularly context
dependent , usually lasting for a very short time . However these experiments have kept
up the interest and set visions for a breakthrough in the near future . Self awareness hints
towards attaining consciousness , however the conscious robot is still an optimist ’ s dream if
not just an oxymoron as suggested by Dennett . The following are the various attempts to
demonstrate self consciousness in robots . Four routes taken by researchers are ; 
1 . Extending behaviour-based methods , assuming that a higher level of behaviour will
emerge with a number of reactive modes working in parallel . 
2 . Overlap of the various modes of sensory processing to converge to the same event . For
example , the falling of a glass tumbler will be observed through vision — seeing the
tumbler fall — and sound . If the robot can discern the overlap of these two events and
converge them to the event , then it would suggest an elementary level of consciousness . 
3 . Consistency of behaviour . Such methods highlight predictability and have been tagged
to the mirror cognition test and its variants . 
4 . Puzzle solving , which involves inquiry of the self and explores the unique
characteristics and traits of the robot . 
It is to be noted that social cognition and conscious behaviour often overlap and various
experiments on social robots also ascertain some degree of conscious behaviour , as the
peek-a-boo and drumming mate experiments on KASPAR , and the mutual care paradigm
designed for Hobbit . 
9 . 6 . 1 From reactive architecture
Since traditional symbolic AI is insufficient to lead to agency similar to human behaviour , 
connectionist approach and layering of behaviour as in subsumption architecture may be
a good starting point . However this will not help in deliberative processes such as inward
thinking which is essential for consciousness . Employing a deliberative approach doesn ’ t
solve the problem as rule-based systems are plagued by the frame problem and cognitive
 305
FIGURE 9 . 12 A suggestion for cognitive architecture , adapted from Long and Kelley [ 207 ]  . 
Data fusion is important , as the simplest conscious experience occurs over a number of sensory
perceptions , and is perfected over feedback cycles . 
architectures require a great number of rules , and this process is difficult to scale up to
billions of rules . 
Long and Kelley [ 207 ] suggest that artificial cognition may be designed using hybrid
architecture and machine learning , as is shown in Figure 9 . 12 , carefully designing the
emergence of the system , taught and trained by large teams of engineers and scientists . 
Such a project may well be crowd sourced and driven by the enthusiasm of the citizen
roboticist . 
We human beings , interact with the environment through visual , auditory , 
somatosensory , tactile and olfactory sensing . These are processed simultaneously in near
parallel , and the integration of information acquired across all these modes in the brain ’ s
cerebral cortex broadly forms our perception and our consciousness . Behaviour-based
methods are designed with ascending layers of complexity , with each behaviour module
directly relating stimulus ( S ) to response ( R )  , and these near parallel modules leading to the
emergence of a behaviour at runtime . 
9 . 6 . 1 . 1 Cog
Cog , a humanoid robot bust , was developed by Brooks and his team at MIT in late 1990s . 
The aim was to develop a fully conscious robot , with sensory motor ‘ experience ’ than
designing it via an information processing route . It was nearly the size of an adult human and
had two arms , but no legs . While fully cognitive human-like functionality was never achieved , 
it did attempt to address the question of consciousness and strengthen the philosophical
issues in such research . Cog broadly addressed the following [ 91 , 92 ]  : 
1 . Cog was designed to go around the symbol grounding problem , as any
symbolism was to be grounded in its real interactions designed as sensory-motor . 
2 . Cog was equipped with the ability to make preferential choices — the typical valuation
of two choices at a given instance over points of merit typifing an ability to make a
conscious decision and adherence to a set of values . 
3 . Cog was equipped with a number of self monitoring devices and therefore , it was
306  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
in effect designed to be aware of its own internal states by observing its own
artificially attained homeostasis . It was also aware of the various parts of its body
with proprioceptive feedback from the joints in the head , torso and neck . 
4 . For us human beings , vision is the superlative of the remaining four senses and more
often an interaction starts with the meeting of the eyes . In conjunction , Cog ’ s video
camera eyes saccaded to focus on a newly arrived human being in the room . Such
eye-contact and gaze monitoring enabled attention focussing , and provided for at
least semi-sentient interactions . 
Cog was the first effort to develop artificial consciousness in real robots by extending
reactive models to the domain of artificial consciousness . 
9 . 6 . 1 . 2 Consciousness based architecture
Kitamura [ 181 , 183 ] draws a one-to-one similarity between behaviour and the observed blend
of consciousness over biological evolution , from single-celled organisms to animals to birds
and finally to human beings as shown in Table 9 . 2 . 
TABLE 9 . 2 8 levels of consciousness employed in CBA
Level Phylogeny Human
Ontogeny
Consciousness Behaviour
8 Human Being less than 2
years
Conception Linguistics
7 Human Child 2 years Representation Making of a tool
6 Chimpanzee 18 months Image Use of a tool
5 Monkey 1 year Temporal and
spatial relations
Use of medium
4 Mammal 
( Quadruped ) 
9 months Stable emotions Detour , search , 
arm manipulation
3 Fish 5 months Temporary
attention
Capture , escape , 
approach
2 Earthworm 1 month Pleasure and
displeasure
Orientation of
body and limbs
1 Jellyfish Few days Primitive reflexes Reflex
displacement , 
feeding
Consciousness based architecture ( CBA ) is designed on the model proposed by
Vietnamese philosopher Duc Thao , a hierarchy where consciousness and behaviour is a
single phenomenon . Consciousness is developed over a number of levels and is explained as
an inhibited action written in the memory and drives a chosen action in the immediately
higher level . The chosen action if again inhibited acts as the consciousness driver for the next
higher level . Duc Thao ’ s model is motivated from evolutionary biology and assumes that
the phylogenetic evolution across millions of years in the mental process , from single-celled
organisms to human beings , is nearly the same as the ontogenetic growth of human
consciousness from infant to adult beings . 
In a hierarchical architecture as shown in Figure 9 . 13 , lower levels developed on
single-celled organisms and insects are therefore reflexive and higher ones designed
on mammals , apes and human beings , are more cerebral and therefore driven by
 307
FIGURE 9 . 13 Consciousness Based Architecture , adapted from Kitamura [ 181 , 183 ] 
representational knowledge . The level of consciousness activated selects and produces a
behaviour at the immediately next level where the behaviour is obstructed . The five levels
of consciousness in CBA are : 
1 . Level 1 — Reflex motion , without memory . The stimulus decays with time , therefore
though there is no appreciable memory , the agent is still conscious of the past instances
of time . Typical actions for this level are changing body directions , motion of limbs , 
feeding including chewing and swallowing , etc . 
2 . Level 2 — Each stimulus can be gauged by a corresponding emotion of pleasure
or displeasure , based on the memory of the past stimuli experienced on Level 1 . If
the stimulus which causes reflex in Level 1 goes over a threshold or alternatively
the agent cannot respond with reflex action , then the information acquired from the
stimulus stored as memory acts as past experience for Level 2 . Level 2 is the start
of development of marking each stimulus with an emotional value — a coordinate
system of sorts , which continues in Level 3 and 4 . The memory from this level guides
the intentional actions of the agent in the immediate future and also forms base
representations to forsee simple events — food , predator etc . 
3 . Level 3 — Transient emotions related to external objects form the consciousness of
this level . Consciousness is modulated by emotions such as , desire , pleasure , anger , 
comfort , hatred as long as the stimulus is present . If stimulus from Level 2 is strong
enough then it works to drive towards action in Level 3 . For example , if the agent
is able to find food in Level 2 , then the drive to approach the food and acquire it is
acted out in Level 3 . 
4 . Level 4 — If actions in Level 3 fail to reach the desired goal , viz . acquiring food
308  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
or attacking a predator , then the agent has to seek other routes to accomplish these
goals . The corresponding emotion is no longer transient , but is lasting and it acts as
a motivator to pursue the job in hand . 
5 . Level 5 — The agent is able to recognise and manipulate low-level temporal and
spatial information . 
By ethological correspondence , level 5 tallies to the consciousness of lower anthropoids
such as monkeys ; level 4 to mammals lower than monkeys including birds ; level 3 to fish ; level
2 to insects and earthworms ; and level 1 to single-cell organisms . The level of consciousness
activated selects and produces a behaviour at the immediately next level of hierarchy above
the level where the behaviour is obstructed . The behaviour selection [ 184 ] designed as : 
Ci ( t )  = X
NE
j = 1 
| βij |  + 
X
NI
j = 1 
| γij |  + 
X
NE
j = 1 
| aij |  ( 9 . 1 ) 
where βij is the external perception , γij is the internal perception and aij is anticipation . 
Of these three , the latter two can be used to design the levels of CBA ; γij is designed as a
function of time , independent of βij , while anticipation is modelled as a function of βij . 
HAL 9000
In Arthur C . Clarke ’ s futuristic saga ‘ 2001 : A Space Odyssey ’ HAL 9000 is a
super computer brain of the spaceship Discovery that houses 2 inmates , the astronauts
Dave Bowman and Frank Poole . HAL is an acronym for , Heuristically programmed
ALgorithmic computer and the 9000 series is said to have never made a mistake . In the
movie , the supercomputer kills both the human inmates in order to pursue the goal of
the mission — cause for the greater good . 
HAL 9000 has been a matter of debate and has spurred various lines of thought
in roboethics . While Abrams suggests HAL 9000 to be the fictional premise of the
singularity , Wheat , using instances from the movie , has tried to demonstrate the
various traits of HAL 9000 , which are : Consciousness , Cognition , Confidence , Enjoyment , 
Enthusiasm , Secretiveness , Pride , Blaming , Treachery , Fear , Panic , Lying and Senility . 
HAL 9000 also has human faculties as appreciating art , playing chess and using tools . 
Kubrick met with Good to discuss the script of the movie , it is possible that HAL 9000 is
motivated by Good ’ s ultra-intelligent machines . Around the second half of 2014 , HAL was
in the news as an example of how a superior AI can be detrimental to human welfare and
existence . After Musk and Hawking expressed their concerns regarding super intelligent
AI . 
Using this model , Kitamura et al . initially developed simulations and later experiments
with Khepera robots to demonstrate the working of CBA . Experiments on a prey-predator
game showed that behaviour starts at lower levels ( level 1 ) and as the lower levels are
 309
inhibited , the robot demonstrates consciousness and moves to higher levels ( maximum of
level 5 ) to account for this change . These experiments and simulations also showed that at
higher levels , two robots in the same level of behaviour tend to cooperate implicitly . CBA
works well in navigational problems such as motion to goal and tracking a moving target , 
and led to emergence of implicit cooperation . 
A behaviour-based layering to consciousness was proven to be more effective at such tasks
as compared to reinforced learning methods [ 182 ]  . Later , Kitamura extended CBA using
motivation from rat brain manipulating techniques , and also developed a more sophisticated
level 5 to account for ‘ thinking ’  , particularly planning and learning . However , CBA is
suitable only for low-level tasks and is not extendible to human-like representational tasks , 
such as communication through vision , voice and sight , which are tagged to emotions and
social norms . 
As an apparent shortcoming , CBA is suited to low-level behaviours and lacks in variety . 
Since the levels of behaviour are very well defined , the robot never really encountered
scenarios which were not anticipated . Therefore , though CBA may suggest synthetic
consciousness , it is not appreciable for development of consciousness as found in human
beings . Research over the last decade has moved away from layering of behaviour in favour
of unison of modalities , binding together distinct channels of information and action , such
as voice , vision , touch and joint movements etc . to converge to the same event . 
9 . 6 . 2 From cross-modal bindings
In our-day-to-day activities , on hearing one ’ s name the immediate reaction is to turn the
head to look in that direction . This is a cross-modality of information modes ,  ( 1 ) audibility
and ( 2 ) feedback from the joints to ( 3 ) see the source uttering the name , and it focuses the
attention towards this event . Cross-modality is said to be a superior functionality and a
mark of conscious behaviour and has been a popular model and also a tool used by various
research groups . 
FIGURE 9 . 14 Self-aware internal states are obtained by binding three modalities . 
Relating the sound , vision and proprioception helps the robot develop internal states which can
identify an action , object or its ownself by the sound . Image and concept adapted from Fitzpatrick 
[ 105 ]  . 
310  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
9 . 6 . 2 . 1 Cog ’ s tambourine experiment
Fitzpatrick [ 105 ] and his co-researchers at MIT developed higher states of cognition and
awareness in the Cog by associating information across three different modalities , visual , 
acoustic and proprioception . The method is to segment groups of signals in individual
modalities of visual , acoustic and proprioception and then to identify and bind causally
related groups of signals . All of those signals will convey the same event . Using a tambourine
for the experiment , the periodicity in its motion can be studied by tracking and grouping
periodically moving points while it is being played . The two events , the motion and the
sound will be causally related or bound if they happen in tandem and converge to the same
event . 
Fitzpatrick et al . use Short-Time Fourier Transform ( STFT ) for the visual signal and use
a histogram for the acoustic signal and then two signals are bound together using binding
algorithms such that binding occurs if the visual period matches the acoustic period or
if it matches half the acoustic period within a tolerance of 60 ms . Half periodicity is of
significance as sound is often generated at the fastest point or the extremes of the trajectory , 
introducing a factor of two . This allows to ‘ see the sound of a tambourine ’ and identify the
object by its rhythm . Extending such cross-modal binding to the robot involves the robot
identifying its own bodily rhythm . For example Cog ’ s movement of the arm can also be
identified by its rhythm and this poses an opportunity to bind it with its own visual signal . 
Cog is also aware of its proprioceptive feedback from it ’ s arm , therefore making it a binding
across three modalities of visual , acoustic and proprioception , as shown in Figure 9 . 14 . This
method led Cog to attain the cognitive capabilities of a 10-12 month infant , and may have
initiated s-consciousness . 
The Cog is also seen to understand the functioning of us human beings and our social
functions , for example a person nodding his head in disagreement will correspond to an event
with at least two modalities . Therefore from then on , a similar nod of head would help the
robot understand the social function of disagreement , thus tying the event to a general
notion of disagreement . Future prospect is to incorporate newer modalities such as tactile
sensing and olfaction to make a robot more robust , dynamic and in better correspondence
with human-like consciousness . 
9 . 6 . 2 . 2 Nico ’ s drumming
Circk et al . at Yale University use cross-modal states for the humanoid robot Nico , seen in
Figure 9 . 15 to make it beat the drum , following human actions . 
Nico has been iconic to studies in cognition , internal states and self consciousness , and
in an experiment in 2008 Gold et al . tried to teach it language using a basic vocabulary [ 129 ] 
and 2012 Hart and Scassellati tried to make the robot recognise its own image in a mirror , 
and thus pass the mirror test and also to use mirror reflections to interpret other objects in
its environment . 
In the last chapter the ‘ drumming mate experiment ’ on Kaspar was discussed . This
experiment marks a robot ’ s cognitive ability to detect , understand and to cooperate with
human beings quickly and accurately and to adapt to a real time response of a complex
activity as rhythm synchronisation and therefore demonstrate cognition in social activities . 
For these reasons this has become a benchmark for cognitive studies in robots . 
In the drumming experiment , Nico is programmed to play a drum in a performance
with human drummers at the direction of a human conductor , by integration across three
modalities : visual , auditory and proprioceptive . As shown in Figure 9 . 15 ( b )  , the vision
module detects and monitors the arm motion of the human drummer or conductor , and the
 311
audition module detects the drum beats from both the human being and the robot . The
perception fusion prediction module employs learning analysis and prediction to generate
arm commands . Nico can follow a human drummer or take instructions from a human
conductor and delivers a precise synchronisation with the human performers . Nico is aware
and evaluates the outcomes of its own actions in near real time and therefore can adapt to
brief changes in rhythm and tempo , much like a seasoned drummer . 
FIGURE 9 . 15 Nico at Yale University .  ( a ) the robot and ( b ) the control architecture for
drumbeating . Nico ’ s image is from Gold et al .  [ 129 ]  , used with permission from Elsevier . 
The vision module monitors the hand motion of the conductor and looks for those
instances when the conductor ’ s hand moves away , indicating the ictus of a beat . The robot
is exposed to three streams of information , the ictus detection , motion commands for the
arm and drumbeat detected by the auditory module . In the perception fusion prediction
module , the ictus motion is causally related to its sound , arm motion is compared to the
sound , and then checked for the synchronisation obtained by the robot and attunement
towards a tempo is extrapolated to provide some prediction for the robot . The architecture
is sufficiently dynamic and Nico learns to compensate for errors , lack of information and
time delays , and the researchers provide Nico with a ‘ warmup period ’ where it can play on
its own and learn prior to a ensemble performance . The shortcomings of the above approach
312  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
are , in dark settings such as minimal lighting on a stage the vision module may not be able
to focus so well on the conductor ’ s hands . All drums seem the same to the robot and
uncharacteristic loud noises can confuse the robot . 
These experiments demonstrate that cross-modal sensory integration can lead to precise
synchronisation and therefore a realisation of causality of an event6 and hence predict its
outcome . 
9 . 6 . 3 Mirror cognition
Gallup [ 59 , 114 ] found that on introducing a primate to a mirror , it responded as thought
the image is another animal . After prolonged exposure for a few days the chimpanzees were
able to recognise their own images while the monkeys failed to do so . His experiments also
demonstrated that mirror cognition improved with incremental learning in chimpanzees . 
It is known that chimpanzees have DNA material about 85% to 95% similar to human
beings . Therefore the mirror cognition test sets the tone to assess for self awareness in AI
agents . Human babies cannot pass the mirror test until they are around eighteen months
old , and in animals only primates , elephants and dolphins have been able to clear the test . 
Lacan [ 196 ] was guided by similar results and concluded that human infants pass
through a stage in which an external image of the body , as seen in a mirror or shown as a
photograph , produces a psychic response augmenting the rudiments of “ I-representations ”  . 
Lacan believed that the mirror test is a milestone to confirm cognitive development . Vision
is unique and is more advanced than the other five senses , therefore it is desirable to augment
the “ I-representations ”  , using vision — a mirror to show the “ I ” to itself . 
For Gallup ’ s chimpanzee , self-awareness is confirmed by detecting self-directed actions
in front of a mirror , while for a robot this is an enactive phenomenon — an overlap of
both the creation and the detection of self-awareness in near real time , which will be
discussed later in the chapter in the experiment with three Nao robots . It is well established
that mirror neurons [ 176 , 277 ] are integral to human cognition and lead to mimicking the
behaviour of another person , as though the observer was engaged in the same action . 
This aping triggers such mirror neurons and augments the “ I-representations ”  . Neurologists
further claim that mirror neurons are the physiological mechanism for the perception / action
coupling , encoding-in the meanings of actions . 
9 . 6 . 3 . 1 A very simple implementation of the mirror test in robots
A trivial implementation of the mirror test is shown in Figure 9 . 16 , consider that the face of
the robot has one blinking LED for facial expressions , and a photo diode for the eye . In ideal
conditions when the ambient light is not of appreciable influence , the reflected light from
the robot ’ s face will cause different output states than a similar external blinking LED . As
shown , the LED is supplied with a pulse generator and this blinking light ( T ) is reflected 
( R ) to a detector in the robot ’ s eye . If T and R corresponds — as AND logic ( S = R· T ) 
— then arguably , this is a pass for the mirror test . 
However , this would be mere detection of the robot ’ s image , thereby reducing the
problem to that of signal processing rather than of cognitive deduction of the self , nor would
6
I am tempted to conclude that binding over three modalities is unique and may be the simplest scenario
of artificially self aware states in a robot , since binding over two modalities is a common occurrence in sensor
integration , particularly in mobile robots and doesn ’ t lead to self aware states . However , I have not come
across such literature and being qualitative human experience I am not sure a rigorous mathematical proof
is possible . 
 313
FIGURE 9 . 16 Mirror cognition with AND logic , reduces the test of cognition to pattern / signal
recognition and therefore it is not a good experimental set up . 
this generate internal states of the self . Further , unlike Gallup ’ s chimpanzees , recognition
of the self will be more of a instant detection and not a gradually acquired ability . 
9 . 6 . 3 . 2 Haikonen ’ s somatosensory model
Across multiple modes , information conveying the same representation helps to develop and
augment emergent internal states of consciousness . An example which solves the symbol
grounding problem is , when the word ‘ apple ’ is uttered it would not mean much to the
robot until at about the same time a physical apple is placed in its vision , and therefore the
information is augmented over the neural network . At each later instance the robot will be
able to relate the language to the physical aspect . 
Haikonen [ 137 ]  , proposes a cognitive architecture which considers the flow of information
across three information channels or modalities , auditory , visual and cutaneous inputs as
shown in Figure 9 . 17 , where the cutaneous comprises touch and facial features ( T and F ) 
both of which help to ground self-related representations . Each percept is augmented with at
least one more percept generating a feedback loop and three such feedback loops working in
tandem for the cognitive processing of the robot . The signal SP is generated when the robot
is touched or it detects a face expression . The process of recognising the self is demonstrated
across three temporal steps as discussed below . 
1 . The robot is touched , which generates touch signals T , which will enable a
somatosensory percept , SP . At the same instant the robot ’ s name is called out , 
generating an auditory percept AP , thereby associating the two percepts . Thus the
name of the robot is associated with the tactile feel of the physical body of the robot . 
Somatosensory percepts can evoke the auditory signal of the name and in the same
way , the auditory signal of the name can evoke generalised somatosensory percepts as if
the body were touched . The name , heard by the robot would shift the robot ’ s attention
from the external world to its own self and cause it to develop its “ I-representations ”  . 
2 . The robot is placed in front of a mirror , and is visually able to detect its own
face , but it will not be able to recognise it as its own . The robot changes its facial
expression , generating a somatosensory percept SP . This also enables a visual input , 
therefore a signal VP . A direct association of SP and VP is avoided as the visual world
contains a number of non-relevant features and may not prove useful for developing 
 “ I-representations ”  , however the timing of these two processes will help towards
314  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
association and thereby grounding in the visual mirror image to the somatosensory
percepts . 
3 . The robot sees its own mirror image , evoking somatosensory self concept SP , thus
evoking the name percept AP by the association in step 1 . The concept of “ I ” is
complete by a name , an image , a tactile feel of the physical body and the facial
aspects of the robot . 
This helps to develop internal states for “ I-representations ” and it also reflects a unity
of consciousness over the three sensory inputs . 
9 . 6 . 3 . 3 Designing the mirror test with MoNADs
Takeno et al . at Robot Science Institute at Meiji University define consciousness as
consistency of cognition and behaviour in direct extension of Husserlian philosophy , and
not as an emergent phenomenon as is suggested in behaviourism . The mirror cognition
is designed using a neural module , Module of Nerve Advanced Dynamics ( MoNAD )  
[ 220 , 315 , 316 ]  , which is a connectionist architecture and can be related to a number of
functions in human cognition . 
Each MoNAD , as shown in Figure 9 . 18 , is made of two crossing recursive neural
networks and strongly ties both the cognitive and the behavioural aspects of consciousness , 
binding in both reason and feeling . MoNAD work on the current as well as information
at the last recursion on behaviour and cognition , therefore they are not simple first-order
systems but rather complex second-order systems . Therefore , immediate previous experience
is retroactively utilised to develop future behaviour and cognition , thereby maintaining
consistency and learning from previous experience across both behaviour and cognition . 
As shown below , in the MoNAD system , the primitive representation , such as spatial
information , time etc . supplies the basis for cognitive representation and is augmented
by behaviour representation . Stimuli is processed by the sensor to primitive representation
and is primarily cognitive representation , since MoNAD is not a behaviourist system . The
behaviour , due to the cognitive representation and / or by an external influence , is processed
to the primitive representation and through to actuation . Since , cognition and behaviour are
neurally connected , each future instance of this state of cognition will push to perform the
same behaviour . MoNADs are a connectionist paradigm are thus not plagued by the frame
problem . They can solve the symbol grounding problem by learning the relation between the
environment and the representation and it mostly solves the binding problem as cognition
and behaviour are strongly tied to each other . It can be suggested that human cognition
is via conjunction of a number of MoNADs as shown in Figure 9 . 19 , where the cognitive 
( dotted lines ) and behavioural ( solid lines ) processes overlap neurally to relate the outer
world with the inner world . 
To design mirror cognition , three MoNADs are used : Imitation MoNAD , Distance
MoNAD and Settlement MoNAD , as shown in Figure 9 . 20 . Since behaviour of the Khepera
is more or less motor action , the Imitation MoNAD is a reasoning system and interprets the
behaviour of the image and steadies the behaviour of the motor accordingly . The Distance
MoNAD works on qualitative information and keeps a tab on the distance between the
object and the image . Too little and the robot has to back up ; and too much and it has
to advance forward . The Settlement MoNAD is an association system though not a central
control . The blue LED lights up when the behaviour is replicated . The LED lights up when
the motor behaviour of the robot and its image are the same . Experiments conducted as
shown in figure in Figure 9 . 22 ,  ( a ) robot-mirror as shown in Figure 9 . 21 , indicate the robot
 315
FIGURE 9 . 17 Haikonen ’ s somatosensory approach to the mirror test . knowledge of the self
occurs over three modalities : touch , voice and vision . In the three feedback loops , the auditory
percept ( AP ) is coupled up with cutaneous ( SP ) and visual percepts ( VP )  , the visual percept ( VP ) 
coupled with auditory percept ( AP ) and cutaneous percept ( SP ) with visual ( VP ) and auditory
percept ( AP )  . 
316  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 9 . 18 The concept of a MoNAD . A MoNAD is composed of two crossing recursive
neural networks for behaviour and cognition , thus interleafing experience and behaviour , and both
are connected to the primary representation corresponding to the somatosensory nerves . Every
behaviour is intricately related to cognition . 
FIGURE 9 . 19 MoNAD as the bridge between inner and outer worlds . Here the dotted lines
convey the process of cognition and the solid lines convey the process of behaviour . Behaviour and
cognition work in tandem . Manner and Takeno have suggested MoNADs as the functional structure
of the human brain , and this approach is able to explain emotion , cognition and consciousness , and
also confirms their overlap . Image taken from Takeno [ 316 ]  , reproduced with permission from the
publisher . 
 317
FIGURE 9 . 20 Schematics for mirror cognition . Takeno designs the mirror cognition with three
MoNADs , Imitation MoNAD , Distance MoNAD and Settlement MoNAD . Image taken from Takeno 
[ 316 ]  , reproduced with permission from the publisher . 
imitates the action of its own image . This experiment gave a coincidence rate at about 70%
and in ( b ) robot-robot as shown in Figure 9 . 22 , both robots are equipped with the same
hardware and software , but are individual units not controlled by a central executive nor
wired to each other . Each imitates the other as in when one lights up the LED , the next
one follows etc . This experiment gave a coincidence rate of about 50% . 
Mirror cognition is probably the simplest test of experiencing the subjective self , and has
become a benchmark experiment for self consciousness . As a newer variant , Govindarajulu
at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute develops the mirror test for formal logical systems . In
the reformulation , a little dab of coloured paint is smeared on the forehead of the AI agent
when it is in sleep mode . After the agent wakes it can look into the mirror and attempt to
remove the smear . Then the agent is self conscious . This formulation of the mirror test was
tested in simulation , and led to Bringsjord and Govindarajulu formulating the Knowledge
Game and its implementation in the Nao robot , discussed in the next section . 
Mirror , Mirror .  .  . 
Mirror cognition has been a cornerstone in developing self-awareness in robots . The
method derives from studies done in primates , where over a graduated timeline chimpanzees
demonstrated the ability to recognise their own selves in the mirror while monkeys failed
to acquire this higher level of cognition . Using a mirror to trigger robot behaviour was first
employed by W . G Walter in the iconic turtles , Elmer and Elsie . 
Dr . Junichi Takeno at Meji University has developed the mirror cognition test as an
overlap of behaviour and cognition using MoNADs . Here he shares some of his thoughts . 
This mini interview took place in early December 2015 . 
318  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 9 . 21 Takeno ’ s mirror cognition test . to the left is the mirror cognition experiment
and to the right is Dr . Takeno and the Khepera robot
AB : For a young robot enthusiast , the definition of consciousness and therefore
artificial consciousness has always been a difficult one . How would you define it , say
for a graduate student ? 
JT : Human consciousness originates from each person ’ s subjective feelings . Therefore , 
understanding human consciousness is a very difficult task , as you know . However , just
as many people will say that the moon is somewhere up there in the nighttime sky , of
course . The existence of the moon originates from the subjective feelings of each person . 
But now we have a strong certainty about the actual existence of the moon because
the Apollo astronauts brought a lot of moon rocks back to Earth . When Galileo Galilei
improved on a telescope and turned it toward the moon , certainty about the existence
of the moon increased at that time . Scientific research begins when a researcher
feels some subjective feelings about the object of the research . The story of the
existence of the moon is the same as the subjective feeling about the existence of one ’ s
own consciousness . And naturally we already have a huge body of knowledge about
human consciousness from philosophers , psychologists , psychopathologists and brain
scientists . We should not neglect this knowledge . I thought about what a definition of
the core of human consciousness could be . When thinking about the core of human
consciousness , we must engage in philosophical thought because rational thought must
be involved in finding the core of consciousness in light of the many different various
research studies about it . By the core I mean the principle . That is to say , it is better
to be able to recognize that the moon exists , rather than that the moon does not
exist . This is a better rational thought at this moment . Various research studies have
pointed out that the core of consciousness is the relationship between human behaviour
and the human cognitive process . I recognize that I am doing a behaviour . And I am
doing the behaviour when I am thinking . And those two states are synchronized with
each other at that moment . In other words , my cognition and my behaviour are being
done at the same subjective timing of my system . My research group and I decided
that the core of human consciousness originates from the consistency of cognition
and behaviour . We created a program for this core concept using a recursive neural
 319
network which we designed and call the Module of Nerves for Advanced Dynamics , 
or MoNAD for short . Then we conducted mirror image cognition experiments using
a small robot running a program comprising these MoNADs . We thought that if the
program using these MoNADs were able to be implemented on a mechanical system
as a core of human consciousness , then the program could be expected to provide
an effective representation of mirror image cognition in human consciousness in our
experiments . Our experiments on mirror image cognition were not a direct repetition
of the mirror test performed by the psychologist Gordon Gallup . Our point of focus
was that most people can recognize their own image in a mirror . Why can we do this
so easily ? This mystery had not yet been fully understood . This is a manifestation
of human consciousness , and it is just self-consciousness because we are checking our
own body using a mirror . This is directly connected to the mark test , as you know . 
Therefore , we started building a program with MoNADs . And our experiment was
targeted at learning the reason why we are able to easily recognize our own image in
a mirror . On a dark evening in the German city of Freiburg in 1989 , I was walking
along the street with my family when I suddenly had the feeling that another family
was approaching us from the right . But I recognized immediately that the other family
was not someone else because I felt that their movements were the same as our own . 
I felt that it was just my family and me . The windows of a shop on the street acted
as a large darkened mirror , and the image of the family in the window was just a
reflection of us . And that experience got me thinking that mirror image recognition is
very related to a comparison of ones own movements and the movements of others . 
AB : How conscious is a robot that can detect itself in a mirror , as in your experiments ? 
Of course , this robot probably cannot get a pail of water to douse a fire , so are we
looking at levels of consciousness and mirror cognition as an apparent ground level
state ? 
JT : My research group and I created a conscious system comprising a number of
connected MoNADs . The objective of this system was to have a robot perform
imitation behaviour . We calculated the value of the coincidence between the robot ’ s
own behaviour and the behaviour of an object located in front of the robot . We
conducted three types of experiments . In the first experiment , the object presented in
front of the self robot was its own image reflected in a mirror . The coincidence rate
was 70% , which is not so high , because the performance in a mirror is imperfect in
normal environments . These were , of course , objectively calculated results because the
processing was being done by the program using input values from sensors . But you
must also recognize that the values represent the subjective evaluation of the robot . 
In the second experiment , the object presented to the self robot was another robot
which had the same body and used the same program . The coincidence rate was 50% , 
which was very low , because the other robot existed in a different environment from
the location of the self robot . And I should point out that the other robot behaved
independently , so it cannot be said that the other robot had a relationship with the
self robot . In the third experiment , the object presented to the self robot was another
similar robot which was connected to it by a communication cable . This connected
other robot was controlled by the movements of the self robot . If the self robot moved
forward , then the connected other robot would be commanded to also move forward
immediately . The controlled other robot was simpler than the self robot because the
program of the self robot commanded the behaviour in the other . The coincidence rate
320  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
was 60% . This result was very interesting because the rate was fairly in the middle of
the results of the preceding two experiments . The coincidence rate of the mirror image
robot was higher than the value for the experiment using the controlled other robot . 
And the controlled robot was just like a physical part of the self robot because the
controlled robot was connected by a cable from the self robot and controlled directly by
it , much like the hand of a self robot might be . This experiment demonstrated that the
mirror image robot could be interpreted subjectively as a part of the self robot . For that
reason , we declared that our experimental results indicate the most powerful evidence
for the grounded existence of the phenomenon of human mirror image cognition so
far . Because the robot knows the existence of its own body , the robot can discriminate
between the body of its self and the body of an “ other .  ” Therefore , it is natural that
the robot would not do a behaviour that would injure a part of its own body . 
AB : Can your method of mirror-based cognition , be extended to more complicated
robots , such as humanoid robots ? Will it need any modification in those cases ? 
JT : We have not encountered any obstacles to that end as yet . Thus , my research
group and I will try to build a larger robot like a conscious humanoid . Also , deep
learning methods will enable us to accelerate our efforts quite a bit . 
AB : There has been concerted effort from the AI community to develop artificial
consciousness in robots , over nearly the last 10 years right from methods suggested
by Haikonen ( 2003 ) and Floridi ( 2005 )  . However , either ,  ( i ) artificial consciousness
has been developed in a very narrow concern such as mirror cognition or ( ii ) it has
been very short lived , as seen in experiments conducted at Rensselaer Polytechnic on
the Nao robot . According to you , what are we missing ? What should the research
community target next ? 
JT : First of all , I would like to express my deep respect for them and their research
efforts . My viewpoint regarding cognitivism is that of a robot scientist , and I believe
in my own subjective feelings . Therefore , I assert that I am thinking , I have emotions
and feelings , and I have consciousness . And I do not doubt that I will able to build
subjective phenomena into a robot just by using neural networks in a computer
program . Of course , subjective feelings include a lot of illusions . Nevertheless , we must
believe in subjective feelings at the first stage . If we do not do so , we can absolutely
never discover the illusions within those subjective feelings . I felt that in Freiburg . 
Lastly , I would like to point out that philosophical thinking is the most important
scientific act . When I discuss the philosophy of human consciousness with scientific
researchers , most of them look upon me with some distrust and as though they would
like to stop the discussion . I feel that they just want to discuss the results from scientific
tools , and I enjoy talking about the results too . But , it is important to note that tools
detect tendencies in an object . Scientists must learn about the core of an object using
these several tendencies as well as from the descriptions made by pioneers in the field . 
This unified approach needs philosophical thinking . If we can accurately learn about
the core of an object , all of the tendencies will be able to be explained by the core , 
and new hypotheses can be created . If a researcher cannot create a new hypothesis
that can expand the research target from their research results , the researcher should
recognize that they have not yet reached the central core of their research target . 
AB : You have found inspiration from Walter , Braitenberg and Brooks ; predominantly
 321
the reactive approach , but to model human-like consciousness there will be a need for
some deliberative aspects . So , should artificial consciousness be modelled as a hybrid
of reactive and deliberative architecture and supplemented with learning methods ? 
JT : The MoNAD structure that I have proposed is designed as a hybrid of reactive
and deliberative architecture . And the MoNAD has self-referential functions . Our
conscious system is constructed using several MoNADs connected in a hierarchy . The
system functions by exchanging information along bottom-up and top-down paths . 
Because a MoNAD has a double-looped cognitive function , it is possible to calculate
the MoNAD ’ s feelings . For example , if the convergence speed of the MoNAD is slow
against a given input , the feelings of the MoNAD will be unpleasant . The opposite
represents a pleasant state . Our conscious system can detect unknown information
because the unknown information makes the MoNAD decrease the convergence speed , 
and it can learn the information . My research group and I are currently using our
conscious system to study the modelling of human mental illness , like post traumatic
stress disorder ( PTSD )  . 
FIGURE 9 . 22 Robot-robot mirror cognition with MoNADs . The second robot mirrors the
behaviour of the first one . 
9 . 6 . 4 Psychometric AI — The knowledge game
Floridi designs a test which attempts to answer the question ,  “ how do you know you are not
a zombie ?  ” which in hindsight is a test for self-consciousness . Being similar to the Turing
test , the Knowledge Game is a variant of a popular puzzle ,  “ The King ’ s Wise Men ” and
is played by a system of interacting agents , which possess the ability to communicate and
infer . 
The test is subject to three types of agents : robots , zombies and human beings . Each
agent can be characterised by a state S , such that acquiring a state S is something different
from being in it and different again from knowing that one is in it . The states are parameters
322  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 9 . 23 Knowledge game , classic version . Knowing the states of the previous two
prisoners , the third can determine his own . Cartoon made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
chosen by the experimenter , who later queries the agents about their states . The agents can
determine their states inferentially and only on the basis of the information made available
and not on innate , a priori knowledge or particularly privileged information . 
1 . Robots , conscious-less artificial agents ( endowed with interactivity , autonomy and
adaptability ) 
2 . Zombies , conscious-less biological agents ( lacking in p- and s-consciousness ) 
3 . Human beings , conscious biological agents ( endowed with e- , p- and s-consciousness ) 
There is no particular classification for conscious artificial agents — no conscious robots . 
Floridi designs four variations of the Knowledge Game . 
1 . Classic version : A prison guard challenges three prisoners to a game . In the game , 
the prisoners are made aware that there are 5 fezzes , 3 red and 2 blue . The guard
blindfolds each of the prisoner and makes them each wear a red fez and hides the
remaining fezzes . On removing the blindfolds , each prisoner can see only the other
prisoners ’ fezzes and not his own . The object is to tell the colour of his own fez
correctly , on being questioned one at a time and thus walk away to freedom . The
first prisoner checks the fez of the other two and declares that he doesn ’ t know the
colour of his fez ; the second prisoner has heard the first one and checks the fez of the
other two and also declares that he doesn ’ t know the answer ; the third prisoner , who
has heard both the previous two prisoners replies even before his blindfold has been
removed ,  “ My fez is red ”  , as shown in figure 9 . 23 . The third prisoner is correct and is
freed by the guard . How did the third prisoner know ? 
To analyse the problem , the exhaustive number of solutions of the problem are eight :  
( 1 ) first prisoner - red , second prisoner - red , third prisoner - red 
( 2 ) first prisoner - red , second prisoner - red , third prisoner - blue 
( 3 ) first prisoner - red , second prisoner - blue , third prisoner - red 
( 4 ) first prisoner - red , second prisoner - blue , third prisoner - blue 
( 5 ) first prisoner - blue , second prisoner - red , third prisoner - red 
( 6 ) first prisoner - blue , second prisoner - red , third prisoner - blue 
( 7 ) first prisoner - blue , second prisoner - blue , third prisoner - red 
( 8 ) first prisoner - blue , second prisoner - blue , third prisoner - blue
Here ,  ( 8 ) is not possible as there are only 2 blue fezzes in play . Now , considering the
 323
first prisoner , a correct answer is only possible if both the other prisoners are wearing
blue fezzes , since he says that he doesn ’ t know the colour of his own fez . Therefore 
( 4 ) cannot be possible . With similar arguments for the second prisoner who has also
heard the first one speak and also says that he doesn ’ t know the colour of his own fez ,  
( 6 ) cannot be possible . Also if the other two are wearing a red fez and a blue fez , then
the second prisoner himself can only be wearing red . Therefore ( 2 ) is also ruled out . 
Of the remaining solutions ( 1 )  ,  ( 3 )  ,  ( 5 ) and ( 7 )  , the third prisoner is always wearing
a red fez — therefore his emphatic answer . 
2 . Bootstrapping version : The prisoners are told to choose from five pairs of boots . 
All the boots look identical , but the three worn by the prisoners are either torturing
instruments which crush the feet or are ordinary boots . On being questioned about
which boot they are wearing , the prisoners answer immediately and correctly . 
3 . Deafening version : The prisoners are given to drink from five glasses . They are told
that three contain water and two contain a totally-deafening beverage . On being asked
what he drank , the prisoner answers correctly . It is to be noted that if he has had the
totally-deafening beverage then all he will see is the guard shouting , and not really
hear the question — the question , though not heard , will yield the correct answer . 
Therefore this is a self-answering question . From a test perspective , current day robots
fail to identify self-answering questions , and this makes for a distinguishing feature
between zombies and human beings . 
4 . Dumbing ( or Self Conscious ) version : As a final variant , the three prisoners are
offered five pills . Three are completely innocuous placebos and two make the agents
totally dumb . On being asked , either the prisoner is silent , as he is totally dumb or he
answers seemingly rhetorically with a phrase such as “ heaven knows ”  , as he himself
is not yet aware of his state . Here Floridi argues that there can be two outcomes :  
( a ) His rhetorics trigger no further reaction 
( b ) His lack of awareness of his state triggers a counterfactual reasoning , therefore
reasoning that had he taken the dumbing pill he would not have been able to
speak out . However since he has , he did not take the dumbing pill and therefore
revises his previous answer . 
According to Floridi , the second outcome will always be a true forte of human beings
as neither robots nor zombies will be able to bind together and causally relate voice
and hearing to conclude hearing his own voice . Therefore , the dumbing version is a
query for s-conscious agents , and answers the test emphatically ,  “ I am not a zombie ”  . 
Therefore ,  ( 1 ) the classic version relies on the nature and number of possible states , 
the observable state of the other agents and the answers from the other agents ,  ( 2 ) the
bootstrapping version inquires into a first-order effect and relies on the assigned states ,  ( 3 ) 
the deafening version is self-answering as the mode of communication is speech and at the
same time it is detaching from the question itself as the agent may not be able to hear the
guard and ( 4 ) the dumbing version cannot be ascertained in terms of externally inferable , 
bootstrapping or self-answering states , but it may incite 2 modalities , voice and hearing —
the causality confirming self awareness . 
As a corollary to the puzzle , Floridi argues that self consciousness suggests phenomenal
consciousness , so a human being can always be zombie-like but a zombie possesing only
phenomenal consciousness will never realise the self . 
Bringsjord suggests that the last variant of the Knowledge Game , with the agent realising
that he has taken the dumbing pill can be met by AI beings , thus ‘ passing ’ the human test
for self-consciousness , as is shown in Table 9 . 3 . The proof was designed on the idea that the
324  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 9 . 24 Passing the knowledge game . Bringsjord ’ s experiment [ 48 ]  , designed on the lines
of the dumbing version of the ‘ Knowledge Game ’ is probably the best archetype for self awareness
in robots . Cartoon made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
 325
TABLE 9 . 3 Knowledge game , Floridi vs . Bringsjord
Floridi ( 2005 ) Bringsjord ( 2010 ) 
Classic
version
Pass for all Pass for all
Bootstrapping
version
Pass for all Pass for all
Deafening
version
Fails for current day robots , may
pass in the future
Fails for current day robots , will
pass in the future
Dumbing
version
Fails forever for robots and
zombies — an archetype of
human consciousness
Fails now for robots and zombies , 
will pass in the future
prisoner - as an AI agent will be able to perceive its own voice through some combination of
sensorimotor feedback as the vibrations of its robot larynx , and other perceptual processes
that fuse the relevant sensory input to form the perception that an utterance has been
made , and accordingly updates it knowledge base to prove the conjecture7 
. 
In the first half of 2015 , Bringsjord and his team at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
modelled the psychometric test for humanoid Nao robots [ 48 ] as is shown in Figure 9 . 24 . 
In the experiment two Nao are given given the ‘ dumbing pill ’  , while the thirdis given a
placebo . The pills are administered not as a real pill , but with a tap on the head , and then
they are asked which pill have they been given ?  , after about 13 minutes the Nao , which
had been given the placebo gets up and says ,  “ I dont know ” and soon realises that this
is its own voice and then after a short pause speaks out its conclusion . In this experiment
no concept of self awareness was pre-programmed than the knowledge of the dumbing pill . 
The Nao robot attains sentient behaviour for a very short time and it is able to identify
its own voice and therefore attain selfawareness and thus solve the riddle - demonstrating
association over sensory input and reasoning . 
Summing up , a good engineering solution to self awareness will be characterised by ,  
( i ) central executive ,  ( ii ) binding over three or more modalities ,  ( iii ) imitating , aping and
mirroring8 
,  ( iv ) connectionism and ( v ) attention switching . Consciousness should appear as
a learned and superior faculty once self awareness has been tuned to perfection . Continued
interaction with the environment should aid to develop binding across various modalities
and therefore phenomenal consciousness . 
Most research has been guided by cross-modal association over neural networks , and the 
 ‘ mirror test ’ and the ‘ drumming mate ’ tests have become useful tools for benchmarking and
moving the robot ’ s cognitive and social functions , as shown in Table 9 . 4 . It is interesting to
note that the focus has been on designing experiments to test for self-awareness in robots , 
but there has also been gathering enthusiasm to devise more sophisticated versions of the
Turing test , which tap unique abilities and tendencies of being a human being . The quest to
find conscious robots has furthered the onus in the search for unique human values which
machines lack , and instead of asking ‘ what is a robot ?  ’ the question to ask has been ‘ what is
a human being ?  ’  . Will a conscious robot be better than us ? That is a difficult question , and
the least that can be said is that conscious robots are sure to be smarter than we are . We
stand at a unique place in the history of our civilisation , and also the planet as we are the
7Bringsjord uses Deontic Cognitive Event Calculus ( DCEC *  ) to structure both the mirror cognition and
the knowledge game , it is not in the scope of this book to discuss details of DCEC *  . 
8Not necessarily needing a mirror for the process of mirroring . 
326  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
TABLE 9 . 4 Development of Robot Consciousness via Experiments
Research Paradigm Experiment Remarks
Braitenberg 
( 1986 ) 
Meditative mode to form
association
Gedanken
experiment , 
vehicle-12
From synthetic
psychology
Brooks et al .  
( 1994–1998 ) Reactive approach Humanoid bust , 
COG
Solution to the
symbol grounding
problem
Kitamura
et al .  
( 1995–2006 ) 
Levelling of behaviour , 
inhibition triggers a higher
level
Low-level tasks as
navigation , 
tracking etc . 
In both simulation
and real robots
Fitzpatrick et
al .  ( 2005 ) Cross-modal association Binding to
develop causality
Cog attains
awareness of objects
and the self
Crick et al .  
( 2005 ) Cross-modal association Nico beating the
drums
Can adapt in real
time with the
human performer
Takeno 
( 2005 ) 
Consistency of behaviour , 
not an emergent
phenomena
MoNADs to
design mirror
cognition
Both for
mirror-robot and
robot-robot
Haikonen 
( 2008 ) 
Augmenting mirror
cognition with
proprioception
Binding in visual , 
cutaneous and
auditory inputs
Manipulates
attention towards
its self-concepts
Bringsjord et
al .  ( 2014 ) 
Causality of speech , 
auditory input
Puzzle solving in
simulation and
real robots
Sensorimotor route
to solve the
knowledge game
first species which has dared to create intelligent beings designed to model ourselves . We
are soon to see a society in the making which has high levels of automation , and if human
beings and robots coexist , will we be reduced to second class citizens ? Will the robots take
over the workings of the various systems of society , such as government , the food supply , 
financial systems etc . These questions are addressed in the next chapter . 
SUMMARY
1 . Artificial consciousness has the promise to be implemented in robots to make them
more human like
2 . The semi-sentient paradigm has led us to ‘ obedient ’ social robots but they lack in
imagination , free will and sentientism . 
3 . Consciousness lacks a definition and robotics has been led on two ways of thoughts ,  
( 1 ) emergence of novel behaviour and ( 2 ) consistency of behaviour . 
4 . Qualia has been a squabble and is a philosophical pitfall for design of artificial
consciousness . 
5 . Turing test is a quotient of the difference between man and machine , and newer
versions has been designed . 
6 . Inner world of a robot is both an abstract concept and difficult to verify . 
 327
7 . Newer experiments to develop artificial consciousness in robots have either been in a
rather narrow concern or has been too short lived . 
NOTES
1 . From a philosophical point of view , Kierkegaard [ 179 ] considered that human beings
pass through three stages on the way to becoming a true self : the aesthetic , the ethical , 
and the religious . The aesthetic is experienced by sensory perception at a nascent stage
of existence and is characterised by immediacy , whereas the ethical is adherence to
the social rules — how one ought to act and the ablility to make and take moral
responsibility and accountability . The third , religious , is the illumination to one ’ s
personal quest to find faith and belief . Drawing a corollary , three such distinct phases
can be seen in the agent based robotics : the sensorimotor , moral agency and conscious
robots . 
2 . Robert . A . Heinlein ’ s ‘ The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress ’ features a computer , HOLMES
IV , which attains self consciousness which shows up as a sense of humour . This
happened as the computer was connected up with more hardware which augmented
the temporary memory to reach cognitive domains which are well beyond the human
brain . Of course this is not possible , but makes for wonderful reading . 
3 . Dennett plays down the debate of qualia with four characteristics : ineffable , intrinsic , 
private and directly or immediately apprehensible in consciousness , and therefore he
contends against any non material route to consciousness . He suggests that ,  “ We ’ re
all zombies ” and hence , qualia is illusory . Dennett ’ s Multiple Draft Theory ( which is
in the consciousness domain ) bears similarity to Brook ’ s Subsumption Architecture 
( which is in the the behaviour domain ) and also to Hollan ’ s model for artificial
emotions ( which is in the emotion domain )  . 
4 . Contrary to popular belief , Nagel ’ s celebrated paper [ 249 ] doesn ’ t coin nor mention
qualia . Nagel develops his debate against reductionism with the ‘ subjective character
of experience ’ and ‘ what it is like ?  ’  . 
5 . As the debate on consciousness has warmed up , the AI community has often crucified
the philosophical zombie , by most ironically using it as an archetype in opposition to
material models of consciousness . Chalmers [ 64 ] argues with the following four part
syllogism :  
( 1 ) It is conceivable that there be zombies 
( 2 ) If it is conceivable that there be zombies , it is metaphysically possible that there
be zombies .  
( 3 ) If it is metaphysically possible that there be zombies , then consciousness is
non-physical .  
( 4 ) Therefore , consciousness is non-physical . 
6 . In Artificial Consciousness the easy problem is the behavioural change in response
to the environment and the hard one is phenomenal experience and qualia . For
development of artificial consciousness , researchers qualify distinction between the
strong , weak and intermediate approach . Strong qualifies for design of systems that
are conscious , therefore a computer suitably programmed is conscious . Whereas , a
weak approach would be use of technology to understand consciousness , social robots
such as Pepper and ROMAN which seemingly play on human emotions to imitate
consciousness are examples of a weak approach . Between these two lies an intermediate
which is built on the principle that mathematical modelling leads to an overlap of
328  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
consciousness and technology . Such an approach is coined by Chrisley [ 69 ] as lagom
AI , lagom meaning ,  “ perfection through modelling ” is placed midway and attempts at
some of the necessary conditions for attaining artificial consciousness . Computational
models for consciousness are a type of lagom approach . 
7 . Chalmers has suggested that the human mind is a quantum phenomena , and should
be tackled with quantum mechanics . Similar ideas have been suggested by Hofstadter . 
8 . Qualia registers uniquely for every human being , and is the bone of contention
in development of Artificial Consciousness . An illustration is the celebrated
Wittgenstein ’ s “ Beetle in a Box ” paradox , which illustrates one ’ s inability to experience
the world from anyone else ’ s perspective . The thought experiment is as follows : 
consider that everyone has a box where they keep a beetle , and only the keeper can
look into their own box . Now everyone is asked to describe the contents of the box . 
Since no one can really know what ’ s in any of the boxes but their own ,  ” beetle ” ceases
to have any other meaning than ” what is in your box ”  . The box is an analogy for our
mind , which assumes that the experiences of another person are very similar to our
own , but that is just an assumption which may not and does not hold good under all
circumstances . 
9 . The very fast ( above 10 Hz ) and the very slow ( below 0 . 1 Hz ) cannot be modelled into
cross-modal experiments yet . Which means that though Cog can relate the vision to
the audio of a tambourine , it will not be able to detect the buzzing of a bee or the
rotation of the Earth . 
10 . The AND logic circuitry for mirror cognition is designed with microchip IS471F made
by SHARP which is an electronic oscillator . The signal from the oscillator is used as
as input to an external LED and a photodiode with a synchronous detector for the
incoming light . 
11 . With more sophisticated Natural Language Processing ( NLP )  , a robot may be able to
solve riddles put to it in English language . This will be the next level of cross-modal
representations . 
12 . Experiments have shown that social understanding is not a necessary precondition for
mirror self-recognition test . Therefore critics claim that the mirror test may not be
about “ self-awareness ”  , but more about the ability to deal with a new kind of visual
feedback . 
13 . Concepts of consciousness is closely associated with our perception of reality . This
duality has been expressed by Philip K Dick in his definition of reality ,  “ Reality is that
which , when you stop believing in it , doesn ’ t go away .  ” 
EXERCISES
1 . CATCH-22 . Incorrigibility is a manifestation of free will and conscious thinking . 
A ‘ stubborn robot ’ which doesn ’ t attend to the task it is designed for since it
lacks in intent , imagination and enterprise , will defeat the very purpose of making
robots . Given such a CATCH-22 scenario , should research continue in development of
conscious robots ? 
2 . Haikonen suggests that the somatosensory model for self cognition will work even
if instead of a mirror the robot is provided with a photograph of itself . Discuss the
prospects and limitations of this change . 
3 . Floridi ’ s Knowledge Game . In the classic version consider that the guard keeps
all the five fezzes in play and randomly selects three for the three prisoners . The first
prisoner checks the fez of the other two and declares ,  “ I don ’ t know ” and the second
 329
prisoner who has heard the first one and checks the fez of the other two , emphatically
announces ,  “ My fez is red ”  . Can the third prisoner who has heard both the previous
two prisoners be sure of the colour of his own fez ? 
C H A P T E R 10
Super intelligent robots and
other predictions 
 “ Unlike our intelligence , machine-based superintelligence will not evolve in an
ecosystem in which empathy is rewarded and passed on to subsequent
generations .  ” 
– James Barrat [ 30 ]  
 “ It has always been popular to bash AI because that puts one in the glorious
position of defending humanity .  ” 
– Luc Steels [ 310 ] 
10 . 1 PEERING INTO THE CRYSTAL BALL
H
ow will sentient robots change our lives ? In comparison to human beings , they will
have added virtues ; they will lack in ego , greed and jealousy and will be guided more
by logic and information at hand than anything else . They will only heed to energy — be
it battery power , jet pack , organic fuel or robots powered by nuclear fuel . Since explorer
robots are always the first to survey other heavenly bodies , a sentient robot may well be our
best bet for an interplanetary colony [ 192 ]  . The stark contrast will be a lack in emotional
quotient , and as long as qualia remains intractable or at best unresolved , we are sure to
find more of the zombie than a genuine replication of human beings . 
Despite this prospected leap in technology , prominent scientists and technologists suggest
progress towards a dystopian telltale [ 27 , 215 , 321 ] where AI will emerge as a powerful
adversary to our race and lead to our extinction [ 165 ]  , and a race of super intelligent
robots [ 94 ] will inherit the planet . 
This apocalyptic future , where technological intelligence is a few million times that of
the average human intelligence and technological progress is so fast that it is difficult to keep
track of it , is known as ‘ technological singularity ’ or ‘ singularity ’  . AI scientists also relate
this event to the coming of super intelligence [ 43 ]  , artificial entities which have cognitive
abilities a million times richer in intellect and are stupendously faster than the processing of
the human brain . The irony is such that nowadays the monikers of Terminator and Skynet 
[ 318 ]  , as shown in Figure 10 . 1 , are quickly married into research and innovation in AI [ 185 ] 
and robotics [ 66 ]  , such as Google Cars [ 303 ]  , robotic cooks [ 295 ] and waiters [ 319 ]  , the
OpenWorm project [ 216 ] etc . and has consequently led to fear mongering [ 255 , 306 , 355 ] and
332  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 10 . 1 The SKYNET moniker and technological singularity . Since the movie series
Terminator ( 1984 )  , the SKYNET moniker has generated pop-fiction and has added to scientific
debate and discussions on technological singularity . The moniker broadly is used as an illustration
for a powerful AGI which , once created , steadily improves itself attaining near sentience and
develops prohibitive technologies such as time travel and imitating living beings , which then either
enslave or attempt to annihilate human civilisation . Made using Google Books Ngram Viewer [ 230 ]  
. 
drafting of guidelines [ 24 , 224 , 274 ]  , rules [ 364 ] and laws [ 60 , 342 , 348 ] to tackle this apocalypse
of the future . These edicts attempt to restore human superiority by either reducing robots
to mere artifacts and machines or tries to make a moral call to the AI scientist , insisting on
awareness of the consequences . Therefore , advancing AI clearly sets the proverbial cat among
the pigeons . Other than the media , science fiction is replete with such futuristic scenarios . 
Cˇapek ’ s iconic play in the 1920s , R . U . R — Rossum ’ s Universal Robots , which gave us the
word ‘ Robot ’ ends with the death of the last human being and a world dominated by robots
with feelings such as endearment , love and attachment . Other iconic tales of robocalypse
and dystopia are , HAL set in 2001 , Blade Runner in 2019 , I , Robot in 2035 , Terminator set
in 2029 , while Wall-E is set 800 years in the future in 2805 . All of these provide examples of
a futuristic human-robot society , and while nearly all of them are unsettling , all of them at
the very least confirm a proliferation of AI and robots both in the near and far off future . 
It is interesting to note that in more academic concerns , Toda ’ s fungus eaters are tagged to
a sell date of 2061 . 
This chapter is different from the rest of the book and tries to look at such a future
from the perspective of what has been discussed in the last nine chapters . This technology
forecasting is done by retracing the predictions made by various leading thinkers , AI
scientists , entrepreneurs and leaders of technology and by extrapolating trends from the
present . 
One of the earliest proponents of this dystopia was author and futurist Vernor Vinge 
[ 338 , 339 ]  . Vinge projected that in about the next thirty years , we would have created
superhuman intelligence which will lead to the end of the human era . He suggested five
possible paths by which we may reach this unsettling future . 
1 . The AI Scenario : We create superhuman artificial intelligence ( AI ) — computers
which are ‘ awake ’  . 
2 . The Digital Gaia Scenario : The network of embedded microprocessors becomes
sufficiently effective to elicit superhuman intelligence — a ‘ wake up ’ call for the
network . 
 333
FIGURE 10 . 2 Technology intelligence cycle . Particularly after the microelectronics ( late 1970s )  , 
computer ( mid 1980s ) and internet ( late 1990s ) revolutions , our technology has come to be
information based and is fueled by increasing intelligence , which in turn improves intelligence . 
Made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license 
. 
3 . The Intelligence Amplification Scenario : We enhance human intelligence through
smart human-to-computer interfaces , which melds together the human mind with the
AI ’ s capabilities — that is , we achieve intelligence amplification . 
4 . The Biomedical Scenario : We directly increase our intelligence by improving the
neurological operation of our brains — the route via brain scanning and genetics . 
5 . The Internet Scenario : Humanity , its networks , computers , and databases become
sufficiently effective to be considered a superhuman being — the Internet of Things 
( IoT ) coalesces to represent coherent intelligence . This is an extension of the Digital
Gaia scenario , however over a network which covers the entire planet . 
History tells us that technology has redefined social interactions , ethical values , 
governance , belief systems , political and economic paradigms , cultural values and therefore , 
society itself . 
The best illustration is the industrial revolution and from the mid 1850s industry and
its functions have become an integral part of our lives and nearly every single thing we
use has been through an industrial process . Our economic growth and political choices are
tagged with industry and most of us work for industries or one of its allied services , viz . 
marketing , finance , advertising , human resources etc . 
Another such example is mobile phones . There was not much of a change in the telephone
since Graham Bell ’ s invention in the 1850s and as late as the 1970s . People talking across
swathes of distance through a tiny little portable box seemed improbable . Over the last
two decades , mobile phones have evolved into a technology , and with the advent of the
smart phone and unification of the telephone with the internet , our social norms and value
334  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
systems have also seen modification . For example , social acceptance is often cited in terms
of followers , fans and views on social media websites , while political and social debates find
their way to web forums and blogs . Services and utilities such as food vendors , movies and
cabs are available over android / iphone apps and the hashtag has found an entirely new
meaning . 
Over the years , we have come to use our brain power a lot more than mere muscle power , 
which is a diametric transition from the Stone Age . This advancement is attributed to readily
available information at our disposal . Compared to past societies our society knows more
and as we advance in technology , this knowledge is responsible for wealth creation [ 122 ] 
and higher levels of technology . In the last four decades , technology has ascended to newer
heights , due to the microelectronics revolution in the 1970s , the computer revolution in
mid 1980s and the internet revolution in late 1990s , and most of present-day technology is
information based , information which is automated by intelligent systems . With growing
technology these intelligent systems , viz . clouds , servers and apps , are becoming more
versatile and aid in the cyclic growth of technology and intelligence , as shown in Figure 10 . 2 . 
It is foreseen that in the near future , technology will broadly consist of digital implements
and more smart phone based ( 1 ) businesses such as Airbnb and Uber ,  ( 2 ) utility-based
cloud apps as Dropbox and Google Drive tailored to specific needs ,  ( 3 ) online counseling for
technology , education , law and medicine etc .  ( 4 ) combination of mobile app and Internet of
Things ( IoT )  , viz . Amazon Dash Buttons and Starship , and not forgetting that ( 5 ) there
will be the imitation of humanly content as seen with Alexa and Siri , ushering in a new
trend for doing business . The Internet of Things ( IoT ) and other hardware implements ( self
driven cars , domestic robots , robotic butler etc .  ) have already been successful in research
and are teeming to take the next leap in the commercial domain . 
Allergy to Technology ! 
Electrohypersensitivity ( EHS ) is an ailment where exposure to electrical signals from
devices such as mobile phones , computers , WiFi routers and cellphone towers causes
consistent headaches , uneasiness , hair loss and rashes . Though the debate has not settled
as to whether it is a true medical diagnosis or merely another allergic reaction happening
rather arbitrarily . However , with 11 million people affected in the United States , it
demands a discussion . Examples such as the National Radio Quiet Zone , which is devoid
of cellphones , routers and antennas , goes on to show that technology fails to impress
everyone . 
It is proven that extended exposure to high power transmission wires leads to
mutations leading to cancer . Medical practitioners have confirmed that continued
exposure of the human body to radio frequencies and other electromagnetic waves may
have adverse effect on us , EHS may be just a tip of the iceberg and more such syndromes
and medical conditions could emerge in the near future . 
Science fiction is replete with potboilers where robots take over the world for the greater
good of the universe . Can such a devastation really happen ? If current day robots stood
up in an uprising , the outcomes would vary from the futile to the hilarious [ 243 ]  . However
with self aware sentient AI beings , the scenario can quickly change [ 265 ]  . Consider sentient
robots connected across a worldwide network or a cloud . These may soon proliferate to a
legion of robots , where knowledge and skill acquired by one robot is easily ‘ downloadable ’ 
to the rest of the fellow robots and other AI beings . The interactions of such a new species
will be more in the psyche than in real world . These sentient robots will become higher
 335
beings in a remarkably shorter time spans than natural biological evolution , evolving into
Walterian creatures discussed in chapter 2 . 
It is hypothetical scenarios like these that led I . J . Good to develop models of
ultra-intelligent beings . It is apparent that sooner or later our race will develop
ultra-intelligent AI beings , and this will lead to an impasse where human labour and intellect
will only be used for development and improvement of such machines and these machines
will fulfill the needs and requirements of human civilisation , viz . construction of buildings , 
bridges and cars , developing political machinery , edicts of law , academia and production
of food etc . Thus , these ultra-intelligent AI beings may be the last things that human
civilisation will develop . Now , these beings with superior skill , higher deductive ability , 
better judgement and higher levels of understanding may well try to get rid of the inferior
species of human beings . History has seen innumerable examples where a superior and
technologically advanced civilisation has dominated and crushes the inferior civilisation . 
European discovery of the Americas saw the end of Inca and Aztec cultures , similar travesty
resulted with Cook ’ s discovery of Australia and the aborigine population was reduced to
insignificant numbers . 
After Good and Vinge , Moravec [ 241 ] suggested a grim future in which the 21st century
will be dominated by robots and robot-based industry , human labour will be reduced to
developing laws to maintain human values and social institutions , and also to discourage
the transformation of human beings to unbounded super intelligent robots . The human race
has a short lease on life and robots will sooner or later take over . Like Moravec , futurists
contend that there are 3 likely scenarios for the next 100 years . 
1 . A takeover by AI — fully self aware beings take over the workings of the planet and
human beings are doomed to extinction under the dominance of a superior species . 
2 . Containment of AI — laws and restrictions are put in place , forbidding the
development of fully self aware AI . This has been cautiously suggested by Musk [ 110 ]  , 
Gates [ 95 ]  , Hawking and Shiller [ 72 ]  . 
3 . A technology fueled Darwinain evolution — this view is contrary to the previous
two [ 193 ]  , where singularity is the ‘ next step ’ in a technology-fuelled Darwinian-like
evolution , a future where human beings and machines meld together to move towards
a higher species — though a machine take over is not ruled out . Many proponents
of this option also forsee the coming of super intelligence and in the long run , the
evolution of posthuman beings — superior beings which may be bred from human
implements , but are no longer human beings — so human extinction , though in a
subdued fashion . 
These scenarios do not consider socioeconomic issues such as economic downfall , wars , 
terrorist attacks , nuclear annihilation nor ecological or cosmological catastrophes such as the
greenhouse effect , meteorites and collisions with other heavenly bodies . One unflinchingly
sketches the demise of the human race , the second and the third have been in research
papers , tabloids , newspapers etc . time and again . The way we deal with new age technology
will determine if our civilisation may be able to choose between these three options . The
second option may work and we may be able to contain AI , however that will also stagnate
any more technological growth and it will also undermine the development of fully sentient
AI beings . The third option , where human beings and machines fuse together to propel
Darwinian evolution at a much faster pace and the coming of super intelligence , is discussed
in this chapter . To fuel the debate , Kranzberg ’ s first law [ 188 ] would suggest that super
intelligence is neither good nor bad ; nor is it neutral . 
336  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Principles for designers , builders and users of robots ( EPSRC [ 39 ]  , 2010 ) 
Robots are multi-use tools : Robots should not be designed solely to harm human
beings , except in the national interest
Humans , not robots , are responsible agents : Human beings are responsible , 
not the robots and robots should be operated as far as possible within existing laws , 
rights and personal freedom including privacy
Robots are products : Robots should be designed to be safe , and should be
designed via processes which assure their safety and security
Robots are manufactured artefacts : Robots should not be designed to deceive
human beings , and the fake expressions of empathy and emotions should not target
user vulnerability
Legal attribution : There should be a human being legally responsible for a robot
10 . 2 TWILIGHT OR REBIRTH OF OUR CIVILISATION ? 
The promise of the future has not been entirely rosy , as machines have made human labour
redundant and robots can do our job and often better than we can . Since the Industrial
Revolution in the mid 1700s , efficient machines have improved productivity and lessened
the requirement for human labour . In a world where human population is ever growing , a
diminishing demand for human labour spells an apparent doom for the working class . As
a communist principle , the erstwhile Soviet Union , the Eastern Block countries and Mao ’ s
China advocated against automation of the key industries of agriculture and mining as they
provided the livelihood for the masses . With the fall of the Iron Curtain and globalisation
in full bloom we have accelerated towards an age of automation , idiomatically defined by
robots . 
As of today , we have robots which can help in household chores , assist and conduct
military warfare and defence systems , pursue interstellar explorations with or without
human assistance , coordinate search and rescue operations to save human beings from
hazardous scenarios such as nuclear catastrophe , automated surgeons and caregivers , 
automated instructors , office support staff etc . the robot revolution is very much on its
way . It may be 5—10 more years before robots come out of the laboratory , get rid of the
price tag of 6 digits and become mainstream . 
Though human beings still supersede all known forms of intelligence when it comes to
the question of intelligence vs . autonomy , as shown in Figure 7 . 1 , it is nonetheless projected
that over the next one to two decades , nearly 50% of all jobs in the United States , 36% of all
jobs in the UK [ 25 ] and about 59% of all jobs in Germany [ 213 ] will be taken over by robots
and smart automation . The market for personal and household robots is growing by 20%
every year . What does that hold for the human populace ? There are two viewpoints . The
first one spells gloom and doom where reduced prospects for a job will lead to a modern
day Luddite revolution , where swathes of impoverished and desperate masses destroy robots
and machines in a futile effort to reestablish the hegemony of the working class . The second
is that , with the development of Internet of Things ( IoT ) and cheaper means of 3D printing , 
the cost to develop things will reduce to near zero . Thus there will be plenty of anything
and nearly everything , and a flash end to capitalism and the institution of new rules for the
new age . 
Robots are better than human workers since they never get tired , they ’ re never irritable
 337
FIGURE 10 . 3 Reduced human job opportunities . As an immediate effect of the robotics
revolution [ 117 ]  , there will be marked unemployment , with middle income jobs dwindling out
fast . Image courtesy NESTA ( www . nesta . org . uk )  , designed by A3 Design ( www . a3studios . com )  . 
CC-by-SA , NC 4 . 0 license . 
or ill-mannered , they are not rude and don ’ t use foul language , they don ’ t have an ego , they
have instant access to all of human knowledge and they never make mistakes [ 96 ]  . This reads
like a repeat of history [ 85 ]  , when the Luddites vandalised machines and industries in the
early 1800s in protest to the labour-economising technology of the Industrial Revolution , 
as shown in Figure 10 . 3 . More recently , human ego and superlative technology had a mock
fight in a referendum in Switzerland , where the voters overwhelmingly ( 76 . 9% ) rejected a
proposal to automate nearly every facet of society , starting with every job , and provide
an unconditional basic monthly income of 2 , 500 Swiss francs to every adult and 625 Swiss
francs per child under 18 , regardless of how much they work [ 187 ]  . 
Various economists contend that modern technology doesn ’ t lead to inequality , rather
that social and political choices are instruments of this stratification . Modern technology
tends to eat away the routine jobs typically meant for the middle class , such as bookkeeping , 
tele calling , construction and lathing , while jobs needing creativity , empathy , social skills
and which are non-routine are firmly grounded in the human domain . The hardest hit will
be administrative workers [ 108 ] such as secretaries which will be completely taken over by
electronic processes and smart computer algorithms , while , as yet we do not have technology
to make robots actors , robot nurses , robot investment bankers , robot museum curators , 
robot artists , robot singers etc . Thus this parasite of technological unemployment hits and
erodes away particularly the middle class and this adds on to the disparity of the class
structure broadening the gulf between the rich and the poor . It has been suggested that this
may be a short-term phenomenon , and previously such occurrences of advancing technology
have always created more job opportunities than those it has curtailed or compromised , but
the current trend may be just too unique to predict and soon we will be left with a teeming
338  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Roboticist ’ s Oath ( McCauley [ 224 ]  , 2007 . Courtesy Springer , used with
permission ) 
I swear to fulfill , to the best of my ability and judgement , this covenant :  .  .  . 
1 ) I will respect the hard-won scientific gains of those scientists in whose steps I
walk , gladly share such knowledge as is mine and impart the importance of this
oath to those who are to follow . 
2 ) I will remember that artificially intelligent machines are for the benefit of
humanity and will strive to contribute to the human race through my creations . 
3 ) Every artificial intelligence I have a direct role in creating will follow the spirit of
the following rules : 
i ) Do no harm to humans either directly or through non-action . 
ii ) Do no harm to itself either directly or through non-action unless it will cause
harm to a human . 
iii ) Follow the orders given it by humans through its programming or other input
medium unless it will cause harm to itself or a human . 
4 ) I will not take part in producing any system that would , itself , create an artificial
intelligence that does not follow the spirit of the above rules . 
If I do not violate this oath , may I enjoy life and art , respected while I live and
remembered with affection thereafter . May I always act so as to preserve the finest
traditions of my calling and may I long experience the joy of benefiting humanity
through my science . 
population without a livelihood . Emerging economies of China and India which are labour
intensive and provide for backend repetitive jobs will come to a standstill and to stave off
a revolution , our society and governance may need a reorganisation . A way out of this is to
stop , or at least slow down , this progressive use of automation . However that will lead to
poor , or at best mediocre , industrial output and a low domestic product . Economists are
still divided on a society which is governed by high automation and each citizen is paid a
basic income or minimum wage regardless of work done . This disparity of divorcing work
from wage is probably not the best way to charter the progress of a society . 
Despite this social dilemma , a shift towards automation and robotics and automation
is obvious . Amazon has acquired Kiva Systems for $770 million and is considering
transportation and delivery systems using drones , Google has acquired at least nine robotics
or artificial intelligence companies for sums totaling in the billions , which includes Boston
Dynamics , and is considering launching the self- driving car as a commercial product and
Musk has launched Powerwall , as the clean and free energy system of the future . 
We , human beings , knowingly or unknowingly , tend to crown ourselves at the apex of
the pyramid of all biological creations , and the contention is not entirely wrong as higher
biological intelligence is yet to be found . This wishful Hyberborea1 was reached with the
unbridled success in technological growth piggybacking on fossil fuels . From hunter-gatherers
to space explorers , our success in the last 15 , 000 years has put into question the pace of
Darwinian evolution , and it is more than just a question whether nature ever witnessed
1
In Greek mythology , Hyperborea was a mythical land which was supposed to be perfect in every manner , 
with the sun shining throughout the day and the inhabitants being perpetually youthful and happy . 
 339
FIGURE 10 . 4 Transhumanism . Equipping the human body with new age technology for well
being and to extend life will become the norm by around 2040 , and may be the first steps towards
human robot integration to form androids . Cartoon made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license . 
intellectual growth at this rate ? Recently higher acumen and greater ability than human
beings has been seen in artificial agencies and they may well be more suited to carry the
metaphorical Darwinian baton . Will that spell doom for the human race ? Will we be second
rate beings in a world dominated by AI agents ? 
The development of a failsafe where artificial intelligence cannot harm human beings
has been an ongoing effort . The first example was in fiction — Asimov ’ s laws and effort
have been to rope in such laws , rules and moratoriums to contain AI and AI research . 
The debate takes a further twist when the intent of the artificial beings is considered . 
Until now all incidents of harm from robots have been mere accidents where the robot
lacked sentientism and therefore did not harbour any wrongful intent ; but that may not
always be the scenario . At the other end are the suggestions of a code of ethical conduct
for AI practitioners and roboticists , closely following the epithet of the Hippocratic Oath , 
synonymous with doctors . 
Other than loss of jobs and social changes another prospective outcome of the
technological and automation revolution is to devalue products . With the Internet of Things , 
3D printing and a shift towards solar and wind energy , automation may herald an era of
opulence [ 276 ]  , an era in complete contrast to the Skynet dystopia , which promises nearly
free goods and services , efficient means of transportation , newer methods of growing food
and the growth of collective opinion . These events and activities in parallel will eclipse
capitalism and lead to the set up of a new age society . Societies make choices which lead to
their failure or success [ 93 ]  . We are also faced with such choices in regards to AI and modern
technology . Pollack [ 266 , 267 ] summarises the robot age with an open set of questions . It is in
earnest that these questions are revisited to construct the apparent future in the backdrop
of super intelligent robots and singularity and to forsee our roles and the choices that we
might have . 
340  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
1 . Should robots be humanoid ? The creation of a robot is strongly guided by
anthropomorphism , and replicating human beings will probably be the greatest
achievement of AI . The appeal of a humanoid robot is greatly due to it ’ s appearance
rendering it , a ‘ doppleganger ’  [ 7 ]  . The ASIMO ’ s dance or the PR2 fetching a bottle of
beer connects at a psychological level , and makes us respond and react as though they
were indeed human beings . The immediate future will have humanoids but they will
lack sentience and at best will be expertly trained sales puppets or entertainment gigs . 
Pollock suggests that humanoids may lead to robot sales executives ; pitching a product
with enthusiasm , answering all of the consumer ’ s questions patiently , finding common
interests and finally arranging a better discount and amicable payment methods to
get the deal . The down side is that just like spam emails , these sales persons may
have a spam bot like avatar such as door to door sales , selling things which are of low
utility and poor quality . As discussed previously , humanoids have played active roles
in plays and ballets . With telepresence , the future may have robots on stage while
putting the stage shy human actor in a more comfortable place . 
2 . Should we become robots ? Modern-day medicine and surgery have led to
embedded devices and wearables such as pacemaker devices , smart prosthetics , 
heartbeat and pulse rate monitors to be commonplace . Research and mapping of
the human brain has found interest across the domains of AI , medicine , computer
science and physics communities , and it may not be too long before human beings and
computers are connected via direct neural interfaces — from mind to the computer
to the internet , where instead of using senses as touch and vision , there is direct
neural interface in both directions . Such an interface will embed virtual reality
into our network of neurons , making the virtual and the real seamlessly interact
with one another and render them indistinguishable [ 350 ]  . The emergence of better
technology will continue to lure us to incorporate electronics embedded into our
biological systems as means to monitor and enrich our metabolic processes , extend our
longevity and add to more mind power , as shown in Figure 10 . 4 . This improvement
of our biological processes by the use of technology is termed transhumanism . Using
electronics is said to be the beginning . Further sophistication will be achieved by a
plethora of cutting-edge technologies such as cryonics , virtual reality , gene therapy , 
space colonies , cybernetics , self-replicating robots , terra farming , mind uploading etc . 
Unknowingly , we already use our minds as extensions of the internet , with resources
such as Wikipedia and other online databases , we consider clicking our phones
rather than relying on our retention of information or extending our thoughts and , 
with embedded electronics in our body , this process of checking an online database
will become ubiquitous . Transhumanism means transitional beings , suggesting a
moderate enhancement in the ascendancy to posthumanism , an era which will herald
a melding of machine with biology to yield super human beings , which are no longer
unambiguously human . They will reflect neither human values nor adhere to human
virtues , as considered by our current standards . A fictional example of posthumans
are the Daleks in Dr . Who , as shown in Figure 10 . 5 . Posthumans will most probably
interpret the world with more than five senses , and have additional cognitive modules
at their disposal , as is shown in Figure 10 . 6 . 
Human beings + Machines → Transhumanism → Posthumanism
It can be argued that our species is probably outdated and technology has proceded
faster than our own selves . Therefore it can be argues that human beings need an
 341
FIGURE 10 . 5 The Daleks from Dr . Who are shown to be an advanced race where their true selves
are confined within a robotic cast . Though fictional , it serves to be an apt example where technology
and biology have overlapped and the Daleks are nearly in the same league as posthumans . Image
courtesy peregrinestudios . deviantart . com CC-by-SA 3 . 0 license . 
upgrade [ 327 ] through a technological stimulus . This apparent revolution will blur out
the boundaries between technology and human beings . The new species is presumed
to have some qualities of human beings and have been potrayed as a being with some
virtual attributes which work in tandem with machines and AI , or as science fiction
puts it — an avatar in cyberspace [ 35 ]  . This will enable us with farsightedness , higher
mental ability and a planet-wide awareness acting in real-time . This revolution is
probably imperative , since we have employed our resources in arms race for making
weapons which can destroy our world a few thousand times over and we are engaging
in activities such as pollution , the greenhouse effect , climate change and an economy
which fails to provide for everyone ’ s needs , all of which are destined to lead us to an
unhappy future . Biological evolution over 3 . 5 billion years has weeded out the lesser
species and mother nature has replaced as many as 99% of the species ever to be
on the planet . To fight off our own extinction due to lack of resources , struggle for
existence , wars and aggressive intent and natural calamity in a way will progress the
development of homo sapiens 2 . 0 [ 94 ] as our evolutionary heirs . 
3 . Should robots excrete by-products ? Pollack draws a parallel with automation
and heavy industry . Cars pollute the environment with carbon monoxide while heavy
industries add sulphur , lead and other particulates . Current-day automated systems
such as ATMs and InkJet Printers only generate paper and empty cartridges , but an
excess of such rubbish will only add to the environmental hazard . By-products should
be safely biodegradable or be readily consumed by another dynamic cyclical process
of the perceived ecology , else such waste will destablise the order of things . 
4 . Should robots eat ? It is a futurist ’ s ecstasy meeting an ethologist ’ s fervour . A
robot produces goods and services for society and consumes the undesirable , obsolete
and redundant matter for its own energy needs . The notion finds similarity with trees . 
They produce oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide , thus striking the perfect balance with
human beings and thus being a part of the ecological niche supporting the biosphere . 
As an example , consider an agricultural robot which obtains power by ‘ feeding ’ on
insects . Such will ensure a bumper harvest and also solve the problem of pests . There
342  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
has been progress in such research . ECOBOT III is a prime example where human
waste has been used to achieve robot motion . However , fueling a robot with organic
biological matter lacks virtue and Pollack also underscores the calamity it may pose if
such a robot industry multiplies exponentially . That could create a severe imbalance
in the food chain and other dynamical biological processes such as the water cycle and
the nitrogen cycle . Chances are that human beings and robots may soon be competing
for subsistence . Thus robots and such industries should run on renewable power such
as solar , hydrogen , or wind , not biological fodder . 
5 . Should robots carry weapons ? Various ethical issues have been raised regarding
robots in a battlefield , as discussed in the last chapter . 
6 . Should robots import human brains ? Uploading brains is very much in the
domain of fairy tales , however importing human brains is not . Telerobotics has found
application in sophisticated puppetry , surgical procedures , telepresence in hazardous
settings and planetary explorations . Pollack sketches a modern innovation for business
and industry when telerobotics meets broadband , so a worker based in China may be
actuating an industrial process in a factory in America . Such business will be lucrative
as the worker based in China will come at a low cost , while the actual work will
be executed in America and the factory will adhere to US laws . This is a dreamy
extrapolation of outsourcing , however very much possible . 
7 . Should robots be awarded patents ? Robots and AI are not only threatening the
boring jobs , but software such as Wordsmith developed by Automated Insights can
emulate the job of a reporter , algorithms developed by Nimble books can write full
length books and put an author out of work . Therefore , should creative efforts from
nonbiological entities be addressed with a different view point , viz . if a ‘ musician ’ 
robot writes the notes for a song , the commercial benefits from the song should
go to the betterment of the robot , and probably not the company which made the
robot . Therefore , either the intellectual property laws will need modification or the
nonbiological entity will need to be considered at par and with the same rights as a
human being . 
Turing ’ s test and its modern versions , Asimov ’ s laws and Pollack ’ s questions lead to
answers which seem to point towards a watershed event when man and machine are
indistinguishable , where machines have attained humanly values and man has imported
machines into his biology and metabolic processing for betterment , or the coming of
technological singularity . 
10 . 3 SUPERINTELLIGENCE , FUTURE TECHNOLOGY AND RAY KURZWEIL
Technological singularity plays as a consequence to Ray Kurzweil ‘ s [ 193 ] model of 
 ‘ accelerating returns ’  . Advanced societies progressing at a faster rate have been termed
by Kurzweil as ,  ‘ accelerating returns ’  . It is believed the progress of the entire 20th century
will be equivalent to the first 20 years in the 21st century , thus an apparent five times faster
rate of progress than in the 20th century . With similar arguments , Kurzweil foresees that
the 21st century will be marked by 1000 times the progress achieved in the 20th century . 
This growth is not linear , but rather as S-curves [ 232 , 332 ]  , where each S-curve is
representative of a new technology . There are 3 phases in the life cycle of a paradigm
as shown in Figure 10 . 7 . Phase-1 is characterised by low growth where the new technology
is yet to impact in its entirety , Phase-2 is marked by rapid growth , an explosive phase
 343
FIGURE 10 . 6 Transhumans and Posthumans . Bostrom classifies Transhumans and Posthumans
on the modes of beings . Our own current mode of being , as dictated by our 5 senses and cognitive
ability , is a subspace permitted by the physical constraints of the universe . Transhumans will be
moderately enhanced humans occupying a larger subspace , however posthumans which bear little
to no correlation to current day human beings will occupy a remarkably larger subspace . Adapted
from Bostrom [ 42 ] 
FIGURE 10 . 7 Three phases in the the life cycle of a paradigm . Growth progresses via
S-curves . A portion of the curve has been zoomed in to show the 3 phases , Phase-1 when growth
is slow , Phase-2 rapid growth and Phase-3 when the growth has plateaued out . Adapted from
Kurzweil [ 193 ]  
. 
344  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
of growth and Phase-3 is a leveling off as the particular paradigm matures and cannot
be exploited further . As an illustration , the Industrial Revolution took off really slowly 
( Phase-1 ) trying to pump out water from coal mines in the late 1700s . Soon it became the
mainstay of the textile industry but it was nowhere near a revolution . It was only around
1840s with large scale growth ( Phase-2 ) in steam transport and the manufacture of machine
tools — a time often termed as ‘ Second Industrial Revolution ’ by historians — did it truly
permeate human lives and society and was seen as a transformation . This growth started
to plateau out ( Phase-3 ) as industrialisation was dictated more by economic and political
strategies and not by growth in technology . A new technological paradigm fuels growth until
its potential is exhausted . At this point , a paradigm shift occurs , another S-curve which
facilitates for exponential growth to continue . The growth due to Industrial Revolution
really slowed down after the second world war , and it was taken over by electronics in the
1970s . 
Extending the S-curve concept to AI , the Open Worm project has developed neural
models for a ringworm ’ s locomotion with 302 neurons ; therefore , a full understanding of
the human brain with around 100 billion neurons should be 10-15 years in the offing . 
Similarly , projects such as ‘ Eugene Goostman ’ has AI mimicking a 13 year old boy in
2015 ; therefore mature human like intelligence should be achievable by around 2035 . This
sort of acceleration is not a figment of imagination , and has happened in the past . Kurzweil
recalls that the number of calculations per second ( cps ) for $1000 was around 1 in the 1960s
prior to the microelectronics revolution . This number grew at an incredible rate to 10 , 000
by the 1980s and now stands at around 106 
. If the trend continues we should reach 1015 —
the capacity of the human brain , by 2025 . 
modelling the exponential growth
This model developed by Kurzweil demonstrates that technologically advanced societies
tend to accelerate faster . If we consider the speed of computation ( V , measured in
calculations per second )  , technological know-how ( W ) and time ( t )  , then since better
technology will lead to better speed of computation , 
V ∝ W ( 10 . 1 ) 
also the speed of computation will be enhanced with growing technology , therefore ; 
V ∝
dW
dt ( 10 . 2 ) 
thus , 
W = W0e
c1t 
( 10 . 3 ) 
where c1 is a constant , this shows that technological know-how increases exponentially . 
However in advanced societies , the resources for computation are increasing with time , 
thus the second equation is modified to ; 
c2NV ∝
dW
dt ( 10 . 4 ) 
where c2 is a constant , N is the available computational resources , which are increasing
with time and therefore can be considered as an exponential in time , N = c3e
c4t 
, where
c3 and c4 are constants , thus ; 
W = W0e
c1c2c3
c4
e
c4t
∼ W0e
αeβt 
( 10 . 5 ) 
 345
where the combination of the constants is suitably replaced by constants α and β to arrive
at the double exponential variation . This comparison shows that technologically advanced
societies accelerate and acquire technical know-how as a double exponential in time at an
appreciably faster rate than a technologically naive civilisation . Since Kurzweil argues that
exponential growth is not limited to computers , but is valid for all information technologies
including the full range of economic activity , cultural endeavor and also human knowledge , 
the above variation is not just limited to the domain of technologies obtained from AI and
computer science , but rather pervades social and economic growth too . 
Biological evolution encourages changes which assist the growth and well being of the
species , suitably adapting to change . In order to attain longevity , good health and well
being our race has been subscribing to technology ; our monetary system has gone digital
in a mere 20 years after the invention of the internet . Implanting a smart device in our
body or resorting to genetics and stem-cell research to cure diseases has gone mainstream
and for many , the need for companionship and sexual needs may soon be fulfilled by
non-biological entities . The rate of technical progress right now is doubling every decade , and
at the singularity , machines would be indistinguishable from human beings . Unlike Vinge ’ s
dystopia where a far superior intelligence will subjugate human beings to second-class
citizens , Kurzweil believes in a new age Darwinian evolution . This ‘ next step ’ in evolution
will trigger a merger of human beings and technology . It is surely debatable whether we are
extrapolating to the right future or not , however of the various futuristic predictions that
Kurzweil has made since 1990 , a staggering 86% [ 194 ] of those has come to be true . 
Cool Farm , Farmers of The Future
As we embrace technology , the new age promises to revolutionise the way we live . 
Cabrita , Marques , Esteves , Igor & Carvalho and their brand of new age farming hopes
to change the way we have been doing things for more than 15 , 000 years — growing food . 
FIGURE 10 . 8 Cool Farm concept , automation in food production . Courtesy coolfarm , used with
permission . 
The basic blueprint for the enterprise is to develop smart electronics , sensors , actuators
and software for hydroponics and enable their application via the cloud . Based at Coimbra , 
Portugal , the product on sale is divided into two parts ,  ( i ) the CoolFarm Box and the ( ii ) 
CoolFarm Cloud . The box is the hardware containing electronics , sensors and actuators
while the cloud is more than just a cloud interface , it also contains a database and AI
346  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
techniques to optimise the output . More details can be found at the project ’ s website ,  
. 
Automating agriculture using Cool Farm has three broad advantages ;  ( 1 ) Saves time
and is more efficient . With an exhaustive and crowd-sourced database , the automated
system is well equipped to grow plants with the least amount of resources such as water , 
energy and nutrients and in optimal time ,  ( 2 ) Automated means to be rid of diseases . 
Since the system is near real time , it is easy to spot and avoid diseases and insect infestation
and ( 3 ) Real-time data acquired via the cloud . The various information regarding the
growth and yield of the crops at near real time is a handy tool for future predictions and
research . 
FIGURE 10 . 9 First prototype , a lettuce hydropone ( to the left )  , and its cloud interface on a
mobile phone ( to the right )  . Courtesy coolfarm , used with permission . 
FIGURE 10 . 10 Automated Greenhouse . Cool Farms automation for a full geeenhouse to grow
peppers in the summer of 2015 . Courtesy coolfarm , used with permission . 
 347
The Cool Farm model can be directly applied to two distinct markets , hydroponic
greenhouses which encompasses hydroponic and aquaponic urban greenhouses ; and
microalgae reactors which are used to manufacture biofuels and cosmetics industries . The
project aims to provide integrated agricultural solutions and prospects to supplement
growth for the urban agriculture market , provide scope for the bio-fuel market and pose
a solution to the food grains and poverty issues by increasing the production in industrial
greenhouses at an affordable price thus foreseeing a technology which provides food , energy
and manufacture of biochemicals in the decades to come . Needless to say , Cool Farm
represents the next technological evolution in agriculture . 
FIGURE 10 . 11 Cool Farmers , the company ’ s core team . Courtesy coolfarm , used with permission . 
10 . 3 . 1 Super intelligence
To explain super intelligence , Bostrom uses the IQ scale , where 90 is below average and 140
is borderline genius . However what will a score of 9000 mean ? What type of a being will
such an intelligence be ? What will be its merits and virtues ? It can be suggested that an
intelligence that superior will manifest across a planet wide network and thus will not lend
meaning to the intelligence vs . autonomy debate , since it will be able to orchestrate action
at a distance — telekinesis , transportation over a large distance in remarkably short time
— teleportation and tune into the thinking of lesser beings — telepathy and therefore a
soothsayer and predict future to a very high degree of certainity . 
There are 3 types of AI , Artificial Narrow Intelligence ( ANI ) which has been very
successful , Artificial General Intelligence ( AGI ) is in the process of being made , the third , 
Artificial Super Intelligence ( ASI ) appeals more to the realm of fantasy and magic . 
1 . Artificial Narrow Intelligence ( ANI )  . AI which is capable of executing jobs in
348  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
only one concern and their expertise cannot be employed in any other concern , such
as self driven cars — they can only drive and negotiate a safe and efficient path —
will never learn to play chess or write a poem . We are in a position to manipulate
and make ANI work to our needs and requirements ; Google translate , search engines , 
computer game engines are all examples of ANI . 
2 . Artificial General Intelligence ( AGI )  . Human-like AI , a non-biological entity
that can come close to accomplishing any intellectual task that a human being can . 
In principle , AGI should exhibit the various tenets of AI such as ability to reason , 
plan , learning , problem solving , abstract logical thinking etc . Going by current-day
technology , AGI should be connected to the internet and have the entire web as its
database . Clearly developing AGI is way more difficult than ANI and we are yet to
make any AGI level AI . Issues vary from overcoming Moravec ’ s paradox to imitating
the human brain to developing high computational power which also has appreciable
mobility . Researchers have been pursuing three broad routes to create AGI ,  ( 1 ) the
most obvious way to attain AGI is to increase computation power , the obvious
motivation is that to do like human beings — one should be able to think as fast as
human beings . However , the fastest computational resources available to us are still in
the research domain , consume too much power and don ’ t allow us the extravagance of
autonomy and at best serve as ‘ high computational resources ’ for developing numeric
simulations or developing quality cryptography .  ( 2 ) Another way is by copying the
human brain . This approach finds interest with neurologists and it is prospected
that once we have enough medical expertise in the near future , it should be possible
to map the human brain and thus develop neural models for the human thought
process and thinking . There have been efforts to extend the ANIMAT paradigm to
neural models . The Open Worm project has successfully modelled about 300 neurons
to simulate the locomotion for a ring worm , but even then we stand far from solving
the problem . The human brain would need a model of around 100 billion neurons .  ( 3 ) 
The third route is to replicate mother nature ’ s tactics and ‘ grow ’ to evolve a nascent
AI using developmental routes via genetic algorithms . As of today , state of the art
AI as , Eugene Goostman imitates human response , Kismet and Peppers pretend to
respond to human emotions and the HONDA ASIMO can run , dance and jog like a
human being but none of these will come anywhere close to AGI2 
. It is anticipated that
AGI will be a reality around the middle of this century [ 127 ]  . The typical signatures
heralding the coming of AGI are supposed to be [ 37 ]  .  
( a ) Success at broader , less structured tasks : AGI will be reached by extending
the capabilities of ANI . As an illustration , consider a carer robot such as
Care-O-Bot etc . which attains capabilities bordering nursing skills and medical
advicing , and demonstrates capabilities as a nurse and doctor .  
( b ) Unification of different ‘ styles ’ of AI methods : AI has seen different
approaches . Robotics was dominated by behaviourism and low level of symbolism
in the 1990s , image processing relies on cutting-edge algorithms and social
robotics is structured on mirroring human beings . It is probably not a long shot
of imagination that a humanoid sentient robot which is indistinguishable from a
human being will have to incorporate all of the various styles of AI . Thus , the
arrival of AGI will be marked by progressive unification of AI . 
2Goertzel ’ s , Goal-Oriented LEarning Meta-Architecture ( GOLEM )  [ 126 ] is seemingly the first step to
developing a true AGI , however there is a lack of scope to discuss this in detail here . 
 349
FIGURE 10 . 12 Artificial Superior Intelligence ,  ( ASI ) will act across the planet via an internet
like netowrk and will be omniscient and omnipresent , and the debate regarding intelligence vs . 
autonomy will not be relevant . ASI will be capable of performing ; telekinesis , telepathy & mind
reading and be a near 100% sucessful soothsayer . The zoomed in portion shows the present day
scenario where human beings are at the roost . Made by the author , CC-by-SA 4 . 0 license .  
( c ) Cultural transfer and learning : A challenge in machine learning is transfer
learning , the design of an algorithm whose result can be applied or transferred
to a range of new applications . In human beings , cultural information transfer
is common place , however such has not been so with machines . Once successful , 
machines will be able to willfully transfer their learning ( and experience ) to newer
machines . 
3 . Artificial Super Intelligence ( ASI )  . AI a few million times ‘ smarter ’ and faster
than human brains , as shown in Figure 10 . 12 . ASI will exhibit faster information
processing — far superior speeds than the human brain . The entity will be omniscient
and omnipresent by acting across the planet ( and more ) over a network , an advanced
internet . It will be capable of telekinesis , by teleoperation over a network , telepathy
— it will be able to pervade and ‘ listen to ’ and also override the plans , thoughts
and perceptions of all biological and non-biological entities and it will also be a par
excellence soothsayer , making near 100% successful predictions based on heuristics
collected across the planet . Bostrom also suggests that ASI may be formed due to
coalescence of a number of smaller intellects , therefore a very large number of AGIs
working in tandem may start to behave as an ASI . 
ASI will be much faster than the human brain , and it will also be better equipped than
our thinking capabilities . Compared to a monkey ’ s brain our brain has added advanced
cognitive modules giving us the ability for abstract thinking , representative knowledge , 
linguistics , writing , creativity , the notion of cause-effect , long term planning , broadly
structuring our cerebral activities , cognitive prowess which cannot be attained by mere
speeding up a monkey ’ s brain [ 331 ]  . Extending the arguments it can be suggested at least
350  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
that ASI will have more deductive ability and would be intellectually far superior to human
beings . Illustrating the notion , ASI will be able to accomplish mental tasks not possible for
us human beings , viz . as visualising a 30-dimensional space , reading with perfect recollection
— every single word and bit of information read in the last 10 years — and being able to
forsee the long-term effects of each and every action taken by oneself . It is possible that our
species with low level intellect and acumen may not be able to fathom the true ability and
scope of ASI . At the other end of this argument is the fact that ASI also will not subscribe
to humanly values or adhere to humanly virtues . 
AGI may be motivated by biology and may replicate some of the traits of human and
animal behaviour as shown in Figure 10 . 13 , even at times attempting to wrongly imitate
and replicate some of the biological processes . However , it is an easy to see that ASI will
lack any trait of being a biological entity . Neither will it mimic human behaviour , emotions , 
creativity , cerebral activities , values and virtues nor any other humanly attributes . It will
fail the Turing tests and Lovelace test with aplomb and probably also conclude that such
tests are futile . 
There is a substantial chance that we would be able to create AGI before 2100 and ASI
will follow as a result of the ensuing intelligence explosion , and such can destroy human
civilisation . However a controlled intelligence explosion , if achieved would benefit humanity
enormously . Considering a controlled explosion of intelligence and the arrival of a benevolent
ASI , which will be an all knowing entity existing across the planet and also beyond , like
a God among us , it may function in various ways . Bostrom [ 43 ] suggests that ASI can be
an oracle , with ability to tap into the minds of every single being and all previous data
of environmental , geological and climatic processes , hence it will be able to predict future
events with nearly 100% accuracy . This ability can be seen as an extension of a smart web
search answering nearly all questions posed to it by human beings . It may also function as
a genie , and can employ new technology to develop new machines , buildings , bridges and
also new molecules to make newer medicines and drugs , etc .  , an all-knowing and all-seeing
engineer and scientist building everything and anything . It can also be a ruler of the planet
and function as a sovereign , more or less an open-ended pursuit , making its own decisions
and setting the far-sighted goals for human society . It is believed that such a sovereign will
be benevolent to human beings , and its decisions will work in the greater good of the human
race . Or , alternatively ASI may try on all of the three roles , as and when it desires . 
Supercomputers Are NOT Superintelligent .  .  . Not Yet ! 
The world ‘ s fastest supercomputer , Tianhe-2 at Guangzhou , China can perform 34
peta flops ( 34 x 1015 calculations per second ( cps )  )  , the second and the third in rank are
the Titan at Oak Ridge , United States at 18 peta flops and Sequoia at Livermore , United
States at 17 peta flops . All of these three machines do better than the human brain which
is found to work at about 10 peta flops . However current day supercomputers are bulky , 
expensive and consume way too much energy for comfort , and therefore lack autonomy
and therefore cannot be used for autonomous systems such as robots . 
10 . 3 . 2 “ To singularity and beyond ” 
Singularity , the term used to convey the future arrival of an instance in the history of
the human race due to ever accelerating progress of technology , was coined by John von
Neumann in the early 1950s . Development of ultra-intelligent machines and a stand-off with
 351
FIGURE 10 . 13 The presidential debate 2070 . Even if the singularity doesn ’ t occur , cooperation
and coexistence between biological and non-biological life forms is forseen in the near future and
such a society will be marked by such new age technology as nanotechnology , space exploration , 
genetics etc and dictated by the need to acquire energy . Cartoon made by the author , CC-by-SA
4 . 0 license . 
352  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 10 . 14 Six epochs . From the birth and ordering of the universe to growth of biological
rudiments to formation of life leading to human beings and the subsequent discovery of technology , 
we stand at the 4th epoch . Singularity , if it happens , will be the 5th . Adapted from Kurzweil [ 193 ]  . 
technology was speculated by I . J . Good [ 131 ] in 1965 . Good ’ s model of ultra-intelligent
machines far exceeded all the intellectual activities of human beings , and he believed that
such machines will be the last invention of the human race . In recent times similar opinion
has been expressed by Bostrom [ 41 ] and Barrat [ 30 ]  . Moravec ’ s contention in the late 1980s is
more from a robotics viewpoint , where he identifies robots of the 2040s as our ‘ evolutionary
heirs ’ and Vinge ’ s charting routes to a ‘ post-human era ’ in the early 1990s set the debate
on fire which has only been rekindled more recently by Hawking , Musk , Gates and others . 
However , staying away from the dystopian view Kurzweil suggests that the singularity may
not be a sad end to our species , rather the event heralds the inevitable next step in the
evolutionary process . However unlike a slow biological evolution , this will be punctuated by
human-directed technological evolution . 
The singularity will greatly depend on three technologies , Genetics , Nanotechnology , 
and Robotics , and it is believed that these technologies will not be resource hungry , but
environment friendly and will be designed predominantly as knowledge-based technologies . 
According to Kurzweil , the singularity is the 5th of the 6 epochs as shown in Figure 10 . 14 . 
The first epoch is Physics and Chemistry from the start of the universe when information
was represented as discrete units of mass or energy and coherent alliances between these
two led to an order in the universe . In the second epoch of Biology & DNA , complicated
structures such as molecules and atoms formed in unison with energy and mass and led to
the formation of carbon atoms and biomolecules which were instrumental in the formation
of DNA , replicating strands of information . The third epoch is Brains , where the DNA
formed in the second epoch produced organisms which can detect information from their
surroundings with their own sensory organs and process and store that information in their
own brains and nervous systems . The fourth epoch is Technology . This is where we stand
 353
currently . Our civilisation has realised quality technology and we are already overwhelmed
at the outcome . If singularity happens , that would herald the fifth epoch and a merger of
human beings and technology . The sixth epoch is an extension of speculation where
the beings created by merger will try to build planet-sized processing units to tap into
the information processes in the universe . The universe wakes up to realise itself as an
information system will be the sixth and final epoch . 
The law of ‘ accelerating returns ’  , predicts that speed , capacity , bandwidth and price to
performance of information processing systems are attaining better values , doubling about
every year . The growth of the computer industry from vacuum tubes to a silicon revolution
has attracted research and development accounting for more than a trillion dollars annually . 
This exponential growth has allowed for other technologies such as virtual reality , robotics , 
medical technologies etc . 
The mapping of the human brain is considered to be a paradigm shift and would thus
initiate research into reverse engineering the human brain . Software models of human-like
intelligence , which can pass the Turing test are tagged for 2020 . With realistic chatbots such
as the most celebrated Eugene Goostman , Apple ’ s Siri , Google Assistant and Microsoft ’ s
Cortana we have come tantalisingly close to faking a human being . Machines can share their
knowledge at very high speed which is a remarkable improvement over biological intelligence
where the primary means of information transfer is visual , text and voice . Goertzel et al . 
also prospect that around 2020 , AI may be able to conduct Nobel quality scientific research . 
We already have artificial means such as ,  ‘ Imagination Engine ’ which has made new findings
in molecular chemistry and proteomics . A pathbreaking find in science and technology via
an artificial route may be around the corner . 
According to renowned android researcher Ishiguro , the definition of person has been
changing with evolving technology . If a full human body constituted a person about 70 years
ago , now a text-based chat also conveys the being of a person and with changing perceptions
of personhood , around singularity machines will reach striking similarity to human beings , 
as is shown in Figure 10 . 15 . Smart chatbots have done well to fool the Turing test . In about
2-3 decades we may be in a position to ‘ upload ’ our brain onto an intelligent system and
therefore attain immortality of sorts . 
Both Bostrom and Kurzweil suggest that knowing about the human brain is an essential
part of the puzzle . Projects such as Blue Brain , the Human Connectome Project and Brain
Preservation have added to the impetus . There has been raging debate whether ‘ uploaded
brains ’ qualify to be persons . If our continually evolving social and ethical values allow us
to accept that , then we would have moved away from mortal biological intelligence towards
bio-machinations which are nearly immortal . 
Studies show that human brains may not be a good comparison to a computer , as
there is a limit to the humanly capacity and speed of computation . In contrast , machines
can compute prime factors of numbers with 100 digits , a feat which cannot be attained
by biological intelligence . Since robots and AI entities equipped with Hebbian learning3
evolve much faster than biological intelligence , the rate of technological growth will not be
limited to biological limitations of the human mental processing speeds . Such nonbiological
intelligence will be able to master the facts , figures and understanding acquired over the
entire human civilisation via the internet and other online facilities and resources . These
superior intelligent beings will also be able to download skills and knowledge from other
machines and with continued advancements , from human beings too . 
Nanotechnology will add to this acceleration in technology and nanostructures as
nanotube electronics will be used to develop molecular level circuitry which will enable
3
If intelligence evolves as a feat of social cohesion , then it can also be memetic learning
354  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
Kurzweil ’ s Singularity Timeline ( 2005 , in his book ‘ Singularity Is Near ’  ) 
2010-2020 
( 1 ) Most text is read on screen , not on paper 
( 2 ) Self driving cars are a reality 
( 3 ) Face recognition is commonplace 
( 4 ) Effective human-robot interactions 
( 5 ) Simulated personalities are more human-like and more convincing 
( 6 ) Nanotechnology is very promising , yet to go mainstream 
( 7 ) Total computational power of all the computers exceeds that of the human race 
( 8 ) Immersive technology is the buzz word . 
2020-2030 
( 1 ) Virtual reality is indistinguishable from reality 
( 2 ) Nanomachines are available commercially to one and all 
( 3 ) Nanobots can enter the human blood stream aiding in surgical procedures etc .  
( 4 ) Computers with 100 nanometer dimensions 
( 5 ) Turing test is passable for artificial beings 
( 6 ) Phone calls allow for real time 3D holographic image of both people 
( 7 ) A $1000 computer is 1000 times more powerful than the human brain 
( 8 ) Human eating replaced by smart nano systems 
( 9 ) Human body version 2 . 0 - with better skeleton , brain and digestion 
( 10 ) Whole of human brain has been decoded 
( 11 ) Household robots are a commonplace
2030-2040 
( 1 ) Mind uploading is a reality and human beings continue to ‘ live ’ as their software
avatars 
( 2 ) Fully immersive VR , with nanomachines implanted into the human brain 
( 3 ) People can change their own memories and experiences - therefore their
personalities
2040-Singularity 
( 1 ) Real time brain transmissions of a person ’ s daily chores can be experienced
remotely 
( 2 ) Nonbiological intelligence has surpassed biological intelligence by far 
( 3 ) People spend more time in VR than the real world 
( 4 ) A $1000 computer is billion times powerful compared to the entire human race 
( 5 ) Nanotech ‘ foglets ’ can make food out of ‘ thin air ’ 
At Singularity , technological growth has been taken over by ultra intelligent
machines which can think , act and communicate so quickly that it cannot be
comprehended by biological intelligence . Machines continue to progress AI with ever
increasing , self-improving cycles . Technological advancement is explosive and cannot
be accurately predicted . The sharp distinction between human beings and machines
has ceased to exist . 
 355
FIGURE 10 . 15 Technology attains humanly virtues , we are headed towards a future where
technology will start to behave as though it has human values and abilities . CC 3 . 0 license , cartoon
courtesy . 
speeds of operation 1000 times more than current times . With nanotechnology-based
electronic designs , artificial brains with far higher capacities than the human brain can be
developed without increased size or energy consumption . Machine brains being electronic
will process signals at about the speed of light , a marked improvement over electrochemical
signals in biological systems . These artificial brains will be equipped with iterative learning , 
thus improving its own design at will , and apparently creating an unending cycle of
perfection until singularity . 
These smart machines will be able to develop their own social niche , and can work
cooperatively by merging their resources as networked hardware or shared memory over a
cloud . Kurzweil also believes that these machines will have modular functionality where two
or more machines join together to become one to effect a particular task and then become
separate again after the task has been accomplished . 
The 5th epoch promises a merger of machine intelligence with biological intelligence . This
will meld the biological ability of pattern-recognition with non-biological virtues of enriched
speed , high memory capacity , accuracy , knowledge and skill-sharing . Kurzweil suggests a 
 ‘ double exponential growth ’ after this stage , and results will be off the charts in speed , 
capacity and price-performance . Medical science after this merger will be able to reengineer
all of the organs , and truly develop super humans , with a superlative body and a vastly
developed cranium facility . Though unlike the notion of Walterian creatures , this will not
yet trigger artificial evolution faster than the dynamics of the environment . That may have
to wait for a few more decades , when artificial organs can be manufactured by the individual
on the fly . 
Robotics meets nanotechnology . Robots at the nano dimension will supplement medical
procedures and drug delivery and be instrumental in reversing ageing , curing various
diseases , providing for a platform to create immersive virtual reality by interacting with
the human nervous system and enriching human intelligence by manipulating capillaries
of the brain . Once these nanobots starts to upgrade the brain , the power of the human
356  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
FIGURE 10 . 16 Containment of AI has been suggested by various leading thinkers and
technologists , in order to stop or at least delay the coming of ASI and the technological singularity . 
However , the singularitian ’ s camp is of the opinion that the inevitable cannot be stopped . Cartoon
by Iyad Rahwan at ∼irahwan / cartoons . html , CC license . 
brain will double each year . Other than medical facets , nanobots will also enhance the
environment by reversing pollution from earlier industrialisation , and also aid in developing
life like virtual reality . 
Close to singularity , the distinctions between the virtual and the real will tend to fade
away , and virtual reality will be operated from within our nervous systems . It will be
immersive and which will make current massively multi person online virtual reality systems
as second life and sims online seem like toys . 
The timeline for singularity is said to be in the range 2040 – 2100 . Moravec and Kurzweil
agree on a 2040 – 2050 timeline . Bostrom and Goertzel suggest that ASI may arrive as early
as 10 years from now ; Bostrom puts an upper limit at around 2100 . 
10 . 3 . 3 Alternate opinions & containment of AI
As an alternative opinion , the greatest danger of AI is not ultra intelligent machines but
rather a variant of the Dunning Kruger effect with worldwide manifestation , that people
surmise too early that they grasp AI and the true experts stop short of making an expressed
opinion . Clearly , Ned Ludd and his followers never grasped AI , but the coming of the
singularity has found substantial enthusiasm from science fiction readers who may not be
proficient in AI . Making up theories runs amok in the sciences and has also formed the
ground for newer disciplines . The effect is seemingly too acute in AI as it is not a ‘ settled ’ 
science but a discipline which belongs to the future and not to wizened pages of a textbook . 
Predicting AI has been difficult [ 22 ]  , however that has not stopped the hubris for
a futuristic technology , and speculations and forecasting are often made to facilitate a
project , monetary or otherwise . On such lines , Kelly has suggested the semi-emperical , 
 357
Maes–Garreau Law ( Kelly , 2007 ) 
Maes–Garreau Law Most favourable predictions about future technology will fall
within the Maes-Garreau Point . 
Where , the Maes–Garreau point is defined as a year less than the life expectancy of
the person making the prediction .  
 ‘ Maes–Garreau Law ’  [ 175 ] which is a play on the inherent bias in the person making the
prediction . Kelly ’ s sarcasm points out that the person making the prediction draws at a
date which is sufficiently late , yet within his / her lifetime — the Maes-Garreau Point . 
Critics of singularity [ 11 ] are either dismissive of it , by claiming it to be ( 1 ) speculative , 
pseudo-scientific and a crackpot theory , or otherwise try to reason against it , while others
suggest that ( 2 )  ‘ accelerating returns ’ may not attain such heights in such a short time 
( not around 2100 or sooner )  [ 236 ]  ,  ( 3 ) Moore ’ s Law is the physical limitation which will
prevent the needed technological progress and slow down the exponential growth ,  ( 4 ) lack
of mapping the human brain and complexities in developing human-like AI [ 10 ] will derail
AI from its destination ,  ( 5 ) societal collapse , natural apocalypse and disinclination to AI
all will change the destiny of the human race away from singularity etc . and ( 6 ) success of
active prevention methods containing the development of AI4 
, as is shown in Figure 10 . 16 . 
In a future devoid of singularity , there will still be the essence of super intelligence and
such entities will take over crucial roles such as healthcare , economics , politics and warfare . 
To reflect , we already have supercomputers which are indeed super intelligent , however
they lack mobility and are meant for multitasking and number crunching . However , with
continued efforts to imbue ethics and values into artificial non-biological entities , it is only
a matter of time until we have artificial value systems somewhat replicating human ideals . 
Thus , whether our civilization reaches singularity or not , we should witness the coming of
AGI , contained or not , and a robot economy . Robots which now number at 1 . 7 million are
sure to proliferate , and only time will tell if our future generations live to tell the story , or
whether our extinction is recorded in binary code . 
The infinite prowess of synthetic intelligence could mean that AGI and its superior
avatars will gradually acquire the ability to modify the physical processes of the universe5 
. 
Hence as the last piece to Kurzweil ’ s prophecy , following the 6th epoch a universe which 
 ‘ wakes up ’ as an intelligent entity may be able to rewrite the laws of physics and undo the
thermodynamic prohibition of the second law and also the limitation on time and speed of
light , and when such a universe speaks out loud ,  “ let there be light ” — there may truly be
light . 
SUMMARY
1 . A technologically advanced civilisation tends to progress much faster compared to
technologically naive civilisations . 
2 . Technologists , roboticists and philosophers point to a watershed event when ( i ) 
machines will be far too advanced compared to human beings and their progress
will befuddle the biological human mind ( ii ) human beings and machines will meld
4Goertzel has named this approach ‘ Nanny AI ’ 
5This is the topic of Asimov ’ s short story ,  ‘ The Last Question ’  [ 23 ]  . 
358  From AI to Robotics : Mobile , Social and Sentient Robots
together ( iii ) an artificial superintelligence will be omnipresent and pervade all human
and natural activities . The first two are referred to as technological singularity though 
( i ) is attributed to Vinge ,  ( ii ) to Kurzweil , while ( iii ) is the coming of Artificial Super
Intelligence ( ASI )  . 
3 . The rate of paradigm shift for technical innovation is accelerating , nearly doubling
every decade . 
4 . Three innovations which will propel ther path to this event are : genetics , 
nanotechnology and robotics . 
5 . Transhumanism and nihilism are tenets of singularity and human beings will meld
with technology and no more be biological entities as per our current standards . 
6 . Singularity and super intelligence may usher in technologies which are apparently
magical such as ( i ) mind uploading and immortality ,  ( ii ) human beings slowly melding
into cyborgs , by supplimenting their biological beings with snazzy devices and new
age medical equipments ,  ( iii ) telekinesis ,  ( iv ) telepathy ,  ( v ) teleportation and ( vi ) 
soothsaying to very high level of certainity ∼ 100% . 
7 . Though experts are divided , 2040 – 2100 is the timeline for the fulfillment of the
prophecy . 
NOTES
1 . Melvin Kranzberg presented his six laws of technology at the presidential address
delivered by him at the annual meeting of the Society for the History of Technology in
1985 . The six laws are ; 
I Technology is neither good nor bad ; nor is it neutral . 
II Invention is the mother of necessity . 
III Technology comes in packages , big and small . 
IV Although technology might be a prime element in many public issues , nontechnical
factors take precedence in technology-policy decisions . 
V All history is relevant , but the history of technology is the most relevant . 
VI Technology is a very human activity — and so is the history of technology . 
2 . Robots have taken to the stage . In contrast some movie actors have played the role of
the robot to perfection ; Robin Williams in the ‘ Bicentennial Man ’ and Michael Sheen
in ‘ The Passengers ’ are two very memorable performances . 
3 . Transhumanism is now a social and political movement , their logo which is h + in a
circle , for ‘ human plus ’  . 
4 . Embodiment — the need of a body for real-world interactions , is a necessity for
robotics . However , with the crescendo of AI and new technology we may be at a
juncture where superintelligent entities without a body may soon be a reality . The 
 ‘ no body ’ hypothesis can be arrived at , in 2 ways :  ( 1 ) either super intelligence is
an omnipotent entity across the planet which in effect controls the living and also
the non-living , as a benevolent ruler of the teeming multitude , or ( 2 ) mind uploading
becomes a reality , and human beings can upload their minds onto electronic hardware . 
5 . Discussing the first epoch , Kurzweil asks the question whether matter and energy are
digital or analog in nature . It is to be noted that both matter and energy are discrete
at atomic scale but seem to be continuous in macroscopic scale . 
6 . Kurzweil backs his arguments in favour of 2045 by extrapolating his model of
accelerating returns and predicts that we will reach artificial capabilities equal to the
entire human civilisation , 1026 cps for the cost of $1000 at around 2049 . 
 359
7 . Experts also predict a technological leap in space travel and successful attempts at
overcoming the speed of light , which may happen around the same timeline . 
8 . In December 2012 Ray Kurzweil joined Google as Director of Engineering , to pursue
projects on machine learning and language processing . 
9 . A controversial , yet very popular thought experiment is ‘ Roko ’ s Basilisk ’  , which
suggested that ASI may punish those who did not help to bring it to existence . It
was first discussed at and has been one of the hotly contested
questions on ASI . 
10 . Randall Munroe of xkcd fame has often hinted that we are , unobstrusively and
seamlessly using wikipedia as an extension of our minds ,  and

11 . In 2045 other than the singularity , it is anticipated that ;  ( i ) China ’ s economy will
become the largest in the world and ( ii ) Production of oil may be down to 15
million barrels per day , that is a depletion by nearly 80% of our current world wide
consumption . 
12 . In the history of technology , the arrival of super intelligence will be a Kuhnian
paradigm shift , comparable to the Copernican revolution . 
Running The Examples
Download and unzip the software codes from Robotics-Mobile-Social-and-Sentient-Robots / Bhaumik / p / book / 9781482251470 . 
A . 1 BRAITENBERG SIMULATOR
In the sub-folder named b-simulator , right click on the file named braitenberg . html and
open it with a web browser ( mozilla firefox or google chrome )  . A screen will appear with a
braitenberg vehicle and a light source . 
A . 2 WALLE EVA CHAT
Run the python script from the terminal window with the command python walleeva . py