1. INTRODUCTION: WHY THIS BOOK? 
“Teachers of teachers – what they are like, what they do, what they think – are 
typically overlooked in studies of teacher education.” 
 (Lanier & Little, 1986*1
, p. 528) 
1.1. CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND 
This is a book about teacher educators and their profession. Until now, such a book 
has been rather unique, as for a long time only limited attention was paid to the 
important work of teacher educators. However, after the above observation by 
Lanier and Little in the 1980s, a fundamental shift has taken place. Since the 
1990s, the crucial role of teacher educators in the educational chain has gradually 
received more attention in research, practice, and educational policy (see, e.g., 
Koster, Brekelmans, Korthagen, & Wubbels, 2005). Nowadays, there seems to be a 
quite general consensus that, to a large degree, teacher educators determine the 
quality of teachers and that these teachers are a crucial factor in the quality of 
primary and secondary education (Liston, Borko, & Whitcomb, 2008). Hence, it is 
important that teacher educators are able to function at a high professional level. 
What does this mean? And do teacher educators meet this requirement? 
Notwithstanding the increased attention to teacher educators, the literature does 
not give clear answers to such questions (Verloop, 2001*). Martinez (2008) states: 
Little systematic research has been undertaken to inform us about 
fundamental characteristics of the professional lives of this occupational 
group – their qualifications, their recruitment, their career pathways into and 
through the academy, their teaching and research practices, the problems they 
encounter, or their professional development needs and practices. (p. 35) 
However, especially during the last decade, many publications have offered partial 
answers to questions about the characteristics of the profession and the behaviour 
of teacher educators. Hence, if we wish to take the profession of teacher educator 
seriously, this situation asks for a solid analysis and synthesis of what is known in 
this field. This was the incentive to conduct the review study described in this 
book.2
 
This study fits into an international trend. Various authors have emphasised that 
for too long the profession of teacher educators has received too little attention. 
Worldwide, a growing number of studies on teacher educators are now being 
published. For example, within the Assocation of Teacher Educators (ATE, USA) 
as well as within the Association of Teacher Educators in Europe (ATEE), there is 
an ongoing debate about the importance of further professional development of 
teacher educators, not only for enhancing the quality of their work, but also for 
elevating their status and position as a professional group. 
This review study is also relevant, because the professional community of 
teacher educators is rather diffuse, which until now made it difficult to arrive at a 
1. INTRODUCTION: WHY THIS BOOK? 
2 
clear and solid framework for the profession. As Lunenberg (2010*) states, teacher 
educators form a rather heterogeneous group. One becomes a teacher educator by 
being appointed as such. There is no formal educational route, tied to admission 
requirements for the profession, to becoming a teacher educator (Cochran-Smith, 
2003). Many teacher educators, but not all, started their career as a teacher 
(Dinkelman, Margolis, & Sikkenga, 2006; Berry, 2007*). We will return to this 
issue in Section 2.1. 
1.2. GOAL OF THIS REVIEW STUDY AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
The goal of the review study was to arrive at a solid overview of what is known 
about the professional roles of teacher educators, their related professional 
behaviour, and the professional development of teacher educators regarding these 
roles and the accompanying behaviour. We will also analyse what is known from 
the literature about critical features determining the professional roles, the 
accompanying professional behaviour, and the professional development of teacher 
educators. 
The following research questions have guided this study: 
1. What professional roles of teacher educators can be identified? 
2. What are the critical features determining the professional roles of teacher 
educators and the accompanying professional behaviour? 
3. What are the critical features determining the development of the professional 
roles and the accompanying professional behaviour of teacher educators? 
This study focuses on the professional roles and the professional behaviour of 
individual teacher educators. This implies, for example, we do not draw 
conclusions about the level of professionalism of the community of teacher 
educators as a whole, although some of our findings do touch upon this issue. 
On the basis of our analysis, we also give an overview of blind spots in the 
current research and we offer suggestions for further research. After our final 
conclusions and discussion, we also offer suggestions for practice. 
1.3. RELEVANCE FOR RESEARCH 
As we mentioned, already in the 1980s, Lanier and Little (1986*, p. 528) stated 
that there was too little knowledge about the work of teacher educators. One of the 
first and leading publications having the teacher educator as its object of study was 
the book The lives of teacher educators by Ducharme (1993*). In the 1990s, worldwide more studies appeared about teacher educators and their work, and there was 
a growing acknowledgment that the profession of teacher educator should meet 
certain professional requirements. In this respect, an important development was 
the formation, in 1993, of a Special Interest Group of the American Educational 
Research Association (AERA), named Self-Study of Teacher Education Practices, 
or briefly S-STEP (Russell, 2010*). Zeichner (1999*) maintains that this may have 
been the most important development ever to the research in the area of teacher 
education. A publication by Russell and Korthagen (1995*), named Teachers who 
1. INTRODUCTION: WHY THIS BOOK?
3
teach teachers, brought together experiences from members of the Special Interest 
Group. As such, it offered in-depth insights into the daily work and struggles of 
teacher educators world-wide. In 2004, the Special Interest Group published the 
International Handbook of Self-Study of Teaching and Teacher Education 
Practices (Loughran, Hamilton, LaBoskey, & Russell, 2004*), which is an 
extensive and rich collection of studies in this area, with much attention to the 
practical work of individual teacher educators and their professional development. 
This means that a point had been reached at which, for the first time, there was a 
broad and in-depth overview of what teacher educators actually do and think and, 
most of all, what they struggle with. 
Hence, it is only since the beginning of the 1990s that we know more about the 
teacher educator (Koster et al., 2005). This leads to the need for a clear and 
research-based overview of what is known to date about the professional 
functioning of teacher educators and the factors contributing to this, as well as to 
their further professional development. Until now, such an overview has been 
missing. 
In 2005, AERA published the review study Studying Teacher Education 
(Cochran-Smith & Zeichner, 2005*). This contains an analysis and synthesis of the 
available empirical research relevant to policy and practice in teacher education. 
However, some topics relevant to teacher education are not discussed in this AERA 
study, such as an historical analysis of teacher education and in-service teacher 
education (Cochran-Smith & Zeichner, 2005*, pp. 59-60). Also absent is a clear 
perspective on the roles and behaviour of individual teacher educators and on 
factors determining their quality and their development, which is exactly what the 
present review study focuses on. Hence, the present review fills in a blank in the 
available research. Moreover, the AERA study was limited to research carried out 
in North America, whereas we have adopted an international perspective. 
1.4. PRACTICAL RELEVANCE AND RELATION TO OTHER DEVELOPMENTS 
The significance of this review study may be important to practice and to society as 
a whole, as teacher educators increasingly fulfil a crucial role in the educational 
chain (Liston et al., 2008). Moreover, there is much emphasis nowadays on the fact 
that the profession of teacher educator is a specific profession, which differs from 
the profession of teacher in primary or secondary education (Murray & Male, 
2005). Also, many researchers have noted that teacher educators need support in 
their work in order to develop their professional behaviour (Cochran-Smith, 2003; 
Koster et al., 2005; Snoek, Swennen, & Van der Klink, 2011; Swennen, Jones, & 
Volman, 2010). In this respect, this review study offers a framework for such 
support. Given the fact that many teacher educators are constantly struggling with 
time constraints, this book could be a powerful instrument, as it offers a brief 
overview of the most important research in this area. 
This review study also fits into a trend in the Netherlands, which has taken place 
during recent years. As we will further discuss in chapter 6, important steps have 
been taken regarding the professional development of teacher educators. First, 
1. INTRODUCTION: WHY THIS BOOK? 
4 
during the previous decade, the Dutch association of teacher educators developed a 
registration procedure. Teacher educators choosing to pass through this procedure, 
undergo a peer assessment (Koster, Dengerink, Lunenberg, & Korthagen, 2008; 
Koster & Dengerink, 2008). In addition, projects were started to promote selfstudies by teacher educators (see, e.g., Lunenberg, Zwart, & Korthagen, 2010). 
Also, in co-operation with the Dutch association of teacher educators, VU 
University in Amsterdam developed a knowledge base for the profession. Such a 
knowledge base for teacher educators is rather unique in the world. With this 
review study, we aim at putting an even stronger theoretical basis under this 
knowledge base, which could possibly also lead to further adaptations in the 
knowledge base itself. 
Finally, based on the knowledge base for teacher educators, a professional 
development trajectory for teacher educators was developed in the Netherlands. 
This trajectory is linked to the registration procedure of the Dutch association of 
teacher educators. Both institution-based and school-based teacher educators 
participate in this trajectory, which attracts quite some interest from the 
professional community. This is a development which is important as, 
internationally, structured trajectories for teacher educators are rare, and if they 
exist at all, they are often rather limited in scope. On the basis of an extensive 
study in the 1990s, Wilson (1990*) concluded that in Europe, systematic training 
or coaching of teacher educators was almost completely missing. He rightly added 
that this situation was highly remarkable in an area where professional 
development has always been the operative word. Ten years later, the situation had 
not changed much, as noted by Buchberger, Campos, Kallos, and Stephenson, 
(2000*). We believe that this review study could offer the building blocks for 
structured and in-depth trajectories for teacher educators. As such, it could 
contribute to a higher level of professionalism and positive outcomes for education 
as a whole.
NOTES 
1
 References marked with * are additional to the database of this review study. (See Chapter 3 for an 
explanation.) A list of these references can be found at the end of this study. 2
 The review study has been carried out with a grant of The Netherlands Organisation for Scientific 
Research (NWO). 
5 
2. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
In this chapter, we explain the core concepts used in this review study. We discuss 
how we define ‘teacher educator’, ‘professional role’, ‘professional behaviour’, 
and ‘critical features’. 
2.1. TEACHER EDUCATOR 
Teacher educators are a heterogeneous group. Not only do they come from 
different backgrounds, but they also work in different settings (Lunenberg, 2010*). 
Some work in an institution for teacher education for primary education, some in a 
teacher education institution for secondary education. Others work in teacher 
education institutions for specific fields such as the arts, technology, or agriculture. 
Moreover, there is a growing group of school-based teacher educators co-operating 
with those who are institution-based and with their students (Van Velzen & 
Volman, 2009). Teacher educators also have a variety of tasks. They teach a 
subject or pedagogy, and support students who do field work. In addition, teacher 
educators are increasingly expected to develop and carry out courses for 
experienced teachers and to do research (Koster, Dengerink, Lunenberg, & 
Korthagen, 2008). 
 Koster (2002*) states that it is difficult to find a satisfying description of what a 
‘teacher educator’ is. He cites Carter (1984*, p. 126-127), who defines a teacher 
educator as ‘a faculty member in a tenure track who had taught at least one 
required undergraduate professional education course during the preceding twelve 
months’. Koster (2002*, p. 7) himself formulates the following definition: ‘A 
teacher educator is someone who teaches at a teacher education institution or 
supports students’ field work in schools, and contributes substantially to the 
development of students towards becoming competent teachers’. 
 Koster’s definition evokes three questions. Firstly, the word substantial is 
ambiguous. Secondly, the tasks and responsibilities of school-based teacher 
educators have been extended during the previous decade. And thirdly, we also 
want to include in our definition teacher educators responsible for courses for 
experienced teachers, especially because the boundaries between initial teacher 
education and professional development courses are fading more and more. 
 Therefore, in this review study, we define teacher educators as: all those who 
teach or coach (student) teachers with the aim of supporting their professional 
development. 
 Hence, we include all those who, in teacher education institutions and in 
schools, are responsible for teaching and coaching future, beginning and 
experienced teachers. 
2. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
6 
2.2. PROFESSIONAL ROLE 
Van Doorn and Lammers (1984*), as well as De Jager, Mok, and Sipkema (2004*) 
define a role as a cluster of more or less stringent expectations of the behaviour of 
a person in a certain position. These expectations may be those of a professional 
group, an organisation in which a person works, or of society. They can be – in part 
– formally established, for example in a professional standard. More important, 
however, is what is in practice expected of a person in a certain position, and what 
is demanded from this person by members of his or her working environment. 
 In this review study, we use the concept professional role. ‘Professional’ refers 
to a complex of systematically organised and transferable theoretical knowledge 
(see for example Knoers, 1987*, p. 6). The use of the adjective ‘transferable’ 
emphasises that the teacher educator should be able to make theoretical knowledge 
explicit. 
 We define the concept ‘professional role’ as: a personal interpretation of a 
position based on expectations from the environment and on a systematically 
organised and transferable knowledge base. (Note: In the following chapters, we 
will often abbreviate ‘professional role’ to ‘role’.) 
 The concept ‘professional role’ should not be confused with the concept 
‘professional identity’, which has recently become more popular in the literature. 
Klaassen, Beijaard, and Kelchtermans (1999*, p. 337) describe professional 
identity as ‘relatively stable views, reflection patterns on professional behaviour, 
and the accompanying self-image’. So, the concept ‘professional identity’ mainly 
focuses on personal views and self-images, whereas the concept ‘professional role’ 
mainly focuses on position and expectations from the environment. 
2.3. PROFESSIONAL BEHAVIOUR 
Knoers (1987*), as well as Jansma and Wubbels (1992*), Eraut (1994*), Hoyle 
and John (1995*), Koster (2002*), and Verloop (2001*), emphasise that 
professional behaviour means behaviour based on a knowledge base. As explained 
above, teacher educators should be able to make this behaviour explicit. Implicit 
knowledge and ‘practical wisdom’ (Lunenberg & Korthagen, 2009*) are in our 
view not a sufficient foundation of professional behaviour. 
 In the medical field, among others, the attention to values and norms is also 
explicitly mentioned as an important aspect of professional behaviour. An ethical 
standard for teacher educators, however, is not yet available. Verloop (2001*) 
concludes that professionals have a certain amount of freedom to make their own 
judgment with regard to what is considered appropriate practice. The fact, 
however, that an ethical standard for teacher educators is still absent, does not 
mean that attention to ethical issues is also missing (see for example Coldron & 
Smith, 1999*; Beijaard, Meijer, & Verloop, 2004*). 
 Hence, in this review study, we define professional behaviour as: behaviour 
based on a systematically organised and transferable knowledge base expressing 
the values and norms of the professional community. 
2. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
7
 The definitions above do not completely cover the professional role and 
professional behaviour of teacher educators. Van Doorn and Lammers (1984*), as 
well as Hoving and Van Bon (2010*) emphasise that a role can be an object of 
discussion, also because in practice several roles are often combined. That teacher 
educators combine several roles seems obvious. Ducharme (1993*) uses the 
metaphor of a (two-faced) Janus-head, and adds that teacher educators seem to 
have even more than two faces: “School person, scholar, researcher, 
methodologist, and visitor to a strange planet” (p. 6). Such role combinations can 
be a source of tensions and conflict, because one has to meet several expectations 
and norms, which are sometimes hard to combine. 
2.4. CRITICAL FEATURES 
We define critical features as: features determining the quality of professional roles 
or professional behaviour, or determining the quality of the professional 
development of teacher educators with regard to roles or behaviour. 
 As we will explain in the next chapter, we will limit our conclusions about 
critical features to those features that are empirically and adequately underpinned. 
9
3. METHOD 
3.1. EIGHT STEPS 
For this review study, we have used the methodological framework for a 
(qualitative) literature review as described by Randolph (2009*). Randolph 
describes eight steps, formulated as tasks that researchers have to carry out: 
1. Create an audit trail; 
2. Define the focus of the review; 
3. Search for relevant literature; 
4. Classify the documents; 
5. Create summary data bases; 
6. Identify constructs and hypothesised causal linkages; 
7. Search for contrary findings and rival interpretations; 
8. Use colleagues or informants to corroborate findings. 
In this chapter, we will describe how we have applied these steps in this review 
study. 
1. Create an Audit Trail 
The aim of this first step is to carefully document all stages of the review process. 
We have done so and will explain below the selection of our sources and of the 
studies we have used in the review study. We will also describe the process of data 
analysis and data interpretation. Next, we will report on how we have enhanced the 
trustworthiness, transparency and completeness of this study through collegial 
collaboration. We have further underpinned these by involving an international 
group of experts (the ‘critical friends’, see step 8). 
2. Define the Focus of the Review 
The focus of our review is defined by the goal of this study and by the three 
research questions. These are described in Chapter 1. 
3. Search for Relevant Literature 
According to Randolph, step 3 is focused on searching for relevant literature. We 
started this search process with an orientation phase, followed by a selection phase. 
Orientation phase 
We started with an orientation phase in which we conducted tryouts in order to 
arrive at the identification of search terms, quality criteria, and a demarcation of the 
3. METHOD 
10 
 
publishing period, which would lead to an overview of relevant studies as complete 
as possible. Such an overview could help us to answer our research questions. 
To begin with, we explored what would be the most relevant search terms for 
our study. Based on our orientation, we chose the following central search terms 
for this study: ‘teacher educator(s)’, ‘teacher trainer(s)’ and ‘mentor teacher(s)’. By 
adding the latter search term, we explicitly included in our study persons 
responsible for teaching and coaching student teachers in their school practice. 
Combining these search terms with the core concepts of our research questions 
(role, behaviour and professional development) proved not to be efficient. For 
example: the combination of the search terms ‘teacher educator’ and ‘role’ hardly 
provided any literature on the role of teacher educators, but mainly articles on the 
role of reflection in teacher education. As a consequence, we decided not to work 
with combinations of the three search terms that we had chosen and the core 
concepts as described in the previous chapter. 
 Next, we looked for quality criteria. We decided on limiting our main search to 
articles in journals recognised by the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) or by 
the Dutch Interuniversity Centre for Educational Sciences (ICO). In addition to ISI, 
ICO recognises a few more journals dedicated to teacher education and teacher 
educators, for example ‘Studying Teacher Education’. The academic forum regards 
the quality of these journals as adequate. Among others, these journals use the 
quality criterion of ‘double blind review’ in judging articles. 
 It is more difficult to find a comparable quality criterion for books. We assume 
that Ph.D. dissertations do meet quality criteria, but also take note that the 
information from Ph. D. dissertations relevant to this review study has very often 
also been published in an article. We know that articles in some relevant 
handbooks are solidly reviewed, but in most cases books are a grey area when it 
comes to guaranteeing the quality. 
 Hence, we decided to use ISI- and ICO-articles as the primary source in 
answering our research questions. Where it seemed sensible, we used book 
publications as an additional source. These mostly proved to be books that were 
frequently referred to in the selected ISI- and ICO-articles. In this review study, 
references to additional publications are marked with an asterisk (*). 
Another point of attention in this orientation phase was to determine the period 
of time we would focus on. We chose the period 1991-2011, because before the 
nineties of the previous century, hardly any studies on teacher educators had been 
published (as is stated by Wilson, 1990*; Ducharme, 1993*; Zeichner, 1999*; 
Buchberger, Campos, Kallos, & Stephenson, 2000*). 
Finally, we had to decide which search engines to use. We tried out 
which would lead to the best quantitative and conceptual saturation. This proved 
to be a combination of Web of Knowledge, Science Direct and Tandfononline. 
The use of these three, combined with the search terms ‘teacher educator(s)’, 
‘teacher trainer(s)’, and ‘mentor teacher(s)’, led to the results represented in 
Table 3.1. 
3. METHOD 
11 
Table 3.1. Overview of search results for the terms teacher educator, teacher trainer, and 
mentor teacher using three search engines, for the period 1991-2011 
Search engine Search terms Number of (additional) hits 
Web of Knowledge 
(in title and topic) 
Teacher educator(s) 
Teacher trainer(s) 
Mentor teacher(s) 
Search terms in title and 
subject1
979 hits 
Science Direct 
(in title, keyword and 
abstract) 
Teacher educator(s) 
Teacher trainer(s) 
Mentor teacher(s) 
Search terms in title, 
keyword and subject 
+ 139 additional hits 
Tandfonline 
(in title, keyword and 
abstract) 
Teacher educator(s) 
Teacher trainer(s) 
Mentor teacher(s) 
Search terms in title, 
keyword and subject 
+ 142 additional hits 
 Total 1260 
Selection phase 
Starting with the 1260 articles we had found, the second phase consisted of the 
further selection from this body of literature. Based on the journal titles and the 
abstracts, we narrowed down our search using two criteria: 
1. the article should have been published in an ISI or ICO-journal; 
2. the teacher educator, teacher trainer or mentor teacher should be the focus of the 
study reported on in the article. 
The choice of this second criterion was important, because there are many studies 
on teacher education - for example on the learning of student teachers - that contain 
recommendations for teacher educators, but they basically do not focus on teacher 
educators. Such studies were not included in our selection.
Two researchers independently used these two criteria in judging the first 300 out 
of the 1260 abstracts. This led to a Cohen’s Kappa of .80. Because of this high 
inter-rater reliability, the other abstracts were judged by only one of the 
researchers. In case of doubt, however, a second researcher was consulted. This 
selection procedure resulted in a list of 405 articles. 
4. Classify the Documents 
In steps 4 and 5, according to Randolph, the selected studies should be classified 
and summarised into a database. Randolph emphasises that this is an iterative 
process. We carried out these two steps as follows. 
 The 405 studies were read in their entirety by one of the three researchers with 
the aim of selecting those articles that offered information about the professional 
roles, the professional behaviour and the development of the professional roles or 
professional behaviour of teacher educators. A list was made of the relevant 
3. METHOD 
12 
 
articles, mentioning the core concept(s) studied in these articles, and also including 
some additional information about the studies. We removed some studies dating 
back to the beginning of the nineties, in which themes related to the core concepts 
were mentioned, but which were obviously outdated (for example a study asking 
for the attention of teacher educators to the gap between theory and practice, but 
not offering empirical underpinning or options for behaviour). We also discovered 
that the criterion that an article should have been published in an ISI- or ICOjournal was not in itself a watertight quality guarantee. Hence, we also removed a 
few articles because of the lack of quality (for example in cases where a 
description of the methods used was missing or was very superficial). We found 
that approximately 130 articles were useful in answering our leading questions. 
These articles offered information about the professional role, the accompanying 
professional behaviour and/or the professional development of teacher educators.
5. Create Summary Data Bases 
Using the lists of articles created in step 4, we summarised our findings and created 
a database in which for each of the selected studies we described: 
1. The country or countries in which the study had been carried out; 
2. The central research question(s) or the focus of the study; 
3. The method(s) used; 
4. The data sources; 
5. The number of teacher educators that had been objects of study; 
6. The number of others, for example students that had been objects of study; 
7. The roles and/or accompanying behaviour on which the study provided 
information; 
8. The professional development of roles and/or accompanying behaviour on 
which the study provided information. 
Table 3.2 shows the format of the database. 
Table 3.2. Format of the database for this study 
Article Country 
Research 
question/ 
Focus 
Methods Data 
Sources 
N 
Teacher 
educators 
N 
Others 
Roles 
and 
Behaviour 
Development 
Roles and 
Behaviour 
6. Identify Constructs and Hypothesised Causal Linkages 
Randolph remarks that the goal of the sixth step “unlike meta-analysis, is to 
increase the understanding of the phenomena being investigated” (p. 10). We 
followed a grounded theory approach (Strauss, 1987*; Strauss & Corbin, 1998*) to 
analyse the data, and used an inductive analysis (Patton, 2002*). We chose this 
approach, because no ready-made frame of reference was available for answering 
our research questions. 
3. METHOD 
13 
Our procedure was as follows. First, using the database, we identified what 
professional roles of teacher educators were being distinguished within the selected 
literature (Research Question 1). This was sometimes quite complicated. In some 
studies, roles were named and described explicitly, but other studies only presented 
more abstract descriptions. Besides, similar names for a role appeared not always 
to lead to similar descriptions, and similar descriptions not always led to the same 
name for a role. After discussing these issues among the three researchers, one of 
them carried out the overall analysis, which was then checked by the other two. 
Based on this procedure, we distinguished six roles. 
During the process, it became clear that, after analysing about 50 studies, no 
more roles were to be found, so conceptual saturation (Van Veen, Zwart, Meirink, 
& Verloop, 2010*) had been reached. 
 Next, we analysed which critical features, according to the selected literature, 
characterise a professional role and the accompanying professional behaviour 
(Research Question 2). The number of studies we found for each of the six roles, 
and the accompanying behaviour varied in quantity and quality. As a result, some 
aspects were mentioned only a few times in small, qualitative studies. Therefore, 
we put together related aspects. In this way, we achieved a strengthened empirical 
basis. Isolated aspects from small qualitative studies not found in other studies, 
were thus not included in this review. 
Hence, it is important to note that we only formulated a critical feature for a 
role, and/or the accompanying behaviour, if we found several studies that 
mentioned (aspects of) such a critical feature. Especially because many of the 
studies we found were small-scale and qualitative (case studies, interview studies, 
self-studies), we have carefully guarded the empirical underpinning of the critical 
features we identified. 
For some roles and behaviours, the number of selected studies was small and/or 
the results were not very consistent. As a result of our careful procedure, for two 
out of the six roles we only found one critical feature. 
 We followed the same procedure for the analysis of the critical features of the 
professional development of each of the roles and the accompanying behaviour 
(Research Question 3). For three of the six roles and the accompanying behaviour 
we found hardly any studies that answered research question 3. Hence for these 
three roles we could not formulate critical features for the professional 
development. 
 To enhance internal validity, for each role two researchers independently 
analysed at least part of the studies on that role and the accompanying professional 
behaviour. We did the same for the studies on the development of the roles and 
behaviour. Especially with regard to studies focusing on several roles, this proved 
to be important in order to arrive at a consistent description across roles, behaviour 
and development. In the few cases the researchers arrived at different outcomes, 
the differences were discussed, and the relevant studies were analysed again, until 
agreement was achieved. 
3. METHOD 
14 
 
7. Search for Contrary Findings and Alternative Interpretations 
During the year we, the three researchers, worked on this review study, we met 
every three weeks. In the meetings, we critically discussed the steps described 
above. We also looked for alternative interpretations, especially during the time 
step 6 was being carried out. After step 6 had been carried out, we wrote a draft 
text that included a description of the methods used and a first version of the results 
we had found. This text was sent to our ‘critical friends’ (see step 8). Their 
comments led to a sharpening of our interpretations. 
8. Use Colleagues or Informants to Corroborate Findings 
A draft version of the Methods and Results chapters of this study, together with an 
overview of the selected articles, was reviewed by seven critical friends, experts in 
the field of teacher education, from different countries2
. We asked them to 
comment on the trustworthiness and transparency of the methods, on the 
completeness of our literature selection, and on other aspects of their own 
choosing. They all wrote underpinned, mostly positive, reactions. Below, we 
summarise their critical remarks and comments. We also describe what we did with 
their comments. 
Goal and concepts 
In most comments, questions were asked about the exact aim of the study and 
about how we had defined its core concepts. Although we had explained in an 
accompanying letter to them that we would describe this in the first chapters of the 
study, they clearly missed this information in the draft text. Their questions, 
however, proved to be helpful in precisely formulating the core concepts and in 
writing the first two chapters. 
Context 
Our critical friends emphasised that we should take into account that the contexts 
of studies differ from country to country and sometimes even within a country. 
This has consequences for the meaning of the wording used. Sometimes, they also 
offered suggestions coloured by specific ideas about teacher education or research. 
These comments enhanced our already present awareness that, where relevant, we 
should make explicit how visions and meanings were context-related. 
Method 
With regard to the method, our critical friends pointed to three aspects, mainly 
related to steps 3 and 4, which required further clarification. 
Firstly, they mentioned that the choice of search terms also determined the 
results that would be found. As explained above (step 3), our choice was partly 
pragmatic. Search terms related to the term ‘teacher educator’ proved to be the 
most productive, while, for example, searches with the combination of the terms 
‘teacher educator’ and ‘role’ proved not to be efficient. 
3. METHOD 
15 
 More specifically, some critical friends pointed to the consequences of the 
choice of the search term ‘mentor teachers’ to the results. This was a choice we had 
also struggled with. In our view, because of the increasing importance of schoolbased teacher education, studies on school-based teacher educators should be 
included in our review. So, in the orientation phase, we tried out which search term 
would work best. The term ‘school-based teacher educator’ proved to be too 
narrow. In contrast, the term ‘mentor teacher’ was rather broad. Moreover, the 
tasks and responsibilities of a mentor teacher vary per country and context. For 
example, in some countries the mentor teacher is the person responsible for 
coaching students inside the university, while in other countries the mentor teacher 
is the school teacher who coaches the student teacher in the school practice 
component of the teacher education programme. Hence, using the search term 
‘mentor teacher’ would cause some vagueness. Nevertheless, we decided to use it 
and to read the selected studies carefully to decide whether or not the research 
described was about school-based teacher educators. We did so by keeping in mind 
the research questions and central concepts of our study while selecting relevant 
literature. 
The second methodological aspect mentioned by our critical friends also 
concerned step 3. The choice of only including in our selection articles focussing 
on teacher educators meant that studies were missing that did not focus on teacher 
educators but, for example, on professional development schools or on subject 
matter, curriculum development or assessment in teacher education. They rightly 
noted that those studies could also offer useful insights into the professional roles, 
behaviour and development of teacher educators. In the context of this review 
study, however, we had to make choices and it would be impossible to include all 
studies on teacher education in our selection. The number of studies would have 
been too large if we would have taken into account all publications in which 
teacher educators were discussed. All the same, we recognised that our choices had 
influenced the results we had found. 
The third methodological aspect eliciting questions from our critical friends 
concerned the way we had taken into account in the process of selecting articles 
criteria with regard to quality, empirical strength, and validity. The question 
emerged if it would be possible to code the levels of quality, empirical strength and 
validity. 
 As described above, our most important quality criterion was that, in order to be 
selected, an article had to have been published in an ISI- or ICO-journal. We have 
already mentioned that this was not a watertight criterion. While reading the 
complete articles (step 4), we discovered a few articles that in our view could not 
stand the test of criticism. As a consequence, we did not include these few articles 
in our selection. In the Appendix to this book, we describe for each of the selected 
articles the research methods of the study reported on in the article. It was almost 
impossible to judge the quality of these very diverse and mainly qualitative studies. 
Because of the large variety in the kind of studies – from quasi-experiments to selfstudies – judging the validity in an unambiguous way appeared tricky. Therefore, 
we decided not to do this. 
3. METHOD 
16 
 
In our description of step 6, we explained our choice of strengthening the 
(internal) validity by only formulating a critical feature for a role and/or the 
accompanying behaviour, and the development of a role and/or the accompanying 
behaviour, if we found more studies mentioning (aspects of) such a critical feature. 
In this way, we carefully guarded the empirical support of the critical features we 
identified. So, we only drew conclusions on critical features if several studies 
pointed in the same direction.
Completeness 
The additional literature suggestions the critical friends offered can be divided into 
three categories: 
1. Suggestions for studies outside the boundaries set by the above described 
choices we had made. These studies were not included. 
2. Suggestions for some articles that were on our first list of 1260 studies, but were 
not included in the selection. We reread these articles and added a few to our 
final selection. 
3. Suggestions for books and other additional studies. We carefully checked these 
suggestions and in this review study used as additional references those that 
were relevant. 
Other remarks 
Finally, our critical friends offered some editorial comments. For example: we 
had made a critical comment about the competencies of teacher educators with 
regard to self-regulated learning. Two critical friends remarked that this 
general comment was not in line with their experiences. These kind of comments 
helped us to keep a close watch on the literature as well as on the conclusions we 
drew based on this literature. The literature, however, was leading in drawing our 
conclusions, and not the possibly somewhat context-bounded views of individual 
critical friends. 
3.2. THE FINAL DATABASE 
The steps described in the previous section led to a final list of 137 articles, which 
are included in our database (see the Appendix). The database shows that most of 
the research on the professional roles, the professional behaviour, and the 
professional development of teacher educators is concentrated in North-America, a 
few European countries (UK, The Netherlands), Israel and Australia (see 
Table 3.3). 
From the database, we can also conclude that the research in this area 
shows a strong growth over the previous decade. Out of the selected 137 studies, 
130 (95%) originate in 2002 or later years. The database also shows that a major 
part of the articles (61%) were published in a relatively small number of 
journals, of which Teaching and Teacher Education is represented the most (see 
Table 3.4). 
3. METHOD 
17 
Table 3.3. Overview of the six countries where most of the selected studies 
were carried out. Not counted are studies carried out in more than one country 
Country Number of 
studies 
United States 46 
The Netherlands 23 
UK 14 
Israel 9 
Canada 9 
Australia 8 
TOTAL 109 (80%) 
Table 3.4. Overview of the five journals in which more than 60% 
of the selected articles were published
Journal Number of 
studies 
Teaching and Teacher Education 39 
European Journal of Teacher Education 12 
Professional Development in Education 11 
Journal of Teacher Education 11 
Studying Teacher Education 11 
TOTAL 84 (61%) 
Table 3.5. Overview of the research methods in the selected studies 
Method Number of 
studies 
Case study 36 
Self-study 28 
Essay 17 
Interview study 15 
Survey 7 
Correlation study 3 
Quasi-experiment 3 
Descriptive study 3 
Document analysis 2 
Literature study 2 
Comparative study 2 
Action research 1 
Observation study 1 
Combination of methods 17 
TOTAL 137 (100%) 
In the studies included in our database, various research methods were used. In 
Table 3.5 an overview of these methods is presented. Mainly used were qualitative 
3. METHOD 
18 
 
methods, and many studies were small-scale. The method was often a case study, a 
self-study or an interview study (together 58% of the studies). We also found a 
relatively high number of essays (12%). The quantitative studies we found were 
generally limited in scope. This was why a statistical meta-analysis of the literature 
was not possible. 
NOTES 
1
 In Web of Knowledge searching on keywords is not possible. 
2
 We would like to thank our critical friends Ronnie Davey (New Zealand), Clare Kosnik, Jackie 
Delong, Lynn Thomas (Canada), Melanie Shoffner (United States of America), Perry den Brok and 
Harm Tillema (The Netherlands) for their contributions to this review study. 
19 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 
PROFESSION 
In this chapter, we present the results of our review study. In Section 4.1, we 
describe the six professional roles of teacher educators we have found. In the 
following sections (Sections 4.2 to 4.7), we describe the critical features for each 
role, and for the accompanying behaviour. Next, we report on the critical features 
for the development of that professional role and the accompanying behaviour. 
4.1. SIX ROLES 
As mentioned in Chapter 2, Ducharme (1993*, p. 4) characterises the identity of 
teacher educators as ‘Janus-like’. He even uses the word ‘schizophrenic’. Three 
years later Koster, Korthagen, Wubbels, and Hoornweg (1996*) attempted to 
describe what teacher educators do. They mention facilitating the learning process 
of students and teachers, and stimulating them to reflect. Further on, they mention 
that teacher educators also develop curricula, are responsible for the induction into 
the profession of teacher, carry out research, and keep in contact with relevant 
persons and organisations in and outside their institution. In the following years, 
the discussion about what it means to be a teacher educator continued. CochranSmith (2003), for example, points to the shift of responsibilities for the education 
of teachers from institution-based to school-based teacher educators. Several 
authors (Murray & Male, 2005; Martinez, 2008; Mayer, Mitchell, Santaro, & 
White, 2011) remarked that, worldwide, most teacher educators have been a 
teacher before becoming a teacher educator, although there are also teacher 
educators entering the profession after a Ph.D. study (Kosnik, Cleovoulou, 
Fletcher, Harris, McGlynn-Stewart, & Beck, 2011). The numeric ratio between 
these two groups differs per country (Martinez, 2008; Van Velzen, Swennen, & 
Jaffe, 2010; Menter, 2011), but overall one can say that most beginning teacher 
educators have already had a career that has influenced their professional identity. 
4.1.1. Teacher of Teachers and Researcher 
The profession of teacher educator essentially differs from the profession of 
teacher (Murray & Male, 2005). A teacher educator is not a primary or secondary 
school teacher, but a higher education teacher, which – among others – requires a 
solid academic knowledge base. In higher education, however, teacher educators 
are also seen as a specific group given the nature of their work. Teachers who 
become teacher educators, sometimes have the idea that the difference between 
both professions is small, but they soon find themselves confronted with many new 
situations. 
 Bullock and Ritter (2011), for example, conclude in their collaborative selfstudy that, in their transition from being a teacher to becoming a teacher educator, 
aspects important to their professional identity were the confrontations with 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
20 
implicit and explicit expectations in their institutions for teacher education and 
their own reflections on their competencies as teachers of teachers and as 
researchers. 
Murray and Male (2005) interviewed 28 teachers who had become teacher 
educators. The analysis of these interviews resulted in the following key aspects of 
the process of becoming a teacher educator: 1. Developing a personal pedagogy of 
teacher education; 2. Learning to work in a higher education context; 3. Starting to 
conduct research and developing an inquiry-based attitude. 
 Lunenberg and Hamilton (2008*) carried out a collaborative self-study of their 
own professional development as teacher educators. They conclude that the 
vagueness of the profession together with the fact that a formal educational 
programme is missing, means that the influence of one’s personal history on the 
way the profession is practised, seems to be greater than in other professions. They 
emphasise that the development of a personal pedagogy of teacher education, 
especially with regard to modelling (being a role model) and stimulating students’ 
reflection, was a key element in their professional development. A second 
important shift they mention is changing from being a knowledge consumer to also 
becoming a knowledge producer (cf. Murray & Male, 2005). 
 Swennen et al. (2010) analysed 25 studies on the transition from teacher to 
teacher educator. Based on their analysis, they distinguish four sub-identities of 
teacher educators: 1. The (previous) teacher; 2. The teacher in higher education; 3. 
The teacher of teachers; 4. The researcher. They also stress that the transition from 
teacher to teacher of teachers and to researcher is a key in the development towards 
becoming a teacher educator. They also found that modelling, theoretically 
underpinning this modelling, and studying one’s own practice are stimulating 
aspects in the professional development of beginning teacher educators. 
 Taking into account the studies mentioned above, it is not surprising that the 
roles of teacher of teachers and researcher emerged prominently in our analysis of 
the 137 selected studies. In Sections 4.2 and 4.3, we discuss the results we have 
found for these two roles. Based on our analysis, four other roles of teacher 
educators can also be identified, which we will introduce below. 
4.1.2. Coach 
For the role of coach, in the literature also named guide, mentor, mentor teacher, 
cooperating teacher, facilitator or school-based teacher educator, we did not find a 
generally accepted definition, but widely shared is the basic idea that stimulating 
the learning process of the student teacher is the focal point of this role. The studies 
we have found for this role are mostly related to stimulating the learning process of 
students in the school practice part of a teacher education programme. Section 4.4 
is devoted to this role. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
21 
4.1.3. Curriculum Developer 
Developing a curriculum for teacher education is, according to our initial 
literature search, object of relatively many studies. An analysis of these studies 
shows that only in a few of them the teacher educator as curriculum developer is 
the object of (self-) study. The studies we did find, however, clearly show that the 
role of curriculum developer is a specific professional role teacher educators can 
fulfil. 
 Hence, although we did not find many studies focused on teacher educators, 
those we did find gave some indications of the way teacher educators can shape 
this role. In Section 4.5 we further discuss this role. 
4.1.4. Gatekeeper 
A fifth role that came up from our analysis concerns the responsibility of teacher 
educators in admitting student teachers to the profession of teacher. Often the 
studies on this role are focused on the tension between, on the one hand, 
constructivist views on active or self-regulated learning and, on the other, 
requirements established in standards and profiles for the profession of teacher. We 
will return to this role in Section 4.6. 
4.1.5. Broker 
In the past, the role of mentors or cooperating teachers in the school was often 
limited to coaching a single student and keeping in touch with a single institutionbased teacher educator. This situation is changing rapidly. Schools and mentors 
increasingly become co-responsible for the teacher education programme. As a 
consequence, there is a need for teacher educators in both schools and institutions 
to be able to shape this cooperation. This is the role of the broker or facilitator. 
According to the studies we have found, stimulating the cooperation between the 
partners often happens in a community of learners. We further discuss this role in 
Section 4.7. 
4.1.6. Number of Studies for each of the Six Roles 
For each of the six roles, Table 4.1 shows the number of studies we have found 
contributing to answering research questions 2 (second column) and 3 (third 
column). 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
22 
Table 4.1. Studies describing critical features of a professional role and/or behaviour (a), 
and studies describing critical features of the development of a role and/or behaviour (b)
Role Number of studies on 
role and behaviour (a)
Number of studies on 
development of role 
and behaviour (b) 
Total number of 
studies on a or b
Teacher of 
teachers 
33 41 67 
Researcher 13 18 26 
Coach 18 12 25 
Curriculum 
developer 
14 0 14 
Gatekeeper 8 0 8 
Broker 10 1 11 
4.2. TEACHER OF TEACHERS 
The role of teacher of teachers evolved as the most prominent in the literature we 
used. We found 67 relevant publications. In these publications, the distinction 
between the profession of teachers and that of teacher educators is a prominent 
theme. 
Already in Chapter 4 we mentioned that most teacher educators had been 
teachers in primary or secondary education before being appointed as a teacher 
educator. This is not surprising, as experience as a teacher is an important criterion 
in the recruitment of teacher educators (Twombly, Wolf-Wendel, Williams, & 
Green, 2006). Teachers take with them their teaching experience, their ability to 
communicate and to engage students, their sensitivity to group-dynamics, their 
ability to create a safe and stimulating learning environment in the classroom, their 
ability to motivate students and to support reflection. They also have their 
flexibility and organisational skills (Van Velzen et al., 2010). Additionally, they 
possess specific content knowledge of subject disciplines (Greensfeld & ElkadLehman, 2007). But, even with all of these qualities, they are not yet teachers of 
teachers. 
4.2.1. Role and Behaviour 
We have found seven crucial factors for the role of teacher of teachers and the 
quality of the behaviour within this role. These factors can be put into four 
categories: 
I. Second order teaching 
II. Promotion of self-regulated learning 
III. Explicit modelling 
IV. Dealing with tensions and dilemmas. 
Most of these factors require a specific pedagogy of teacher education rooted in 
constructivism (Korthagen & Kessels, 1999*; Korthagen, Loughran, & Russell, 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
23 
2006). From the perspective of constructivism, themes such as the promotion of 
active and self-regulated learning of students, modelling and making pedagogical 
behaviour explicit including dealing with tensions, are important aspects of the role 
of teacher of teachers (Loughran & Berry, 2005; Berry, 2009). 
I. Second order teaching
In their interview-based study of the professionalism of teacher educators in
England, Murray and Male (2005) distinguish between first and second order 
teaching. First order teaching refers to the teacher who teaches pupils; second order 
teaching to the teacher educator who teaches (prospective) teachers. Also Berry 
(2009), Harrison and McKeon (2008), and Swennen, Lunenberg, and Korthagen 
(2008) indicate that there are two such levels. Important factors determining the 
quality of second order teaching are: 
1. The ability to work with adult learners in higher education 
The transition from teacher to teacher educator implies a transition from primary or 
secondary education towards higher education and from teaching children to 
teaching adults (McKeon & Harrison, 2010). The study by Murray and Male 
(2005), based on 28 beginning teacher educators, confirms earlier findings from 
Kremer-Hayon and Zuzovsky (1995*) that teachers who become teacher educators 
have difficulties to translate pedagogical skills acquired in primary or secondary 
education to working with adults. They search for suitable ways of transferring 
knowledge and give shape to discussions (Mueller, 2006); it means that they 
should acquire knowledge about how (young) adults learn and discover how they 
can support the learning of these adults (Murray & Male, 2005). In their survey 
study, Swennen et al. (2010) confirm that the transition towards higher education is 
problematic for beginning teacher educators and that most of them express a lack 
of guidance. 
2. The ability to articulate tacit knowledge and underlying theory 
Smith (2005) asked 40 beginning teachers and 18 teacher educators from Israel 
what it means to be a good teacher educator. About two-thirds of the beginning 
teachers indicated they expected from good teacher educators the ability to make 
explicit the practice and underlying approach of their pedagogy of teacher 
education. It is remarkable that not a single teacher educator mentioned this item. 
In their study of values in teacher education, Willemse, Lunenberg, and Korthagen 
(2008) too, stress the importance of articulating tacit knowledge in the pedagogical 
domain: teacher educators should develop a “moral language” to make their tacit 
knowledge explicit. Articulating tacit knowledge is also emphasised by Mueller 
(2006) as an important aspect of her role as a teacher of teachers. 
II. Promotion of active learning 
Another important topic that surfaced after the turn of the millennium, was the 
promotion of student-directed, or self-regulated, and active learning, both in 
schools and in teacher education (e.g. Tillema & Kremer-Hayon, 2002). This 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
24 
seems a direct consequence of the increasing international attention to 
constructivist views of learning. Within this category we found one important 
factor: 
3. Having a vision and being able to promote active (self-regulated) learning 
The study by Bronkhorst, Meijer, Koster, and Vermunt (2011) has as its main 
research question how teacher educators can stimulate student-directed learning, 
and encourage that this leads to meaning-oriented learning and the development of 
deliberate practice among their students. Through interviews with twelve Dutch 
expert teacher educators, they arrived at twelve pedagogical principles, such as 
challenge student teachers’ assumptions, include diverging perspectives, model 
meaning-oriented learning and explicate teacher education pedagogy. 
However, we may question to what extent teacher educators share these 
principles and act accordingly in their practices. Donche and Van Petegem (2011) 
studied the learning and teaching strategies of 119 Flemish teacher educators. 
Especially their finding that these teacher educators show a preference for external 
steering of the learning process of prospective teachers indicates that the 
importance of the promotion of active and self-regulated learning is not yet 
commonly shared, or at least not translated into practice. Goubeaud and Yan 
(2004) conducted a secondary analysis on data of 524 teacher educators from the 
National study of Postsecondary Faculty (NSOPF-93), collected by the US 
Department of Education, to examine the instructional practices of teacher 
education faculty. A similar tendency emerges in this study: though teacher 
educators differ from other teaching staff in the university in their instructional 
methods, still more than half of them used lectures as their main instructional 
method. A little bit more than a quarter of them used discussion and only six 
percent used group work as their main instructional method. Also, from interviews 
with Israeli and Dutch teacher educators (Kremer-Hayon & Tillema, 1999) comes 
an image that the promotion of active and self-regulated learning is not common 
practice among teacher educators. In this study, the teacher educators had a 
positive attitude towards self-regulated learning, but said that they were hindered 
by conditions when it comes to implementation. The authors warn us that the 
introduction of such views in teacher education is a complex endeavour, and 
conclude on the basis of their study: 
Teacher educators stress the need to motivate and stimulate students whereas 
students indicate they need support and fear becoming isolated learners in 
self-regulated learning, not having enough opportunity for cooperative 
learning. These concerns may be justified in that self-regulated learning 
requires skills in self-management and goal setting which need to be 
developed in students and implemented prior to and alongside programmes in 
teacher education. (p. 519) 
The studied teacher educators reported to be bound by curriculum restrictions and 
time constraints. When asked about activities that might promote self-regulated 
learning, nobody refers to the affective dimension or metacognition. The activities 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
25 
these teacher educators mention are less demanding for students in terms of 
cognition. The subsequent small-scale studies by Tillema and Kremer-Hayon 
(2002, 2005) and Cabaroglu and Tillema (2011) show that teacher educators in the 
Netherlands, Israel and Turkey experience two interconnected dilemmas: (a) the 
tension between theory and practice and (b) the tension between teacher-directed 
and student-directed learning. Interviews with them show that cultural and 
contextual differences between these groups of teacher educators have 
consequences for the extent and manner of implementation of self-directed 
learning. 
Case-studies about the behaviour of teacher educators in their role of teachers of 
teachers confirm that further improvements are possible regarding the promotion of 
active learning (e.g. Dozier & Rutten, 2005). Andrew (2007) used the results of the 
already mentioned study by Goubeaud and Yan as a starting-point for a multiple 
case-study and interviewed and observed mathematics teacher educators. The 
interviews showed that teacher educators desired to implement teaching methods 
which can, according to Andrew, be labelled as constructivist. However, during 
observations it became apparent that their practice was only partially congruent 
with their conceptions. Lunenberg and Korthagen (2003, 2005) drew similar 
conclusions based on their multiple case-study of the promotion of active learning 
by Dutch teacher educators, who were interviewed and observed as well. 
Moreover, the authors observed that teacher educators did not make their 
exemplary behaviour explicit, nor did they explain it. 
Finally, in her case-study, Holt-Reynolds (2000) points to the risk that teacher 
educators should be sensitive to, namely that prospective teachers conceive 
constructivism as a pedagogical instead of a learning theory, with the result that the 
means becomes an end in itself and that they focus on generating discussions 
instead of enhancing new learning. Holt-Reynolds concludes: 
We will need to consciously create opportunities to hear in the midst of 
prospective teachers' noisy enthusiasm for constructivist practices their 
silence in response to critical questions about what students should learn 
through the activities and how teachers work to ensure that learning. (p. 30) 
III. Modelling and making modelling explicit 
4. Two levels of modelling 
As stated above, the retrieved studies describe modelling as a characteristic feature 
of the pedagogy of teacher education. One of the first publications on this theme is 
the case-study by Wood and Geddis (1999). Based on their collaborative selfstudy, Loughran and Berry (2005) describe modelling at two levels. The first level 
is concerned with exemplary behaviour of the teacher educator: in teacher 
education classes, the teacher educator practises the behaviour expected of student 
teachers in their teaching (‘teach as you preach’; ‘walk your talk’). At the second 
level, the teacher educator makes the pedagogical grounds of his or her choices 
explicit and explains the reasoning, feelings, thoughts and actions accompanying 
these choices. Loughran and Berry developed a rich variety of strategies to 
promote this meta-learning, such as the teacher educator thinking aloud, journaling, 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
26 
discussions during and after class with groups and individual student teachers (p. 
194). In this way, the teacher educator makes his or her approach explicit and 
accounts for it. 
5. Modelling in practice 
According to the retrieved studies, in-practice modelling by teacher educators is a 
difficult issue. Modelling requires that the teacher educator calls his own role into 
question and takes a vulnerable stand. An observation study by Lunenberg, 
Korthagen, and Swennen (2007) on the practice of modelling shows that, only 
incidentally, six out of the ten observed teacher educators made their exemplary 
behaviour explicit. Four of them also made a connection with the practice of the 
students. Never was their explanation combined with theoretical references. In a 
subsequent study of three teacher educators, a workshop was given to promote 
modelling (Swennen et al., 2008). This study shows that these teacher educators 
lacked a professional language and theoretical knowledge to be able to make their 
exemplary behaviour explicit and legitimise it effectively. Also from the study by 
Willemse (2006*; Willemse et al., 2008) on the knowledge and practice of teachers 
of teachers regarding moral education, it becomes clear that teacher educators 
struggle with finding a language to make explicit how they model values in 
practice. 
6. Attention for the affective side of modelling 
The results of the study by Willemse et al. (2008) can make us aware of the 
affective side of modelling. Frequently, students name attitude, empathy, 
understanding and availability as important aspects of the exemplary role of 
teacher educators. Kim and Schallert (2011) illustrate the process by which a 
teacher educator builds a caring relationship with three students, making use of 
online communication. Their findings show the significance of the role of trust as a 
mediating factor in the development of caring relationships. But they also point out 
that teacher educators who are committed to caring for their students, reflect on 
their own strengths and limitations, too. A study by Vagle (2011) yielded similar 
results. He joins other calls for examination of the self in teacher education 
practices – in particular calls for compassionate, mindful, caring, thoughtful, and 
tactful pedagogies. This implies, according to him, that the teacher educator 
carefully examines his or her own practices, and reflects how those practices are 
driven by particular assumptions and strongly held beliefs. Also, he stresses that 
these caring and tactful pedagogies need to be aimed at what is at stake in a 
broader societal sense, and how these pedagogies reside in relationships, 
discourses, systems and practices in teacher education. 
Several North-American studies dealing with diversity stress the affective 
dimension of modelling, too. In her self-study, Cochran-Smith (2000) reflects on 
her experiences as a white teacher educator with a course focussing on the 
examination of race, class, and culture as part of a teacher education curriculum. 
Two fields of tension emerge from this study. The first is the circumstance that 
teacher education students are predominantly white, while their next-door 
neighbours are schools and communities populated by African, Latino and Asian 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
27 
immigrants. The second is the tension between the cognitive approach towards 
diversity in this course, and the often strong personal feelings and emotions which 
come along with this subject. 
The self-study of Bair, Bair, Mader, Hipp, and Hakim (2012) also refers to these 
two areas of tension. They add the importance of reflection of teacher educators on 
their own feelings and interpretations, as a condition for supporting the 
professional development of their students in this area. This reflection is influenced 
by personal characteristics (e.g. the awareness of being culturally different, and the 
choice of masking or disclosing this) and contextual characteristics, such as the 
curriculum and the feedback of students and the institution. They also stress the 
importance of talking with colleagues, in order to pay more attention to the 
affective side of modelling. This is not always easy: 
As much as we have benefited personally from this self-study, the process 
also brought many challenges. Self-study required us to be unflinchingly 
honest. Self-scrutiny, especially of our emotions, was an exhausting process. 
There was an element of risk involved in laying bare our feelings of 
vulnerability. While it was hard enough to confront emotions privately, 
sharing them with colleagues was harder still. Collaborative relationships do 
not just happen; they need to be nurtured and they take time to develop. This 
is even truer in cross-cultural collaboration, with its potential for multiple 
interpretations of the same reality. (p. 108) 
The self-studies by Galman, Pica-Smith, and Rosenberger (2010) and Adler (2011) 
confirm these conclusions. 
IV. Dealing with tensions and dilemmas 
7. Tensions 
We already referred to tensions teacher educators are confronted with in their 
development of a pedagogy of teacher education. Berry (2007*) conducted 
systematic research on this topic and distinguishes six main tensions: 
1. Telling and growth (how to find a balance between the desire to tell prospective 
teachers about teaching and providing opportunities for prospective teachers to 
learn about teaching themselves);
2. Confidence and uncertainty (stick to established approaches to teaching or move 
away to explore new, more uncertain approaches to teacher education); 
3. Action and intent (discrepancies between goals teacher educators set out to 
achieve in their teaching and the ways in which these goals can be undermined 
by the actions chosen to attain them); 
4. Safety and challenge (creating a safe environment for students and pushing 
students beyond the climate of safety, necessary for learning to take place); 
5. Valuing and reconstructing experience (helping prospective teachers to 
recognise the value of personal experience in learning to teach, and helping 
them to see that there is more to teaching than simply acquiring experience); 
6. Planning and being responsive (implementing a predetermined curriculum, and 
responding to learning opportunities arising within the context of practice). 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
28 
Berry (2009) stresses that educating (prospective) teachers is never predictable and 
can never be fully controlled, and therefore requires substantial knowledge, 
experience, and understanding to do the right thing at the right moment. Teaching 
teachers requires specific knowledge in specific situations (Koster et al., 2005). By 
again and again finding the right balance in these tensions, the teacher educator 
gives shape to the role of teacher of teachers. This is not easy, as is illustrated by 
the case-study by Gort and Glenn (2010) about an English language teacher 
educator. According to Clandinin, Downey, and Huber (2009), teacher educators 
ought to be thoughtful of the tensions arising between what happens in the 
classroom and the shifting educational landscapes outside their classrooms teachers 
have to work in, and about working to create spaces in which they can support 
teachers to come to know what works ´for now´ in these shifting landscapes. 
Another tension experienced by teacher educators is about the relation between 
theory and practice (Mueller, 2006; Korthagen & Kessel, 1999*). This tension is 
not very explicit in most of the retrieved literature, but seems to be an implicit and 
underlying theme for the factors and approaches that help in fulfilling the role of 
teachers of teachers. 
Critical features 
In sum, we may distinguish the following critical features in the professional role 
of teacher of teachers and the accompanying professional behaviour in this role: 
1. Second order teaching. The teacher of teachers teaches (prospective) teachers 
instead of pupils or students. This means that the teacher educator should get along 
with adults in the context of higher education, and should have the knowledge 
about adult learning and about how to promote adult learning. It requires the ability 
to articulate experiential knowledge and to bring into practice theoretical 
knowledge. 
2. Promotion of active and self-regulated learning. The teacher of teachers should 
be able to promote active, self-regulated and meaningful learning of students. 
Research shows that teacher educators have a positive attitude towards this aspect, 
but often fail to put it into practice. 
3. Modelling and making modelling explicit. Teacher educators are an example to 
teachers, but on another level. This implies that they make explicit the pedagogical 
foundations underlying their behaviour. Additionally, in order to support the 
affective development of teachers, teacher educators should be able to make their 
own feelings explicit and reflect on them. Also in this respect, our retrieved studies 
show that teacher educators hardly put this into practice. 
4. Dealing with tensions and dilemmas. Dealing with tensions in specific situations 
requires from teacher educators thorough theoretical knowledge, experience and 
reflective judgements. By finding the right balance in these tensions at the right 
moment, teacher educators make sense of their role of teacher of teachers. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
29
4.2.2. Professional Development 
As we have indicated already, in their first years teacher educators rely heavily on 
the expertise acquired as a teacher, but discover that this expertise is not sufficient 
for the role of teacher of teachers (Van Velzen et al., 2010; Greensfeld & Elkad 
Lehman, 2007; Noel, 2006). The self-study by Ritter (2007) points out that 
teachers who become teacher educators are seldom aware of the qualities required 
for teacher educators. Looking back, Ritter concludes: “I will never again take for 
granted the skills, expertise and knowledge required to be a teacher educator” (p. 
107). For teacher educators entering the profession after a Ph.D. study, the 
situation is sometimes even harder. They are often wrestling with their professional 
identity (Bullock & Ritter, 2011). 
Many of the retrieved studies deal with the first years of being a teacher 
educator, when they have to settle down in their new environment (Dawson & 
Bondy, 2003; Dinkelman, Margolis & Sikkenga, 2006; Gallagher, Griffin, 
Ciuffetelli Parker, Kitchen, & Figg, 2011; Harrison & McKeon, 2008; McKeon & 
Harrison, 2010; Murray & Male, 2005; Shagrir, 2010; Van Velzen, Van der Klink, 
Swennen, & Yaffe, 2010). In some cases, a study evolves from enduring 
disappointing experiences of teacher educators with the results of their students. 
Choi (2011), for instance, decided on this basis to figure out how a teacher 
educator can improve a course on action-research. 
Below we describe eight factors, within four categories, accounting for the 
professional development of teacher educators in their role of teacher of teachers: 
I. Context 
II. Building on personal qualities of the teacher educator 
III. Support 
IV. Research. 
I. Context 
1. Availability of a frame of reference
Several authors (Byrd, Hlas, Watzke, & Valencia, 2011; Greensfeld & ElkadLehman, 2007; Koster & Dengerink, 2008; Murray, 2008b; Shagrir, 2010; Snoek et 
al., 2011) stress the positive effects of a national frame of reference, for instance a 
professional standard, for the professional development of teacher educators. 
Shagrir (2010) adds to this the importance of the availability of a knowledge base. 
In the retrieved studies, the American standard of the Association of Teacher 
Educators and the Dutch professional standard of the Association of Teacher 
Educators in the Netherlands were mentioned as examples. According to Murray 
(2008b) and Koster and Dengerink (2008), professional standards should not be 
formulated too strictly, in order to prevent them from becoming a straitjacket. 
Preferably they serve as a frame of reference in promoting understanding of the 
complex work of the teacher educator and in supporting professional development. 
In a study by Koster et al. (2008), teacher educators reported positive changes in 
knowledge and behaviour, as a result of their participation in a standards-based 
assessment procedure and an accompanying trajectory of professional 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
30
development. About one-third of these teacher educators also perceived positive 
effects in their environment. Additionally, the procedure proved to contribute to 
self-esteem, moral development and enthusiasm for the profession. After having 
completed the procedure, these teacher educators were more able to regulate their 
professional development. 
II. Building on personal qualities of the teacher educator 
2. Personal qualities 
Personal qualities such as openness to new ideas, eagerness to learn, and 
enjoyment of sharing are, according to Silova, Moyer, Webster, and McAllister 
(2010), important factors contributing to the professional development of teacher 
educators. In their study, Drent and Meelissen (2008) stress the personal factor of 
interest in technological developments and a student-oriented focus: 
Personal entrepreneurship turns out to be the anchor point for stimulating the 
innovative use of ICT in education. The teacher educators characterised as 
‘personal entrepreneurs’ in this study, created possibilities to experiment with 
ICT applications, researched the use of ICT in their education, reflected on 
their outcomes, and exchanged ideas with colleagues. (p. 197) 
Above, we already referred to Choi (2011), who considers his embarrassment with 
disappointing results of students as an important incentive for taking up his 
valuable self-study. In line with this, Dinkelman et al. (2006) stress that especially 
less positive reactions of students may be an important catalyst for professional 
development. Additionally, Byrd et al. (2011), in their study of teacher educators in 
the field of teaching second languages, stress the importance of a personal interest 
in the subject-discipline, in students, and personal experiences with and an interest 
in other cultures as important motivators. 
3. (Gaps in) Prior knowledge and experience 
Van Velzen et al. (2010) reported that the main challenges of beginning teacher 
educators were: preparation of lessons, assessment, the use of adequate teaching 
styles and coping with students’ motivation. The beginning teacher educators 
struggled with finding a balance between providing structure and inviting students 
to learn independently or in a group. These teacher educators sought support on 
these themes. 
To overcome their primary ‘classroom concerns’, perhaps the most important 
need of beginning teacher educators is, according to Dinkelman et al. (2006), the 
quality, nature and organisation of time. Following Cochran-Smith (2003), several 
authors (Greensfield & Elkad-Lehman, 2007; Silova et al., 2010) stress the 
importance of the promotion of “inquiry as a stance”. This means that teacher 
educators learn to pose questions and make use of empirical data, to improve and 
deepen their teaching practice. Chauvot (2009), Byrd et al. (2011) and Greensfeld 
and Elkad-Lehman (2007) refer to experiences and interactions with students as 
important sources for informing teacher educators about their gaps of knowledge 
and experience, and for supporting their development. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
31
III. Support 
The learning of teacher educators is usually informal workplace learning (Van 
Velzen et al., 2010). This means that their learning is seldom organised in a 
systematic manner and that the quality of the learning depends on the learning 
opportunities offered in the workplace. Some of the following aspects are related to 
this. 
4. Coaching by a mentor
Several studies have the coaching of beginning teacher educators by a mentor 
(mostly an experienced colleague) as their central theme. Mayer et al. (2011) stress 
the critical role of a significant mentor in helping to understand the culture of the 
university and the role of academics, and to find a balance between research and 
teaching in their work. A study by Murray (2008a) shows that, in England, only 
one third of the institutions for teacher education had a structured induction scheme 
for new colleagues. According to this study, the role of mentor was sometimes 
taken up by the head of the department or another executive, with the risk of 
conflating appraisal and probationary requirements with mentoring and coaching. 
Additionally, 
Care should be taken to ensure that provision for work-based learning does 
not generate only ‘local’ or parochial knowledge of teacher education … 
Induction … also needs to reflect the accepted discourses and practices of 
teacher education as a professional discipline in the university sector. (p. 131) 
In the studies by Harrison and McKeon (2008, 2010), all interviewed teacher 
educators were assigned a mentor, but the mentoring took place incidentally, and 
the mentoring sessions were without an agenda and reports. The teacher educators 
did not have a clear vision on what to expect from mentors. 
We may conclude that many beginning teacher educators only sporadically 
receive a kind of mentoring. Hence, their professional development is often 
individual, incidental, spontaneous, unconscious (Smith, 2003), and based on trial 
and error (Harrison & McKeon, 2008). Notably in their first period as teacher of 
teachers, they rely on their expertise as a teacher out of necessity (Dinkelman et al., 
2006). 
5. Learning from and with colleagues 
Many teacher educators indicate that they learn from colleagues in daily practice, 
at the micro-level within the department or team (Murray, 2008a; Harrison & 
McKeon, 2008, 2010; Van Velzen et al., 2010). In their Australian study, Schuck, 
Aubusson, and Buchanan examined the value of peer observations and subsequent 
professional conversations and their contribution to professional development. As 
important conditions, they mention a strong mutual professional and personal 
relation, based on willingness to take risks, respect for each other’s expertise in 
teaching, and the ability to reflect collaboratively on the teaching and learning of 
the participants. Dawson and Bondy (2003) describe a similar experience in the 
U.S. Silova et al. (2010) report on a project in Latvia, in which beginning and 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
32
experienced teacher educators participated in a network aimed at collaborative 
learning. Key factor for positive outcomes was a common approach, based on 
“inquiry as a stance”. Williams and Power (2010) describe how “core-reflection” 
helped them in exploring their professional identities in their mutual professional 
relationship. Also, Chauvot (2009) stressed the importance of interactions with 
colleagues, in committees and colloquia within the university department and at 
conferences. 
6. Participation in a community of learners 
Participation in a community of learners stimulates the professional development 
of teacher educators (LeCornu & Ewing, 2008). Based on their study of eight 
teacher educators in a professional development community, Hadar and Brody 
(2010) developed a layered model to understand the effects of such a community. 
The first layer is called “breaking of isolation” and is focussed on acquaintance, a 
shared topic, interdisciplinary discourse and a safe environment. The second layer 
is called “improvement of teaching”, which includes skill acquisition, classroom 
implementation, documentation and collegial reflection. As the professional 
development community progresses, the third layer, called “professional 
development”, emerges. It consists of acquiring a disposition towards teacher 
thinking, a sense of accomplishment and a feeling of personal efficacy. It leads to 
adopting a broader pedagogical outlook. In a study by Draper (2008), participation 
in a professional development community also led to a shift of focus from ‘teacher 
education’ towards ‘teacher educator education’. 
The study by Greensfeld and Elkad-Lehman (2007) indicated that communities 
of learners, particularly those aiming at inquiry, creation and representation of new 
knowledge, contribute to the process of change in thinking. In this respect, they 
explicitly mention the importance of working in a partnership with schools and in a 
companionship with a colleague, aimed at carrying out research in education. 
Poyas and Smith (2007) reported similar outcomes in their study on the 
experiences of teacher educators, who, in a series of meetings based on the notion 
of a ‘community of practice’, aimed at elevating pedagogical content courses to a 
higher level. The study by Gallagher et al. (2011) indicated that, through authentic 
conversations in a self-study community of practice, there are more opportunities 
of finding resonance in each other’s stories. These conversations helped to promote 
professional development amongst all members. 
7. Participating in a course
In a study by Murray (2008a), eight out of 35 new teacher educators had taken part 
in a Postgraduate Certificate Teaching in Higher Education programme. Other new 
teachers seemed to have been exempted from this qualification, often because they 
were already qualified school teachers. This is confirmed in the studies by Harrison 
and McKeon (2008, 2010), who have interviewed new teacher educators several 
times during the first phase of their career. The teacher educators who followed the 
course for this certificate reported a limited usefulness, because of their extensive 
teaching experience. The course had its focus mainly on teaching and not on 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
33
getting acquainted with the research culture in higher education and with linking 
teaching and research, while the latter themes were the problematic ones for 
teacher educators, coming from the world of primary and secondary education into 
the world of higher education. 
In a study by Lunenberg (2002), a group of experienced teacher educators 
designed a two-year curriculum especially for university-based and school-based 
teacher educators. The competencies to be acquired were mainly derived from the 
Dutch professional standard for teacher educators, and subsequently from a 
literature study and ten case-studies on teacher educators. These case studies 
showed that these teacher educators acted as a good role model, but none of them 
explained their pedagogical and educational choices systematically. 
While this study does not report on the realisation and outcomes of a 
curriculum, the study by Shagrir (2010) does. She studied which elements in a 
programme for novice teacher educators, offered by the MOFET-Institute in Israel, 
contributed most to their professional development. The one-year programme (one 
day a week, 112 hours) served university- and college-based lecturers as well as 
school-based mentors of student-teachers. The data collected reflected as most 
important elements: the interaction with practice, the collegial support group, the 
availability of a professional coach guiding the participants throughout the year, 
and the opportunity to work with colleagues towards developing and grounding the 
profession. The standards of ATE proved to be a useful frame of reference. 
Moreover, the cooperative learning of teacher educators from different universities 
and schools proved to be a great advantage. It enabled them to discover new 
models and frames of teaching and learning, and to develop interpersonal working 
skills. Regarding the benefits and results of the programme, the study revealed 
three main domains: building a professional self, being a member of a community 
of professionals, and improving the teacher educator’s professional skills. 
A study by Kosnik et al. (2011) deals with the design and realisation of a 
Canadian initiative, aimed at a group of doctoral students who wanted to become 
teacher educators. Most of these twelve doctoral students had teaching experience. 
The community, called “Becoming Teacher Educators” (BTE), had monthly 
meetings on a voluntary basis for three years. Activities included discussing 
scholarly articles, observing and interviewing teacher educators, lectures by and 
discussions with guest speakers, reviewing websites of schools of education, 
presentations by members of the BTE group on their research, and discussing their 
teaching experiences. According to this study, the participants in this trajectory 
developed the skills to be successful teacher educators. The development of their 
professional and academic identities was also strongly influenced by the project. 
IV. Research 
8. Studying one’s own practice
Many authors, among them Dinkelman (2003), Gallagher et al. (2011), Geursen, 
De Heer, Korthagen, Lunenberg, and Zwart (2010), Loughran and Berry (2005), 
Schuck et al. (2008), Wood and Geddis (1999), and Zeichner (2007), maintain that 
self-studies are an excellent way for teacher educators of reflecting in a systematic 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
34
and well-founded manner on their own practices as teachers of teachers. Zeichner 
and Liston (1996*) state that “self-study highlights the reflective process and yields 
knowledge about practice that does not arise from daily practice alone” (p. 9). 
Shteinman, Gidron, Eilon, and Katz (2010), one of the rare publications 
explicitly dealing with the professional development of experienced teacher 
educators, stress that researching one’s own practice and writing about it not only 
leads to the improvement of practice, but also to one’s development as a ‘reflective 
practitioner’. Based on interviews with 18 experienced Israeli teacher educators, 
they found that all of them felt that “writing enabled integration of their theoretical 
and practical knowledge to a new kind of ‘learning’ that developed during the 
writing process” (p. 352-353). The teacher educators evaluated their own learning 
as more productive because of doing the work collaboratively. They stress that it 
strengthened the position of the teacher educators within the academic community. 
Teachers of teachers who work on their own professional development in this way, 
also take on the role of researcher. This role will be elaborated in Section 4.3. 
Critical features 
From the above we may derive the following critical features regarding the 
professional development in the role teacher of teachers and the behaviour in this 
role: 
1. Context. The availability of a frame of reference, such as a professional standard 
or knowledge base, is important in guiding the professional development of the 
teacher educator as a teacher of teachers, and in promoting self-confidence. 
2. Building on personal qualities of the teacher educator. Personal qualities of 
teacher educators, such as eagerness to learn and interest in the subject-discipline 
and students, are important. Moreover links with (gaps in) prior knowledge and 
experience improve professional development. 
3. Support. Informal learning from and with colleagues, but also through peercoaching, seminars and conferences, and within professional learning communities, 
is supportive of professional development in this role. Although, according to the 
retrieved studies, the assignment of a mentor to a novice teacher educator occurs 
regularly in practice, the mentoring turns out to be limited. Programmes for teacher 
educators have to be specifically tailored to this profession. The research on such 
programmes is still limited. 
4. Research. Studying one’s own practice proves to be productive for the 
professional development in the role and for the behaviour as a teacher of teachers. 
4.3. RESEARCHER 
On the basis of the selected studies, we conclude that the conviction that teacher 
educators should do research is increasingly shared by institutions for higher 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
35
education, i.e. universities, but also polytechnics and colleges (the so-called new 
universities). This is not only true for Western countries (Gemmell, Griffiths, & 
Kibble, 2010; Jaruszewicz & Landrus, 2005; Murray, Czerniawski, & Barber, 
2011), but also for countries such as Saudi Arabia (Borg & Alshumaimeri, 2012*) 
and South Africa (Chetty & Lubben, 2010). However, in practice the situation is 
quite complicated, as we will see below. 
 Our discussion of the critical features regarding the role and the behaviour of the 
teacher educator as a researcher is based on 26 articles found using our selection 
method. 
4.3.1. Role and Behaviour 
In the literature, we have found eight features, which can be grouped into three 
categories, as being critical to the role and the behaviour of the teacher educator as 
a researcher. These categories are: 
I. Views of the role of researcher; 
II. The practical elaboration of the role of researcher; 
III. The focus of research. 
I. Views of the role of researcher
1. Acknowledgment of the role of researcher 
The view that the role of researcher is a feature of a good teacher educator, is not 
supported by all teacher educators. A study by Smith (2005) showed that only half 
of 18 teacher educators who filled in a questionnaire found that good teacher 
educators are involved with research. None of the 40 teachers in Smith's study 
mentioned this as a feature of a good teacher educator. This concurs with findings 
from Wold, Young, and Risko (2011), who sent a questionnaire to 61 teachers. 
Only 6% of these teachers found that their quality as a teacher was dependent on 
the fact that their teacher educator did research. 
 Murray et al. (2011) interviewed 20 teacher educators in England and found a 
lot of different views concerning the question of whether doing research should be 
part of their work or not. 
2. Friction with the role of teacher of teachers 
Such findings from Murray et al. are in contrast with the increasing emphasis 
institutions of higher education put on research by teacher educators, and thus on 
their role as researchers. Sometimes teacher educators struggle with this contrast. 
They feel the attention to their role as researchers undermines the importance of 
their role as teachers of teachers (Mayer et al. 2011; Jaruszewicz & Landrus, 
2005). At the same time, teacher educators often identify themselves with their role 
as teacher of teachers. This has become clear from a study by Griffiths, Thompson, 
and Hryniewicz (2010), who interviewed six teacher educators and their six 
research supervisors. The teacher educators saw themselves primarily as teachers 
of teachers and found it hard to view themselves also as researchers. This concurs 
with findings from the collective self-study by Gemmell et al. (2010). 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
36
3. Meaning of the role of researcher 
Those teacher educators from the study Murray et al. (2011) who did consider 
research as part of their work as a teacher educator, had different ideas of what this 
would mean. For some of them, doing research meant reading and reflecting, 
which seems to refer to a conception of research that approaches the notion of 
scholarship. For others, it meant doing research oneself, and publishing about it 
(compare Atkinson, 2001* and Boyer, 1990*). In addition, the 20 interviews held 
by Chetty and Lubben (2010) among teacher educators yielded a variety of views 
of the role of researcher, for example including being a coach of research carried 
out by students. For Houston, Ross, Robinson, and Malcolm (2010) such 
differences in views formed the starting point of their collective self-study, in 
which they focused on the question of how they wanted to elaborate their role as 
researchers. 
II. The practical elaboration of the role of researcher
4. Lack of time, information, and support 
A study by Jaruszewicz and Landrus (2005), based on a questionnaire sent to 57 
teacher educators and focusing on the practical elaboration of their role as 
researchers, shows the practical problems they encounter. Lack of time and lack of 
information were important obstacles, but also lack of support, both from their 
research supervisors and from research assistants. Murray and Male (2005), Borg 
and Alshumaimeri (2012*), and Gemmell et al. (2010) also stress the time aspect. 
In a study by Griffiths et al. (2010), too, lack of time, information, and support are 
important limiting factors as far as the role of researcher is concerned: 
Unanimously the main barrier to research cited by both teacher educators and 
research mentors was time, or rather lack of time: ‘a massive issue’, as one 
teacher educator put it. Teacher educators have highly intensive teaching 
timetables and there is very little time left over for research. […] Teacher 
educators theoretically had a minimum of half a day per week research time, 
but in practice this tended to disappear. Apart from the intensity of the 
teaching load itself, teacher education programmes follow a school year 
rather than a university year, therefore there is less time overall for research; 
regular validation and inspections by government agencies are an added 
pressure. (p. 253) 
5. Ambivalence 
Regarding the time aspect, Griffiths et al. (2010) also conclude from their study 
that an ambivalence seems to play a role. On the one hand, many teacher educators 
are overburdened by teaching and organisational tasks, and many have little 
research time available. On the other hand, as a result of their background as a 
teacher, they tend to give priority to the contact with students over doing research: 
In addition, the teacher educators saw teaching as the central and most 
important part of their work, and therefore this tended to be put first, 
particularly the student-teachers’ needs. (p. 253) 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
37
6. No research culture 
Several authors maintain that the above aspects are connected with the fact that, in 
general, a research culture is missing within institutions for teacher education 
(Gemmell et al., 2010; Griffiths et al., 2010; Houston et al., 2010), which makes it 
difficult for teacher educators to shape their role as a researcher. 
III. The focus of research
7. Traditional research focus 
There are three dominant research foci of teacher educators as researchers: (1) the 
(school) subject, (2) pupils and/or teachers, and (3) one's own teaching practices. 
Based on their research among 82 teacher educators of a prominent university in 
Saudi Arabia, Borg and Alshumaimeri (2011*) conclude that for teacher educators 
their discipline or primary or secondary education are their traditional research 
objects. Related to this is the idea that the roles of teacher of teacher and researcher 
represent separate worlds and that a researcher is an objective outsider, collecting 
mainly quantitative data (Griffiths et al., 2010). 
8. Research into one's own practices 
Increasingly, teacher educators carry out research into their own teacher education 
practices, as has become clear from the enormous growth of the self-study 
movement over the last fifteen years. This choice has a content aspect (knowledge 
development by the professional community itself), but also a practical side; it is a 
matter of “double dipping” (Jaruszewicz & Landrus, 2005): data are often easy to 
collect and research outcomes not only yield academic output, but also contribute 
to the improvement of one's own practices. Cochran-Smith (2005) states that this 
kind of research deserves more attention, as it can offer important contributions to 
our knowledge about teacher education. However, she also discusses that this 
standpoint is under discussion in academic circles (see also Griffiths et al., 2010). 
The most important critique of research into one's own practices is, on the one 
hand, the quality and generalisability of the often qualitative research (Lunenberg, 
Ponte, & Van der Ven, 2007), and, on the other hand, the absence of a research 
programme in which the cohesion between individual studies is guarded (Zeichner, 
2010). 
Critical features 
Summarising, we found three critical features for the role of researcher and the 
behaviour in this role: 
1. Views of the role of researcher. In order to be able to function well in the role of 
researcher, teacher educators themselves need to acknowledge the importance of 
this role. Such acknowledgment is not common. Teacher educators often put more 
priority on their role as a teacher of teachers. In addition, more clarity is needed 
about what it means to be a researcher, as teacher educators who do consider this 
role as part of their profession, differ in the way they interpret the role. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
38
2. The practical elaboration of the role of researcher. Practical issues, such as time 
and information require attention, and also the provision of suitable support. In 
addition, teacher educators themselves should give more priority to their role as 
researchers, which can be promoted by creating a research culture within 
institutions for teacher education. 
3. The focus of research. In general, there are three dominant research foci: the 
subject, primary or secondary education, and the teacher educator’s own practice. 
This variety of foci is accompanied by a debate about goals, methods, and quality 
criteria, in particular when research into one's own practices is at stake. It would be 
helpful if there would be more clarity about and acceptance of research into one's 
own practices, which can be improved by clear methodological guidelines for such 
research. 
4.3.2. Professional Development 
Many issues mentioned in the literature point to the need of professional 
development of the teacher educator as a researcher, such as the tension between, 
on the one hand, the view of institutions for higher education that teacher educators 
should do research, and, on the other hand, the ambivalence of teacher educators 
themselves regarding this role, the practical problems that teacher educators 
encounter in their role as a researcher, and the lack of clarity with regard to the 
type of research which is suitable and acceptable. We will now discuss the research 
that has focused on the professional development of the teacher educator as a 
researcher. 
 We found fifteen factors that are mentioned in the literature with regard to the 
development of the role of the teacher educator as a researcher and the 
accompanying behaviour. We have put these factors into three categories: 
I. Context; 
II. Factors in the teacher educator-researcher himself or herself; 
III. Specific incentives to start as a researcher and to keep going. 
These three categories are not completely separable, as the various factors in the 
three categories show much overlap. 
I. Context
1. Creating a research culture 
Important to the professional development in the role of researcher is the creation 
of a research culture within the workplace, in which the experiences and attitudes 
of teacher educators with regard to research receive explicit attention through 
presentations, discussions, and other exchanges (Houston et al., 2010). Based on 
their study of teacher educators in Saudi Arabia, Borg and Alshumaimeri (2012*) 
too, consider this an important factor: 
(…) overall, respondents felt the context they worked in was only moderately 
conducive to research activity. In particular, there was a perceived tension 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
39
among respondents between institutional expectations and the actual support 
they received in relation to their research activity. (p. 354) 
2. Making institutional expectations and requirements explicit 
Too often institutional expectations and requirements remain implicit, or they are 
considered self-evident by others who do have research experience, whereas this is 
not the case for those to whom the area of research is new. This is why it is crucial 
that institutional expectations and requirements regarding research activities by 
teacher educators are made explicit (Borg & Alshumaimeri, 2012*). As Griffiths et 
al. (2010) state it, research should be “on the agenda” within institutions for teacher 
education. 
3. Providing clear information 
Emerging from, for example, the research by Griffiths et al. (2010) is the 
importance of giving clear information about research facilities. This concerns, for 
example, access to journals, possibilities for study leave, and the criteria for 
promotion within the profession. 
4. Providing support 
Support is needed when teacher educators design and carry out research (Borg & 
Alshumaimeri, 2012*; Geursen et al., 2010), especially in the form of frequent and 
personal coaching, in which feedback and advice is provided and trust is being 
built (Griffiths et al., 2010). 
 Several initiatives have surfaced aimed at supporting teacher educators in 
carrying out research. For example, Lunenberg, Zwart, and Korthagen (2010) 
facilitated a group of teacher educators in carrying out self-studies that both 
contributed to their own development, as well as to the knowledge base of the 
community of teacher educators. Their study shows that such support is much 
needed and helps teacher educators in overcoming obstacles they encounter when 
starting to take the first steps on the road of self-study. One such obstacle is 
becoming a beginner again: 
Teacher educators starting a self-study are often experienced professionals. 
At the same time, with regard to research they are novices. Hence, 
experienced teacher educators starting a self-study have the courage to 
expose themselves and become vulnerable. (p. 1285) 
The approach described by Lunenberg, Zwart, and Korthagen concurs with a study 
carried out by Gallagher et al. (2011), who describe an approach to the professional 
development of pre-tenure teacher educators through the establishment of a selfstudy group. This group evolved into what the authors call “a community of 
scholars” (p. 884), a process stimulated by the fact that the participants were “in 
the same boat” (p. 885) concerning issues such as promotion and tenure. Gallagher 
et al. present evidence as to how teacher educators can work together to build a 
culture linking teaching practice to scholarship. A strong feature of their 
community was the authentic conversations about individual and collective 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
40
concerns, which built trust and allowed for the mutual vulnerability that Lunenberg 
et al. (2010) also pointed to. Important is also that facilitators are easily accessible 
(Lunenberg et al., 2010, p. 1282, speak about “a sense of being next door”). 
5. Identifying and offering additional support and resources 
What is also important is identifying additional support and resources that teacher 
educators need for their research activities. This kind of support can take many 
forms, for example taking care of physical and financial resources, courses, formal 
and informal acknowledgment (Borg & Alshumaimeri, 2012*), and the availability 
of experts (Lunenberg et al., 2010). Katz and Coleman (2005) mention the 
importance of statistical support by facilitators. Also, courses and methodological 
training can offer important support. They can build trust in the beginning 
researcher, as concluded by Harrison and McKeon (2010) on the basis of a study of 
three teacher educators. This issue is also mentioned in an essay by Lin, Wang, 
Spalding, Klecka, and Odell (2011). Very important is the engagement of 
experienced researchers who can offer tailor-made methodological help and who 
can suggest research instruments fitting the needs of the teacher educatorresearcher at that moment (Lunenberg, et al., 2010). 
6. Planned and protected time 
Helpful is planning and protecting time for research (Griffiths et al, 2010), for, as 
noted above, teacher educators continuously experience time pressure (Borg & 
Alshumaimeri, 2012*): 
Following from induction, many teacher educators thought that ‘dedicated’ 
research time should be timetabled, because this would help them preserve 
research time and ‘give them permission’ to do it. A (new university) teacher 
educator suggested faculty research days, in addition to the scholarship days 
that already existed: ‘This is time for you to do your research. I don’t see any 
evidence of that’. (Griffiths et al, 2010, p. 258) 
7. Role models 
Griffiths et al. (2010) point to the importance of role models. Through guidance 
from more experienced researchers functioning as role models, or through 
cooperation with other researchers, teacher educators can develop the knowledge, 
skills, and attitudes needed for doing research. In this context, Lin et al. (2011) 
advocate an apprenticeship model. In such a model, an experienced teacher 
educator-researcher can, for instance, model how to deal with the continuous 
pressure on research time coming from practice. Harrison and McKeon state that 
beginning researchers can start with carrying out ‘low risk’ research activities, 
which may help them to gradually become part of a research culture. 
8. Collaboration structures 
Helpful is the promotion of collaboration between teacher educators in carrying out 
research, which can include creating possibilities for exchanges about research and 
for learning from each other (Gemmell et al., 2010; Houston et al., 2010; Kitchen 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
41
& Stevens, 2008; Lunenberg et al., 2010). Griffith et al. (2010) state that peer 
support is important. McGee and Lawrence (2009) discuss that this creates safety. 
On the basis of a joint self-study trajectory of five Dutch teacher educators, 
Geursen et al. (2010) state that collaborating on research can stimulate a sense of 
professional intimacy which furthers deeper analyses of one's own practices (see 
also Fitzgerald, East, Heston, & Miller 2002*). McGee and Lawrence (2009) note 
that collaboration on research is more productive if there is a shared research 
question linked to the teacher educators’ practices. 
9. Institutional reflection and reframing 
At the institutional level, reflection and possibly reframing should take place with 
regard to conceptions about research, because - as mentioned above - exactly in 
this respect teacher educators experience problems: 
The way in which their institutions define scholarship and classify research 
efforts are not necessarily consistent with the kind of work they are engaged 
in. (Jaruszewicz & Landrus, 2005, p. 110) 
According to Lunenberg and Willemse (2006), to teacher educators a form of 
research is productive in which the focus lies on unique practical situations and in 
which the value of personal experiences is acknowledged. 
 In fact, a reframing seems necessary within the whole professional community 
of teacher educators, as Day (1995*) states. This statement is in line with CochranSmith (2005), who puts forward a critical comment, stating that: 
[…] there are currently competing agendas and viewpoints about the worth of 
research conducted by teacher educators themselves on their own practice, 
their own knowledge and perspectives, and their own students’ (i.e., 
prospective teachers) learning. […] On the one hand, there is now more 
research being conducted about teacher education by teacher educators 
themselves than at any previous time. This trend reflects a 
reconceptualization of the role of the teacher educator and a rethinking of the 
kinds of knowledge and skills teacher educators ought to have. On the other 
hand, in some of the most influential syntheses of the teacher education 
research literature, research conducted by practitioners about their own work 
is discounted and ignored because it does not meet standards for rigor or 
because it is considered to have very little value in terms of generalizations 
across contexts. (p. 224) 
Murray et al. (2009) conclude: 
The time may also be right for a re-framing of what ‘counts’ as research 
activity for teacher educators whose busy day job is practice in teacher 
education […]. Any such reframing of research and scholarship activities in 
teacher education could be part of a long term and intra-professional 
challenge for teacher educators, one that establishes a new language of 
learning and scholarship. (p. 949) 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
42
10. Writing 
Writing about practical experiences promotes teacher educators’ professional 
development and helps them elaborate theoretical insights, for example by writing 
a book about them. Shteiman et al. (2010) report about good experiences with this 
approach in Israel, where funding is available for such writing projects, and also 
other support from the MOFET Institute, which focuses on the professional 
development of teacher educators. These authors state that this elevates the status 
of teacher educators, while at the same time the available knowledge about the 
theory and practice of teacher education is broadened. 
II. Factors in the teacher educator-researcher himself or herself 
11. Developing personal qualities 
Important is the development of personal qualities in the teacher educatorresearcher, such as motivation, passion, and steadfastness. The best way to start on 
the path of research is, as Wilson (2006) states, beginning it: 
The best way to learn research is to do research, even though most of us 
know that immersion is not always the best teacher - whether one is learning 
to be a teacher or to be a researcher. (p. 323) 
12. Broadening one's perspective 
Gemmell et al. (2010) describe a joint self-study trajectory of nine Scottish teacher 
educators that shows how they needed a shift in perspective in order to change 
their attitudes with regard to research. They had to abandon the idea that their work 
was all about teaching teachers, or that research was something they only learned 
about through the publications of others. Hence, what is especially helpful to 
teacher educators is a broadening of their perspective on research by learning about 
various forms of research. For example, in contexts where quantitative research is 
dominant, the teacher educator can deliberately dive into publications on 
qualitative research methods (Borg & Alshumaimeri, 2012*; Gemmell et al., 
2010). As stated above, it is important to promote that teacher educators learn 
about and start to value a non-traditional view of research (Houston et al., 2010), 
especially a view aimed at the development and improvement of their own 
practices (practice-oriented research, action research, self-studies) (Gemmell et al., 
2010). This requires a reframing within institutions or within the professional 
community as a whole of what is or could be research (see factor 9), but also at the 
level of the individual teacher educator, as teacher educators often think that 
research has little to do with their everyday work, or adhere to a rather technical 
view of research (Harrison & McKeon, 2010). However, research focused on one's 
own practices should also contribute to the professional field as a whole (Borg & 
Alshumaimeri, 2012*). Research is more than a personal reflection (Murray, 
2010). However, this is sometimes problematic: Zeichner (2007) states that teacher 
educators often have a limited focus in which they only give attention to their own 
practices at the cost of contributing to the existing scholarly knowledge and the 
development of the professional community of teacher educators. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
43
III. Specific incentives to start as a researcher and to keep going 
13. A motivating focus 
McGee and Lawrence (2009) discovered that teacher educators are more focused 
on the learning of their students than on their own learning, and that this 
phenomenon can be deliberately used for connecting their research questions to 
this interest. This concurs with a conclusion by Murray et al. (2009) from a project 
aimed at helping teacher educators do research, namely that it is important to build 
on the professional values and missions of teacher educators when promoting a 
research-oriented attitude: 
[…] the project needs to work with the existing institutional structures, 
interests and expertise and with the teacher education researchers’ personal 
agency and habitus […], and underlying senses of professional values and 
missions. Of central importance here, we suggest, is how the relationships 
between research, scholarship and teaching are conceptualized both 
individually and institutionally. (p. 949) 
14. Going public 
Very stimulating is going public with one's own research, at conferences and other 
professional meetings (Geursen et al., 2010; Griffiths et al., 2010; Lunenberg et al., 
2010). Even writing a paper proposal is an important incentive for development 
(Kosnik et al., 2011). It is very stimulating when a teacher educator knows that a 
presentation about his or her own research has been scheduled. Going public with 
one's own research also provides a counterbalance to the above mentioned concern 
expressed by Zeichner about the often limited focus that teacher educators 
sometimes adopt. 
 Having to report about one's own research is also stimulating when such a report 
only takes place within one's own institution. When the teacher educator researcher 
knows that a report or presentation about the research should be delivered, this is 
an important incentive for working hard to arrive at tangible results. Griffiths et al. 
(2010, p. 259) state that an essence is “having to be accountable for research time”. 
15. Rewards 
Important is the rewarding of completed research with a title or a higher position, 
for example as an associate professor, or any other form of acknowledgment 
(Griffiths et al., 2010). Another possibility is, for example, giving an award or 
providing extra research time (Lin et al., 2011). 
Critical features
From the above list, we can derive the following critical features determining the 
development of the professional role of the teacher educator as a researcher and the 
professional behaviour of teacher educators in this role: 
1. Context. Important is building a supportive context through work environments 
in which there is a research culture with an appropriate view of research, in which 
institutional expectations and requirements are made explicit, and in which various 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
44
ways of support are provided (frequent supervision, training, availability of 
resources, and so forth), and in which collaboration is promoted. 
2. Factors within the person of the teacher educator-researcher. Important is 
attention to the development of personal qualities, such as motivation, passion, and 
steadfastness, and to a broadening of perspectives with regard to possible forms of 
research. 
3. Specific incentives to start as a researcher and to keep going. Professional 
development in the role of researcher is promoted by specific incentives, such as 
going public with the research, reporting about it, and receiving rewards. 
4.4. COACH 
Teacher educators and students from all institutions for teacher education agree 
that practice is an important experiential source of learning and also that the 
student teacher should be supported while learning from practice (Zanting, 
Verloop, Vermunt, & Van Driel, 1998). In the literature, the role of the person 
offering this support is referred to by various terms, such as coach, guide, mentor, 
or facilitator. We will use the term coach. As we discussed in Section 4.1.2, the 
central aspect of this role is facilitating the learning process of student teachers, a 
view broadly shared in the literature. Research by Wold et al. (2011) among more 
than 60 literacy teachers into the impact of various roles of the teacher educator on 
these teachers’ professional development, shows that the teachers consider the role 
of the teacher educator as a coach as being most influential. The teachers under 
study report that the most important in this role are qualities such as being 
generous, forgiving, enthusiastic, approachable, inspiring, irreverent but respectful, 
helpful but not controlling, and being nonjudgmental. 
 Coaching of the learning process of student teachers takes place in the 
institution for teacher education, as well as in the workplace, i.e. the school. In 
4.1.2, we noted that the person in charge of supporting the learning in the 
workplace, is generally named a mentor, mentor teacher, cooperating teacher, or 
school-based teacher educator. Clear definitions of the various terms are absent in 
the literature, and conceptualisations differ per country and context (Zanting et al., 
1998). Moreover, the term mentor is used both as a description of a position, and 
for referring to a role. Below, we will use the term workplace facilitator for all 
those supporting the learning of the student in the workplace. 
 Only a few studies deal with teacher educators working as a coach in institutions 
for teacher education (institution-based teacher educators). Most of the selected 25 
studies dealing with the role of a coach, have a bearing on workplace facilitators. 
Various orientations are possible regarding this role (Wang & Odell, 2007). 
Hennissen, Crasborn, Brouwer, Korthagen, and Bergen (2008) published a 
literature review on the role of the workplace facilitator that we were happy to use 
for mapping out the factors that are determinant for the role of the teacher educator 
as a coach and their behaviour in this role. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
45
4.4.1. Role and Behaviour 
We found five factors determining the role as a coach and the behaviour in this 
role. They can be placed into two categories: 
I. The task of workplace facilitators; 
II. The task of institution-based coaches. 
I. The task of workplace facilitators
1. Offering local knowledge 
A study carried out in the US by Hall, Draper, Smith, and Bullough (2008) among 
264 workplace facilitators shows that they consider coaching as their key activity. 
This concerns both professional support (giving information about the curriculum 
and classroom management, serving as a role model), as well as emotional support. 
The workplace facilitators in this study emphasise professional support over 
emotional support. 
 The most important resources workplace facilitators use in their coaching are 
personal qualities and experience as a teacher. Cothran, McCaughtry, Smigell, 
Garn, Kulinna, Martin, and Faust (2008) found as the most important activities of 
the workplace facilitator: providing contextual subject matter knowledge and 
experience, and skilful communication. In an international comparative study, 
Wang (2001) found similar results. 
 Workplace facilitators mainly function as a local guide. Hall et al. (2008) 
conclude that this role conception is limited, as students should develop a broader 
than only local perspective on education (cf. Zeichner, 2002*; Loughran, 2006*). 
2. Practical orientation: giving advice about curriculum and classroom practice 
Rajuan, Beijaard, and Verloop (2007*, 2010*) did a study on the cooperation 
between 20 Israeli students and their 10 workplace facilitators. Both groups 
experienced a good balance between support and challenge as being the most 
effective in coaching. Such a balance appeared to be present in most combinations 
of students and coaches. The students found a personal orientation of the coach the 
most important, and next, a practical and technical orientation. The coaches, 
however, appeared to be mainly practically and technically oriented. 
 A Dutch study by Crasborn, Hennissen, Brouwer, Korthagen, and Bergen 
(2010) showed that the image workplace facilitators form about their students is 
often implicit or rudimentary, which leads to giving advice instead of asking 
questions, discussing, and giving attention to problem solving. In the stimulatedrecall interviews the researchers held with the workplace facilitators under study, 
these coaches themselves considered only 20% of their conversations as reflective. 
A case-study by Perry, Hutchinson, and Thanberger (2008) showed another 
perspective, namely that workplace facilitators are in fact able to give the latter 
type of support, but on the basis of recorded conversations they conclude that 
offering information and support was more helpful to the students than asking 
questions and modelling. In a second study, Crasborn, Hennissen, Brouwer, 
Korthagen, and Bergen (2011) conclude from the literature that the topics most 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
46
discussed in the dialogues between workplace facilitators and students are 
instructional and organisational situations and, to a lesser degree, pupils, classes, 
and subject matter. This concurs with a study by Strong and Baron (2004), who 
found that teaching was the most important topic in such conversations. Wang 
(2001) studied 23 workplace facilitators in the US, UK and China. He states that, in 
their interactions with students, workplace facilitators mainly focus on aspects of 
the curriculum (goals, learning activities, instructional materials, plans and 
schedules) and on pedagogy. Whether the emphasis is more on the curriculum or 
on the actual practice of teaching seems to depend on the national context. In the 
US, there is much attention to individual pupils and the curriculum, which to a 
large degree can be made specific by the teacher himself or herself. In China, 
where the national curriculum limits teachers’ autonomy in making decisions about 
the curriculum content and assessment, the focus is more on helping novices learn 
how to teach the standardised curriculum and develop a shared understanding 
about norms. The UK takes a middle position. 
 The emphasis on giving advice is also found by Barrera, Braley, and Slate 
(2010) in their study of 46 workplace facilitators who supported beginning teachers 
in schools in Texas (US). This may be related to a lack of clear information about 
expectations: the coaches reported to feel a need for well-defined goals and more 
clarity about their duties and responsibilities. 
3. Promoting reflection aimed at transfer 
In the studies cited above there is frequent emphasis on the increasing part schoolbased teacher educators play in the education of teachers. As a result, attention is 
needed for the tasks and role conceptions of workplace facilitators (YendalHoppey, 2007). Loughran (2006*) offers building blocks for this. He states that the 
workplace facilitator should create a context that makes it possible for the 
beginning teacher to become engaged in a discussion about, a reflection on, and 
critique of views and practices of teaching. However, from studies by Burn (2007) 
and Van Velzen and Volman (2009) we learn that a problem occurs when giving 
such tasks to workplace facilitators. They appear not able to provide reflection 
aimed at transfer, as they are not competent at connecting their practical knowledge 
with theoretical concepts. This is also the reason why the exemplary role of 
workplace facilitators often remains implicit; they do show exemplary behaviour, 
but hardly make this behaviour or the thinking leading to explicit (Levine & 
Marcus, 2010*). Zanting et al. (1998) and Margolis (2007) stress that workplace 
facilitators should do this more often. 
The study by Rajuan et al. (2007*, 2010*) already mentioned above, show that 
Israeli workplace facilitators scored significantly low on academic and critical 
orientation. This was similar in their students, which might be a result of the 
orientation of their coaches. A case-study by Bullough (2005) on the identity 
development of one workplace facilitator showed how complicated collaboration 
structures between the institution and the school were. As a result of the lack of 
clarity about what was expected from her, the coach took on a ‘caring mother role’. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
47
 Another view is presented in a study by Whitehead and Fitzgerald (2007) of an 
interesting and successful project based on “a living theory approach to action 
research” as described in the work of Mc Niff, Lomax, and Whitehead (1996*) and 
McNiff and Whitehead (2002*). Based on an initiative from and supported by the 
university, the workplace facilitators and students collaborated developing and 
giving lessons, and afterwards systematically discussed video recording of these 
lessons. In the first stage, this was a lesson by the workplace facilitator; in the 
second stage a lesson given by the student. In this project, the emphasis was on 
developing a reflective dialogue. Through this approach, reflection was promoted 
in both the mentor and the student. As one of the participants said: “We weren’t 
just getting a lesson on a lesson: we are getting a lesson on reflection as well” (p. 
7). Based on the collected data, the authors conclude that a real learning 
community was created. 
II. The task of institution-based coaches
4. The caring therapist 
The few studies we found on the institution-based coach mainly deal with pitfalls 
connected with the role of a coach. Boote (2003) discusses the shift from 
traditional perspectives on teacher education towards a constructivist view, and 
notes that, as a result of this shift, an increasing number of teacher educators 
consider themselves mainly as coaches and less as teachers of teachers. Boote 
explores the boundaries and pitfalls of this role conception, which he rather 
ironically refers to as a ‘belief-and-attitude therapist’. Nicol, Novakowski, Ghaleb, 
and Beairsto (2010) examined the tension between the role of a coach who mainly 
focuses on care, and a role in which the focus lies on inquiry in the role of a teacher 
of teachers. The institution-based teacher educator in this study mainly focused on 
care. This teacher educator built primarily on her experiences as a teacher and 
shared these with the students. This means that the role conception of such an 
institution-based teacher educator resembles that of many workplace facilitators. 
 These findings from Boote and from Nicol et al. raise the question whether 
institution-based teacher educators are in fact able to enact the broader conception 
of the role of coach proposed by Loughran (2006)*, and whether they are 
competent at creating a context that engages the beginning teacher in a discussion 
about and critical reflection on education. 
5. Fading boundaries: overlapping tasks 
The tasks, and thus the roles, of on the one hand institution-based teacher 
educators, and on the other the workplace facilitator, are increasingly merging, as 
we saw above. In addition, Poyas and Smith (2007) note that a growing number of 
teacher educators combine working in school and in the institution. This asks for 
more precise definitions of the roles and tasks of all those involved. Moreover, for 
those teacher educators who often are expert teachers whose roots are in the 
school, a specific challenge is the expression of their experiences in professional 
terms: 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
48
They joined the college faculty on the basis of an actual identity as expert 
teachers. Their stories talk of professional activities and beliefs in a 
discursive manner that suits their primary field of practice, the school. 
However, when they start teaching methods courses in an academic context, 
they struggle to adapt these stories and to define their professional expertise. 
The professional knowledge they hold is expected to be verbalised and made 
accessible to pre-service teachers and to college faculty. (Poyas & Smith, 
2007, p. 332) 
Critical features 
In sum, we have found the following critical features regarding the role of coach 
and the accompanying behaviour: 
1. The task of workplace facilitators. The workplace facilitators should not only 
take an advisory role and introduce novice teachers to the school, but they should 
ask more questions and promote discussion and reflection. While doing so, they 
should go beyond the local context. However, from the studies we discussed, a 
rather limited role conception of the workplace facilitators arises. They often 
conceive their task as restricted to their own location. They base their behaviour on 
their personal qualities and their experiences as a teacher, and focus on giving 
advice to students about practical issues in the specific school situation, such as 
designing and giving lessons, and relating to pupils. In general, workplace 
facilitators insufficiently make their own teaching behaviour and the underlying 
thinking explicit. In conclusion, they should be better prepared for a broader task 
conception. 
2. The task of institution-based coaches. For institution-based coaches too, there is 
a challenge. They should find more of a balance between their role as a coach and 
their role as a teacher of teachers, and they should more clearly mark off their own 
tasks from those of the workplace facilitator. In addition, they should avoid the role 
of a ‘caring therapist’, should give more attention to discussion and to critical 
reflection on education. 
4.4.2. Professional Development 
In all of the selected studies on the professional development of the coach, the 
focus is on the school-based teacher educator. However, as already noted, a 
growing number of teacher educators combine work in a school and in the 
institution for teacher education (Poyas & Smith, 2007), and this asks for further 
and joint professional development of all those participating in the process of 
educating teachers. In this context, it is remarkable that so little has been published 
about the professional development of institution-based teacher educators 
regarding their role as a coach. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
49
 From the studies in our selection, we have derived four factors determining the 
professional development of the teacher educator as a coach. We could put these 
factors into two categories: 
I. Goals and context; 
II. Forms of support. 
I. Goals and context
1. Towards a research-oriented attitude in the workplace facilitator 
As discussed in 4.4.1, the participation of workplace facilitators in the education of 
teachers is growing. This influences the goals of the professional development of 
workplace facilitators. Burn (2007), for example, emphasises that through a more 
research-oriented attitude in workplace facilitators, an identity change can take 
place from experts in teaching to professionals who put their own teaching under 
discussion and both the students’ and their own professional development. 
Although this may sound attractive, Burn warns us that 
combining research with teacher education, however, means asking mentors 
to adopt simultaneous roles as learners and teachers; something that can only 
be done if they and their partners fully recognise the critical role that their 
existing knowledge bases play in the construction of new professional 
knowledge. (p. 463) 
2. A strong partnership between schools and the institution for teacher education 
Support from their own school and from the institution for teacher education is 
important to the professional development of workplace facilitators, in particular in 
order to overcome an isolated perspective on one's own practice (Burn, 2007). In 
this respect, various studies (Barrera et al., 2010; Crasborn, Hennissen, Brouwer, 
Korthagen, & Bergen, 2008; Crasborn et al., 2010; Dever, Hager, & Klein, 2003) 
emphasise the importance of a strong partnership between institutions for teacher 
education and schools as a prerequisite to effective professional development. 
II. Forms of support
3. Training 
The Dutch studies by Crasborn et al. (2008, 2010) and Hennissen, Crasborn, 
Brouwer, Korthagen, and Bergen (2010) describe a training for workplace 
facilitators, based on the principles of ‘realistic teacher education’ (Korthagen, 
Kessels, Koster, Lagerwerf, & Wubbels, 2001*) and micro-teaching. The training 
resulted in significant behavioural changes, visible in the conversations of the 
workplace facilitators with their students: they became more of “encouragers”, and 
less advisers and instructors, and they used the available time more efficiently 
(Crasborn et al, 2008). The researchers also found that the coaches became more 
consciously aware of their behaviour (Crasborn et al., 2010). Moreover, more 
frequently they used suitable coaching skills and, after training, they indicated in 
stimulated-recall interviews that there were more reflective moments in their 
conversations (a growth from 20% in the conversational sequences to 33%). As a 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
50
result, there was more attention to the learning process of the student teachers 
(Crasborn et al., 2010; Hennissen et al., 2010). 
 Dever et al. (2003), too, report about a study of the training of workplace 
facilitators. This training was primarily focused on giving feedback. An evaluation 
of the training showed that the participants became more able to collect objective 
data when observing students and could give more specific feedback on the 
students’ behaviour. Margolis (2007) supported seven teachers (with four to six 
years of experience) who became workplace facilitators. Important in this 
successful experiment was that these relatively new teachers were themselves 
trained in making their own thinking and dealing with challenges explicit and that 
they themselves chose to become a coach as a new step in their professional 
development. Nevertheless, this study showed it took at least six months before the 
workplace facilitators were able to explain their approaches, choices, and dilemmas 
to their students. Co-teaching by the workplace facilitator and the student teacher 
deepened the process and promoted joint learning, and also learning from each 
other’s mistakes. 
4. Communities of learners 
Similar to what we saw in the discussion of the role of teacher of teachers, the 
professional development of workplace facilitators appears to be promoted by 
participating in communities of learners. Cochran-Smith (2003) describes a study 
in which institution-based and workplace facilitators used “inquiry as a stance” for 
improving the coaching of student teachers. Doing research together, continuously 
asking each other questions, and using data from practice, did indeed lead to 
fundamental developments. For example, it promoted a move away from an 
emphasis on an existing checklist for the evaluation of students towards a 
‘narrative profile with … 
rich vignettes from practice, journal entries, lesson and unit plans, 
observation notes, excerpts from student teachers’ interactions with children 
and teachers, and other documentation of the student teacher’s work in the 
school and classroom. This narrative profile is jointly constructed two times a 
year by the student teacher, the cooperating teacher, and the supervisor. 
Rather than general impressions or abstract categories, we use concrete 
examples to construct a dynamic portrait of the student teacher in action. 
(Cochran-Smith, 2003, p. 15) 
Zellermayer and Margolin (2005) studied a community of beginning coaches in a 
teacher education college in Israel. They base their research on summaries of 
conversations about four critical events in this community. An example of such an 
event was that one of the participating researchers made herself vulnerable when 
discussing her action research. This stimulated the other participants to leave their 
comfort zone too, and all of them started to participate actively in the joint learning 
process. This finding concurs with studies by Carroll (2005) and Davey and Ham 
(2010) that showing that balanced attention to product and process determines the 
success of the professional development within a community of learners. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
51
Critical features
We have found two critical features regarding the professional development in the 
role of a coach and its accompanying behaviour: 
1. Goals and context. As the participation of workplace facilitators in the education 
of teachers is increasing, this requires that they are not only competent at 
introducing new teachers to the practices in their schools, but also that they are able 
to support novice teachers in reflection, research, and the (theoretical) 
underpinning of practical choices. This means that workplace facilitators should 
themselves develop a research-oriented attitude. In order to realise such 
professional development of workplace facilitators, close partnerships between 
schools and institutions for teacher education are necessary. (See also Section 4.7 
on the role of broker.) 
2. Forms of support. On the basis of the selected studies, we can conclude that 
training of workplace facilitators (focusing on coaching skills, promoting 
reflection, making one's own behaviour explicit, and giving productive feedback) 
and participation in – facilitated – communities of learners (focusing on inquiry 
and research into one's own practices) are effective forms of support for promoting 
the professional development of workplace facilitators. 
4.5. CURRICULUM DEVELOPER 
We have found only 14 studies about the role and behaviour of the teacher 
educator as a curriculum developer. Regarding this small number of studies and the 
relatively poor empirical grounding of most of the retrieved studies, we have put 
all the elements we found into only one category, namely ´Variety of approaches 
and practices´. Subsequently, for reasons of validity and reliability, we confine 
ourselves to formulating only one critical feature for the role of teacher educators 
as curriculum developers and the accompanying behaviour. In our selection, we 
have not retrieved any relevant publications on the professional development of 
teacher educators in the role of curriculum developer and/or the accompanying 
behaviour. 
4.5.1. Role and Behaviour 
Variety of approaches and practices 
1. Societal discussions 
Ideas about curriculum development in teacher education are influenced by sociopolitical discussions about the desired qualities of teachers, and subsequently by 
different conceptions of learning and teaching (Grossman, Hammerness, & 
McDonald, 2009; Krokfors, Kynäslahti, Stenberg, Toom, Maaranen, Jyrhämä, & 
Kansanen, 2011; LeCornu, 2010). Grossman et al. and LeCornu describe that, 
through the years, conceptions of teacher education have changed under the 
influence of socio-political discussion. Examples of conceptions are: a focus on a 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
52
curriculum organised by knowledge domains; a focus on skills and teaching 
practice; a more reflective orientation in which student teachers go beyond a 
consideration of technical skills to consider the moral and ethical issues involved in 
teaching; “realistic teacher education” aimed at creating a better connection 
between theory and practice, in which teachers’ concerns and needs are at the 
centre; an orientation around ‘learning communities’; and curricula organised 
around a set of core practices in which novices can develop their professional 
knowledge, skills and professional identity. 
Cochran-Smith (2006*) argues that teacher educators are ‘public intellectuals’, 
who should play an active role in the (inter)national debate about curriculum 
development in education, but as yet teacher educators are more likely to be 
following than leading in the debate. 
2. Principles guiding teacher education
The retrieved literature shows that the discussion about basic pedagogical 
conceptions underlying teacher education is still lively among teacher educators. 
Moreover, conceptions and principles underlying curriculum development in 
teacher education seem to be strongly influenced by local habits and preferences. 
While the one teacher educator strongly believes in the use of autobiographical 
reflections by students and the sharing of accompanying emotions (e.g. LeFevre, 
2011), the other stresses the importance of ICT in the curricula (e.g. Drent & 
Meelissen, 2008). 
We did find some commonly shared principles for the design of teacher 
education curricula, with implications for the role of the teacher educator as a 
curriculum developer. One of these is the common principle of linking theory and 
practice. Korthagen et al. (2006) designed the concept of “realistic teacher 
education” as a means to effectively link theory with practice. They put the 
development of the teacher as ‘reflective practitioner’ at the centre of the 
curriculum. Important in this respect is to start from the concerns of students (their 
struggles, needs and practices). The starting point of this approach is that learning 
about teaching requires a shift in focus from the curriculum to the learner, i.e. the 
student. The teacher education programme improves learning through the 
promotion of student research into their own practice, and through close mutual 
cooperation between students and between students and staff. According to the 
concept of “realistic teacher education”, the teacher educator as a curriculum 
developer has a clear vision of the nature of relevant knowledge, professional 
learning, and of meaningful relationships between schools, universities and student 
teachers. The teacher educator models the teaching and learning approaches 
advocated in the programme. The Dutch study by Van Tartwijk (2011*) offers a 
concrete example of such a curriculum. 
We also found some Scandinavian studies on the translation of similar 
principles to teacher education curricula (Krokfors et al., 2010; Arreman & 
Weiner, 2007). In the Finnish study by Krokfors et al., teacher educators were 
asked if the teaching in their teacher education institutions should be mainly 
‘research-led’, ‘research-oriented’, ‘research-based’, or ‘research-informed’. The 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
53
majority of the teacher educators preferred a ‘research-based’ curriculum, in which 
the curriculum is designed around inquiry-based activities rather than based on the 
acquisition of subject matter knowledge. The aim of this kind of teacher education 
is “to produce pedagogically thinking teachers” (p. 11). 
Struyven and De Meyst (2010) perceive a revival of competency-based curricula 
in Flanders, but based on a more holistic approach compared to the more 
fragmented behavioural approaches in previous times. In the current approach, an 
integral focus on skills, knowledge, attitudes and experience should lead to a 
successful interpretation of the role of the teacher. Although this study gives 
information about the preferences for competency-based teacher education among 
different groups of teacher educators in Flanders, systematic research on how these 
teacher educators give shape to such a curriculum has not been conducted. 
Mainly in the United States, an approach has emerged in which the curriculum 
is built around ‘core practices’ of the teacher profession (Grossman et al., 2009). 
´Core practices´ are practices frequently occurring in teaching, which novices can 
use in classrooms and can actually begin to master. They allow novices to learn 
more about students and about learning. They preserve the integrity and 
complexity of teaching, are research-based and have the potential of improving 
student achievement. A curriculum around a set of core practices is intended to 
help students develop professional knowledge and skills, as well as an emerging 
professional identity. 
The practices of teaching would provide the warp threads of the professional 
curriculum, while the knowledge and skill required to enact these practices 
constitute the weft. (Grossman et al., 2009, p. 277) 
In this way, the gap between theory and practice, which characterised traditional 
curricula with foundation courses on the one hand and methods courses on the 
other, should be bridged. Grossman et al. use the example of instructional 
scaffolding: 
When teaching practices related to instructional scaffolding to preservice 
teachers, teacher educators can focus on the underlying theoretical principles 
of why to scaffold instruction so that teachers learn when and under what 
conditions to provide instructional scaffolding. In addition, teacher educators 
should provide preservice teachers with opportunities to learn and enact the 
instructional routines involved in scaffolding instruction. While novices 
experiment with enacting such practices, they also are developing a 
professional identity built around their role as a teacher – the practices help 
elaborate their understanding of what it means to act as a teacher. 
Professional knowledge and identity are thus woven around practices of 
teaching. (p. 278) 
This kind of curriculum requires a close cooperation between universities and 
schools. As a result, university-based teacher educators will be more involved in 
the elaboration of teacher education programmes within schools. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
54
3. Curriculum development in practice 
The Australian study by Blaise and Elsden (2007) focuses on changes in their own 
curriculum. They collected data on the experiences of more than 300 students with 
a new, competency-based curriculum, in which group work, peer-feedback and 
group assessment were prominent elements. The authors disclosed the resistance 
among students to time-consuming group work with a diversity of participants, and 
the need to explicitly address the inequities and power relationships occurring 
when individuals are working together. Blaise and Elsden decided to explicitly 
share with their students the tensions, discomfort and doubts they had. They made 
space in the curriculum for letting students see how they themselves were 
questioning and rethinking their pedagogies. According to the authors 
This postmodern strategy acknowledges that a teachers’ identity is similarly 
constructed like the students’, and therefore, multiple and open to change. (p. 
402) 
While the educational principle of competency-based learning was leading in the 
study of Blaise and Elsden, most of the other studies we found show that teacher 
educators working within a curriculum lack a shared guiding principle. Willemse, 
Lunenberg, and Korthagen (2005) describe a Dutch case-study of nine teacher 
educators who designed a new curriculum for one semester. It was the intention to 
realise a better integration of pedagogical aims within the teacher education 
curriculum, especially regarding aspects of moral education. The study reveals that 
these teacher educators were mainly focused on the development of that part of the 
curriculum they were individually responsible for, with the result that moral 
education became only recognisable in some parts of the curriculum. Moreover, 
objectives were not formulated clearly, with the result that valid assessments 
became difficult. 
Kosnik and Beck (2008) studied the literacy instruction by ten teacher educators 
in their own Canadian elementary preservice programme. These teacher educators 
made their own individual choices concerning the way they taught the content of 
the curriculum. All of them wrestled with finding a balance between theory and 
practice. Six of them indicated they were teaching from a socio-constructivist 
perspective. 
They built community, tried to have students work from their own beliefs, 
presented many options, and used teaching strategies that allowed the 
students to experience first-hand many of the suggested methods. (p. 121) 
However, a closer analysis of the course outlines revealed that many of the courses 
were highly disjointed, “with the instruction ‘skipping’ from one topic to the next 
one” (p. 121). Moreover, students complained that they did not understand the 
theory presented in their courses and few of them reported using the practical 
strategies provided. 
In a U.S. study, Caroll (2005), himself a university-based teacher educator, 
describes the design process of a curriculum in a team (the Collaborating Teacher 
Study Group) together with school-based mentors. According to Caroll, by 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
55
fostering interactive talk in this study group around artefacts of mentoring practice, 
which had been developed by the mentors in the team, the members were able to 
jointly construct understandings of mentoring. Based on this common 
understanding, mentors took an increased responsibility for demonstrating their 
own planning in detail, and for creating checkpoints for assessing the progress of 
the students. Caroll also analysed his own role in this process, being both a 
participant and discussion facilitator. LeCornu (2010) and Martin, Snow, and 
Torrez (2011) also refer to the role of the teacher educator as a ‘linking pin’ 
between university and school in curriculum development. We will elaborate this 
aspect in depth in Section 4.7, where we discuss the role of broker. 
Critical features 
As we indicated above, we have found only a small number of studies on the 
teacher educator as a curriculum developer. Based on these studies, we identified 
one critical feature for the role of the teacher educator as a curriculum developer 
and the accompanying behaviour. 
Variety of approaches and practices. Characteristic of the present situation is that 
the retrieved literature shows a great diversity in approaches and practices. This 
creates an unclear situation for individual teacher educators in their role as 
curriculum developers. To a large extent, this role seems to be determined by local 
circumstances and socio-political discussions. The public debate is influencing the 
specific teacher education principles considered to be guiding for the development 
of teacher education curricula in a certain period and context. Mistakenly, the 
teacher educator seems to be more likely following than leading in this respect. 
Recently, the attention to curriculum development in cooperation with schools 
has been increasing. However, a systematic approach to curriculum development, 
by starting with clear objectives, is considered to be important, but in practice such 
an approach is rare. 
4.5.2. Professional Development 
In the introduction to this role, we already observed that we have not found any 
studies on professional development in the role of curriculum developer. Hence, 
we were not able to formulate a critical feature on this topic. 
4.6. GATEKEEPER 
In the role of gatekeeper, the teacher educator is responsible for the introduction of 
the student to the profession of teacher. We have only found 8 studies on this role 
and the accompanying behaviour. Three aspects emerge from these studies, which 
we have placed into one category, named Variety in assumptions and practices. 
This is the same category we used for the role of curriculum developer. Also 
similar is that for this role, studies of the professional development of teacher 
educators in the role of gatekeeper are absent in our selection of studies. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
56
4.6.1. Role and Behaviour 
Variety of approaches and practices 
Three aspects emerge from the literature. We discuss these below. 
1. Standards and profiles 
In the selected studies, the rod teacher educators use to measure student teachers 
against is defined by standards and profiles. Delandshere and Arens (2003) as well 
as Struyven and de Meyst (2010) state that these standards and profiles are meant 
to measure competencies, and that this view originates in the increasing emphasis 
in education on competencies in the previous decades. How student teachers 
should be supported to reach the competencies as defined in the standards and 
profiles, has been left to teacher educators and institutions for teacher education. 
The discussion on this challenge is, according to Struyven and de Meyst (2010), 
strongly influenced by constructivist ideas emphasising active learning. In practice, 
their study among 51 teacher educators in Flanders shows that there is a huge 
variety in approach and in the level of attention to the variety of competencies. 
They conclude that the quality of assessment procedures is often questionable. On 
the basis of their empirical study, they state that: 
In fact, the – reliable – measurement of competencies is an important 
problem due to its holistic approach, job-related nature and the integration of 
knowledge, skills and attitudes. (p. 1507) 
The US study of Goubeaud and Yan (2004) proved that teacher educators use 
significantly more constructivist inspired assessment methods (like writing essays 
and papers, and using peer feedback) than other teachers in higher education. 
Nonetheless, they also use traditional ways of assessment, such as multiple choice 
tests, to judge whether or not student teachers match the required standards. 
2. Portfolios 
Constructivist views about active learning have stimulated the use of portfolios in 
teacher education. Students are asked to compose a portfolio, because of the 
assumption that this will stimulate their active learning. Therefore, several of the 
studies of the role of gatekeeper focus on the teacher educator as an assessor of 
portfolios. As these studies (Delandshere & Arens, 2003; Granberg, 2010; Smith, 
2007, 2010; Tillema & Smith, 2007) show, there is a lot of confusion about what 
should be the content of portfolios, about the reliability and validity of the 
assessment of portfolios, and about the purpose of the assessment. 
 According to Tillema and Smith, an important reason for this confusion is the 
dilemma teacher educators face between their role as coach and their role as 
gatekeeper (see also Boote, 2003). They feel that using strict criteria does not fit 
the context and the development process of individual students. A summative 
evaluation, however, is essential to protecting the profession against incompetent 
teachers (Smith, 2007), i.e. for the role of gatekeeper. The studies by Tillema and 
Smith (2007) and Granberg (2010) show that teacher educators differ substantially 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
57
in the status they attribute to portfolios, and in their tendency towards a formative 
or summative assessment of portfolios. The Norwegian/Dutch study by Tillema 
and Smith shows that teacher educators value most the use of portfolios as 
instruments for development and as a means for authentic assessment. The way 
feedback is given and the assessment is grounded, shows a broad variety. Tillema 
and Smith examined how 34 teacher educators dealt with portfolios in their 
practices. They also offered an authentic portfolio document to 14 different 
assessors to compare their quality of rating and the way criteria were used. The 
dramatic conclusion from this study is phrased by the authors as follows: 
One of the most striking results is the lack of explicit, and above all, shared 
criteria between assessors in rating the quality of portfolios. This study shows 
there is hardly any communality, not in the grade giving nor in criteria 
selection for appraisal. Essentially, this means that the grade the student 
receives, based on the presented portfolio, is very subjective. It depends to a 
large degree on who the assessor is and what preferences she or he exercises. 
(p. 453) 
The US study by Delandshere and Arens (2003) of the use of portfolios in teacher 
education institutions at three universities, is focused on summative evaluation. 
The results of their study emphasise the usefulness of a portfolio for job hunting. 
The teacher educators in their study also emphasise that the quality of portfolios is 
important to the accreditation of their teacher education programme. In contrast, 
the students feel that the formative function of portfolios (as a means of learning to 
understand what teaching means and of getting feedback) suffers, because of the 
emphasis on matching standards. 
3. Assessment of school practices 
Struijven and De Meyst (2010) and Smith (2007, 2010) also point to another aspect 
of the teacher educators´ role as gatekeeper: the assessment of the school practice 
component of the teacher education programme, which is a core element of the 
programme. Smith (2007) put forward the question what the object of this 
assessment is, performance or competencies? If one shares the view that 
competencies are an integration of knowledge, skills and attitudes, then 
observation would not be sufficient to assess these. If that is the case, a follow-up 
question arises how observation of the school practice performance of student 
teachers is related to assessment based on competency-based standards. 
 Because of the shift of responsibilities from institutions to schools, a shift going 
on in many countries, the responsibility of the mentor or school-based teacher 
educator for assessment, especially with regard to the school practice component of 
the programme, becomes more and more important. Smith (2010) studied the 
mentors’ influence on assessment and found, among others, that it is not obvious 
that mentors and students agree on the focus of the feedback mentors provide on 
how students function in practice and on the level they should reach. Smith (2007) 
states: 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
58
To find evidence-based answers to all the questions and issues related to 
assessment, a dialectic process engaging all teacher educators is required. It 
requires intensive cooperation between the school and the university. In 
partnership programs which claim to share the responsibility for teacher 
education, close cooperation is needed in order to develop mutual trust and 
full understanding of how the responsibility for assessment is shared. (p. 284) 
Critical feature 
We have only found a limited number of studies on the teacher educator as a 
gatekeeper. Based on these studies, we formulate one single critical feature for 
the role of gatekeeper: 
Variety of approaches and practices. Teacher educators are expected to use fixed 
standards and profiles to decide whether or not a student teacher should be 
admitted to the profession of teacher. The development of ways along which 
students learn to match these standards and profiles is the responsibility of teacher 
education institutions, and varies hugely between these institutions. Due to a 
constructivist view on learning, portfolios are widely used to assess student 
teachers. The emphasis on the assessment of portfolios varies from formative to 
summative. Conducting a summative assessment, however, is essential to the 
teacher educator in the role of gatekeeper. 
 The validity and reliability of the assessment procedures in teacher education 
can be doubted. This is the case for the assessment of portfolios, but also with 
regard to the assessment of competencies in the school practice part of the 
programme, even more so because the responsibility for the assessment is 
increasingly shared with mentors, who often have different perspectives on the 
quality criteria student teachers should meet. 
 Above all, it seems that teacher educators struggle with combining the role of 
coach and the role of gatekeeper. 
4.6.2. Professional Development 
As mentioned before, we did not find any studies on the professional development 
for the role of gatekeeper, so no critical issues can be formulated here. 
4.7. BROKER 
As already discussed in the previous sections on the roles of coach, curriculum 
developer and gatekeeper, the contribution of the mentor to the education of 
student teachers is growing. In the past, the cooperation between a school and an 
institution for teacher education often consisted of a contact between one 
institution-based teacher educator, one mentor, and one student teacher. The 
purpose of the cooperation among this trio was limited to the coaching of the 
student teacher during the practice component of the teacher education programme. 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
59
Although the advice of the mentor was often taken into account in the assessment 
of the school practice component, in most cases only the institution-based teacher 
educator was responsible for the final decision. A case study by Bullough and 
Draper (2004) clearly illustrates how the opinion about each other the two 
facilitators had formed, based on limited contact, led to problems for the student 
involved. In another case study, Bullough (2005) concludes that the division of 
tasks and responsibilities between the institution-based teacher educator and the 
mentor defined the mentor’s identity: she focused on interaction and affection, on 
compassion instead of inquiry. 
 However, this situation is changing rapidly. Mentor educators become coresponsible for the development of the curriculum, for carrying out parts of the 
programme, and for the assessment of student teachers. Additional to being a 
coach, they also become a teacher of teachers, a curriculum developer, a 
gatekeeper, and even a researcher. Mentors become school-based teacher 
educators. This change requires adjustment, consultation and joint learning. As a 
consequence, it also requires teacher educators who are able to lead this process. 
He An (2009) introduced the name of broker for this role, a role often carried out 
in the context of a community of learners (Wenger, 1998*). 
 We have found 11 studies on this role and the accompanying behaviour. Only 1 
study discussed the development of this role and accompanying behaviour, which 
was not enough to draw conclusions. 
4.7.1 Role and Behaviour 
Based on the studies we have found, we can describe three factors defining the role 
and the accompanying behaviour of the teacher educator in the role of broker. We 
have classified these into two themes: 
I. Goals of cooperation; 
II. Competencies of a broker. 
I. Goals of cooperation
1. The student as the central focus
The primary goal for intensifying the cooperation between school and teacher 
education institutions is to better prepare student teachers. In their self-study, 
Martin et al. (2011) characterise their roles as brokers as: 
critical roles in developing and fostering interactions that could move the 
student teaching context from one of cooperation, in which the school simply 
agrees to take student teachers and to comply with university expectations, to 
one of collaboration, in which university faculty and K-12 teachers work 
together for joint aims. (p. 308) 
Le Cornu (2010) suggests to create communities of learners consisting of 
institution-based and school-based teacher educators, in which the learning of 
student teachers is the central focus, and to adjust the roles of the teacher educators 
in order to suit the student learning best. The need to tune between institution- and 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
60
school-based teacher educators to enhance the support for students also arises in 
several other studies (Bullough & Draper, 2004; Bullough, 2005; Hall et al., 2008). 
2. Becoming a collective 
Erickson, Brandes, Mitchell, and Mitchell (2005) studied both an Australian and a 
Canadian project in which models for joint learning of teacher educators and 
teachers were developed. Important factors for success proved to be: a long-term 
relationship in a safe environment, agreement on starting points and goals, 
connecting to the needs of the participants, taking into account different 
orientations of the participants, and also the time and means available to them. 
In line with Bullough, Draper, Smith, and Birrell (2004), who state that the 
process of forming partnerships needs to be understood less as an administrative 
and motivational problem than as a question of identity formation and of 
relationship building, Erickson et al. (2005) conclude: 
The potential of such projects to achieve these aims depends upon: 
(a) a mutually held understanding of what types of classroom practices 
nurture good teaching and learning, 
(b) a setting where teachers have a strong commitment and control over the 
project and decide on its direction, and 
(c) a structure that allows teachers and teacher educators to meet regularly in 
an atmosphere of trust and mutual understanding. (p. 787) 
Graham (1998) emphasises that the development of a joint identity of institutionbased and school-based teacher educators is not self-evident. Both groups come 
from different contexts with different foci, tempi, cultures and hierarchies. In his 
study, the role of broker circulated among the participants. This resulted in a better 
mutual understanding and a more enduring relationship. Martin et al. (2011) 
carried out a collaborative self-study to find out how the worlds of the school, the 
teacher education institution and the student teacher could become better 
connected. They conclude that creating a ‘third space’ with a teacher educator 
based in the school as well as in the teacher education institution involved, is 
important to connect the complex networks.
II. Competencies of the broker 
3. Shaping the role of broker. Based on his self-study, Carroll (2005) found that 
important activities of a broker are focusing the communal attention on specific 
themes or questions, supporting thinking aloud, and summarizing and 
consolidating joint insights and products. His study also shows that inviting and 
responsive leadership is important. Carroll summarised his findings as follows: 
I (…) focused upon the qualities and skills of leadership needed to promote 
inquiry oriented professional learning, I analyzed the role that I played in 
developing materials of practice, in designing analytic tasks, in modeling revoicing moves myself, and in directing the flow of conversation to promote 
inquiry. Taken together, these dimensions of the leadership role call attention 
4. RESULTS: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROFESSION 
61
to the challenges of finding of developing persons with the experience and 
capacity to fulfil such roles. (p. 472) 
He An (2009) adds that the broker needs communication and negotiation skills to 
guide decision making. Davey and Ham (2010) conclude that the most important 
points of attention in their collaborative self-study with mentors were: attention to 
the process and progress of the mentors’ research, attention to relationships, a safe 
environment and a positive atmosphere. 
Critical features 
The results described above lead to two critical features that define the role and the 
accompanying behaviour of the teacher educator as a broker. 
1. Goals of cooperation. The literature shows that there is widespread agreement 
about the central goal of the cooperation between school and teacher education 
institutions, and of the role of the broker in this cooperation: the shaping of the 
cooperation between teacher educators with different backgrounds and different 
working contexts so that, together, they can better facilitate the learning of student 
teachers. The broker should create a third space in which school-based and 
institution-based teacher educators can develop a joint vision, approach and 
identity. 
2. Competencies of the broker. The professional behaviour of a teacher educator in 
the role of broker requires specific competencies, such as focusing the joint 
attention on specific themes, consolidating joint achievements, attention to 
relationships and stimulating inquiry. 
4.7.2. Professional Development 
We only found one study of the professional development of the role of broker: the 
study by Bullough, Draper, Smith and Birrell (2004). These authors emphasise the 
process of ‘professional identity development’, because new ways of cooperation 
and new relationships require the willingness to change their professional identity 
from all who are involved. This one study, however, offers insufficient basis for 
defining a critical feature for the professional development of teacher educators as 
brokers. 
63 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
Recommendations for Research and Practice 
5.1. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this section, our review study will be summarised. 
In Chapter 1, we discussed that since the 1990s, there has been more attention to 
the crucial role of teacher educators in the educational chain. This has led to many 
studies about and by teacher educators. However, the research in this area has been 
quite scattered and missing until now was a clear, research-based overview of what 
is known internationally about the professional functioning of teacher educators. 
The aim of this review study was to fill in this blank through an analysis and 
synthesis of the literature, giving answers to the following research questions: 
1. What professional roles of teacher educators can be identified? 
2. What are the critical features determining the professional roles of teacher 
educators and the accompanying professional behaviour? 
3. What are the critical features determining the development of the professional 
roles and the accompanying professional behaviour of teacher educators? 
Chapter 2 described the theoretical framework. Teacher educators were defined as: 
all those who teach or coach (student) teachers with the aim of supporting their 
professional development. A professional role (in this book often briefly referred to 
as ‘a role’) was defined as: a personal interpretation of a position based on 
expectations from the environment and on a systematically organised and 
transferable knowledge base. Professional behaviour was conceptualised as: a 
personal interpretation of a position based on expectations from the environment 
and on a systematically organised and transferable knowledge base. Critical 
features are features determining the quality of professional roles or professional 
behaviour, or determining the quality of the professional development of teacher 
educators with regard to roles or behaviour. 
 In Chapter 3, we elaborated on the eight methodological steps described by 
Randolph (2009*) which shaped our research method. We used the keywords 
‘teacher educator(s)’, ‘teacher trainer(s)’ and ‘mentor teacher(s)’ in our searches in 
Web of Knowledge, Science Direct and Tandfonline. We restricted ourselves to 
articles from the period 1991-2011, focussing on the teacher educator and 
published in journals recognised by the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) or 
by the Dutch Interuniversity Centre for Educational Sciences (ICO). 
 A draft version of the review study was reviewed by seven ‘critical friends’ 
from the international community of researchers studying teacher education and/or 
teacher educators. In many respects, this led to a validation of the research method 
we followed and to a confirmation of the research findings. On a few issues, the 
5. CONLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
64 
comments of the critical friends helped us clarify text fragments, add literature, and 
slightly adapt the formulation of a few conclusions. 
 Finally, we ended up with 137 studies that seemed relevant to our research 
questions. They are presented in the appendix to this book. A major part of these 
studies was carried out after the year 2000, and most of them were published in 
North America, Australia, some European countries, and Israel. Qualitative and 
small-scale studies were dominant. The research methods most used were case 
studies, self-studies and interview studies (together they represented 58% of the 
studies found). The quantitative studies were generally limited in size and the 
research questions in the studies were quite diverse, which made a statistical metaanalysis impossible. 
 Chapter 4 discussed the findings of our review study. We identified six 
professional roles (as the answer to research question 1). Below, for each role we 
describe the answers we found regarding research questions 2 and 3. 
1. Teacher of teachers 
We found 67 studies on the role of teacher of teachers, which primarily deal with 
the pedagogical behaviour of the teacher educator. Critical features of the role of 
teacher of teachers and the behaviour in this role are: 
1. Second order teaching. 
The teacher of teachers does not teach the students in the schools, but their 
(prospective) teachers. This implies that teacher educators should be able to adapt 
their behaviour to adults within the context of higher education, and therefore need 
knowledge about (promoting) adult learning. This requires, for example, being able 
to articulate experiential knowledge and putting theoretical knowledge into 
practice. 
2. Promotion of active and self-directed learning. 
The teacher of teachers should be competent at promoting active, self-directed, and 
meaningful learning of students. In general, teacher educators share this view, but 
implementing this view is not easy and thus often inadequate. 
3. Modelling and making modelling explicit. 
Teacher educators are role models to a teacher, although they act at another level 
than teachers in primary or secondary education. Hence, teacher educators should 
be able to set good examples of effective teaching, to make this exemplary 
behaviour explicit, and to underpin their behaviour theoretically. One aspect of this 
is that they can reflect on their own feelings and are able to make these feelings 
explicit, in order to support the affective development of student teachers. Such 
explicit modelling seems difficult to teacher educators and they do it only to a 
small degree. 
4. Dealing with tensions and dilemmas. 
In order to be able to cope with tensions in specific situations, teacher educators 
need solid theoretical knowledge, experience and the ability to make wise 
decisions (practical wisdom). By continuously looking for the right balance in 
complicated situations, teacher educators fill in their role of teacher of teachers. 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
65 
Critical features of professional development in the role of teacher of teachers and 
the professional behaviour in this role are: 
1. Context. 
The existence of a frame of reference, such as professional standards and a 
knowledge base, are important in giving direction to the professional development 
of teacher educators as teachers of teachers, and in promoting their self-efficacy. 
2. Building on personal qualities of the teacher educator. 
Personal qualities of teacher educators are important, such as the will to learn and 
interest in their subject and in students. In addition, it is helpful if the professional 
development builds on the existing knowledge and experience of the teacher 
educator or fills gaps in this knowledge and experience. 
3. Support. 
Beneficial is informally learning from and with colleagues, but also through peer 
coaching, during colloquia and conferences, and in learning communities. Support 
from mentors of beginning teachers appears to take place in a rather fragmented 
manner. Learning trajectories for teacher educators should be targeted at their 
specific profession, but hardly any research has been done into the outcomes of 
such trajectories. 
4. Research. 
Carrying out research into one’s own practices appears to enhance the development 
of the professional role and the professional behaviour as a teacher of teachers. 
2. Researcher 
We found 26 studies dealing with the role of researcher. Worldwide, they show 
agreement that teacher educators should do research. However, in practice this is 
not self-evident as teacher educators appear to struggle with the role of researcher. 
 Critical features of the role of researcher and the behaviour in this role are: 
1. Views of the role of researcher. 
Teacher educators need acknowledgment of this role, but at the same time, they 
themselves tend to give greater priority to the role of teacher of teachers. 
Moreover, it is often unclear what the role of researcher involves. 
2. The practical elaboration of the role of researcher. 
Practical issues, such as the available time and information, should receive more 
attention. Also, more emphasis should be put on providing adequate support and 
creating a research culture within institutions for teacher education. 
3. The focus of research. 
Three possible foci for research are: the subject matter, primary or secondary 
education, and one’s own practices as a teacher educator. More clarity about and 
acceptance of research into one’s own practices seems necessary. In this respect, 
methodological guidelines are helpful. 
 Critical features of development in the role of researcher and the professional 
behaviour in this role are: 
5. CONLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
66 
1. Context. 
Important is creating a supportive context, with an appropriate view of research, 
explicit expectations and requirements, and various forms of support and 
collaboration. 
2. Factors within the person of the teacher educator-researcher. 
Important is attention to the development of personal qualities and to broadening 
perspectives on possible forms of research. 
3. Specific incentives to begin as a researcher and to keep going. 
Important incentives are making the research public, reporting about it within one’s 
own institution, and rewards. 
3. Coach 
We found 25 studies dealing with the teacher educator as a coach, which entails 
giving process support to student teachers both within the institution and in the 
workplace (in the latter case by the workplace facilitator). There seems to be 
general agreement in the literature that this is a pivotal factor in educating teachers.
 Critical features of the role of coach and the behaviour in this role are: 
1. The tasks of workplace facilitators. 
Workplace facilitators should not only give advice and introduce beginning 
teachers to the practices in the school, but they should also ask probing questions 
and stimulate discussion and reflection, going beyond the local context. However, 
the selected studies show that workplace facilitators do this insufficiently, and 
hardly make their own teaching behaviour and the underlying thinking explicit. 
This demands a better preparation of workplace facilitators, targeted at a broader 
task definition. 
2. The task of institution-based coaches. 
Institution-based coaches should find a balance between the role of coach and the 
role of teacher of teachers, and should clearly demarcate their task from the task of 
the workplace facilitator. They should avoid the role of a ‘caring therapist’, and 
focus more on discussion and critical reflection. 
 Critical features for the development of the coaching role and the professional 
behaviour in this role are: 
1. Goals and context. 
The part workplace facilitators play in the education of teachers is growing, and the 
nature of their contribution is changing considerably as increasingly they become 
school-based teacher educators. In their new role, they must not only be able to 
introduce new teachers to the practices of the school, but also to support them in 
reflection and research, and in the theoretical underpinning of their practical 
choices. For this aim, workplace facilitators should develop a research-oriented 
attitude. In order to realise adequate professional development of workplace 
facilitators, a strong partnership between schools and institutions for teacher 
education is important. 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
67 
2. Forms of support. 
Effective are training courses for workplace facilitators and participation in 
(guided) communities of learners that focus on inquiry and research into one’s own 
practices. 
4. Curriculum developer 
The development of a curriculum for teacher education is an important aspect of 
the work of teacher educators and the object of many studies. However, we found 
only 14 studies on the role of teacher educators as curriculum developers. Given 
this low number of studies, we limited ourselves to formulating one critical feature. 
We did not find any studies on professional development regarding the role of 
curriculum developer and/or regarding the accompanying behaviour. 
 A critical feature of the role of curriculum developer and the behaviour in this 
role is: 
A variety of approaches and practices. 
The literature shows a variety of guiding principles for the role of curriculum 
developer and their behaviour in this role, which creates an ambiguous situation for 
individual teacher educators. The role of curriculum developer is determined by 
local circumstances and by socio-political discussions. Regretfully, in this respect 
teacher educators seem more following than leading. During the last couple of 
years, there has been much attention to curriculum development in teacher 
education in cooperation with schools. However, a systematic approach to 
curriculum development, starting with the specification of goals, seems an 
exception. 
5. Gatekeeper 
In the role of gatekeeper, the teacher educator stands guard at the entrance to the 
teaching profession. We found only eight studies on this role, which is why we 
have again limited ourselves to one critical feature. We did not find any studies 
about professional development in the role of gatekeeper and/or the accompanying 
behaviour, which is why we did not formulate a critical feature for professional 
development in the role of gatekeeper. 
 A critical feature of the role of gatekeeper and the behaviour in this role is: 
A variety of approaches and practices. 
In general, teacher educators use fixed standards and profiles for the teaching 
profession, but the paths along which students can learn how to meet those 
standards differ greatly among various contexts. Portfolios are frequently used as a 
means for formative or summative assessment. There are, however, doubts about 
the validity and reliability of the assessment of portfolios and also about the 
assessment of competencies, in particular because workplace facilitators often have 
5. CONLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
68 
a different perspective on quality criteria. Teacher educators struggle with the 
combined role of coach and gatekeeper. 
6. Broker 
The contribution of the workplace facilitator to the education of teachers is 
growing, which asks for teacher educators who, in the role of broker, are able to 
realise alignment of programme elements in close cooperation between the 
institution for teacher education and the schools. We found 11 studies on the role 
of broker and the behaviour in this role, but only one of them dealt with the teacher 
educator’s professional development in this role. Therefore, we did not formulate a 
critical feature for professional development in the role of broker. 
Critical features of the role of broker and the professional behaviour in this role 
are: 
1. Goals of cooperation. 
There is much agreement about the central goal of the role of broker, namely 
promoting cooperation between teacher educators from different backgrounds and 
working in different contexts, in order to better prepare students for the teaching 
profession. In order to realise this goal, the broker should promote the development 
of a joint vision, approach and identity by educators in the school and the 
institution for teacher education. 
2. Competencies of the broker. 
The professional behaviour in the role of broker requires specific competencies, 
such as relational skills, being able to focus the joint attention of participants in the 
cooperation towards specific themes, to consolidate results that have been 
acquired, and to promote a research-oriented attitude of the participants in the cooperation. 
5.2. A REFLECTION 
5.2.1. Methodological Reflection 
Although we feel we found a good balance between the available time for this 
review study and the amount of literature we studied, some critical comments are 
called for concerning the research method used. 
 Looking at the number of studies we found with the three search engines, we 
can conclude that each next search engine yielded more than a hundred new and 
possibly relevant publications. Hence, it might be that the use of more search 
engines would have contributed to finding more publications. However, we used 
the criterion of conceptual saturation, which means that we did not continue our 
search because after a content analysis of approximately one third of the studies, no 
new roles or critical features were found. However, it is possible that a further 
search would have yielded additional insights. 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
69 
 A similar limitation concerns the choice of the three search terms. This review 
study deals with a field on which many, often closely related terms are in use, 
which all touch upon aspects that might be important to our study. For practical 
reasons, however, we had to accept this limitation. This may in particular have led 
to consequences as far as the term ‘mentor teacher’ was involved. If we would 
have used the term ‘cooperating teacher’, which is more common in the US, we 
would probably have found a number of other studies. It is possible that this would 
have led to new insights or slightly different categorisations, although the 
disadvantage would have been that the results would then be strongly influenced 
by the American context. Anyway, it may be important to emphasise that for each 
theme in this review study, the results are partly determined by the choice of the 
key words, and by the contexts or the countries in which the selected studies were 
carried out, although we did try to avoid such local ‘bias’ as much as possible. As a 
result of the strict application of Randolph’s eight steps, which included asking for 
feedback from critical friends, we believe that the conclusions of our study are 
valid and reliable. 
 In our selection, we only included studies in which the teacher educator was the 
object of study. This means that studies on, for example, effective pedagogies in 
certain domains or on curriculum development were not included in this review 
study when the role of teacher of teachers or curriculum developer was not the 
central focus. Of course, this could mean that studies could exist that do yield 
guidelines for the behaviour or professional development of teacher educators in 
such roles, but that they remained outside our selection. However, it was 
practically impossible to include all those studies in the review. This could be an 
explanation for the relatively low number of publications in our selection, 
especially where it concerns the roles of curriculum developer and gatekeeper. 
 Finally, in our analysis and synthesis of the literature, we restricted ourselves to 
journals acknowledged by ISI or ICO. From the studies we found, we also removed 
a few more because the methodological quality of these studies seemed too low. 
Moreover, we did not systematically include book publications, as it was often 
difficult to establish their quality, except in the case of Ph.D. theses. The book 
publications we did use, are listed in the additional list of references and are 
marked with an asterisk. Of course, findings from studies we did not use could 
perhaps also have been valid. It is possible that such publications could have 
contributed to additional insights. However, for practical reasons, we had to draw a 
line in our selection. In Chapter 3 we have explained our choices as much as 
possible. 
5.2.2. Reflection on the Findings Concerning (the Behaviour in) the Various Roles 
In this section, we make some specific remarks about our findings concerning the 
(behaviour in) the various roles. 
5. CONLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
70 
Teacher of teachers 
The role of teacher of teachers requires a lot of pedagogical expertise, which 
should be expressed both in the behaviour in this role and in an awareness of 
pedagogical principles and theories. Moreover, teacher educators should be able to 
make those principles and theories explicit and underpin their behaviour (explicit 
modelling). The aim of all this is to promote the use of such theories and principles 
by the students enrolled in the teacher education programme in their work as 
teachers. As we have noted, this implies, for example, that teacher educators 
should have knowledge about adult learning, that they are able to promote active 
and self-directed learning, and that they can cope with all kinds of tensions and 
dilemmas. Not all of this is easy, and it makes the role of teacher of teachers 
complex. In practice, teacher educators do not always possess these competencies, 
and perhaps they do not always realise that they are important. What is helpful in 
this context is the availability of professional standards, a knowledge base for the 
profession of teacher educator, and an educational trajectory and registration 
procedure for teacher educators (see also Chapter 6). Institutions for teacher 
education could promote or even require that (all) teacher educators actually use 
those instruments, as until now, the professional development of teacher educators 
generally only took place on a voluntary basis. It would also be helpful to the 
professional development in the role of teacher of teachers to bring more structure 
into the organisation of peer coaching and coaching by more experienced 
colleagues. Finally, the powerful instrument of research into one’s own practices 
could be used more broadly in order to promote the professional development as a 
teacher of teachers and to stimulate teacher educators towards scholarship as the 
basis of their professional functioning. 
Researcher 
The role of researcher can offer a major contribution to the professionalisation of 
teacher educators. It is helpful that relatively many studies focus on this role and on 
factors favourable to the professional development in this role and for optimal 
behaviour as a researcher. However, the literature also shows that at the 
institutional level no “quick fixes” exist for promoting the professional 
development of teacher educators as researchers (Murray, 2010, p. 200). An 
important reason is that the fulfilment of this role implies a change in the 
professional identity of teacher educators, and such an identity change takes time. 
As Griffiths et al. (2010, p. 258) state it: “becoming a researcher is not an 
overnight process”; it is rather a “slow journey.” Moreover, there is a discrepancy 
between, on the one hand views in higher education about what is solid research 
and on the other the needs and views of at least part of the teacher educators 
themselves.
Coach 
The coaching of students’ learning processes is an important aspect of the work of 
teacher educators. It is noteworthy that studies on (the development of) the 
professional role and the professional behaviour of teacher educators as coaches 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
71 
generally focus on the workplace facilitator. Studies on the institution-based 
teacher educator as a coach are almost nonexistent, whereas the rare studies we did 
find, show that this role creates certain pitfalls. Further research in this area seems 
needed. 
 Although the trend seems to be to promote cooperation between institutions for 
teacher education and schools, the selected studies show that, in practice, 
workplace facilitators have a rather local perspective and define their own role as 
merely being an advisor. Training and participation in communities of learners 
seem productive ways for promoting the professional development of workplace 
facilitators towards a broader role conception. 
Curriculum developer 
Although Cochran-Smith (2006*) emphasises that teacher educators should play an 
active role in the socio-political debate about principles guiding teacher education 
programmes, this is hardly the case. Pedagogical principles appear to be constantly 
changing under the influence of certain trends, and are often hardly supported by 
research findings. Studies on the practice of curriculum development by teacher 
educators are rare. We did not find any studies on the professional development of 
teacher educators as curriculum developers. However, as mentioned above, there is 
quite some literature about curriculum development in general, or in the area of 
pedagogical content matter. This literature may offer guidelines for the teacher 
educator’s role as a curriculum developer, but these studies were not included in 
our selection if the role of the teacher educator was not an explicit theme.
Gatekeeper 
Teacher educators are expected to stand guard at the entrance to the teaching 
profession. It is remarkable that we did not find any studies discussing an explicit 
view of teacher educators in the role of gatekeeper or the use of standards in this 
role, whereas the literature shows that teacher educators struggle with it. The 
teacher educator as a gatekeeper is expected to give summative assessments of 
teachers based on standard lists of competencies, whereas teacher educators wish 
to include their students’ learning processes in their evaluations. Another tension 
emerges as assessments of the practical components of the teacher education 
programme are often based on observations, whereas the assessment of 
competencies requires that besides skills, knowledge and attitudes are also 
assessed. Finally, the contribution of the workplace facilitator to the assessment is 
often vague. It is noteworthy that we did not find any studies on the professional 
development of teacher educators in the role of gatekeeper. 
Broker 
The role of broker is a relatively new one for teacher educators. In a large number 
of studies, one can find references to this role, but research on this role is still 
scarce. There seems to be general consensus about the core of this role: the essence 
is creating cooperation structures between teacher educators from different 
backgrounds and working in different contexts with the goal of improving the 
5. CONLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
72 
quality of the education of prospective teachers. The selected studies provide a first 
indication regarding the qualities the broker should have in order to fulfil this role. 
Given the trend towards professional development schools, this seems a field on 
which further research is urgent. Such research should also give attention to the 
professional development of teacher educators in the role of broker and the 
accompanying behaviour, topics that are at present absent in the literature. 
A missing role? 
Finally we note that from our review of the literature no role emerges that we could 
describe as ‘organiser’ or ‘coordinator’, whereas we know that many teacher 
educators put much time and effort into organisational work and coordinating 
tasks. Koster (2002*) did an empirical study on the tasks and competencies of 
teacher educators and found that important task areas are (a) taking part in policy 
development and the development of teacher education, and (b) organising 
activities for and with teachers. An explanation for the fact that in our literature 
review we did not find a role such as organiser or coordinator could be that this 
role is considered an integral part of other roles and is thus not studied separately. 
Only in the literature about the role of broker, organisational aspects and 
consequences for the teacher educators’ behaviour are explicitly mentioned. 
Another explanation can be that this role is perhaps not specific to teacher 
educators, because every teacher in higher education fulfils certain organisational 
or coordinating tasks. Finally, a simple explanation can be that researchers find this 
area less interesting as a research theme. 
5.2.3. Reflection on the Status Quo in the Research 
This review study provides an analysis and synthesis of the literature that fills a 
gap in the research on teacher educators and their work. The roles and critical 
features we found make visible what until now had remained below the surface in 
the literature. The critical features offer guidelines for further research, for practice, 
and for policy. They show the status quo on this field, and as such they may give 
support to teacher educators, coordinators, or policymakers searching for 
information about the profession of teacher educators. The list of roles and critical 
features can also help to further develop a knowledge base for teacher educators 
and offer building blocks for the professional development of teacher educators. 
Hence, we consider this review study as a step forward on this field. 
The growing empirical basis for the profession 
We wish to add some critical comments. When overseeing the literature used in 
this review study, we draw two conclusions: 
1. The literature is unevenly distributed and shows a variety of foci. What is 
lacking is conceptual coherence, but also clear lines of research and attempts 
to promote collaboration of researchers. Examples in which researchers try to 
extend each other’s work are rare. 
2. Solid quantitative studies are almost completely absent in the literature. 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
73 
Our first conclusion will not be a surprise, as it was the incentive to carry out this 
review study and, in this respect, this study represents an important development, 
as an analysis and synthesis has been made of what has been published in quite 
scattered sources. 
We may conclude that there is a beginning of an empirical basis for the 
professional behaviour of teacher educators. However, the degree to which an 
empirical basis for the profession of teacher educator exists, differs per role. 
Although this study offers an important contribution to the further development of 
a systematic, structured, and transferable knowledge base, we have not reached the 
point at which teacher educators can dispose of a robust, research-based foundation 
for their behaviour in the various roles. 
Many studies deal with the central role of teacher of teachers. It is remarkable that 
this research also shows that in practice, the behaviour of teacher educators is often 
problematic. This may be a reason for the lack of strong empirical support for 
specific strategies and pedagogical approaches in teacher education as noted by 
Cochran-Smith & Zeichner (2005*). 
 Studies on the role of researcher show a gap between institutional policies and 
teacher educators’ practices. Empirical studies on ways of bridging this gap are 
rare. Murray (2010) concludes that 
… the hard fact is that, within many other Schools of Education, teacher 
educators as new researchers may still find themselves struggling to reconcile 
their practitioner research with definitions of ‘acceptable’ and ‘conventional’ 
research outputs. (p. 206) 
According to Murray, the challenge is to develop a “new language of learning and 
scholarship” (p. 207) which connects workplace learning, research, personal 
experiences, and teacher education practices. 
Most of the research on the role of coach is focused on the workplace facilitator. 
This research shows that for this role too, there is quite a distance between ideals 
and reality. In practice, the workplace facilitator mainly functions as a local guide 
and a practical advisor. The ideal is that workplace facilitators become schoolbased teacher educators able to put their own teaching practices and those of their 
student teachers under discussion, in a reflective manner. The available research 
shows some first examples of professional development activities contributing to 
such a development. 
 For the other three roles, too, more research is needed, as discussed above. 
Regarding the role of broker, we may conclude that there is a beginning of an 
empirical basis, but this basis is still not strong. This is also true for the roles of 
curriculum developer and gatekeeper, but we expect that additional building blocks 
for an empirical basis for these roles can be found in studies on curriculum 
development and assessment in teacher education (i.e. studies in which the teacher 
educator is not the central focus). 
 As far as the improvement of an empirical basis is concerned, the growth of the 
self-study movement is important: increasingly, teacher educators do research into 
5. CONLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
74 
their own practices. However, in this research strand, methodological rigour, depth 
and connections with other literature are sometimes missing. Teacher educators 
carrying out self-studies should give more attention to “going beyond the story”, as 
Loughran (2010*, p. 223) calls it. We believe that this is essential to bringing the 
profession of teacher educator to a higher level. Teacher educator-researchers 
could in this respect try to collaborate more and to combine their efforts. 
5.2.4. Reflection on the Relation between Research and Teacher Education 
Practices 
The literature shows that many teacher educators feel they can hardly build their 
behaviour on a robust theoretical framework or on standards formulated by the 
professional community (Snoek, Swennen, & Van der Klink, 2011). On the basis 
of our review study, we also conclude that where the literature does offer insights 
into what kind of teacher educator behaviour is effective in certain roles, the actual 
behaviour of teacher educators is not always in line with this. The reason seems to 
be that teacher educators are often insufficiently informed about the literature, and 
that they are often not focused on strengthening their theoretical knowledge. In 
conclusion, it seems important to promote scholarship as the basis of the profession 
of teacher educator. This is true for all six roles that we found. 
The link between research and teacher educators’ practices can be strengthened 
considerably. A mere focus on practical skills of the teacher educator seems 
insufficient. In an in-depth study of six teacher educators, John (2002) found that 
… they all argued strongly for the preparation of teachers by means of 
improving their student teachers’ capacity for professional judgment and 
decision making rather than by providing extensive practice of skills in a 
single classroom - or even several. They also called for the exercise of 
insight, strategic understanding and critical thinking rather than effective 
performance of learnt skills. Additionally, they desired to develop practical 
wisdom in their students rather than endlessly refined but situation-specific 
instrumental knowledge. (pp. 336-337) 
We think that many teacher educators will agree with this perspective, but our 
study shows that in this respect, there is still much work to be done. This is why 
several authors advocate supporting individual teacher educators’ searching for 
optimal behaviour by means of a systematic induction programme. However, more 
methodologically strong and systematic research is needed in this area before it is 
possible to develop an ‘evidence-based’ induction programme. On the basis of the 
literature, Murray (2010, p. 205) states that the idea of research into one’s own 
practices should get a central place in an induction programme for teacher 
educators. This is exactly the kind of research that creates a strong bridge between 
research and teacher education practices. A good example can be found in Israel, 
where the existence of the MOFET Institute has led to interesting outcomes 
regarding the professional development of teacher educators in the role of 
researcher. This shows that an investment in creating supportive contexts can be 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
75 
fruitful. Helpful contexts cannot always be realised easily within separate 
institutions, and it thus seems helpful to organise the professional development of 
teacher educators at the national level. A less far-reaching form was described by 
Jones at al. (2011), namely a collaboration structure between seven universities in 
England, aimed at the promotion of research by teacher educators. Such initiatives 
to transcend separate institutions may help to positively shape the helpful factors 
that we have discussed. 
5.3. RECOMMENDATIONS 
5.3.1. Recommendations for Further Research 
On the basis of this review study, we can conclude that there is a need for further 
strengthening of the empirical basis for teacher educators’ behaviour in most of the 
roles. We have the following recommendations for further research: 
1. A coherent research programme 
As the current research is small-scale and scattered, our overall conclusion is that it 
is important to create a coherent research programme on the professional behaviour 
and the professional development of teacher educators. More international 
collaboration seems important. The following, more specific recommendations 
could be leading in such an effort. 
2. The professional behaviour of teacher educators 
More systematic research is necessary into the professional behaviour of teacher 
educators. Also, more knowledge is needed about critical features determining the 
behaviour of teacher educators in their various roles, and on the effectiveness of 
this behaviour. As studies in this area are often small-scale and isolated, more 
coherence is urgent. In particular, longitudinal research into long-term effects of 
teacher educators’ behaviour on teachers seems important. In addition, more largescale and quantitative studies are needed. 
3. Professional development 
A similar recommendation can be given regarding the professional development of 
teacher educators. This is also an area on which little is known, in particular about 
what is effective in supporting teacher educators in their professional growth. 
Research should focus on relations between on the one hand promising activities 
aiming at the professional development of teacher educators (for example 
participating in a training trajectory or carrying out research into one’s own 
practices), and on the other hand at resulting learning processes and outcomes, also 
in the longer term. Although some research findings seem directly useful to teacher 
educators and have yielded knowledge directly applicable to their practices, teacher 
educators are often unaware of this knowledge. Hence, research should also focus 
on the question of what is helpful to promoting the transfer from research outcomes 
to the daily work of teacher educators. 
5. CONLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
76 
4. Research into one’s own practices 
Given the impressive contribution to the professional development of teacher 
educators of research into one’s own practices, it is important to promote this kind 
of research at (inter)national and institutional levels. In this respect, the critical 
features we derived from the literature could be helpful in creating optimal 
contexts. What is also needed is evaluative research on self-study research by 
teacher educators (thus research at a meta-level). 
5. School-based teacher education and the role of broker 
The trend towards school-based teacher education has an important meaning to 
society as a whole. Therefore, in the relatively new research area dealing with the 
crucial role of the teacher educator as a broker, studies should focus on the 
question of what is effective in teacher educators’ behaviour in this role. Here, we 
should understand the term ‘effective’ in the sense of what the learning outcomes 
in teachers are of the teacher educator’s behaviour in the role of broker. It is also 
necessary to do research on the professional development of teacher educators in 
this role. 
6. Research on the roles of coach, curriculum developer, and gatekeeper 
We recommend that specific research should be done into (the effectiveness of) the 
behaviour of teacher educators in the role of coach, and on effective forms of 
professional development of teacher educators in this role. Such research should 
focus both on institution-based teacher educators and workplace facilitators. A 
specific point of attention could be how workplace facilitators can be supported to 
go beyond their often local perspective. 
 Research on the role of curriculum developer should focus on the question of 
how teacher educators, both in schools and in institutions for teacher education, 
could be supported in the joint development of a research-based curriculum, using 
new insights into effective pedagogies of teacher education. Here an important 
aspect is how to avoid teacher educators becoming entangled in local and political 
conflicts and all kinds of short-term trends, and to promote their ability to defend 
research-based standpoints and use them for effective curriculum development. 
Given the responsibility of teacher educators towards society, in particular in their 
role as gatekeeper, more research is needed into the validity and reliability of 
assessment procedures in teacher education, the concrete behaviour of teacher 
educators in their role of gatekeeper, and their professional development in this 
role. 
5.3.2. Recommendations for Practice 
We have the following recommendations for practice: 
1. Use of this review study 
Teacher educators could make more use of the existing literature on their 
profession. Given the fact that many teacher educators are constantly struggling 
with time constraints, this book could be a powerful instrument, as it is a synthesis 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
77 
of the most important research in this area. We believe it is important that this 
review study would also be used by policymakers at the national and institutional 
level. 
2. Enhancing professional development 
At national and institutional levels, more attention should go to systematic forms of 
professional development of teacher educators. To this end, the above conclusions 
and discussion can be helpful. Also good examples from other countries can be 
used to strengthen the situation in one’s own context. As an example, in Chapter 6 
we describe a few productive developments in the Netherlands. More attention is 
needed to the professional development of school-based teacher educators and 
workplace facilitators, also to help them to transcend a local perspective. Creating 
communities of learners in which institution-based and school-based teacher 
educators collaborate, can be a powerful instrument.
3. Trends in the pedagogy of teacher education 
Given the lack of evidence about pedagogical strategies and instruments in teacher 
education, teacher educators and policymakers could be more critical regarding 
new trends in the education of teachers. Teacher educators could also contribute 
more actively to policymaking in this area. 
4. Assessment and the role of gatekeeper 
More attention to the validity and reliability of assessment procedures in teacher 
education and the concrete behaviour of teacher educators in their role of 
gatekeeper seems urgent. In this role, teacher educators have a responsibility 
towards society. Hence, more attention is needed to the professional development 
of teacher educators in the role of gatekeeper. 
79
MIEKE LUNENBERG, JURRIEN DENGERINK, 
FRED KORTHAGEN, SASKIA ATTEMA-NOORDEWIER, 
JANNEKE GEURSEN AND BOB KOSTER 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
Quality Improvement in the Profession of Teacher Educators 
6.1. INTRODUCTION 
As stated in the previous chapters of this book, teacher educators play a crucial role 
in maintaining and developing the quality of teachers, both at the primary and the 
secondary level (Liston, Borko, & Whitcomb, 2008). As we have seen in recent 
years, a variety of scholars have emphasised this implies that teacher educators 
have a profession of their own, which should be distinguished from the profession 
of teachers, and that there is a need for the further professional development of 
teacher educators (Murray & Male, 2005; Swennen, Jones, & Volman, 2010). 
Given the fact that many become teacher educators after being recognised as a 
good teacher, without any additional training for their new job, one might well ask 
what needs to be done before being a teacher educator will really be a profession in 
its own right. From the start of this millennium on, the Netherlands has been one of 
the countries that has taken the lead with regard to the development of the 
profession and the professional development of teacher educators. In this chapter, 
we report on these Dutch developments. The chapter is based on three national 
projects that the authors of this chapter have been involved in. 
Occupation or Profession? 
Verloop (2001*) describes how an occupation can become a profession. In order to 
become a profession, an occupation should meet the following criteria: (1) the 
profession performs a crucial social function; (2) the profession requires a 
considerable degree of skill; (3) its practitioner draws on a body of structured 
knowledge; (4) entrance into the profession requires a lengthy period of higher 
education; (5) the profession focuses on the pre-eminence of clients’ interests; (6) 
professionals have a certain amount of freedom to make their own judgments with 
regard to what is considered appropriate practice; and (7) the profession is 
rewarded with high prestige and a high level of remuneration. These criteria concur 
with a review study by Krishnaveni and Anitha (2007*) on educators’ professional 
characteristics, which also confirms that an occupation involves formal 
requirements and an extensive formal education in order to become a profession. 
In most western countries, the occupation of teacher educator meets the criteria 1, 5 
and 6, but the other criteria still seem in need of further attention. Criterion 3, for 
example, presumes that a well-defined knowledge base is available, while criteria 2 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
80
and 4 imply that well-defined programmes exist for the professional preparation of 
future teacher educators. In sum, criteria 2, 3, and 4 raise the question what and 
how teacher educators should learn. Answering these questions, theoretically as 
well as in practice, might also contribute to fulfilling criterion 7. 
Based on the review study presented in this book, besides conclusions on the 
current state of research on the profession of teacher educator and 
recommendations for future studies, we have also formulated several 
recommendations for practice that answer this question (see Chapter 5).
Our first recommendation is to strengthen the scholarship of teacher educators, 
because research shows that teacher educators often feel they lack a frame of 
reference and a solid theoretical basis for their behaviour. The review study shows 
that national frames of reference as, for example, the Netherlands and Belgium 
have developed, are helpful. In the next section, we describe the Dutch professional 
standard and the procedure linked to the standard that teacher educators pass 
through to become a teacher educator registered with the Dutch Association of 
Teacher Educators. We will also summarise the outcomes of a study on this 
project, which started in 2002. 
More recently, Dutch teacher educators can also consult a web-based 
knowledge base. In Section 6.3, we report on the development of this knowledge 
base, which started in 2009, and on a study about how teacher educators view and 
use this knowledge base. 
The review study also showed that, even when a frame of reference and a 
theoretical base are available, teacher educators often do not behave in line with 
what is known. Hence, teacher educators should be stimulated to learn about and 
also use the available knowledge to strengthen their scholarship. Therefore, our 
second recommendation is to organise systematic professional development. To 
support the difficult search of – beginning – teacher educators for improving the 
quality of their teaching of student teachers, the suggestion has been put forward in 
several studies to develop a programme for teacher educators. Building blocks 
could be a national frame of reference, a systematic knowledge base and, more 
specifically, learning to carry out research into one’s own practice. Such research, 
if supported by the institutions involved, can bridge the gap between theory and 
practice, and is a productive form of professional development (Murray, 2010). In 
the Netherlands, a programme based on these ideas was carried out twice (in 2011 
and 2012). In Section 6.4, we discuss this programme and how it was evaluated by 
the participating teacher educators. 
6.2. PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS AND REGISTRATION PROCEDURE1
6.2.1. The Project 
In 2001, the Association of Dutch Teacher Educators initiated the project 
“Professional Quality of Teacher Educators”. In this project, a professional 
standard, and a procedure for (self-)assessment and professional development have 
been developed for teacher educators in order to obtain certification. 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
81
Figure 6.1. The first version of the Dutch standard for teacher educators
The foundation area: basic attitudes and beliefs for teacher educators 
F1 A teacher educator can work at three levels: 
- has insight into his/her pupils’ development 
- facilitates and supervises the student teacher’s development 
- takes charge of his/her own professional development. 
F2 Teacher educators formulate their own educational vision, one linked to the reality. They are able 
to adapt this vision to the pedagogical views of their institution, and to communicate this clearly to 
colleagues and students. Their educational vision must therefore be outward looking. 
F3 A teacher educators attitudes are: 
- is open to others and is a good listener 
- dares to take risks and be initiative 
- can offer feedback and is synonymously open to receiving it 
- stands by his/her views and can argue them convincingly 
- is dedicated, committed and involved 
- strives to solve problems with tact and diplomacy. 
F4 A teacher educator uses in his/her work the following criteria for realistic teacher education: 
- takes, as a starting point, the specific practical problems and concerns experienced by 
teachers and student teachers, including those of the subject matter being taught 
- is oriented towards the stimulation of systematic reflection (Note: this reflection is directed towards 
acquiring subject knowledge, establishing routines, seeking professional growth, etc.) 
- makes deliberate use of both interaction between the educator and individual students, 
as well as between the students themselves 
- works in an integrated manner, both with regard to the integration of theory and practice and to the 
integration of different disciplines 
- acquires and maintains knowledge from a variety of sources. 
F5 These attitudes and beliefs mean that the teacher educator must be prepared to take and develop 
initiatives together with his/her students in all competency areas. The educator considers the student 
as a partner qualified to contribute towards the development, implementation, and evaluation of 
his/her own education and development. 
F6 Teacher educators must also be a model in all five competency areas. This means, for instance, 
that they must implement what they consider to be important into their own pedagogical behaviour. 
General competencies
The five competency areas are: 
(0) ICT competencies 
(1) Content competencies 
(2) Pedagogical competencies 
(3) Organisational competencies 
(4) Group dynamic and communicative competencies 
(5) Developmental and personal growth competencies 
The last competency area listed is a prerequisite for the first five; it is a ‘meta-competency’ that the 
other competencies depend on. 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
82
 In the first version of the Dutch standard, the attitudes and beliefs of teacher 
educators are formulated as ‘The foundation: basic attitudes and beliefs for teacher 
educators’. The knowledge and skills of teacher educators are formulated as 
‘General Competencies’ consisting of five competency areas. Each area contains a 
set of related elements occurring in the teacher educator’s work with some 
regularity (see Figure 1). 
The standard is used as a reference point by teacher educators going through the 
procedure of self-assessment and professional development. They are asked: 
1. to analyse their strengths and weaknesses by using a structured standardsbased score form and describe authentic situations demonstrating good 
practice examples from their own work; 
2. to discuss these products with a peer coach who is also a participant in the 
procedure; 
3. to assemble feedback from colleagues and student teachers by giving 
them a structured standards-based score form to be filled out by at least 30 
students and five colleagues; 
4. to formulate goals and develop a plan for professional development; 
5. to assemble a portfolio containing a description of how they have worked 
on their professional development and of the outcomes of their 
professional development. 
Participants first come together for an introductory meeting. In this meeting, the 
procedure is explained and participants select a peer coach. Participation in the 
procedure is on a voluntary basis. Every participant is assigned two peer assessors. 
The assessors are selected by the Dutch Association of Teacher Educators. Peer 
assessors are paid and trained for their work. They evaluate the products and 
portfolios of the participants, and judge whether a participant will be allowed to 
receive registration. 
In the end, successful completion of the procedures of self-assessment and 
professional development allows the participant to become registered as a certified 
teacher educator. After four years of being registered, the certified teacher 
educators will go through a re-registration procedure. 
6.2.2 Research on the Project 
Regarding the teacher educators participating in the Dutch project “Professional 
Quality of Teacher Educators,” we aimed at answering three questions: 
1. What goals do they formulate for their professional development? 
2. What kind of professional development activities do they engage in? 
3. What are the outcomes of their professional development? 
For our study on their professional development, we used 25 portfolios, completed 
between April 2001 and December 2003, while also securing permission from 
those participants to disclose information from their files. 
Table 6.1 illustrates the age distribution of the participants. 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
83
Table 6.1. Age of the participants whose professional development 
we studied (n=25) 
Age of the participants Number of participants 
30-39 years 7 
40-49 years 13 
> 49 years 5 
Out of the 25 participants, eleven were working in a teacher education college or 
department for primary education, and five in a teacher education department for 
secondary education. Six participants were working in a university teacher 
education programme, and three in a specific teacher education programme within 
subject-based colleges such as art and physical education colleges. 
 This group participated voluntarily in the procedure of (self-) assessment and 
professional development. They were also members of the Dutch Association of 
Teacher Educators (VELON). 
Koster (2002*) found that a VELON member is, in general, more active in the 
field of professional development than a non-member. Our research, therefore, 
focused on a specific group: a relatively active, motivated, and experienced group 
of teacher educators. And additionally, the members of the group may be 
characterised as “early adopters”, because they participated in the first two years of 
existence of this (self-) assessment procedure. 
Method 
To answer our first research question, the elements of the Dutch standard for 
teacher educators were used to categorise the goals the participants had defined in 
their own assessments of professional development. Two independent researchers 
were commissioned to carry out this categorisation. 
At times, the participants wrote down goals corresponding exactly to the Dutch 
standard categories. In other cases, the researchers categorised the goals teacher 
educators had formulated into one or more elements of the standard. The reliability 
of the scores of the two researchers was substantial (Cohen’s Kappa = .69). 
To analyse the data for answering the second research question, we used a 
model based on the work of Hoekstra and Bakkenes (2004*) and Berings, Gelissen 
and Poell (2004*). Based on these studies, we selected the following six categories 
of professional development activities of teacher educators in our study: 
1. Learning by doing (non-intentional) 
2. Applying or experimenting (intentional) 
3. Reflecting on work experiences 
4. Learning without interaction 
5. Learning through interaction 
6. Learning outside of work 
Again, two independent researchers performed the categorisation. The inter-rater 
reliability of the scores of the two researchers was substantial (Cohen’s Kappa = 
.81). 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
84
When analysing the data for answering the third research question, which 
regards the outcomes of the participants´ professional development, we used some 
studies (Korthagen & Lunenberg, 2004*; Kallenberg & Koster, 2004*) that 
allowed us to set up distinctions between outcomes at the personal level and those 
at the collective level: 
1. Outcomes at a personal level: change in cognition; 
2. Outcomes at a personal level: change in behaviour; 
3. Outcomes at a collective level: shared with others. 
Two independent researchers performed the categorisation. The inter-rater 
reliability was almost perfect (Cohen’s Kappa = .88). 
Results
Goals of professional development: 
As explained above, the goals of the teacher educators participating in the 
procedure of (self-) assessment and registration are categorised in combination 
with the professional standard for Dutch teacher educators. The number of times 
standard elements are formulated as goals for professional development is 
formulated in Table 6.2. In this table, we also list the number of participants who 
chose a certain area of the professional standard for their professional 
development. As we can see in Table 6.2, almost all seven areas of the professional 
standard were used by those participating when formulating their goals for 
professional development. The exception is area C.4, group dynamics and 
communicative competencies. Only one participant chose this area for professional 
development. The reason for such a low score in that area may be due to the fact 
that teacher educators are in general more experienced teachers, who have 
previously developed these kinds of competencies during their teaching career. 
Out of the foundation (area F), participants frequently selected improving their 
attitudes as a goal. Taking into account the number of elements in certain areas, 
four competency areas were chosen quite often: ICT, pedagogical competencies, 
organisational competencies and developmental / personal growth competencies. 
As verified in Table 6.2, participants chose professional development of 
knowledge and skills 51 times (Areas C.0 to C.5, 20 elements) and the professional 
development of attitudes and beliefs (Area F, so the sum of F.1 to F.6, 17 elements) 
was chosen 19 times. 
As shown in Table 6.3, we observed that 13 participants chose the development 
of knowledge and skills, 9 participants chose the development of a combination of 
knowledge and skills and attitudes and beliefs, and 2 participants chose 
development of attitudes and beliefs only. 
We conclude that participants are more focused on the improvement of their 
knowledge and skills than on the improvement of their attitudes and beliefs. 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
85
Table 6.2. Number of times an aspect of competence is chosen as a goal for professional 
development and the number of participants who chose a certain area for professional 
development (n=24) 
Area of the standard 
(see Figure 1) 
Number of 
elements 
within this 
area of the 
standard 
Number of times 
these elements 
within this area were 
chosen for 
professional 
development 
Number of 
participants who 
chose this area for 
their professional 
development 
F 1: Three levels 1 0 0 
F 2: Educational vision 3 2 1 
F 3: Attitudes 6 12 8 
F 4: Realistic teacher 
education 
5 3 3 
F 5: Student as partner 1 1 1 
F 6: Being a role model 1 1 1 
C.0: ICT 1 8 8 
C.1: Content competencies 3 6 5 
C.2: Pedagogical 
competencies 
7 14 11 
C.3: Organisational 
competencies 
3 12 9 
C.4: Group dynamics and 
communicative 
competencies 
3 1 1 
C.5: Developmental and 
personal growth 
competencies 
3 10 9 
Competencies outside the 
standard 
1 2 2 
Table 6.3. Number of times participants chose attitudes and beliefs and/or 
knowledge and skills as professional development goals (n=24) 
Combination of characteristics of competency Number of participants 
Only attitudes and beliefs (Area F) 2 
Only knowledge and skills (Areas C.O to C.5) 13 
Combination of attitudes and beliefs (area F), and 
knowledge and skills (Areas C.0 to C.5) 
9 
Professional development activities: 
The second research question was: “What kind of professional development 
activities do the teacher educators engage in?” The number of times participants 
engaged in professional development activities is listed in Table 6.4. When 
different activities falling under the same category were indicated by the 
participants, all activities within that one category were tallied. 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
86
Table 6.4. Number of times professional development activities were undertaken by 
participants, per professional development category 
Professional development 
category 
Number of times professional 
development activities within 
this category were 
undertaken 
Number of participants who 
engaged in professional 
development activities 
within this category 
1. Learning by doing (nonintentional) 
0 0 
2. Experimenting 
(intentional) 
30 18 
3. Reflecting on work 
experiences 
9 7 
4. Learning without 
interaction 
15 14 
5. Learning through 
interaction 
29 18 
6. Learning outside of work 0 0 
Although we found a wide variety of descriptions of professional development 
activities, they all fit into four categories. For each of these four categories we give 
examples of activities: 
1. ‘Experimenting’: contributing to an aspect of curriculum renewal, writing policy 
advisements, designing an innovative workshop, organising an excursion, using 
new materials or techniques, paying more attention to a special group, and 
stimulating students to broaden their scope. 
2. ‘Reflecting’: making a video of the participant’s own lessons and analysing it, 
describing realistic situations, and devising a report of self-conducted training. 
3. ‘Learning from others without interaction’: reading literature (the most 
frequently mentioned activity), and conducting written evaluations, which was 
also included because in such cases there is no personal interaction. 
4. ‘Learning from others through interaction’: following a course (the most 
frequently mentioned activity), having a conversation with colleagues and or 
executive staff, video-interaction supported by a colleague, consulting a coach, 
supervisor or external expert, evaluations with students, and spending more time 
with colleagues at lunch. 
As we can see in Table 6.4, the participants showed a preference for experimenting 
and interactive learning in professional development activities. Participants often 
engage in more than one professional development activity within these categories. 
On the other hand, at least sixteen participants went through a process of 
professional development without reporting any reflection on their work 
experiences. Ten other participants went through a process of professional 
development without reporting reading a book or consulting another source of 
literature. 
The vast majority of the participants engaged in more than one professional 
development activity. About two-thirds of the participants attempted two to four 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
87
professional development activities. Based on the combinations of development 
categories the participants had chosen, we found that for their professional 
development they mostly combine ‘experimenting’ with ‘learning through 
interaction’. We also found that if they did read literature as part of their 
professional development, this was most often combined with ‘learning through 
interaction’ and ‘experimenting’. 
Outcomes of professional development:
The third research question was “What are the outcomes of the professional 
development activities for the participating teacher educators?” To answer this 
question, we checked their portfolios on explicit formulations of the outcomes of 
their professional development activities. We found that they all reported outcomes 
related to the professional development goals they had previously articulated, and 
eleven of those participants also reported further outcomes unrelated to their 
professional development goals. 
Table 6.5 illustrates the number of participants who mentioned outcomes of 
their professional development activities related to our categorisation: outcomes on 
a personal (change in cognition or in behaviour) or collective level. 
Table 6.5. Number of participants who mentioned outcomes from professional 
development activities related to goals on a personal or collective level
Outcomes of professional development activities Number of 
participants 
1 On a personal level: change in cognition 24 
2 On a personal level: change in behaviour 17 
3 On a collective level: shared with others 10 
Nearly all participants mentioned outcomes in category 1, changes in cognition. 
Examples of documented outcomes in this category are: (1) “[as a result of 
studying literature] I started thinking about the supervision of teaching practice 
from different perspectives.” (2) “I have become more conscious of the moments I 
stimulate students.” (3) “I know better how I can make use of ICT.” (4) “I have 
become more aware of my role as a teacher educator within my faculty 
department.” 
Two-thirds of the participants mentioned outcomes in category 2, changes in 
behaviour. Examples of these changes are: (1) “Now I pass through the different 
phases of systematic reflection in a supervision situation without a note.” (2) “In 
my lessons I use a wider variety of pedagogical instruments.” (3) “I communicate 
more effectively with colleagues.” (4) “I have experimented with a new teaching 
method, which has to be adapted on some minor points.” 
Ten, i.e. a few more than one-third of the participants, mentioned outcomes in 
category 3, at a collective level. Examples of such outcomes that were shared with 
others are: (1) “For my department I have written a paper on reflective teaching.” 
(2) “I have made a list of competencies that should be attained during the inservice teacher education, as an aid to student teachers and their teachers.” (3) “I 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
88
have developed a new course together with a colleague.” (4) “I have made for and 
given to the management of my institution a plan to realise more structural peer 
coaching between the teacher educators of our institution.” 
As is shown in Table 6.6, most of the participants have outcomes in more than 
one category. More than one-third of the participants report outcomes in all three 
categories. 
Table 6.6. Number of times a participant reports a combination of outcomes 
Outcomes category Number of participants (N=25) 
1 (cognition only) 5 
2 (behaviour only) 1 
3 (shared with others only) 0 
1 and 2 6 
1 and 3 3 
2 and 3 0 
1, 2 and 3 10 
Outcomes in category 3, ‘shared with others’, only occur together with 
outcomes in category 1, ‘personal level, change in cognition’. 
Reflection 
In sum, we found that teacher educators who voluntarily participate in a standardsbased procedure for (self-)assessment and professional development: (1) are able to 
set goals for their professional development, (2) are challenged to use a broad 
variety of professional development activities, and (3) experience that they – and in 
many cases their professional environment as well – benefit professionally from 
participating in this procedure. 
However, we wonder if this result indicates that a participant’s knowledge 
base is cultivated more by new experiences and feedback from others than by deep 
reflection and theoretical input. 
6.3. A KNOWLEDGE BASE OF TEACHER EDUCATORS
6.3.1. The Project 
Since 2002, hundreds of teacher educators have gone through the process of 
becoming a formally registered teacher educator as described in the section above. 
They have shown positive changes in their practical knowledge and behaviour. 
Moreover, the self-confidence of the participants and their enthusiasm seems to 
have increased. At the same time, however, an important aspect of professional 
development has been neglected, almost no attention has been given to the 
deepening of theoretical knowledge. A main reason has been that teacher educators 
find it difficult to allocate time to study and to find their way in the growing 
amount of available literature. 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
89
The aim of this second Dutch project, which started in 2009, was to help teacher 
educators in studying and using the available literature by developing a structured 
knowledge base of teacher educators, i.e. an accessible and inspiring overview 
summarising the knowledge essential to the professional development of teacher 
educators.
What is a Knowledge Base? 
A knowledge base is intended to help professionals and a professional community 
in capturing the essential knowledge needed to underpin and improve their 
professional practices. Since the eighties, several attempts have been made to 
identify the knowledge that teachers should acquire and that teacher educators 
should thus teach (Shulman, 1987*; Valli & Tom, 1988*; Verloop, Van Driel, & 
Meijer, 2001*). This work provided a framework for our project to develop a 
knowledge base for teacher educators. 
Following Shulman and Shulman (2004*), we defined such a knowledge base as 
follows: 
A knowledge base of teacher educators is a structured and easily accessible 
collection of knowledge of the professional community. It includes 
theoretical, pedagogical and practical knowledge, and offers teacher 
educators the opportunity to confirm, interconnect, share and further develop 
their professional knowledge, vision, motivation and practices. 
Shulman and Shulman emphasise that a knowledge base is a dynamic set of 
knowledge shared by a professional community, and they distinguish between 
shared knowledge (which every community member should have) and distributed 
knowledge (which should be available in a team or community as a whole, but not 
necessarily in each member).
The Development of the Knowledge Base
Next, the question arose as to how to structure the available knowledge of teacher 
educators in such a way that the website could function both as a canon to the 
novice teacher educator and as a core frame of reference to the experienced teacher 
educator, as Wilson (2006) suggested. We decided to develop the knowledge base 
in two stages. To start with, semi-structured interviews were carried out with 
stakeholders (the board and special interest groups of the Dutch Association of 
Teacher Educators) and some academics who had not only published extensively 
on the professional development of teacher educators, but were also involved in the 
education of teacher educators. The aim of the interviews was to identify possible 
domains of a knowledge base. Parallel to these interviews, an extensive literature 
search was carried out. Based on the results of the interviews and literature study, 
ten domains were identified. 
To validate the format, an international expert meeting was organised. Besides 
experts from the Netherlands, experts from the UK, Australia and the USA 
participated in “one of the best ‘staff development’ events I have attended in a long 
time” (as one of the participants wrote) and discussed the proposed domains. In 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
90
general, the participants recognised and acknowledged the identified domains. 
Some minor corrections were suggested and further refining took place. The main 
discussion, however, focused on the status of the various domains and the question 
which domains represented the knowledge every individual teacher educator 
should have (i.e. what Shulman and Shulman, 2004*, call ‘shared knowledge’), 
and for which knowledge it would be sufficient if available within a team or the 
professional community (‘distributed knowledge’). The outcome of this process is 
represented in Figure 6.2. 
The four core domains are basic, and applicable to all teacher educators. The 
specific domains take into account the different contexts in which teacher 
educators work, and their specialisation (e.g. a specific academic domain/subject or 
pedagogical content). The extended domains are in their most basic form relevant 
to all teacher educators, but in their full depth they are intended for teacher 
educators specialising in such a domain. 
Figure 6.2. The ten domains of the knowledge base of teacher educators
The aim of the second stage was to fill the domains with content. A 
development group was installed, consisting of experts and members of various 
special interest groups of the Dutch Association of Teacher Educators. Important 
criteria for inclusion were: being active as teacher educator and being involved in 
national networks of teacher educators (thus probably having a helicopter view). 
Also important was to involve a number of persons who had a good overview of 
Core domains 
1. The Profession of 
Teacher Educator 
2. Pedagogy of Teacher 
Education 
3. Learning and Learners 
4. Teaching and Coaching 
Specific domains 
1. Programme-specific 
Teacher Education 
2. Subject-specific Teacher 
Education 
Extended domains 
1. Context of Teacher 
Education 
2. Organisation of Teacher 
Education 
3. Curriculum Development 
and Assessment 
4. Research by Teacher 
Educators
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
91
the research on teacher educators. Finally, involvement of teacher educators from 
institutions for teacher education in different parts of the country was taken into 
account, in order to assure a broad ownership. 
The approach of this group was iterative and interactive. The group members 
discovered that formulating leading questions could be an inviting way of 
structuring the domains for colleagues. These leading questions were meant to 
cover the essence of the domains. For example, the leading questions for the 
domain Teaching and Coaching are: What is teaching? How to take students' ages 
and experiences into account? How to support collaborative learning? When is 
teaching or coaching effective? 
It was also discussed that these leading questions could be answered from 
several perspectives. The development group decided to distinguish a theoretical, 
practical, reflective, and a developmental perspective. Hence, for each domain a 
matrix consisting of leading questions (rows) and perspectives (columns) was 
developed.
An important decision of the development group was to invite teacher educatorresearchers to contribute to filling the matrix cells. It was felt that this could be an 
excellent way of stimulating ownership of the knowledge base by the professional 
community. The willingness to co-operate proved to be strong. Many teacher 
educator-researchers contributed to the theoretical perspective of the knowledge 
base by writing encyclopaedic texts. This meant that rich literature studies could be 
incorporated into the knowledge base. 
Even more teacher educators wrote vignettes or sent video clips to fill the cells 
from a practical perspective. Altogether, almost eighty colleagues contributed to 
the knowledge base. The reflection and the discussion cells (with questions for 
reflection and discussion), and the development cells (with suggestions for further 
reading) were filled by the development group. In the spring of 2011, the website 
was launched at the annual Conference of the Dutch Association of Teacher 
Educators.
6.3.2 Research on the Project 
Research questions and design 
The proof of the pudding, however, is whether or not the knowledge base is 
experienced as relevant and will be used. In order to investigate this, we carried out 
a survey among teacher educators. Our leading questions were: 
1. To what extent do teacher educators find it relevant to have knowledge of each 
of the ten domains in order to perform well in their profession? 
2. To what extent do teacher educators find the theoretical content of the four core 
domains useful to their profession? 
Instruments: 
In order to answer the research questions, a questionnaire was developed consisting 
of five parts: 
1. A brief introduction about the development of the knowledge base and 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
92
instructions on how to fill it out. 
2. Some basic questions about the respondent's workplace, years of experience as a 
teacher educator, and so on. 
3. The scoring of the relevance of the ten domains to their work as a teacher 
educator on a ten-point Likert scale (1 = not at all relevant, 10 = extremely 
relevant). In order to do so, the respondents could read the leading questions of 
each domain. 
4. Then, the respondents were asked to read the experts´ theoretical texts for a core 
domain, and to answer questions on the usefulness of these texts, to be scored on a 
four-point scale. The core domains were evenly distributed over the questionnaires, 
so that we were able to collect data for each core domain. 
5. Finally, the participants were asked if they were missing themes, and if they 
intended to use the knowledge base in the future. 
A trial version of the questionnaire was first tested on two teacher educators, 
which led to some minor changes in the text and its layout. In the Netherlands, the 
questionnaire was filled out during a national conference and several workshops 
for teacher educators. The workshops also offered an opportunity to discuss the 
relevance and usefulness of the knowledge base, which provided us with some 
additional insights. 
Participants: 
Questionnaires were filled out by 125 respondents. There were 118 teacher 
educators in the sample, 65 institution-based, 49 school-based, and 4 teacher 
educators working in both a school and a teacher education institution. In addition, 
7 coordinators of teacher education institutions were part of the sample. There were 
54 male and 71 female participants. The youngest was 26 years old, the oldest 64, 
with an average of 47. The respondents worked in primary education (n = 47), 
secondary education (n = 71) or both (N=4). The others (N=3) worked in several 
other institutions, for example in vocational education. The level of experience 
ranged from zero months to 35 years, with an average of 8.6 years. 102 
respondents were members of the Dutch Association of Teacher Educators, and 51 
respondents were formally registered as teacher educators through the registration 
procedure of this association. 
Data analysis: 
The results were analysed using descriptive statistics, independent t-tests, and a 
one-way ANOVA. We used a t-test for comparing the teacher educators with those 
holding other positions in teacher education in order to see if we could include the 
respondents working as coordinators or administrators and those working as an 
advisor (‘other’ category). The coordinators did not differ significantly on any 
question, hence we decided to include them in the dataset.
Results 
Relevance of the domains: 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
93
Table 6.7. Overview of the perceived relevance of the contents of the ten domains of the 
knowledge base of teacher educators (on a ten-point scale; 1 = not at all relevant, 10 = 
extremely relevant)
Domains (N=125)
 Mean SD 
1. The profession of teacher educator 7.5 1.5 
2. Pedagogy of teacher education 8.4 1.3 
3. Learning and learners 8.7 1.1 
4. Teaching and coaching 8.3 1.4 
5. Subject-specific teacher education 8.1 1.4 
6. Programme-specific teacher education 6.8 1.4 
7. Context 6.7 1.4 
8. Organisation 7.0 1.4 
9. Curriculum development and assessment 7.9 1.2 
10. Research 7.7 1.1 
Mean 7.7 1.3 
Table 6.7 shows the perceived relevance of the contents of each of the ten 
domains of the knowledge base on a ten-point Likert scale. Our sample had some 
over-representations. Members of the Dutch Association of Teacher Educators 
were over-represented, and also teacher educators educating teachers for secondary 
education. Hence, we analysed whether subgroups within the sample differed in 
their outcomes. Concerning the relevance of the domains, no significant 
differences were found between members and non-members of the association of 
teacher educators, or between those registered and non-registered. Neither did we 
find significant differences between males and females, between teacher educators 
for primary and those for secondary education, and between coordinators and noncoordinators. As far as the coordinators are concerned, this could mean that they 
are so much part of the community of teacher educators that they have the same 
preferences. There were, however some differences between the answers of schoolbased and institution-based teacher educators. This was the case for two domains, 
where those school-based scored significantly higher than those institution-based, 
as is shown in Table 6.8. An explanation for the first difference could be that 
school-based teacher educators are often new to their role and are therefore still 
searching for what it means to be a teacher educator, and not just a teacher. 
Possibly, this finding can also (partly) explain why the overall score of the core 
domain ‘The profession of teacher educator’ is less high on relevance than the 
other core domains, i.e. because most (other) experienced teacher educators may 
take it for granted that they have knowledge regarding their own profession. 
Because being a school-based teacher educator is a new function in most Dutch 
schools, it is often not yet completely clear what exactly the tasks, responsibilities 
and possibilities of the school-based teacher educator are. Hence, this could explain 
why those school-based score higher on the domain Organisation than institutionbased teacher educators. 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
94
Table 6.8. Significant differences between school-based and institution-based teacher 
educators on the perceived relevance of the contents of the domains (* p < .05, ** p < .01) 
Domains School-based teacher 
educators (N= 39)
Institution-based 
teacher educators 
(N=75) 
p 
Mean SD Mean SD 
The profession of 
teacher educator 
7.9 1.5 7.3 1.4 .048* 
Organisation 7.5 1.3 6.6 1.3 .002** 
Usefulness of the knowledge base: 
To study the usefulness of the knowledge base, we decided to focus on the four 
core domains and especially on the theoretical texts written for these domains. 
Using a one-way ANOVA, we checked whether the answers about usefulness, 
newness and expectation of using the knowledge base differed significantly for the 
four core domains. This was not the case. Table 6.9 shows the perceived usefulness 
and newness of the theoretical texts for these domains combined, according to the 
respondents. It also shows to what degree the respondents expected to make use of 
the knowledge base. 
Table 6.9. Overview of the perceived usefulness, ‘newness’ of the theoretical texts of the four 
core domains of the knowledge base of teacher educators, and expected use of the 
knowledge base (on a four-point scale; 1 = not useful / no new knowledge / never, 4 = 
extremely useful / totally new knowledge / often)
The results show that the theoretical texts are considered quite useful by the 
Dutch teacher educators. They added some new knowledge to their existing 
knowledge and this new knowledge was perceived as quite useful. The respondents 
expected to use the knowledge base regularly. It is noteworthy that the scores on 
the second question (To what extent has this text added something to your existing 
knowledge?) are lower than the scores on the third question (Do you consider the 
added knowledge useful to your work as a teacher educator?). The discussion with 
the respondents in the workshops helped us to clarify this. They made remarks 
such as: “I knew something about this, but now it has become clearer”; “I read 
 (N= 125)
 Mean SD 
Do you consider this text to be useful to your work as a 
teacher educator? 
3.2 .6 
To what extent has this text added something to your 
existing knowledge? 
1.9 .5 
Do you consider the added knowledge useful to your 
work as a teacher educator? 
3.0 .7 
Do you expect to use the knowledge base? 2.7 .7 
Mean 2.7 .6 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
95
about this years ago, but had forgotten about it”, “I always found it difficult to 
explain this to my students, and this is very helpful”. 
For the four core domains, we also analysed whether subgroups within the 
sample differed in their outcomes. Concerning the usefulness of the knowledge 
base, there were no significant differences in how different groups (males vs. 
females, members vs. non-members, etcetera) answered these questions. 
Concerning the question as to what extent the text added new knowledge, nonregistered teacher educators scored significantly higher than those registered (nonregistered 1.97 vs. registered 1.75, p = 0.02). This is understandable, because the 
registered teacher educators had previously participated in a professional 
development process. 
Furthermore, females expected to use the knowledge base significantly more 
often in the future than males (females 2.84 vs. males 2.51; p = .01). As yet, we do 
not have an explanation for this difference. 
The answers to the question whether, according to the respondents, themes were 
missing, showed one gap: within the domain Teaching and coaching, more 
attention to coaching should be given. This request has been met by adding texts on 
coaching to the knowledge base. 
In the workshops, several suggestions on how to use the knowledge base were 
put forward: at the individual level (for example as a source for the registration 
process); at the team level (for example a team of teacher educators might discuss 
the question ‘what are our pedagogical choices?’); at the institutional level (as an 
opportunity to discuss the further professional development of teacher educators), 
and at the level of the professional community as a whole (for example for the 
development of programmes for the professional development of teacher 
educators). These suggestions have also been added to the website.
Reflection
The development of the knowledge base of teacher educators represented a huge 
step forward in the further professional development of Dutch teacher educators. In 
2012, a renewed professional standard and registration procedure were established. 
The foundation of this renewed professional standard as well as the competency 
areas are linked to – aspects of – the domains of the knowledge base of teacher 
educators. The registration procedure has also been renewed accordingly. Teacher 
educators going through the registration procedure are explicitly requested to 
theoretically underpin their work and their development plans. 
The knowledge base also functions as a theoretical frame of reference to the 
programme for teacher educators that we will discuss in the next section. 
6.4. A PROGRAMME FOR TEACHER EDUCATORS 
6.4.1. The Project
In 2010, we (five of the authors of this chapter) started the development of a 
programme for teacher educators. We have different backgrounds and expertise 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
96
(trainer, lecturer, professor, teacher educator, and researcher) and all of us have 
been involved as a developer of the professional standard and/or assessor of the 
registration procedure and/or the development of the knowledge base. Therefore, 
together we had a good overview of what was needed to develop a programme for 
teacher educators. 
To start with, we formulated five principles for the programme: 
1. The programme welcomes teacher educators from different backgrounds, who 
will learn with and from each other. 
Increasingly, teacher education is a task and responsibility of teacher educators in 
schools and institutions for higher education combined. This means that they 
should develop a shared vision of the profession of teacher educator and of the 
knowledge and skills needed to carry out their work. Learning together can 
contribute positively to the development of such a shared vision.
 2. The programme should have a solid theoretical underpinning by linking it to the 
knowledge base of teacher educators. 
 The core domains of the knowledge base (profession of teacher educator, pedagogy 
of teacher education, teaching and coaching, learning and learners) will receive 
much attention in the programme. Also, the domain research will get a prominent 
place, because of the increasing expectation that teacher educators will be able to 
support students’ research projects (Korthagen, Koster, & Lunenberg, 2011*). As 
we have seen in Section 4.3, however, it is not self-evident that teacher educators 
have the background and expertise to carry out this task. Hence, we decided to 
make this one of the focal points of the programme. 
3. The programme should stimulate teacher educators to broaden their 
professional network. 
It is our conviction that becoming a teacher educator also includes becoming 
familiar with the world of teacher educators, knowing what networks there are and 
being able to make a relevant and informed choice about which networks to join. 
4. The registration procedure of the Dutch Association of Teacher Educators 
should be integrated into the programme. 
An elegant way of finding out whether, as a teacher educator, you have acquired 
the basic knowledge and skills of a teacher educator and are able to underpin your 
practice, is to go through the registration procedure of the Dutch Association of 
Teacher Educators. Therefore, the fourth principle we have formulated is that 
going through the registration procedure will be part of the programme for teacher 
educators, in such a way that at the end of the programme the participating teacher 
educators will have been registered. 
5. In the programme, usefulness to the daily practice should be a focal point. 
Our aim is that what the participants will learn in the programme should – 
immediately – be available to them for application in their own practice the 
following day. 
Van den Akker and Nieveen (2011*) state that in a pragmatic approach such as 
this, formative evaluation should be a core activity and that design and evaluation 
should alternate. Therefore, we decided to link evaluative research to every 
separate component of the programme. In this way, we can learn which programme 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
97
components and pedagogical approaches are productive, and we can use the 
experiences of the first module in designing the following one, and so on. 
The programme we designed consists of four modules (Pedagogy of Teacher 
Education, Coaching, Research in Teacher Education, and Broadening your 
Network). The fifth component is going through the registration procedure. The 
year-long programme requires 130 hours of study (including 50 hours for the 
registration procedure), 42 hours of which are contact hours. Figure 6.3 shows the 
format of the programme. 
Module 
Pedagogy of 
Teacher 
Education 
10 contact hours 
Module 
Coaching 
10 contact 
hours 
Module 
Research in 
Teacher 
Education 
10 contact hours 
Module 
Networking 
6 contact 
hours 
Closing day 
6 contact 
hours 
Collegial consultation for the Registration procedure 
6 contact hours 
Figure 6.3. Format of the programme for teacher educators
We have taken great care to see to it that the different parts of the programme 
are connected with each other. For example, in the first module, Pedagogy of 
Teacher Education, self-reflection is an important theme, while in de second 
module, Coaching, supporting students’ reflection receives attention. In the third 
module, Research in Teacher Education, the participants study an aspect of their 
own pedagogy of teacher education. 
We also link the modules to the registration procedure. For example, we use the 
vision description participants have to make in the context of the registration 
procedure as a start to the first module, and the peer coaching meetings of the 
registration procedure are linked to the second module. Finally, we stimulate the 
participants to use points of interest they discover during the first three modules as 
a focus of their networking. As we have already mentioned above, in all parts of 
the programme, theory from the Knowledge Base of Teacher Educators is used as 
an underpinning. 
The programme has been carried out twice (during the academic years 
2011/2012 and 2012/2013). Below, we first elaborate on the module Pedagogy of 
Teacher Education, to illustrate our approach. Next, we summarise the contents 
and approach of the other parts of the programme. 
Illustration: The module pedagogy of teacher education 
To prepare for this module (and for the first stage of the registration procedure), the 
participants read a theoretical text from the domain Pedagogy of Teacher 
Education of the knowledge base. In the two course days of this module, concrete 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
98
pedagogical models are presented and the participants do several practical 
exercises with these models, both within the module and – in between the two 
course days – in their own practices. 
 A first model is a five-step procedure for working with groups that is 
characteristic of realistic teacher education (Korthagen, Kessels, Koster, 
Lagerwerf, & Wubbels, 2001*, pp. 151-161) and applied in the module. The steps 
in this procedure are: (1) Pre-structuring (presenting a focus), (2) Using 
experiences (either experiences the participants bring in from their own practices or 
experiences in the here-and-now), (3) Structuring (bringing a structure into the 
discussion of the experiences, for example through the use of a mind map), (4) 
Focusing (choosing one or two specific foci within the created structure), and (5) 
theory with a small t (the introduction of small theoretical elements, as opposed to 
academic Theory with a capital T). When these steps are introduced to the 
participants, they are clarified on the basis of the learning process the participants 
have gone through right before the procedure is made explicit. 
 A second model is the ALACT model for reflection, named after the initials of 
the five phases: (1) Action, (2) Looking back on the action, (3) Awareness of 
essential aspects, (4) Creating alternative methods of action, and (5) Trial 
(Korthagen et al., 2001*; see Figure 6.4). 
Creating alternative 
methods of action
Trial
Action
Looking back on 
the action
Awareness of 
essential aspects
5
1
4
3
2
Figure 6.4. The ALACT model
 The participating teacher educators are stimulated to write their own reflections 
and connect this ‘practice’ in the here-and-now with the theory of the ALACT 
model. The topic of reflection is further elaborated by the introduction of ‘core 
reflection’. This is an approach to reflection in which the practitioner’s reflection is 
connected with themes such as professional identity and mission (Korthagen, Kim, 
& Greene, 2013*). 
 In sum, there are several interconnected ‘layers’ in the module: (1) the pedagogy 
used within the module, (2) the theory about pedagogy of teacher education 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
99
underlying the first layer, and (3) the participants’ own practices in which they 
apply what they have learned about pedagogy. Experiencing these three layers is an 
excellent experiential basis for introducing the theory about explicit modelling, 
based on Swennen, Lunenberg, and Korthagen (2008). As ‘theory with a small t’ 
about modelling, four steps are introduced: (1) showing exemplary teacher 
behaviour (‘teach as you preach’), (2) making this exemplary behaviour explicit, 
(3) underpinning the exemplary behaviour using theory, and (4) promoting the use 
of this kind of teaching behaviour by student teachers. Again, as a kind of 
‘homework’, the participants apply this ‘theory’ to a concrete meeting with student 
teachers in their own context. 
The final part of the module is devoted to the theme ‘evaluation’. The model of 
Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick (2006*) is presented and discussed. In this model, four 
levels of evaluation are distinguished (is the student satisfied?; what has the student 
learnt?; has the student translated the learning into behaviour?; has this behaviour 
had the expected results?). 
Next, the first two levels were used to evaluate the module. With regard to the 
first level, the participants appeared to be (very) satisfied. They appreciated the 
variety of pedagogical approaches, the integration of theory and practice, the 
expertise of the teacher educators responsible for the module, and the inspiration of 
working together. 
With regard to the second level of evaluation, the participants were asked to 
write a letter to themselves answering two questions: 
− What I take away from this module is … 
− What I don’t want to forget is … 
Two weeks later, these letters were sent to the participants to remind them of their 
ideas and plans. We also got the permission to analyse the themes in these letters. 
The participants appeared to focus among others on wanting to use more 
theoretical knowledge, applying the theoretical models discussed during the course, 
and giving more attention to empowering students. 
Overview of the Other Parts of the Programme 
The focus of the module Coaching was very concrete: how do you support students 
in their reflection on and learning from practical experiences. Remarkable is that in 
their – positive – evaluation of this module the participants also comment on the 
pedagogical approach of their teacher educators. They appreciate their way of 
modelling and the way they combine theory and practice. So it seems that 
following the first module has made them aware of the importance of pedagogical 
choices. 
In the module Research in Teacher Education, theoretical texts from the 
Knowledge Base of Teacher Educators are used to explain and discuss different 
types of research. Social research, and more specifically the possibilities of 
conducting qualitative research, proved to be fairly unfamiliar to some of the 
participating teacher educators. Next, the participants carry out a mini-study on an 
aspect of their own pedagogy of teacher education. They can use the knowledge 
acquired in the previous modules in formulating a research question and in 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
100
developing an instrument. Examples are a school-based teacher educator who 
developed a small questionnaire to find out how students feel about her coaching, 
or three institution-based teacher educators who interviewed each other’s students 
about the degree to which their seminars were connected with the students’ own 
practical experiences. 
 Each stage (formulating a research question, developing instruments, collecting 
data, analysing data, presenting or publishing results) is discussed on two levels: 1. 
carrying out research oneself and 2. translating these experiences into supporting 
students’ research. Together, an overview of points of attention for supporting 
students’ research is constructed. The positive evaluation of this module shows that 
highly valued, among others, were learning about the possibilities of qualitative 
research, becoming conscious of the importance of formulating a specific and 
unambiguous research question, and the jointly constructed list of tips for 
supporting students’ research. 
 In the Networking module, we offer the participants an overview of networks 
interesting to teacher educators. The participants formulate, individually or in small 
groups, a plan to explore a network that is new to them. They use the SMART 
criteria (specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and time-bound) to streamline 
the completion of this plan. To do so, they search the web, study literature, contact 
an expert or expert centre, participate in a network meeting and/or interview one or 
more key persons. All participants write a reflection paper and present the 
outcomes of their plan on the final day of the course. Most remarkable are the 
enthusiasm of the participants, among others about the fact that busy (international) 
experts are not only very willing to offer information, and make time for a (Skype) 
interview, but are also interested in the participants’ professional development 
activities! 
The programme component Collegial consultation for the registration 
procedure takes place parallel to the four modules. This contributes to the 
integration of the registration procedure with the contents of the modules. In the 
meetings, the participants work in groups of four to support each other. In the first 
semester, they describe their vision and analyse their own knowledge and skills 
while following the module Pedagogy of Teacher Education, and they have peer 
coach discussions while following the module Coaching. In the second semester 
they write a development plan. The modules Research in Teacher Education and 
Networking, which they follow during this semester, are, as the evaluations show, 
important sources of inspiration and help to arrive at a useful and underpinned 
development plan. 
On the closing day of the programme, the results of the Networking module are 
presented, the complete programme is reflected on and evaluated, and certificates 
are festively presented to the participants. 
6.4.2. Evaluative and Reflective Remarks about the Project 
Above, we presented the way in which we developed a programme for teacher 
educators and have since carried it out twice. As mentioned before, in developing 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
101
and carrying out the programme, design and evaluation were alternated. For 
example, the idea to make the participants’ own pedagogy of teacher education the 
central theme of the module Research in Education was born when we discussed 
the evaluation of the first module. 
 From the beginning onwards, the evaluations were (very) positive. Nevertheless, 
in the first year the programme was carried out we learned that more attention 
could be given to the different settings of the participants and their variety of 
knowledge and experience. Also, more time should be devoted to the 
differentiation and the connection between the three levels that teacher educators 
have to take into account (their own level, the level of student teachers, and the 
level of the students of the student teachers). More practically, the participants 
asked for more practical information about some organisational aspects of the 
course. We took these comments into account in the second year we organised the 
programme. 
An elaborate analysis of the data we have collected on both cohorts is not 
finished yet, but based on the evaluations of the two courses we dare to conclude 
that the five principles we formulated, seem to work. For example, with regard to 
the first principle (teacher educators with different backgrounds learn together), 
one of the participants remarks: 
It is fantastic, the contact between institution-based and school-based teacher 
educators. You work together and have discussions. I have also become more 
conscious of what it is that hinders school-based teacher educators in their 
co-operation with us. It clarifies so much. Hence, that in itself is already a 
benefit. 
Also, the attention to a solid theoretical base (principle 2) is appreciated. One of 
the participants formulates this as follows: 
I have got a lot more grip on teaching and supporting students […] what is a 
really strong point is the relationship between practice and theory. Often the 
starting point is practice, our own experiences, and then it is linked to theory 
and gets a foundation. 
Being introduced to relevant literature apparently increased the demand for this 
literature. In this context, being able to consult and use the Knowledge Base of 
Teacher Educators also proves to be useful, according to the participants. 
With regard to principle 3 (stimulating participants to broaden their professional 
network), several participants remarked that, at the start of the programme, they did 
not know what to expect or that networking was not their priority. At the end of the 
programme, however, they had revised their idea: 
Valuable […] Nice that international networking was stimulated too […] It 
stimulated me to go beyond my comfort zone. 
Principle 4, the integration of the registration procedure into the modules, also 
seems to be successful. Participants sometimes referred to the registration 
procedure and the modules in the same breath: 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
102
The models offered are really useful. I cannot wait to use them in my own 
practice. I would like to follow more modules, because I want to continue my 
professional development after my registration as a teacher educator. 
With regard to principle 5, usefulness of the programme to the daily practice, it is 
interesting to note that participants do find the programme useful to their daily 
practice, mainly as a result of the connection between practising, reflection and 
theory. One of them formulates this as follows: 
[It is] instructive to experience a pedagogical approach in different ways 
(practising, adding theory, reflecting on experience, reading about it) and 
then use this approach in your own practice and reflect on it again. 
6.5. THE FUTURE OF THE DUTCH CASE 
6.5.1. Summary 
To wrap up this chapter, we wish to state once more that – in line with other 
authors – we believe that teacher educators play a crucial role in the quality of 
education, and that their professional development should consequently be strongly 
supported. We feel that, in the Netherlands, we now have some building blocks to 
do so; building blocks that are also becoming increasingly intertwined. 
The first building block is the registration procedure linked to a professional 
standard. As we saw in Section 4.2.2, several studies point to positive effects of a 
national framework for the professional development of teacher educators. At the 
beginning of the current century, in the Netherlands, a professional standard was 
established and since then, hundreds of teacher educators have gone through the 
process of becoming a formally registered teacher educator. 
The second building block is the knowledge base of teacher educators. Recently, 
the professional standard and the registration procedure have been restructured, and 
underpinning the professional development process with the aid of the knowledge 
base has become an integrated aspect of the procedure. Teacher educators can go 
through this process supported by a peer, but also make the choice to follow a more 
extensive programme, which brings us to the third building block. 
The third building block is a professional development programme. This 
programme has several modules, among them a module focused on the pedagogy 
of teacher education and a module focused on carrying out research into the teacher 
educators’ own practices. The knowledge base offers the theoretical basis for this 
programme. Moreover, a trajectory of peer-coaching is included in the programme. 
6.5.2. Mission 
Although we feel that much has been achieved in the previous decade, more work 
has to be done in The Netherlands. Firstly, the maintenance of the professional 
standard, the registration procedure, the knowledge base, and the programme for 
teacher educators is of great importance and needs more guarantees than currently 
6. THE DUTCH CASE 
103
have been established. At the moment, there is too much dependency on a number 
of enthusiastic persons and occasional funding. There is a real danger that what has 
been achieved in the previous decade will get lost in the next, if no structural 
measures will be taken. Secondly, we have to realise that only a relatively small 
part of the Dutch teacher educators have taken part in the professional development 
activities described in this chapter. The majority of them still teach future teachers 
based on their expertise as good teachers. Hence, the challenge to involve more 
teacher educators will persist during the next decade. Thirdly, we have to think 
about opportunities for further professional development of the teacher educators 
who have been registered. After all, for everyone, but most certainly for teacher 
educators, lifelong learning is a must. We have some experiences with supporting 
more intensive self-study projects of teacher educators (Lunenberg, Zwart, & 
Korthagen, 2010), which we feel will be well worth repeating. The review study 
presented in the previous chapters of this book also suggests that programmes 
focused on the deepening of knowledge and skills, about for example curriculum 
development and assessment, could be interesting. 
Finally, the conclusions in Chapter 5 with regard to further programmatic 
research on the profession and the professional development of teacher educators 
are also valid for the Netherlands. We need to collect more systematic knowledge 
about which professional development activities are productive and which are not, 
taking into account the great varieties of backgrounds, expertise and work contexts 
of Dutch teacher educators.