The real-life struggles of distance learning , according to 5 families
By Elissa Strauss , CNN

Updated 0907 GMT ( 1707 HKT ) November 14 , 2020 
 
( CNN ) In the not-so-distant past , there was a place where parents could drop off their kids for six-plus hours a day . Teachers and administration kept them safe , and taught them things . It was wonderful . 

Now , it ' s all parents . Even with teachers working hard to reimagine school online , it ' s up to parents and guardians — mostly moms — to oversee their children ' s education and well-being all hours of the day . 
CNN spoke to five families across the United States to hear how the grand , forced experiment of distance learning is going for them . They spoke about their struggles , as well as the tiny pockets of resilience they have discovered along the way . Answers have been condensed and edited for clarity . 
Coping with a lack of structure
Robert Kent is a single dad who lives in Warren , Rhode Island . His daughters , 10-year-old Ayla and 8-year-old Bella , are distance learning full time . He oversees them three school days a week , and their mom oversees them the other two . 
Robert Kent ( center ) of Warren , Rhode Island , single dad to daughters Ayla ( left ) and Bella  ( right )  , oversees their online learning three days a week . 
Robert Kent ( center ) of Warren , Rhode Island , single dad to daughters Ayla ( left ) and Bella ( right )  , oversees their online learning three days a week . 
CNN : What ' s your distance learning routine ? 
Robert Kent : We get online by 8 : 30 , and they have activities for basically the whole school day . 
In the afternoons , we try to get out . My younger sister has kids and lives close so we go there a couple days a week . We try to do other activities , like go to the zoo — one of my friends gave me a free pass — or ride bikes . It can be hard to get them out . 
CNN : How ' s it going ? 
Kent : I know the teachers are trying , but the parents are on their own . It ' s up to us to figure it out . 
My younger daughter needs more structure to learn . She can be defiant , and it ' s really hard to get her to understand . Sometimes I find myself doing what my parents used to do , and just doing her work . But I know you can ' t do that and I tell myself ,  " No .  " 
My older daughter just wants to get her work over with . 
CNN : What personal challenges are you facing ? 
Kent : I work at a college , and my hours were cut . For the first time in my life , I had to file for unemployment . I used to take home $470 a week . Now I am taking home $290 a week with unemployment . It has been a real struggle . 
I ' ve been downloading grocery apps so I can shop for the best deals and budgeting . I recently got a free 10-pound bag of potatoes through one of these apps . We ate a lot of potatoes for a while . 
READ MORE : How to help children with ADHD thrive in a virtual schoolhouse
CNN : What do you do to take a break ? 
Kent : My stress levels are pretty high , and I need to have patience so I don ' t yell at the kids . 
What has really saved me is my gym membership . Yeah , I can use the money for other stuff , but mentally just working out and being able to have that little moment for myself so I don ' t freak out is important . 
Cooking and therapy to deal with stress
Laura Gonzalez lives in Seattle with her 13-year-old son , who is distance learning full time . Her partner , a merchant marine , is regularly away for monthslong trips . 
CNN : What ' s your distance learning routine ? 
Laura Gonazalez : I wake up at 6 a . m . and make breakfast and lunch for my son . I prepare for the whole day because he stays alone while I go to my job . I am a nanny and work 10 a . m . to 4 p . m . for another family . 
After I get home , I cook dinner and do everything I didn ' t do in the morning at the house , like cleaning . 
I ' ll ask him if he read and did his homework . Sometimes , depending on the material he is working on , we sit down together to do it . He is good at math , but he needs help with other subjects . If he finishes in time he gets to go back online and play videos and video games . 
READ MORE : Why now is the time to embrace video games for kids
When I have time , I do online learning . I am working on getting my GED right now . And then we go to sleep early so we can start early again the next day . 
CNN : How ' s it going ? 
Gonazalez : It has been a challenge to keep up with the communications at the school . There are various teachers on different platforms , and I have to be on different group chats . 
Also , it ' s a problem that he is alone all day . He is responsible and he gets his work done , and I haven ' t noticed him being sad . But I do worry about him being by himself . 
CNN : What personal challenges are you facing ? 
Gonazalez : At this moment , I am doing better compared to what happened at the beginning of the pandemic . I was out of work , and he was out of school . Now we have a routine . Before I was worried about everything , and my biggest concern was money . 
Of course , I worry that he spends his days in solitude , but it is something necessary that we have to do . 
CNN : What do you do to take a break ? 
Gonazalez : During the week we think about what kind of special meals we want to cook , and then on the weekends we cook them . We make cakes , sopes ( a popular Mexican street snack ) and elaborate dishes . Sometimes we go for a walk . 
A few months ago , the National Domestic Workers Alliance offered group therapy sessions for domestic workers , and I took one . I learned a type of therapy ( Hakomi ) that combines mind , body and breathing . It helps you feel liberated and let go of the stress that keeps circling in your head . 
Career sacrifice for a mom
Gabby Turner lives with her husband and two sons , ages 3 and 6 , in Oakland , California . Her younger child attends in-person preschool , and her older child is in distance learning full time . 
CNN : What ' s your distance learning routine ? 
Gabby Turner : Starting at 9 a . m .  , I spend the first two hours doing morning meetings with my first grade son , making sure he is focusing and has all the materials he needs . Then at 11 a . m .  , our pod school starts in our backyard . We have six kids , all who are in first grade at the same school . 
Gabby Turner of Oakland , California , put her career on hold to help manage a pod school for her 6-year-old son and five other first graders . 
Gabby Turner of Oakland , California , put her career on hold to help manage a pod school for her 6-year-old son and five other first graders . 
We have a hybrid model . It ' s a bit of a co-op , where parents participate and take turns teaching . Everyone has their strengths . Two of the moms do about half , if not more , of the actual teaching , and then three days a week we have a young woman we hired through Nextdoor come and help . 
I consider myself the pseudo head of operations , though now I am more head janitor , which is arguably the most important job ! When it first began , there was a lot to figure out operationally . We hit some bumps along the way but fixed quite a bit with some scheduling changes . 
CNN : How ' s it going ? 
Turner : This was a lot like launching a small business , and none of us have ever done this before . I have never been a teacher or a director of a school . But we have found our rhythm and the kids have become more self-sufficient . 
The payoff is that the kids are really happy and getting to socialize . You see the duck gliding gracefully on the surface of the pond , but underneath there are feet — parents — moving fast . 
CNN : What personal challenges are you facing ? 
Turner : I ' ve had to take time off of work . Our pod school is all run by moms . Dads generally help only when they are asked or needed . 
I ' m a person I never thought I would be ; I always thought of myself as a career mom . But my husband is a doctor and he has a crucial role right now and is not able to share the load . So it ' s not even a question . I have to prioritize my family right now and take care of what is in front of me . 
When this started , my mom joked and said I should put launching and managing this pod school on my resume . I said I would never do that , but now I think , maybe . 
CNN : What do you do to take a break ? 
Turner : One of my mantras is to try to recognize all the privileges I have . I know I have very real challenges , but when I get really frustrated with them , it helps to replace those frustrations with gratitude and change my mindset , because my challenges are nothing compared to so many . 
It ' s also a blessing to have young kids right now . You can have the worst day and then your little 3-year-old is so cute , and it melts the stress inside your body . Of course , then they have a tantrum and it all comes back . 
READ MORE : Got a stress headache ? This 5-minute routine brings relief
Community support in difficult times
Roishetta Sibley Ozane lives in Westlake , Louisiana , with her six kids , ages 2 , 8 , 12 , 14 , 15 and 17 , most of whom will distance learn part time . She is a single mom . 
CNN : What ' s your distance learning routine ? 
Roishetta Sibley Ozane : We were supposed to go back on August 25 and then we had to evacuate for Hurricane Laura . Then we were allowed to come back and had three days of school before we were evacuated for Hurricane Delta . 
My 8- and 12-year-olds didn ' t really start school online until mid-October . For the oldest three , school has not started again , and there is no start date yet . Everything is horrible . The internet is so slow kids can ' t access their virtual work , and the buildings , schools and my home are still in need of repair . 
Because of the hurricanes there hasn ' t been any normal learning . They are going to focus on social and emotional learning lesson plans . They will help everyone recover from evacuating — some don ' t even have homes to go back to . All the normal rules of school are out the window , and they won ' t be counting absences . 
CNN : How ' s it going ? 
Sibley Ozane : I am a stickler for education ; my children get good grades and make the honor roll . They ' re good kids . They ' ve missed a lot of school by now , but it ' s OK . These kids have been through a lot . I am an adult , and it is a lot for me . 
CNN : What personal challenges are you facing ? 
Sibley Ozane : I had Covid in June and was very sick for almost a month . I still felt sick when we had to evacuate in August . Imagine you are sick like that and you don ' t want to be around people and have to evacuate . 
I used to work in the schools as a computer lab technician , helping with online resources and activities for kids . When we evacuated , I hadn ' t worked since March 13 and didn ' t have any money or income coming in . I had $32 to my name at the time . 
We were able to stay at a hotel in Mississippi , thanks to an organization called Forever Calcasieu , which gave me $200 . We spent a lot more time on the road trying to register for FEMA ( to pay for home repairs and cover evacuation-related expenses )  , which isn ' t easy . When we made it home , it was devastating . It looked like somebody just picked up our house and dumped it over . 
CNN : What do you do to take a break ? 
Sibley Ozane : I do virtual church and am staying put , thanks to the grace of God and Christian people who helped me . I thank God for my church family , who text , call and send things , and ask if the children need anything . 
READ MORE : How to find resilience during the coronavirus pandemic
Finding a groove
Jamie Fleming lives in Hartwell , Georgia , with her 6-year-old daughter , who is distance learning full time . She is a single mom . 
CNN : What ' s your distance learning routine ? 
Jamie Fleming : I wake up early , around 5 : 30 a . m .  , to get some work done . I ' m a transcriber , which they have made easier to do at home , and I also run a small business helping Black women find calm . I usually do a morning routine of meditation . 
After a couple of hours , I get her up and we get ready for school . While she is in class , I help her and work in any little pockets of time I can , like during recess and lunch . In the afternoon , I try to get more work done , and she is usually playing with Barbies or baby dolls or on her tablet . Sometimes I play with Barbies , too . 
CNN : How ' s it going ? 
Fleming : Over the past two months , it ' s gotten much easier . At first it was a struggle to figure out a schedule that works for both of us so I can get my work done . I also had to figure out how to make sure she got her assignments done . Then I needed to make sure I had time for my business and to spend a little time with her . We found a groove to make all this happen . 
READ MORE : This 5-minute meditation routine will calm you down
We still have our good days and bad days , of course . I ' ve had to learn how to be patient with her and understand that she learns at the speed at which she learns . It has been frustrating , but I ' ve learned to take a breath and let her do it at her pace . 
CNN : What personal challenges are you facing ? 
Fleming : Being around her 24 / 7 is a struggle . She is an only child , and it can be challenging to have time for myself and calm and peace for a minute . 