Chapter 1
A New Professionalism
Introduction
My research was completed amidst a backdrop of continued calls for reform in 
teacher education ( Ramsey Report , 2000 ; Backing Australia ’ s Ability , 2001 ; New 
Learning , Australian Council of Deans of Education ( ACDE ) 2001 ; New Teaching , 
New Learning :  ( ACDE )  ; 2004 )  . These enduring calls for teacher education reform 
have recently gained momentum and represent further claims from those involved 
in teacher education for accountability , well developed program relevance and the 
establishment of what has been perceived as a more encompassing contribution 
and connection to the teaching profession . Investigations into the alleged inadequacies of teacher education programs and numerous research studies have 
reported various outcomes about the effectiveness of current and modified 
approaches ( Cochran-Smith & Zeichner , 2005 ; Korthagen , Kessels , Koster , 
Lagerwerf & Wubbels , 2001 ; Wideen , Mayer-Smith & Moon , 1998 )  . Criticisms 
have been voiced from external organisations , as well as those voices from within . 
For example , Brouwer & Korthagen ( 2005 ) suggested ,  “ the structure of teacher 
education programs may indeed be counterproductive to student teacher learning , 
and teacher educators themselves may not display the best examples of good teaching ”  ( p . 157 )  . Therefore , within the current educational climate there still exists a level 
of urgency for the profession not only to continue to respond to such calls for 
reform but also to be proactive in their response . Recent educational research 
refers to what has been described as a new professionalism ( Day , 1999a ; 
Hargreaves , 1994 ; Sachs , 1997 ) in teacher education . This new professionalism 
rests on the assumption that for systematic and meaningful change to become 
integral and sustainable within the profession , the approach to change must not be 
contrived , but must emerge from within a learning context where meanings are 
identified and negotiated . 
My self-study , presented in this book , describes my proactivity as a teacher educator in a Bachelor of Education program and offers an indepth account of how I 
questioned the culture of teacher education ; from the inside . It is an account of my 
practice as a mathematics teacher educator ; how I came to understand more about 
the nature of taken-for-granted assumptions about teaching and learning and , the 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 3
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008
impact of those assumptions on pre-service teacher learning ; the development of 
professional knowledge ; the impact of reflective practice ; and , the importance of 
relationships in teaching , and learning about teaching . I began to examine what 
Whitehead ( 1993 ) referred to as “ living contradictions ”  . 
In one sense , the problem as I defined it was quite simple – I wanted to teach so 
that pre-service teachers could learn about teaching through their experiences , not 
mine . In seeking a solution , which required a deliberate challenging of the statusquo , complexities associated with teaching and learning about teaching were further exposed . 
The Beginning Teacher Educator
Many teacher educators have described their entry into the teacher education 
profession ( for example , Berry , 2007 ; Hamilton , 2004 ; Mueller , 2003 ) and as 
Mueller ( 2003 ) suggests ,  “ no specific training exists for teacher educators ”  ( p . 68 ) 
– there is indeed , no script . Like most other accounts of entry into the profession 
my transition represented personal and professional struggles which were largely 
dealt with in a private manner . 
Teacher education had become a professional goal for me , set while studying for 
a Master of Education degree . I had successfully completed previous degrees ; I had 
almost two decades of primary ( elementary ) teaching experience and , like so many 
others , had begun university teaching with highly regarded teaching credentials . 
I understood the importance of experience in learning ; the personal qualities 
required , such as flexibility , innovation , responding to and instigating change ; the 
roles of leadership and implications for self-development ; the explicit and implicit 
curriculum ; the frustrations associated with programs , processes and people ; the 
importance of cooperation , collaboration and teamwork and the influences of critical incidents / events ( Woods , 1993 ; Tripp , 1993 ) and the “ teachable moments ”  ( van 
Manen , 1990 ; Loughran , 2002 ) in that learning . My entry therefore , into the teacher 
education profession was quite unremarkable in many ways , and my assumptions 
about being successful in this role were based largely on the ways in which I had 
experienced teaching from a primary school teacher perspective . Generally , I felt 
that my previous experience had prepared me well for my new venture into mathematics teacher education and the issues linked to the transition process were not 
something I had initially or consciously considered . Although the impact of the 
ways in which my assumptions directly influenced my teaching is abundantly clear 
now , they were not clear at this stage in my teaching . Learning about teaching 
through “ assumption hunting ”  ( Brookfield , 1995 ) revealed that embedded assumptions are difficult to identify and even more difficult to alter . I must state , however , 
that at the beginning point in the study of my practice , I was quite aware of my 
assumptions about learning and teaching but had never sought , as an educator , to 
unravel those assumptions and explore their impact on my teaching . 
4 1 A New Professionalism
Teaching Mathematics in Pre-service Teacher Education
For me , teaching mathematics in a university environment delivered some degree 
of academic freedom along with many initial curriculum challenges , however it was 
not until a number of years into my experience of teaching mathematics in the preservice teacher education program that I began to feel a need to challenge my 
approach to teaching . One impetus for this self-challenge was inspired simply by 
one pre-service teacher ’ s written comment at the conclusion of a semester where he 
wrote “ practice what you preach ”  . My initial response to this comment was “ how 
dare he ” and “ what a nerve ”  ! Feedback provided by pre-service teachers who had 
completed the mathematics units which I had previously taught generally reflected 
a high level of satisfaction .  (  “ The assessment of the maths aids was very beneficial . 
Her feedback is excellent . I appreciate her efforts to give feedback on all assessments ”  ( TB791 , pre-service teacher , 2000 ) and ,  “ I think the teaching and assignments are relevant and asks students to actively involve themselves in their own 
learning ”  ( TB791 pre-service teacher , 2000 )  . Why then , did I feel so affronted by 
one pre-service teacher ’ s comment ? In hindsight , this related to what Brookfield 
( 1995 ) refers to as the “ ten out of ten ” syndrome ; the often unachievable desire to 
connect with all learners in positive ways . It also reflected my assumption evident 
at this stage in my teaching , that positive pre-service teacher feedback represented 
success as a teacher educator . 
My professional uneasiness continued . Clearly it became evident that I was 
required to be more than a classroom teacher , although at that point , I was not quite 
sure what the more meant . The formal student evaluation of teaching of the unit , 
TJ591 ( Learning and Teaching Mathematics I )  , the first year Bachelor of Education 
subject , was also published at this time . The results of this evaluation confirmed 
some of my suspicions I held about my practice . The results ( although representing 
only one means of assessment on the teaching of the unit )  , raised pertinent issues 
related to my clarity , intentions and general effectiveness as a teacher . For example , 
almost half of the pre-service teachers indicated that I had been unclear about what 
they were required to complete to be successful in the unit ; half were neutral or 
disagreed about my ability to improve their understanding of concepts within the 
unit and overall , half of the pre-service teachers rated my teaching in the unit as 
either poor or satisfactory . Following an examination of pre-service teachers ’ feedback , it became obvious that although my teaching intention was that pre-service 
teachers would be constructing their own knowledge about teaching and learning 
mathematics through their own experience , the reality suggested something quite 
different . 
Although I espoused and believed I was modeling ( and indeed providing for ) a 
social constructivist approach ( Vygotsky , 1978 ) to learning about teaching , much 
of my practice was represented and interpreted by my pre-service teachers as being 
based on a transmission approach ( Freire , 1970 )  . In this way pre-service mathematics teachers ’ expectations of learning to teach as being formulaic , predictable 
and based on the acquisition of transmittable skills ( Kincheloe , 2003 ) were 
The Beginning Teacher Educator 5
inadvertently being reinforced . I had unintentionally become a complicit provider 
and transmitter of knowledge , skills and practices and it was this revelation that led 
to the challenging of my modus operandi and raised questions about the efficacy of 
my approach to teaching about teaching : Who owned the learning ? What followed 
was my focus on developing ways in which I could teach about teaching mathematics 
so that my pre-service teachers could learn about teaching through their experience , 
and not mine . 
As a result of this preliminary research , I surveyed the pre-service teachers ’ 
wants and needs and I found that the pre-service teachers ’ responses highlighted a 
number of issues for me as their teacher educator . They sought : increased contact 
with schools and real-life teaching ; experienced teachers and respected others ( and 
recent graduates were requested to be incorporated more fully within the program )  ; 
opportunities for developing relationships with school personnel and the planning 
and implementation of teaching activities ; more peer teaching and planning ; relevant assessment tasks and joint negotiation of criteria . However , it was not surprising to note that at this stage in their pre-service teacher preparation the focus for 
these pre-service teachers was on the how and what of teaching mathematics . This 
representation of teaching reflected teaching as a “ craft ”  ; a “ repertoire of skills or 
competencies that accrue over time ”  ( Hoban , 2004 , p . 121 ) and in relation to mathematics teaching in particular , the desire was to know how to teach by use of examples and reference to my repertoire of experience . This also confirmed my belief 
that my previous teaching focus , although unintentional , was situating learning of 
and about teaching as a formulaic process in which skills and knowledge could be 
accrued and transmitted . 
From these expressed needs , I developed a program of study for Semester Two , 
and reflective practices , as a means of enhancing understandings of teaching and 
learning , was integrated throughout the unit . The specific characteristics of my new 
approach to learning and teaching mathematics included :  
( 1 ) Negotiation of the Learning and Teaching Mathematics units with each cohort , 
including the processes , content , learning and teaching experiences , and assessment and learning tasks 
( 2 ) Introduction of partner teaching ( commuting ) where pairs ( in the main ) of preservice teachers planned and taught mathematics lessons in schools for an 
approximately one hour session per week for up to six sessions 
( 3 ) Introduction of systematic reflective practice as a means of unpacking learning 
using the ALACT framework ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 )  
 ( 4 ) An expectation that pre-service teachers would identify and explore critical 
incidents in teaching and learning 
( 5 ) The creation of roundtable sessions as a formal , structured space for 
reflection . 
In Table 1 . 1 , I describe my original and my modified approach for the units 
Learning and Teaching Mathematics I and II . 
All of this became the precursor to examining how these changes impacted preservice teachers ’ learning about teaching and how understanding of teaching about 
6 1 A New Professionalism
teaching might be developed through this close attention to learning about 
practice . 
My endeavour , therefore , in reconceptualising , restructuring and monitoring 
our learning within the mathematics units of the Bachelor of Education Program 
was to delve deeply into the day-to-day of our pre-service classroom experiences 
in order to understand more completely the ways in which our interactions promoted ( or not ) learning about teaching . This exposed for me the critical nature of 
the teacher educator / pre-service teacher learning relationship and prompted me to 
examine my taken-for-granted assumptions , beliefs and practices about teaching 
and learning . 
Underpinning my reconceptualised approach to teaching and learning mathematics was the introduction of reflective practice ; a practice which entailed both reflection in , on and for action . Reflection , rather than be taken as a fait accompli because , 
as Loughran ( 2002 ) suggests , reflection is something that “ rings true for most people 
as something useful and informing ”  ( p . 33 )  , was to become integral , deliberate and 
systematic in this study . Reflection as a concept , a practice and approach within 
teacher education programs has been widely researched ( Beck & Kosnik , 2002 ; 
Berry & Loughran , 2002a ; Boud et al .  , 1985 ; Brookfield , 1995 ; Gore , 1993 ; 
Grimmett & Erikson , 1988 ; Hatton & Smith , 1995 ; Korthagen , 1985 ; Korthagen 
et al .  , 2001 ; Loughran , 2002 ; Munby & Russell , 1994 ; Schön , 1983 , 1987 )  , broadly 
interpreted and , often poorly enacted . 
Table 1 . 1 Summary of comparison of original and modified approach to teaching and learning 
mathematics within the Bachelor of Education degree
Original approach Modified approach
Predetermined unit description , content and 
assessment
Negotiated unit content , processes and 
assessment
Traditional lecture / tutorial format Information sessions , forum and ‘ roundtable 
discussions ’ 
Lecturer assessment Self , peer and lecturer assessment
On campus experiences ( invited guest 
speakers for lectures ) 
Commuting partner teaching – on campus – in 
schools ( up to six weekly ) both primary / 
secondary schools
Summative reflection / evaluation ( Student 
evaluation of Unit – SEU and Student 
evaluation of teaching – SET surveys 
provided and required by university
Emphasis on experiences and systematic reflection in developing knowledge
Introduction of ALACT model of reflective 
practice ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ) 
Opportunities to reflect in a formative manner
Critical incident questionnaire ( Brookfield , 1995 ) 
Freewrite ( LaBoskey , 1994 ) 
Weekly written reflections
SET and SEU evaluations
The Beginning Teacher Educator 7
The framework I adapted and implemented with each of the four cohorts of 
pre-service teachers who participated in this study was based on Korthagen 
et al .  ’ s ( 2001 ) ALACT model . Through reflection in and on practice , assumptions 
about teaching and learning ( which more often than not had remained implicit 
and unchallenged )  , were investigated ; and through this reflective investigation , 
multiple perspectives about teaching , and learning about teaching were 
identified . 
Structures in Place and Happening
Reflecting on this early stage of a change process , it was evident that challenging 
the status-quo was confronting but also liberating as I was provided with a catalyst 
to see teaching and learning differently . Russell ( 1999 ) has suggested that for 
change to impact on pre-service teacher learning and ultimately student learning 
in school environments , approaches and practices in teacher education must firstly 
be re-evaluated . He states ,  “ It is certainly not enough for teacher educators to 
advocate changes that they have not achieved in their own practice ”  ( p . 1 )  . In other 
words , teacher educators must challenge their own practices and assumptions and 
commit to examining practice , before they consider doing so with their students . 
Much has been revealed in teacher education research about the apprenticeships 
we have served as we learn about teaching , and these apprenticeships were once 
viewed as an impediment to progressing alternative views and practices as teachers . However , my research elaborated on the proposition that , through altered 
practices in teacher education , experience can be a “ negotiated and interactive 
process rather than as one that is predetermined by teachers ’  [ and pre-service 
teachers ’  ] prior experiences ”  ( Mewborn & Stinson , 2007 , p . 1457 )  . 
Clearly , I was propositioning pre-service teachers ; they were ultimately being 
asked to negotiate new ways of operating as a pre-service teacher and to have trust 
in me as their educator . This brought with it some element of professional risk for 
me , and required a great deal of support from pre-service teachers ( especially the 
initial research cohort )  . 
Developing My Conceptual Framework
The concept of reflection which underpins the research relates to Dewey ’ s ( 1916 , 
1933 ) explication of reflection as being essential for the continuity of growth and 
the creation of knowledge . Although the definition of reflection remains contested 
within educational contexts ( see , for example , LaBoskey , 1994 ; Loughran , 1996 , 
2002 , 2004a ; Smyth , 1989 , 1992 ) and the outcomes of reflection based research 
studies have generated some disappointing results ( Korthagen , 1985 ; Korthagen 
8 1 A New Professionalism
et al .  , 2001 ; Hatton & Smith , 1995 ; Wideen et al .  , 1998 )  , it has nevertheless been 
acknowledged that reflective practice in teacher education should be encouraged 
( Gore , 1993 ; Hatton & Smith , 1995 ; Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ; Loughran , 2002 )  . 
There is a diversity of approaches to reflective practice and learning from reflection 
within teacher education , and this research will focus on the contributions of Schön 
( 1983 , 1987 ) van Manen ( 1977 ) and Korthagen et al .  ( 2001 )  ( in particular the 
ALACT framework )  . 
The following schematic ( Figure 1 . 1 ) represents the framework that has 
informed the nature and conduct of my research on teaching and learning from 
teaching . The outer circle represents teacher education and as such encompasses 
the beliefs , practices , assumptions , behaviours and ideals of learners within a 
teacher education environment . The two subsets relate to teacher educator teaching 
and pre-service teacher learning about teaching . The intersection of these subsets 
forms what I have named as , the crucible of inquiry and provides the focus for 
learning about teaching . 
Traditionally , this intersection has been interpreted as a space largely represented by a transmission approach ( Freire , 1970 ) to teaching . This research of my 
practice over time reveals the ways in which self-study can expand and reframe this 
space to incorporate : an extended understanding of what it means to teach ; what it 
means to learn ; and , what it means to learn about teaching and learning in teacher 
education . The specific actions which have been intended to contribute to this 
extended understanding include reflection ( through such activities as ALACT , freewrites , critical incident questionnaires , written reflections )  ; experience ( through 
commuting partner teaching ; roundtable reflection ) and through the identification 
and exploration of assumptions and critical events , interactions and incidents in 
learning about teaching . 
Teaching and Learning in
Teacher Education
Crucible of Inquiry
Teacher Educator Pre-service Teacher
Teaching about
teaching
Learning about
teaching
Fig . 1 . 1 Schematic representation of the conceptual framing
Developing My Conceptual Framework 9
Assumptions as a Lens to Study Practice
The lens through which I examined my practice was assumptions . Understanding 
assumptions and the powerful ways in which they influence our practices as teacher 
educators and learners , through teaching , is a difficult process . In essence expressions of assumptions represent “ who we are ”  ( Brookfield , 1995 )  . It is no surprise 
then that as we come to “ hunt ”  ( Brookfield , 1995 ) identify and examine our 
assumptions we do not always feel comfortable with what we find . Throughout this 
book I expose the many challenges , joys and frustrations of being confronted with 
new understandings about self and practices , and reveal my responses as I continued to make sense of my learning and teaching in mathematics pre-service teacher 
education . My focus on assumption hunting required me to dig deeply into the “ tell 
of my classroom ”  ( Fishman & McCarthy , 2002 , p . 132 )  , and my self ; to uncover as 
it were , what had previously remained implicit . As Loughran ( 2006 ) suggests we 
need to “ own up ” to “ the assumptions and taken-for-granted aspects of practice that 
quietly lurk in the depths of our sub-conscious ”  ( p . 19 )  . 
Assumption Hunting
Throughout my research I systematically identified and explored our ( pre-service 
teachers and my ) often taken-for-granted , implicit and intangible directors of the 
ways in which we see and interpret our teaching and learning about teaching 
worlds . To assist in assumption hunting I referred to Brookfield ’ s ( 1995 ) categorisation of assumptions – paradigmatic , prescriptive and causal – and it was through 
using this framework for assumption categorisation that I was able to make deeper 
sense of my understandings and practices as a teacher educator . According to 
Brookfield , paradigmatic assumptions “ bare the basic structuring axioms we use 
to order the world into fundamental categories ” and as such represent the belief 
that “ they ’ re objectively valid renderings of reality , the facts we know to be true ”  
( p . 2 )  . These paradigmatic assumptions represent my reality ; of facts that I know 
to be true for me in my context and based on my experience as a teacher educator . 
An example of one of my paradigmatic assumptions is my belief that democratic 
practices should underpin the teaching and learning processes at university . 
Simply stated , each learner should have access to resources , experiences and 
opportunities for pedagogical growth . 
Prescriptive assumptions “ are assumptions about what we think ought to be happening in a particular situation … Inevitably they are grounded in , and extensions 
of , our paradigmatic assumptions ”  ( Brookfield , 1995 , p . 3 )  . Therefore , an extension 
of my paradigmatic assumption ( above ) which underpinned my new approach to 
learning about teaching was based on the introduction of pre-service teacher negotiation of the content , process and assessment tasks associated with the Learning 
and Teaching Mathematics units . 
10 1 A New Professionalism
Causal assumptions represent yet another level of assumption identification and 
generally they “ help us understand how the world works and the conditions under 
which processes can be changed … they are usually stated in predictive terms ”  
( p . 3 )  . For example , one causal assumption I held and have systematically explored 
was that if I introduced structured reflective practices ( i . e .  , Freewrites , LaBoskey , 
2004 ) then pre-service teachers would develop a repertoire of reflection strategies 
to assist them in their learning about teaching . 
Assumption hunting and identification was also an integral practice with each 
cohort of pre-service teachers and it was from this platform that we began to identify and unpack our assumptions and thereby scrutinise the ways in which these 
firmly held and often unchallenged beliefs affected the ways in which we operated 
as learners of teaching . 
Assumption Hunting 11
Chapter 2
Understanding the Underbelly : 
Making Sense of Theory
Introduction
When I introduce new mathematical concepts with pre-service teachers , I inevitably ask “ What is the big idea ?  ” and our exploration leads to a discussion that highlights multiple understandings about how big ideas are both perceived and 
articulated . As I write about understanding more about the underbelly of my thinking , I am drawn to once again ask “ What is the big idea ?  ” when discussing the role 
of theory when needing to articulate knowledge about my practice . With relation to 
a discussion about a new professionalism in education , perhaps it becomes pertinent to ask more about the nature of theory that is relevant to teacher educators and 
then examine the connection between teacher educator ’ s behaviours and their inner 
beliefs . In positioning teacher educators as producers of knowledge then we need 
to challenge traditional ideas of how knowledge is produced and disseminated 
( Berry , 2004b , 2007 ) and the foundation for this process is on the having of 
experience . 
As a primary teacher , I rarely had recourse to reflect on theory and the ways in 
which theory had explicitly or implicitly influenced my teaching . I did things 
because I did them in much the same way as I believed things because I believed 
them ; they just were . I did not have reason to challenge the status-quo . Teaching , 
for me , was a doing profession with both immediate and urgent needs and in retrospect , this belief transferred to my teacher education classrooms . In my discussion 
in this chapter of the role of theory , I will begin to untangle the ways in which my 
beliefs influenced what I thought pre-service teachers should know and understand 
about theory and developing knowledge , and about the ways in which articulating 
my own philosophy of learning began to influence my practice and beliefs as an 
educator . 
Reflecting on my initial teaching of mathematics with pre-service teachers , 
I found that I taught about the “ Big T ” theorists ( such as Dewey , Vygotsky , Bruner ) 
and assumed that pre-service teachers would inevitably make learning connections 
and allow theory to underpin their understandings and practices as beginning teachers in meaningful ways ( i . e .  , break down the theory-practice divide by attempts to 
make theory meaningful by understanding theorists and their theories )  . However , 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 13
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008
14 2 Understanding the Underbelly : Making Sense of Theory 
following one pre-service teacher ’ s comment in May 2002 (  “ I can remember all the 
theorists but I forget which theory goes with what theorist ”  ) I began to see that for 
some , understanding theory meant being able to adequately associate the theorist 
with the theory – a memory recall activity . To me this provided an indication that 
learning about what Korthagen et al .  ( 2001 ) suggest is “ Big T ” theory , although 
informative , can remain peripheral to pre-service teacher learning , as it had not 
been connected in some meaningful way with personal experience . So what 
did I want pre-service teachers to know and understand about theory ? By asking 
this question , I realised that I needed to articulate my own philosophy about understanding theory and in a sense , work backwards to what I thought pre-service teachers might need to know and understand about their developing theoretical 
understandings . 
My Theoretical Platform : How Does Knowledge Develop ? 
I deliberately place boundaries around the extent of literature and argument in my 
discussion about the construction of knowledge and theoretical influences on the 
construction of knowledge in teaching . However , understanding more about the 
underbelly required me to situate myself somewhere in the conversation for as 
Lankshear & Knobel ( 2004 ) suggest constructivism , for example , can mean “ all 
things to all people ” and that “ The current ‘ fetish ’ for constructivism , which has 
come to mean all things to all people … must be challenged and then clearly 
defined ”  ( p . 10 )  . When working from a constructivist perspective it is generally 
understood that we create , rather than discover an external or already existing reality , As Whitaker ( 2002 ) proposes : 
We do not awaken each morning and stumble through a predetermined and fixed reality . 
Each of us actively creates / constructs our own reality .  .  . we discard some aspects , construe 
and reconstrue others , and in doing so , we constantly shape and re-shape our own reality .  
( p . 76 ) 
The nature of knowledge is highly contested ( Shulman , 1986 , 1987 )  . The epistemological debate relates to the nature of knowledge and focuses on questions around 
 “ What is knowledge ?  ” It has its foundations in philosophy and is often represented 
as a dichotomous argument . In other words , one interprets the construction of 
knowledge as resting on empirical ( based in experience ) or rational ( knowledge 
attained by reasoned , logical thought ) foundations . Confrey ( 1990 ) defines constructivism as :  
[ E ] ssentially a theory about the limits of human knowledge , a belief that all knowledge is 
necessarily a product of our own cognitive acts . We can have no direct or unmediated 
knowledge of any external or objective reality . We construct our understanding through our 
experiences , and the character of our experience is influenced profoundly by our cognitive 
lens .  ( p . 108 ) 
Contentions about the ways in which knowledge is constructed also extend to constructivism being described as a “ one size fits all ” picture of teaching and learning 
( McCarty & Schwandt , 2000 , p . 79 )  ; that all learners are cast in either the active or 
passive mould ( McCarty & Schwandt , 2000 , p . 80 )  ; and that the term constructivism is clearly fashionable but used loosely with no clear definition which then 
makes appraisal difficult . McCarty & Schwandt ( 2000 ) suggest that even when the 
epistemological characterisation of the type of knowledge has been agreed upon , 
there stills exists a void in the explanation about how this knowledge can be conveyed and that “  .  .  . constructivists and constructionists err in their belief that a theory of best teaching can be derived from a theory of knowing ”  ( p . 79 )  . 
One argument relating to suggested limitations of constructivism pertinent to my 
study is the notion that that all learners are cast as either passive or active in their 
learning . McCarty & Schwandt ( 2000 ) question the viability of creating such a 
dichotomy and ask : 
How should a teacher judge a bright but shy student who never “ actively ” participates in 
class but presents excellent written work ? Conversely , what of the student who compulsively participates in classroom conversation ( an “ active ” student .  .  .  ) despite the fact that 
this very activity seems to impede the student ’ s effective learning of writing ?  .  .  . there are 
just too many varieties of student .  ( p . 80 ) 
Clearly then , within this constructivist debate there exists very little agreement , 
commonality and / or consensus about meaning related to constructivism , and as 
scholars argue , this “ impasse ” will be difficult to move beyond ( Burbules , 2000 , 
p . 308 )  . In all of this debate , competing “ realisms / claims / propositions ”  , or “ polarised characterisations ”  ( Burbules , 2000 , p . 310 ) are discussed and perpetuated 
( objective and subjective ; knowledge as being created or discovered ; individual , 
social )  . However , as a means of moving forward in understanding the constructivist 
debate , Burbules ( 2000 ) presents five propositions which , he states , cut across the 
 “ pro- and anti-constructivist positions ”  ( p . 321 )  . These are : 
1 . All understandings of the world partake of a social environment , even when they 
are formulated by individuals alone
2 . Language provides the conditions for both understanding and mis-understanding
3 . Our efforts at understanding the world always occur at a distinct time and place 
and under a set of circumstances that motivate and influence our choice of questions , methods , and reference groups for cross-checking our understandings
4 . The underlying issue that divides the anti- and pro-constructivists is their attitudes towards difference and disagreement
5 . Constructivism operates within a problem-based framework , in which one 
potential problem is always the status of one ’ s constructions themselves ( not 
being constructivist enough )  ( pp . 321–326 )  . 
In summarising his position , Burbules ( 2000 ) advocates that what is required is 
recognition that one operates “ within and across existing views and differences ” 
and one should proceed “ with few preconceptions about what the end result of that 
shared inquiry will generate ”  ( p . 325 )  . Burbules ’ s perspective is particularly relevant to my study as it captures for me the essence of an orientation towards learning 
and the social construction of knowledge within our mathematics learning and 
teaching environment . It relates to the development of pedagogy that rests on 
My Theoretical Platform : How Does Knowledge Develop ? 15
16 2 Understanding the Underbelly : Making Sense of Theory 
challenging assumptions together with an exploration of multiple perspectives in 
coming to know in a socially constructed environment ( Kroll , 2007 )  . 
As with many self-study researchers “ Big T ” social constructivist theory 
informed my understanding of the ways in which knowledge might be constructed 
within our mathematics learning environment . The theoretical framework which 
underpinned my ( modified ) practice with each cohort of pre-service teachers was 
based on a belief that reality is a personal construction that develops within a 
socially constructed context ( Vygotsky , 1978 )  . As such this approach to learning 
privileges the role of others in the social construction of knowledge . Within a 
socially constructed environment ( Vygotsky , 1978 ) individual development is 
dependent upon social transactions within that learning environment , and cultural 
meanings are shared and internalised . This then creates opportunities for individual 
transformation , which , through the establishment of learning communities , might 
then become a “ social transformation ”  ( LaBoskey , 2004 , p . 830 )  . These types of 
interactions can be understood as “ dialectically interacting moments ”  ( Wertsch et 
al .  , 1995 ) whereby within the context , the individual and the environment interact 
to produce altered understandings , in a quest to seek “ answers to questions regarding who we are , what we can know and how we should act ”  ( McCarty & Schwandt , 
2000 , p . 85 )  . 
Two important elements were important for me in establishing new ways of 
learning with pre-service teachers in mathematics education . First , I believed that 
each individual must have an active ( physical , cognitive , affective ) role in learning , 
in constructing knowledge and in reflecting on that construction so as to transform 
their understanding and second , rather than view the learning and knowledge construction process in terms of dichotomies ( whether they be object / reality , subject / 
object , theory / practice )  , learning was viewed as “ intertwined and co-constructing ”  
( Phillips , 2000 , p . 131 )  . 
Learning within a socially constructed environment emphasises the role of significant others and Vygotsky ( 1978 ) highlights the importance of the zone of proximal development ( ZPD ) as it is within this “ zone ” that significant others can 
contribute to knowledge generation and transformation . He states that : 
The distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving 
under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers .  ( Cole & Scribner , 1978 , 
p . 86 ) 
Identification of this ZPD was important to me in my teaching and this meant that 
I needed to know my pre-service teachers ; I needed to continually work to discover 
the “ zone ” and I needed to be explicit about the role that others ( peers , teacher 
educators , mentors ) might have in establishing a deeper understanding of where we 
were all at , as it were . In making this zone explicit , learners can then be supported 
in their attempts to come to know through the establishment of communities of 
practice ( Lave & Wenger , 1991 )  ; a place whereby learning is scaffolded by competent / knowledgeable others ( an example of this which was evident in my practice 
was the development of Roundtable reflection sessions )  . 
Understanding and articulating my theoretical platform meant that it was necessary to understand the “ Big T ” theorists ; I needed to have experience with a focus 
on the theoretical underbelly and be conscious of the ways in which theory was 
being lived in my practice . I also needed to help pre-service teachers understand the 
 “ Big T ” theorists and encourage them to identify their own theoretical platforms . 
I was guided in my learning and teaching by Korthagen et al .  ’ s ( 2001 )  “ Small t ” 
theory . In this way , learning in teacher education for me , was based on a phronesis 
or a practical wisdom orientation and in this way , theoretical understandings 
develop through having relevant experience and this relevant experience , when 
reflected upon can lead to new knowledge . 
Phronesis and Episteme
Discussions about the ways in which knowledge is developed in teacher education 
often refer to a phronesis-episteme dichotomy and put simply , phronesis refers to 
knowledge gained from an experiential , practical approach to practice and epistemic knowledge is that knowledge which is based on sets of propositions and has 
emerged from a theoretical base . An important question we need to ask is whether 
there is indeed a need for a knowledge base in teaching and if so , why , how and for 
whom might this base be created ? In his article , The Knower and the Known : The 
Nature of Knowledge in Research on Teaching , Fenstermacher ( 1994a ) argues for 
a knowledge base in teaching , and he also refers to the Aristotelian notion of “ phronesis ”  , or practical reasoning ( p . 45 )  . In the time of Aristotle :  
[ Phronesis ] concerned situations the nature and complexity of which were unknown 
beforehand : it dealt with them not by merely reapplying predetermined generic techniques 
but by recognising what combinations of actions are appropriate to complex or ambiguous 
situations .  ( Jonsen & Toulmin , 1988 , p . 65 ) 
Reflection is a key component which stimulates the development of phronesis , and 
hence is at the core of the learning process and the moral and ethical dimensions of 
teaching and learning about teaching that are valued ( LaBoskey , 2004 ; Korthagen , 
1985 ; Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ; Sachs , 1997 )  . According to Korthagen et al .  ( 2001 ) 
understanding phronesis as practical wisdom is based on a knowledge of “ concrete 
particulars ” which require a “ grasp of generalities ”  ( p . 25 ) and relies heavily on the 
 “ perceptual ” rather than the “ conceptual ”  . Korthagen et al . also state that :  
[ T ] he ultimate appeal of phronesis is not to principles , rules , thereoms , or any conceptual 
knowledge . Ultimately , the appeal is to perception . For to be able to choose a form of 
behaviour appropriate for the situation , above all , one must be able to perceive and discriminate the relevant details .  ( p . 25 ) 
Therefore , knowledge as phronesis is based on a blending of theory and practice 
arising within the context of particular experience . 
In contrast , episteme is an approach to the development of knowledge based 
within the positivist paradigm and as such is propositional in nature : propositional 
My Theoretical Platform : How Does Knowledge Develop ? 17
18 2 Understanding the Underbelly : Making Sense of Theory 
knowledge reflects assertions that can be investigated and explained . Such propositions , according to Korthagen et al .  ( 2001 )  , learnt within this positivist approach , 
represent a “ truth ” and this truth , because it is considered part of , and consistent 
with , a theory then becomes “ fixed , timeless and objective ”  ( p . 23 )  . Propositional 
knowledge developed in this way then becomes “ purely intellectual insights , unaffected by emotions or desires ”  ( p . 23 )  . However , some difficulties associated with 
this approach to knowledge production relate not so much to the nature of the 
knowledge itself , or even the notion of one having “ theoretical knowledge at one ’ s 
disposal ”  ( p . 25 ) but rather with the users of the knowledge . 
The problem of the knowledge user concurs with Kincheloe ’ s ( 2003 ) response 
to the limitations of the positivist approach which suggests that Western education , 
when based on this premise becomes a reductionist paradigm . This implies that 
 “ limited and correct meanings ”  ( p . 9 ) can be derived from any phenomenon . In 
contrast , from a phronesis perspective , learning grows from experience and experience promotes familiarity and an increased ability to be able to assess situations and 
thereby choose the most appropriate courses of action relevant to the individual . 
Such insights which are derived through experience “ cannot possibly be transferred ”  ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 , p . 27 )  . Therefore , within the context of teacher 
education , the role of the teacher educator becomes crucial . With reference to 
teacher educators , learning about teaching is not and should not be based on transference of concepts , or detailed explanations of rules and strategies about teaching 
with pre-service teachers , but rather the provision of assistance to the pre-service 
teacher in order to gain deeper understandings of his / her perceptions through questioning and guidance in order to explicate tacit learning . 
A Knowledge Base for Teacher Educators
Berry ( 2004a ) states , in positioning teacher educators as producers of knowledge , 
traditional notions of the ways in which knowledge is and has been produced and 
disseminated must be challenged . 
In their review of the arguments relating to the identification and establishment 
of a knowledge base for teaching , Munby et al .  ( 2002 ) cite research which identifies the complexities associated with the ways in which such a knowledge base may 
be created and understood . Other researchers , however , put forward the claim that 
defining a framework for a knowledge base of teaching is both distorting and / or 
limiting ( Lather , 1986 )  , since it cannot fully encompass the moral ( LaBoskey , 
2004 )  ; the personal ( Liston & Zeichner , 1987 )  ; the political ( Donmoyer , 1996 ) nor 
the affective character of such knowledge . Hamilton proposes that this base is not 
determined by a set of skills but rather it serves as an “ anchor , a point where the 
social , moral , political personal and emotional fit together ”  ( 2004 , p . 397 )  . 
Understanding the creation of a knowledge base for teaching from this perspective 
is not new ( Tickle , 1999 ) and according to Korthagen ( 2001 ) implies that teachers 
must be helped to become more aware of the connection between the professional 
and the personal in learning about teacher education ( Kelchtermans , 2005 )  . The 
development of experiential knowledge underpins this approach to teacher educator 
knowledge . 
Experiential Knowledge
Traditionally , the effectiveness of teaching in pre-service teacher education has been 
measured largely by reference to propositional statements which reflect an emphasis 
on knowledge for teaching . However , aspects of the new professionalism in teacher 
education emphasise that one must consider not only knowledge for teaching , but 
knowledge in and knowledge of teaching , as it is through understanding a combination of the ways in which knowledge is produced that one can come to understand 
more about what constitutes a knowledge base of teaching . Rather than view the production of teacher knowledge from a rigid , skill based and pre-determined perspective or as propositional and theoretical , Carter ( 1990 ) proposes that such knowledge 
is “ experiential , procedural , situational and particularistic ”  ( p . 307 ) and that in order 
to understand its development , experience must be unpacked ( Munby et al .  , 2002 , 
p . 887 )  . Therefore , unpacking experience enables one to understand how the experience has contributed to a developing knowledge base of teacher educators . 
Key constructs related to teacher educator knowledge relevant to my study 
include reflection ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ; Schön , 1983 , 1987 ) and the authority of 
experience ( Munby & Russell , 1994 ) which presupposes that teacher knowledge 
viewed from this perspective is “ more contextual than categorical ”  ( LaBoskey , 
2004 , p . 822 )  . Therefore in developing an understanding of what might constitute 
a teacher educator ’ s knowledge base , one must firstly consider knowledge for , in 
and of practice . 
Knowledge for , in and of Practice
My research draws on the views exemplified by Cochran-Smith & Lytle ( 2004 ) 
who propose that a knowledge base for teacher educators is not only desirable , but 
essential , as in articulating learning more is known and shared about what constitutes this knowledge base . In this way , teacher educators are required to explicitly 
consider elements of experience which bring attention to “ issues that impact teaching and learning [ which ] are brought into focus in different ways and at different 
times in order to shape the outcomes of teaching and learning ”  ( Loughran , 2006 , 
p . 76 )  . By identifying and articulating this knowledge , Loughran asserts that ,  “ that 
which may once have appeared shapeless and chaotic actually contains patterns ”  
( 2006 , p . 76 )  . Therefore , by explicating the learning gained from a systematic 
examination of experience as a teacher educator , one contributes to a broader discussion about what those patterns might be . 
A Knowledge Base for Teacher Educators 19
20 2 Understanding the Underbelly : Making Sense of Theory 
There are multiple ways of understanding what is meant by the knowledge base 
of teaching . One way is by reference to the research of Cochran-Smith & Lytle 
( 2004 ) who describe “ knowledge-for-practice ”  ,  “ knowledge-in-practice ” and 
 “ knowledge-of-practice ”  ( p . 611 )  . An initial inquiry into knowledge-for-practice 
provides the foundation by which knowledge in and of practice can be further 
understood . Knowledge-for-practice refers to the production of formal knowledge 
( Fenstermacher , 1994a ; Richardson , 1997b ) and constitutes what has been traditionally referred to as “ the knowledge base ” for / of teaching / teacher education . As 
such this form of knowledge reflects the ways in which competent practitioners 
deal with content matter and this knowledge base represents effective strategies 
practitioners employ to solve problems in practice . It could be suggested that with 
reference to teacher educators , much of their experience in learning about teaching 
emanates from this knowledge-for-teaching position as this was the dominant paradigm in their teacher education preparation . 
Knowledge-in-practice represents what many researchers have named as practical knowledge ( Cochran-Smith & Lytle , 2004 ; Grimmett & McKinnon , 1992 ; 
Russell , 1997 )  . Challenging one ’ s own assumptions and reconsideration of one ’ s 
beliefs and actions are integral to developing knowledge-in-practice . 
Knowledge-of-practice “ treat [ s ] the knowledge and theory produced by others 
as generative material for interrogation and interpretation ”  ( Cochran-Smith & 
Lytle , 2004 , p . 614 ) and in this sense outcomes of research associated with knowledgeof-practice connect with the broader social , political and cultural conversations . 
One of the key elements of knowledge-of-practice is its link with the professional 
as a life-long learner who attempts to problematise her / his practices as well as that 
of others , and therefore continually renews what it means to teach and learn 
about teaching . Cochran-Smith & Lytle ( 2004 ) propose that self-study of 
teacher education practices is one form of practitioner inquiry which generates 
such knowledge-of-practice . 
It becomes clear that , as Berry ( 2004a ) proposes , the traditional ways in which 
knowledge is seen to develop in teacher education must be challenged . One must 
move towards understanding the ways in which knowledge for , of and in practice 
intersect in teaching and learning about and from teaching , and identify knowledge 
that is not only propositional in nature but that which is developed through phronesis – or practical wisdom – gained from experience . In many ways my research 
seeks to understand more about the ways that knowledge for , of and in practice 
intersects with my teaching and learning about and from teaching . 
Summary
Articulating my theoretical positioning has been important as it helped me to see more 
about my assumptions and understand more about the way that I have acted ( and 
continue to act ) as a teacher educator . Defining a theoretical framework identifies the 
drivers of my thinking and practice . My questioning stance encouraged me to 
constantly ask : What is guiding my work and why am I responding in the ways I do ? 
Chapter 3
Self-Study of Practice
Learning to teach – like teaching itself – is always the process of 
becoming : a time formation and transformation , of scrutiny into 
what one is and who one can become .  
( Britzman , 2003 , p . 31 ) 
Introduction
Given the ongoing debate about the relevance and effectiveness of teacher education programs , it becomes even more important for teacher educators to assess , and 
even reframe their roles as educators . Calls for teachers to reflect on practice , however , are not new . Stenhouse , as early as 1975 , advocated that teachers research 
their practice in an attempt to better understand their own practice and therefore 
understand classroom contexts in meaningful ways . However it is particularly during the past decade that calls for teacher educators to reflect and take a research 
stance to their work have arisen , and the Self-Study of Teacher Education Practices 
( S-STEP ) represents an organised effort to formalise the work of teacher educators 
who are engaged in researching their practice . According to Loughran ( 2004a )  , 
self-study practised by teacher educators is an “ empowering way of examining and 
learning about practice while simultaneously developing opportunities for exploring scholarship in , and through , teaching ”  ( p . 7 )  . 
Self-study is an approach to research which enables teacher educators ( and other 
professionals ) to reflect on , and scrutinise practice and assumptions about learning , 
so as to improve pedagogy and to challenge the status-quo within the profession . 
Underpinning all of this is the intention to further explore deeper understandings of 
the why of practice ( Feldman , 2002 )  . However , as with notions of reflection and 
reflective practice , defining the nature of self-study research remains complex and 
 “ open to individual interpretation ”  ( Schuck , 2002 , p . 327 )  . Self-study is defined in 
multiple ways : as a process to research teacher educator practice and pre-service 
teachers ’ perspectives from the “ inside ”  ( Hamilton & Pinnegar , 1998 )  ; as a distinct 
and unique methodology employed by teacher educators to research practice 
( Hamilton & Pinnegar , 1998 )  ; and as systematic and rigorous inquiry into practice , 
often instigated by a problem , which then leads to the theorising of practice and a 
deeper understanding of the why of teaching and learning about teaching and learning 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 21
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008 
( Loughran , 2003 ; Tidwell & Fitzgerald , 2004 )  . Self-study may involve study of an 
individual , a program or an institution but common to all studies is a challenging 
of the status-quo in teacher education through rigorous and systematic inquiry into 
professional practice . A further requirement of self-study is dissemination of 
research outcomes to the educational community for critique and appraisal 
( Loughran , 2004a ; Loughran & Northfield , 1996 ; Schuck , 2002 )  . 
Despite its relatively recent emergence as an approach to researching practice , 
self-study has already impacted and continues to influence the professional practice 
of teacher educators , locally , nationally and internationally . The significance of the 
self-study movement in impacting the work of teacher educators , was notably 
referred to by Zeichner in his AERA 1998 Division K Vice-Presidential address as ,  
 “ probably the single most significant development ever in the field of teacher education research ”  ( 1999 , p . 8 )  . The initial concept of the self-study of teacher education 
practices , Special Interest Group ( SIG ) was established at the 1992 meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association ( AERA ) by a small number of teacher 
educator academics who came together out of a mutually felt need to question 
teacher education beliefs and practices in a systematic and rigorous manner with the 
aim of enhancing learning outcomes for all ( i . e .  , themselves as teacher educators , 
prospective teachers , and the future students of these prospective teachers )  . 
Self in Self-Study
Self-study is an approach which integrates reflection as a tool to view practice from 
varying perspectives ( Dinkelman , 2003 ; Kosnik , 2001 )  . Hamilton & Pinnegar 
( 1998 ) propose , it is :  
[ T ] he study of one ’ s self , one ’ s actions , one ’ s ideas , as well as the ‘ not self ’  . It is autobiographical , historical , cultural , and political and it draws on one ’ s life .  .  .  . Self-study also 
involves a thoughtful look at texts read , experiences had , people known and ideas considered . These are investigated for their connections with and relationships to practice as a 
teacher educator .  ( p . 236 ) 
My self-study focused on researching teaching from an insider perspective and 
I used reflective practice as a conduit for understanding more about assumptions 
and beliefs , and the impact of these on my practice . Therefore , an initial focus for 
me needed to be on the self within a teaching context . A caution which has been 
articulated by self-study scholars has been the identification of “ a romantic tone ” 
which might emerge “ when researchers focus too closely on their own learning ”  
( Bullough & Pinnegar , 2004 , p . 319 )  . Therefore , throughout the conduct of my 
research I needed to constantly ask : What concept of self is operating within 
my self-study and what are the limitations of my study which is conducted by the 
self of the self ? 
Bullough & Pinnegar ( 2004 ) propose that in order for pre-service teachers to 
develop voice and therefore a sense of self / selves , teacher educators must “ speak in 
a strong voice for the sake of their students ”  ( p . 335 )  . In essence then , teacher 
22 3 Self-Study of Practice 
educators need to work on developing a clear understanding of who they are and 
how they operate within their world context , thereby instilling a confidence for preservice teachers to do the same , i . e .  , finding their own voice . 
Characteristics of Self-Study
Self-study is increasingly defined by parameters which include characteristics 
rather than by an agreed upon definition and scholars identify characteristics which 
are evident in self-studies , as markers of this research paradigm . Guilfoyle et al .  
( 2004 ) propose that there are four characteristics of self-study research . These 
characteristics include :  ( 1 ) human interaction ;  ( 2 ) the understanding that the 
 “ researcher and researched are temporal , indeterminate and changing ”  ;  ( 3 ) an 
understanding that there is an obligation to discover all that can be known about the 
students ’  / researchers ’ context , background , goals , social relationships , purposes 
and learning ; and ( 4 ) the belief that “ humans have an impact on each other and the 
content and processes in which they are engaged ”  ( p . 1112 )  . These characteristics 
assume that professional qualities must be enacted in order to conduct self-study . 
These qualities include an ability to recognise ( and in some cases , learn to 
expect and / or tolerate ) temporality and the way in which changing contexts , people 
and events inevitably impacts research . It is acknowledged that during an era 
whereby education reform is seen as being inadequate in terms of recognising and 
implementing change in teacher education , self-study provides a means by which 
teacher educators can immediately instigate research and respond to authentic 
problems in practice with an aim of ( sustainable ) and effective improvement in 
pedagogical practice . As such the process is underpinned by a cycle of identification , action , reflection , response , evaluation and ( re ) implementation , and the realisation that moments cannot be transfixed in time . 
A focal point in self-study research is the establishment of relationships in learning about teaching , and a belief in the importance of understanding how relationships with others impact on the ways in which learning about teaching is 
experienced and how emergent knowledge is constructed ( Vygotsky , 1978 ; Social 
Constructivism )  . An extension of the establishment of professional relationships is 
the notion of professional responsibility ; i . e .  , there is an obligation to identify 
aspects of the context , learners , assumptions , goals and beliefs held by learners 
which will necessarily impact on research . These four characteristics of self-study 
research ( Guilfoyle et al .  , 2004 ) provide what could be interpreted as broad guidelines or an ontological lens for approaching self-study research . 
As a means of further refining these characteristics to my research context 
I referred to LaBoskey ’ s ( 2004 ) five characteristics of self-study which include : 
1 . An initiation by , and focus on self
2 . Improvement – aimed
3 . Interactivity at one or more stages throughout the process
Self in Self-Study 23
4 . Utilisation of multiple , mainly qualitative methods of data collection , analysis 
and representation
5 . Conceptualisation of validity as validation thus endeavouring to advance the 
field through the construction , testing , sharing and re-testing of exemplars of 
teaching practice ( p . 175 )  . 
Although there is an initial focus on self there is an obligation for what LaBoskey 
( 2004 ) suggests as interactivity throughout the research process . This interactivity 
includes connections with colleagues , critical friends , pre-service teachers and 
interested others . Yet another interpretation of interactivity is collaboration . 
Collaboration in Self-Study
Self-study researchers refer to the collaborative nature of self-study ( Kosnik , 2001 ; 
Loughran , 2004a ; Loughran & Northfield , 1996 ; Schuck , 2002 ) and state that for 
self-studies to maintain credibility , validity ( Feldman , 2003 ) and trustworthiness , 
involvement of and with others , is imperative .  ‘ Others ’ might include those involved 
in the formulation and implementation of the study and those that assist in the 
verification and the ongoing data interpretation . LaBoskey ( 1998 ) highlights the 
importance of others but also emphasises interaction as opposed to collaboration , 
suggesting that :  “ interactive may be more apropos as a referent for multi-party selfstudy than collaborative , especially because , in many cases , the researchers are not 
just interacting around an external data set ; the interactions are the data set , or at 
least part of it ”  ( p . 151 )  . Suffice it to say that , most researchers in this field identify 
some form of connection with others as an essential prerequisite for self-study and 
imperative for me in my research was the establishment of collaborative relationships with pre-service teachers . 
Further to an expectation of collaboration , or interaction , frameworks for focusing 
on self-study as a methodology have been suggested ( for example , Bodone et al .  , 
2004 ; Feldman et al .  , 2004 )  . In compiling guiding frameworks for self-study 
researchers they suggest that further questions need to be developed about the outcomes of the research and that the researchers need to be critical of themselves in 
terms of their roles as teacher educator-researchers . 
In essence , self-study , as a form of teacher educator research , recognises the 
value of experience and reflection as contributors to the knowledge base of educators , which in turn contributes to ways of knowing . These ways of knowing develop 
over time and are the result of often “ messy and non-linear ” pathways ( Mitchell , 
2002 , p . 252 )  , which influence the understandings associated with learning more 
about the learning , in contrast to an emphasis on the practice of teaching . Increased 
understanding of teacher education conducted within the context of teacher 
education , by teacher educators is a distinguishing feature of self-study . 
However , as Berry ( 2004b )  , Elijah ( 2004 )  , and Mitchell ( 2002 )  , for example ,  
caution , teacher-researchers can experience a sense of vulnerability as a result of 
24 3 Self-Study of Practice
conducting self-study research as in making public their private experience , there 
exists in this exposure , opportunities for judgment and challenge from the 
profession . Given that self-study researchers risk feeling vulnerable and exposing 
their pedagogical ‘ failures ’  , one might ask ,  “ Why do self-study ?  ” 
Away from a Traditional Paradigm
I wanted to move away from a traditional ‘ transfer of knowledge ’ paradigm in 
my mathematics education classes and move towards a self-study approach 
where my ( our ) taken-for-granted ways of operating and inherent belief systems 
( or assumptions ) were provoked . However , identification and challenging 
assumptions has implications for practice as a teacher educator and pre-service 
teachers and these implications have been revealed in self-study research ( see , 
for example , Berry , 2004a , 2007 ; Russell , 2004 ; Senese , 2002 )  . Self-studies by 
teacher educator researchers provide exemplars whereby the aim is to more 
closely align their practice and beliefs so that congruity in terms of intended and 
actual outcomes could be enhanced . In doing so , these teacher educators were 
required to identify their assumptions which inherently directed their practice , 
and then establish the ways in which congruency ( if any ) with pre-service teachers was being achieved . 
For example , Berry ( 2004a ) identifies six tensions which arose from the study 
of her practice and one of these tensions refers to “ telling and growth ”  ( p . 1313 )  . 
This tension relates , for example , to Brookfield ’ s ( 1995 ) category of prescriptive 
assumptions for it reflects what we [ as educators ] think ought to be happening ; in 
this case , within teacher education classrooms . This tension – learning to balance 
the teacher educator ’ s “ own desire to tell their student teachers about teaching with 
their understanding of the importance of providing opportunities for students to 
learn about teaching for themselves ”  ( 2004a , p . 1314 ) – casts into stark relief the 
dilemmas faced by teacher educators identifying and acknowledging that telling 
will no longer suffice . In examining the impact of not telling , Berry identifies repercussions in terms of the ways in which not telling , for example , might influence 
pre-service teacher evaluations of teacher educator ’ s teaching . One assumption 
which underpins many pre-service teachers ’ beliefs about learning to teach rests on 
the transmission , or telling model . When teacher educators do not tell , or withhold , 
by way of attempting to create balance between telling and providing space for 
pre-service teacher self-directed learning , evaluations from pre-service teachers 
might be negative and therefore impact on overall evaluations of teaching . Negative 
evaluations have implications for teacher educator employment and ongoing tenure 
within institutions . The questions Berry proposes represent knowledge about practice gained from a phronesis approach to teaching . She suggests that closure and 
resolution is not always possible , nor in some cases , is it the ultimate outcome . It is 
living through and with tensions that one can further acknowledge needs for 
Away from a Traditional Paradigm 25 
balance in identifying and accommodating multiple agendas in teaching about 
teaching . 
It is inevitable that teacher educators and pre-service teachers who work from an 
assumption challenging or an understanding tension base for pedagogical inquiry 
will experience levels of frustration ,  “ discomfort , uncertainty ,  [ and ] restless 
inquiry ”  ( Kincheloe , 2003 , p . 44 )  . This point that has been well made , for example , 
in the work of Lyons & Freidus ( 2004 , p . 1100 ) who report on both teacher educator and pre-service teacher experiences with the implementation of reflective 
portfolios in self-study . Initial levels of enthusiasm of those experiencing the 
changes as a result of self-study research are replaced by frustration as so often , 
learners need to learn to tolerate states of disequilibrium . However , as Bullough & 
Pinnegar ( 2004 ) propose , a disintegrative state will exist until the new knowledge 
has become integrated and new routines are developed . 
Self-study holds appeal for those involved in teacher education ( and other professions ) as a means of researching practice , with reflective inquiry as the conduit for 
learning about teaching . However , why did I and why do other teacher educators 
( and other professionals ) choose self-study when it demands intensive personal and 
professional commitment ; rigorous and systematic data collection and analysis ; an 
interruption to routine and habitual practices , which in essence ( re ) creates harmony 
and zones of comfort ; and exposure of vulnerabilities as a teacher educator ? 
Why Self-Study ? 
My research is an example of self-study research that has arisen from my concerns 
to better understand and improve the relationship between my teaching about teaching and my students learning to teach in the mathematics units of the Bachelor of 
Education Course . Choosing to conduct a self-study is my deliberate attempt to 
understand more about practice ( my own and that of my students ) and to better 
understand outcomes of practice in the context of a changing and complex world . 
In one sense , this study is a response to LaBoskey ’ s ( 2004 ) call for self-study 
researchers to identify and respond to “ why ” questions related to understanding and 
researching practice : 
The purpose [ of self-study ] is to improve that practice , in this case teacher education , in 
order to maximise the benefits for the clients , in this instance pre-service and in-service 
teachers and their current and future students . Thus , the aim for teacher educators involved 
in self-study is to better understand , facilitate , and articulate the teacher-learning process 
… it is enormously complex , highly dependent on context and its multiple variations , and 
personally and socially mediated .  ( p . 858 ) 
Increasing understanding of teacher education conducted within the context of 
teacher education , by teacher educators has been , and continues to be , a distinguishing feature of self-study . Although other methods ( such as action research , 
ethnographic research ) are also approaches used to research the work of teacher 
educators , it is the insider perspective , the ongoing , and ever-evolving study of 
26 3 Self-Study of Practice
practice-within-context that is identified as paramount to self-study ( LaBoskey , 
2004 )  . The development of understanding about teaching and learning , reframing , 
and new knowledge which emerges from this practice can be transformative in 
nature and this new learning is then evidenced in practice . 
By definition the conduct of self-study research is open to individual interpretation . Researchers conducting self-studies speak of systematically gathering and 
analysing data in an ongoing way so that authentic problems and issues related to 
practice are dealt with ; of partnerships and collaborative practice which offer critical feedback ; and of sharing knowledge with others in educational research ( and 
increasingly other disciplines ) and thereby articulating the learning they have 
gained from examining practice . This point is crucial . Articulation of knowledge is 
essential if we , as a profession , are to better understand our practice and the effect 
that our practice / s has on us and on those who are preparing to be teachers . Crucial 
for me in my learning about being a teacher educator was the identification and 
articulation of the theoretical underpinnings of my approach to practice and the 
documentation of the processes I introduced and modified with my cohorts of preservice teachers , with the ultimate aim of improving teaching and learning . 
Why Self-Study ? 27
Chapter 4
Designing my Self-Study Research
Introduction
My research was undertaken with four cohorts of pre-service teachers at varying 
stages of their Bachelor of Education Degree at the University of Ballarat , Victoria 
and the content area was Learning and Teaching Mathematics I ( First year , TJ591 ) 
and Learning and Teaching Mathematics II ( Third year , TJ792 )  . I conducted this 
study over a period of three years beginning in June , 2002 and concluding in 
December , 2004 . The pre-service teacher cohorts constituted both males and 
females – averaging 20–25% males ; 75–80% females – the majority of whom were 
Caucasian . The percentage of mature age pre-service teachers ( i . e .  , those who are 
non-direct school leavers and have generally had workforce experience )  , represented approximately 20% of the total number of pre-service teachers in each 
cohort . The average cohort size was 85 and all pre-service teachers referred to in 
my study have been allocated pseudonyms . 
Researching my practice using self-study as a methodology meant that I needed 
to question the intent and the process of my research . What data gathering techniques would prove to be most beneficial as a means of meeting our needs as learners about teaching ?  ( I needed to be critically selective )  . What might the data reveal 
about new understandings of learning about teaching ?  ( I needed to analyse data in a 
systematic and ongoing way )  . What was the research telling me about me ?  ( I needed 
to challenge my assumptions )  . What was the research telling me about the ways in 
which the pre-service teachers were experiencing their learning ?  ( I needed to focus 
on teaching so that pre-service teachers were learning through their experiences , and 
not mine )  . I developed a semi-structured but flexible framework for data collection 
and selected a range of data gathering techniques which I felt would initially meet 
my self-study research needs .  ( For an overview of the research design / data gathering 
tools , see Appendix 1 )  . Although I began with a framework , as my study progressed 
I modified my data collection and the tools I used to collect data and this was as a 
direct response to my need to understand learning in deeper ways . 
In this chapter I describe the ways in which I structured , organised and analysed 
my data . I illustrate the ways in which I designed specific data gathering tools as a 
matter of need in order to more deeply understand aspects of practice ( for example , 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 29
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008
my development of the multiple perspectives tasks which were designed as a tool 
through which I gained a deeper understanding of the multiple perspectives on 
particular roundtable interactions )  . 
Types of Data Gathering Techniques
The data gathering techniques used in my self-study research included : 
1 . Audio-taping and written field notes of selected roundtables
2 . Pre-service teachers ’ written work ( Freewrites ; Critical Incident Questionnaires ; 
Roundtables and Roundtable reflections ; Post-teaching written reflections ) 
3 . Multiple perspectives tasks , where a number of pre-service teachers were invited 
to respond to critical interactions identified within the roundtable sessions , along 
with the teacher educator
4 . Pre-service teacher email communication ( Cohort Two ; Semester Two , 2003 )  ; 
pre-service teachers were required to email the reflection of the ALACT summary ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ) post-teaching . These reflections were then collated 
and analysed
5 . Teacher educator journal entries , and field notes
6 . Assumption writing and examination ( Brookfield , 1995 )  . 
Roundtables
Roundtables ( Brandenburg , 2004b ) replaced traditional tutorial sessions which , 
more often than not , had been previously based on teacher educator identification of 
pre-service teacher needs ; teacher educator instigated discussion and teacher educator assessment of the learning . The sixteen roundtable sessions ( over the three years 
of my study ) were physically constructed as such , each averaging twelve pre-service 
teachers per table . They provided opportunities for pre-service teachers to reflect on , 
and make sense of , their teaching experiences in schools using the ALACT framework as a guide to discussion . Although the roundtable sessions were designed to 
encourage the development and articulation of pre-service teachers ’ voices , they 
became a major catalyst for me in learning more about my pedagogy . 
In gathering the data from roundtable sessions , I relied on audio-taping and transcription , and / or field notes which were constructed in detail . I transcribed data from 
the roundtables in a Four Stage process ( I have included details of this process in 
Appendix 2 ) but simply , during the initial transcribing stage I wrote notes in brackets 
which highlighted an issue for me , or added further meaning or contextual information to the conversation . These additional notes emphasised terms used in the dialogue ; 
mood , facial expressions ; tone , in terms of agitation , defensiveness ; agreement 
which was noted by pre-service teachers nodding ; and generally my interpretation 
of the level of emotion displayed in representing that dialogue . The Second Stage 
involved a form of tabulation whereby the transcript was then allocated a reference 
30 4 Designing my Self-Study Research
and a line number ; Stage Three involved coding whereby the transcript was coded 
and categorised and Stage Four involved the categorical analysis where each transcript was read to identify “ relationships between data items ”  ( Lankshear & Knobel , 
2004 , p . 271 ) which then were refined to a number of categories . 
Roundtable Field Notes
Another form of data collection I consistently used included taking field notes which 
I wrote as the roundtable sessions were being conducted . The combination of audiotaping and / or taking field notes became important for a number of reasons . For some 
pre-service teachers , the audio-recording of roundtable sessions may have been confronting and in this sense , contribute to the silencing of particular pre-service teachers 
and influence the manner in which some might have participated . At the same time , 
in my role as participant researcher , audio-recording of the session / s allowed for an 
increased focus on participation within the session and provided rich data which 
could be revisited and analysed from multiple perspectives over time . Writing field 
notes during sessions increased my responsibility to take careful notes so as to represent the nature of the discussion as accurately as possible . During these sessions , 
pertinent statements were transcribed directly as they were spoken . 
The data from the roundtable sessions were collated in summary form immediately afterwards and the key ideas were presented to each class at the beginning of 
the roundtable session during the following week . My purpose for providing summaries to the pre-service teachers was as a validation exercise to ensure that my 
interpretations adequately and accurately represented a snapshot of the experience 
of the main ideas of the roundtable sessions . It was through analysing data from the 
roundtable reflection sessions that so much of my learning about teaching in 
teacher education emerged , and as I stated in my introduction to this book , examining everyday classroom interactions ( post session and some months later ) led me to 
uncover profound new learning as a teacher educator . 
Pre-service Teachers ’ Post-Roundtable Written Reflections
Written reflections were also completed by the pre-service teachers at the conclusion of each roundtable session . Pre-service teachers were required to summarise 
their learning from the session and these reflections formed one element of their 
professional portfolio , an assessment item for this subject . In the initial stages of 
my research with the first two cohorts of pre-service teachers , roundtable reflections were an assessable task ; one which was completed post-session and included 
as part of the professional mathematics portfolio which was developed throughout 
the semester . However , following discussion with the initial two cohorts it was 
decided that for subsequent cohorts , although the roundtable reflection would 
remain a requisite in terms of reflecting on practice , it would no longer be an 
Roundtables 31
assessable task . In this way pre-service teachers could complete the reflection without being influenced by the pressure of formal assessment . 
Pre-service Teachers ’ Post “ Buddy Teaching ” Written Reflections
Pre-service teachers provided written feedback from their mathematics teaching 
sessions in schools and I include an extract ( below ) as an example . This extract was 
selected as it provides an insight into Nellie ’ s thinking and her reactions to largely 
unanticipated events in her class and parallels the event with her thinking and 
emotions at the same time . The written reflections also provided a springboard for 
discussion during roundtable sessions . 
What an absolute nightmare ! Plan a lesson using MAB [ multibase arithmetic blocks ] and 
assume a basic knowledge of place value . Wrong ! No MABs and never seen a place value 
mat before . What do you do ? I panicked ! I felt myself drowning in this lesson . It wasn ’ t 
when John started crying because the pressure of oral counting was too much that tipped 
me over the edge . It was when I held up a place value mat and said “ who has seen one of 
these before ?  ” and expecting them all to say “ me ” and they all shook their heads and 
stayed silent that I got worried .  .  . 
Use the whiteboard , that ’ s an idea ! Talk about the tens and ones . Children at the back 
aren ’ t listening . They ’ re fighting over the place value mats , worried because there are three 
mats and two children . Who will share and what will Genna do without a partner ? Can she 
have a mat all to herself ? Maybe the maths lesson should have been about this ? 
Finish explanation : tell them to use the bundling sticks . Okay , Richard [ teaching partner ] 
your turn to take over , I ’ ve had enough .  “ What do you want me to do ?  ”  , asks Richard .  “ Try 
and explain the tens and ones ” I say looking for a hole in the floor to swallow me up .  .  . 
Little by little the light gets clearer and the children are working away . I even manage to 
call John from his foetal position under the table to go and do some work despite his accusations of maths being stupid and us being stupid and everyone being stupid . 
Quarter to three and let ’ s pack up , time for a game of heads and tails . Surely not much else 
could go wrong ? Second note to self : never make these kinds of assumptions . Tim goes out 
first in all three games . Hurls self to floor and throws tantrum . Children all take a step 
back .  .  .  “ It ’ s only a game ” I manage to say quite feebly , over his sobbing ,  “ no need to get 
so upset ”  . The kids look at me like I am a monster . I look at Richard and wonder if we could 
make anybody else cry today .  
( Nellie , Tuesday , September 17 , 2002 ) 
Another means by which pre-service teachers ’ learning from experience was captured was through the multiple perspectives tasks . 
Multiple Perspectives Tasks
The development of the multiple perspectives task ( Brandenburg , 2005b ) is an 
example of the way in which self-study methodology prompted me as a teacher 
32 4 Designing my Self-Study Research
educator-participant researcher to identify and respond to critical interactions 
which arose from roundtable reflection sessions . In this way , I made meaningful 
connections between “ pedagogy and research design ”  ( LaBoskey , 2004 , 
p . 842 )  . The multiple perspectives task was developed as an extension of my 
roundtable data collection and included the completion of a reflective activity 
aimed at providing multiple perceptions on critical incidents , events and / or interactions . I felt that I needed to understand some interactions more deeply as it 
became obvious to me that while I was deliberately focused on aligning my 
intentions with a reality of how my teaching was being experienced by preservice teachers , there were multiple interpretations . 
The multiple perspectives task involved the following process . Up to four 
pre-service teachers were invited to complete the multiple perspectives follow 
up task ; participation was voluntary and the pre-service teachers were not compelled to complete the task . In both cases , two of the four pre-service teachers 
accepted . I randomly selected the four pre-service teachers and the number of 
respondents was capped at between two and four as this allowed me to examine 
a sample of perspectives in detail . Pre-service teachers in each instance had 
received their final grade for the unit during the previous semester and therefore , they were not advantaged nor disadvantaged in terms of their final unit 
grades . 
Excerpts from the transcribed data ( Roundtable Eleven , August 2003 ) and the 
field notes data ( Roundtable Fifteen , August 2004 ) were distributed to each participant four months post roundtable session . Each participant , independently , was 
asked to respond to the lines of data as transcribed from the session . The prompts 
for the task included a question :  “ What were you thinking , feeling or wanting at 
this time ?  ” Individual responses were then collated . I have included an example of 
one line of a multiple perspectives task which was completed following Roundtable 
Fifteen ( August 2004 )  ( Table 4 . 1 )  . 
While fascinating and informative in terms of others ’ perspectives and consequently enriching my understanding of pedagogy , the data also provided some 
confronting insights into the ways in which interactions ( particularly ) were being 
perceived by all learners during roundtable sessions . 
Pre-service Teachers Focused Written Tasks
Integral to my modified approach to teaching and learning mathematics was the 
inclusion of structured and ongoing reflection and I anticipated that by offering a 
variety of reflective modes that a richer understanding of the learning might emerge 
for these pre-service teachers . The written tasks included ALACT reflections ; freewrites and Critical Incident Questionnaires ( CIQ , adapted from Brookfield , 1995 )  .  
( In Chapter 5 , I focus on each of the types of reflection and analyse the impact on 
learning )  . 
Roundtables 33
The ALACT Model of Reflective Practice
The ALACT model reflects the Deweyan perspective of the integral nature of experience in learning , and the interrelationship between experience and reflection to 
enhance learning . This approach to reflection and reflective inquiry is underpinned 
by an element of deliberation ; both philosophies ( Dewey and Korthagen ) represent 
systematic approaches and each can be represented as an “ alternation between 
action and reflection ”  ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 , p . 43 )  . The ALACT cycle ( Korthagen 
et al .  , 2001 ) was introduced with each cohort of pre-service teachers as a tool or 
structure for reflecting on practice . The idea of introducing such a tool was in 
response to the findings obtained from my early study which indicated that preservice teachers found open and unstructured reflection tasks difficult , irrelevant 
and generally written for a specific audience . 
The ALACT model provided a structured framework by which pre-service 
teachers might reflect on their experiences . The ALACT reflective cycle includes 
five stages which include : Action ; Looking back on the action ; Awareness of essential aspects ; Creating alternatives , and Trial . This series of phases is referred to as 
 “ The Inner Cycle ”  . An additional “ Outer Cycle ” offered a guide for me as teacher 
educator , working with each phase of the inner cycle , to assist with the process of 
reflection within this framework . The corresponding teacher educator expectations 
are as follows : Phase One : A – Action – help the learner in finding useful experiences 
34 4 Designing my Self-Study Research
Table 4 . 1 Example of multiple perspectives task from field notes Roundtable Fifteen , August 
2004 
Roundtable in- 
session notes Robyn Dee Justin
R15 . 504 Justin :  “ We ’ re Justin – connecting The boy on the This thought had been
teaching with the learner ; floor is in the back of my
students , where the reminding me mind for some time
not subjects ” emphasis should of this . He is and I felt by sharing it ,  
be in teaching the human peers might better 
and learning as learner understand that our
work in the 
classroom is not 
about ourselves
and our own 
accolades – or
about teaching
according to the 
content of a KLA ,  
[ Key Learning Area ] 
but it is about the 
students and their 
learning / needs
to reflect upon ; Phase Two : L – Looking back on the action – offer acceptance , 
empathy , genuineness , concreteness as those experiences are explored ; Phase 
Three : Awareness of essential aspects – continue to offer acceptance , empathy , 
genuineness , as well as confrontation where necessary , provide help with generalising 
experience , utilising the “ here-and- now ”  , offer help in making things explicit with 
the learner ; Phase Four : Creating alternative methods of action – offer all the 
previous skills and help the learner in finding and choosing solutions ; Phase Five : 
Trial – help in continuing the learning process . Additional teacher educator skills , 
identified by Korthagen et al .  , which are desirable for effective learning within this 
cycle , include keeping silent , emphasising and taking advantage of the learner ’ s 
strong points and assisting the learner with the process of learning to learn . Both 
the Inner and the Outer Cycle are depicted in Figure 4 . 1 . 
This framework , by its cyclical nature , enabled both pre-service teachers and 
teacher educator to identify a useful experience for deeper examination and employ 
a consistent strategy as a means of unpacking the experience ; identifying essential 
aspects ; considering alternative methods of action which then ultimately informs 
subsequent action . The application of the “ Outer Cycle ” for me in working with 
pre-service teachers enabled a reflective focus for each phase of the cycle and 
provides a scaffold for the teacher educator in assisting with the process . 
A further source of data I obtained from pre-service teachers was in the form of 
 “ freewrites ” which were adapted from LaBoskey ( 1994 )  . 
creating
alternative methods
of action
awareness
of
essential
aspects
trial
4
3 5
1
2
ACCEPTANCE
EMPATHY
GENUINENESS
CONCRETENESS
ACCEPTANCE
EMPATHY
GENUINENESS
CONCRETENESS
CONFRONTATION
GENERATING
UTILISING THE 
HERE-AND-NOW
HELP IN 
MAKING THINGS 
EXPLICIT
ALL THE PREVIOUS SKILLS + HELP
IN FINDING AND CHOOSING
SOLUTIONS
action
A SEPARATE LEARNING
PROGRAM ( IF NECESSARY ) 
HELP IN
CONTINUING THE 
LEARNING PROCESS 
HELP IN
FINDING USEFUL 
EXPERIENCES 
looking back on
the action
Fig . 4 . 1 Diagram of ALACT Inner and Outer Cycle ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 , p . 130 ) 
Roundtables 35
Freewrites
LaBoskey ( 1994 ) identifies the “ freewrite ”  , an open-ended reflective writing piece 
- in my research completed at random times both during and at the conclusion of a 
semester – as a means of eliciting the responses of pre-service teachers about their 
learning at a particular point . As such , freewrites were conducted with each cohort 
and in most cases , they were completed twice ( mid-semester and at the conclusion 
of the semester )  . To complete a freewrite , each pre-service teacher responded to an 
open-ended prompt ( for example ,  “ Please take ten minutes to write about your 
experiences ( so far ) this semester ”  )  . I then read the responses , identified the emergent themes and coded , categorised ( Lankshear & Knobel , 2004 ) and analysed the 
responses . Key points which emerged from examining this data were then provided 
to each cohort ( for example , one important insight I gained from summarising one 
cohorts ’ responses was the various ways in which partner teaching in schools was 
being experienced . Pre-service teachers raised pertinent issues which were affecting them in the development and maintenance of their partnership teaching in 
schools ; knowing made a timely response possible )  . Therefore , using freewrites as 
a data gathering tool enabled me to elicit a deeper understanding of the ways in 
which pre-service teachers were experiencing their learning about mathematics 
teaching and prompt timely changes in practice if required . 
A further means of gathering data was through the implementation of critical 
incident questionnaires . 
Critical Incidents as Data Gathering
In my study the definition of a critical incident is that of an interaction , usually verbal , which is regarded by participants as critical and initiates a form of reflective 
practice . Critical incidents provided a stimulus for reflection and as such connect 
with Fenstermacher ’ s ( 1994a ) position that in making the tacit explicit ( in this case , 
by implementing the practice of identifying and reflectively exploring the critical 
incident ) that practical knowledge might be both developed and shared within the 
learning community . The nature of a critical incident , event or interaction was discussed with each cohort and pre-service teachers were encouraged to individually 
identify , discuss and write about incidents , events or interactions which they had 
determined to be critical . Pre-service teachers in each cohort were directed towards 
a deeper understanding of the identification and exploration of critical incidents , 
events and interactions within their teacher education and classroom encounters . 
One approach I used to direct this deeper understanding of incidents , events and / or 
interactions was through the use of a critical incident questionnaire ( Brookfield , 
1995 )  . I adapted this questionnaire for the mathematics classes . The questions 
which pre-service teachers responded to were as follows : 
36 4 Designing my Self-Study Research
1 . At what moment in the class ( es ) this week did you feel most engaged with what 
was happening ?  ( see Appendix 3 ) 
2 . At what moment in the class ( es ) this week did you feel most distanced from 
what was happening ? 
3 . What action that anyone ( student , teacher ) took in class this week did you find 
most affirming and helpful ? 
4 . What action that anyone ( student , teacher ) took in class this week did you find 
most puzzling or confusing ? 
5 . What about the class ( es ) this week surprised you the most ? 
This practice of completing the critical incident questionnaires encouraged preservice teachers to identify and respond to critical and / or problematic events and 
interactions and as such provided for me snapshots of their reflective processes . 
Teacher Educator Journal Entries
Journal entries have been increasingly employed as a data gathering technique in 
teacher / practitioner research as a means for promoting reflection in and on practice . 
Studies have confirmed the use of journal entries as an effective means of capturing , 
reporting on , reflecting in / on and evaluating pertinent data ( Brookfield , 1995 ; 
Calderhead & Shorrock , 1997 ; Korthagen & Lagerwerf , 1996 )  . In my research , 
journal reflections provided opportunities for me to unpack my learning in terms of 
clarifying assumptions ; expressing feelings and understandings related to specific 
issues and / or interactions ; providing feedback for future directions in teaching and , 
as a means of articulating my learning from given situations . The journal entries 
therefore became an individual endeavour to monitor my learning journey and provided opportunities for both in situ and retrospective reflection . 
My initial entries reflected an ongoing documentation of the process associated with 
the introduction of a new approach to learning and teaching mathematics , and identified 
the logistics of doing so . These journal entries also represented my reflections on times 
where there was doubt and anxiety about the approach I was implementing : 
Knowing what it feels like to embark on something new , to be a number of paces from the 
comfort zone , to feel inadequate , to have expectations about oneself and to know others 
have expectations - a challenge !  
( Extract from journal entry , July 10 , 2002 ) 
Journal writing provided me with a means to reflect on the research process and this 
space was one where I teased out and refined details about my learning . Written 
journal entries reflected my responses to critical incidents , interactions and events 
( Kosnik , 2001 ) in my teaching and thereby provided a means for me to identify and 
explore incidents / interactions and events and the impact they had on my understanding 
of my teaching and the ways in which I was learning about teacher education . 
Roundtables 37
Assumptions
Another key data source referred to in this analysis was pre-service teachers ’ written assumptions ( Appendix 4 )  . In each cohort , as part of writing about their initial 
( and later , summative ) experiences of the mathematics unit , pre-service teachers 
discussed with me the nature of an assumption and how to write one . As a means 
of monitoring whether the taken-for-granted assumptions identified by pre-service 
teachers had been challenged throughout the semester , each pre-service teacher in 
each cohort wrote three assumptions about learning and teaching mathematics during Week Two of the semester . These assumptions were then revisited during Week 
Twelve to examine the ways in which any of these assumptions had been supported 
and / or challenged as a result of their experiences during the semester . 
Analysis : An Insight into a Researcher ’ s Pedagogical Frame
Much of what lies at the core of self-study research relates to the uniqueness of the 
methodology and ultimately the “ different philosophical and political stance ”  
( Pinnegar , 1998 , p . 31 )  . The uniqueness of self-study methodology became clearer 
to me as time progressed . It was not until I really began to mine the data that more 
about understanding teaching through researching my practice was exposed . For 
me this meant more than collecting and analysing data from a distance . My need to 
represent the data in valid and fair ways prompted me to develop processes whereby 
data could be validated . I constantly ploughed through data and revisited data over 
time and so gained deeper and sometimes greater understandings of alternative 
viewpoints and representations . For example , transcribing roundtable reflection 
sessions was conducted as a four stage process ( described in detail in Appendix 2 )  . 
A further example of my need to correlate my data gathering , organisation and 
analysis with my need to provide fair representations of pre-service teachers ’ perspectives was the development of the multiple perspectives tasks . These tasks 
allowed me to penetrate more deeply into multiple ways that particular interactions 
and events in ordinary everyday practice were being perceived . 
The above examples illustrate the ways in which self-study methodology became 
not only a driver for data collection but a stimulus for creative approaches to collecting 
and interpreting data according to our needs as learners . In this way , inquiry stimulated 
my need for ongoing modification to my approach to researching my practice . 
Summary
My approach to data collection , organisation and analysis reveals much about my 
own pedagogical frame as a self-study researcher . My research design was partly 
based on an understanding that this framework needed to be both flexible and 
38 4 Designing my Self-Study Research
responsive to our needs as teachers and learners about teaching . Using multiple data 
gathering methods allowed me to extract and make explicit the core of learning . I 
needed to revisit some data over time and this allowed me to delve more deeply into 
why some interactions , events or moments were interpreted in the way that they 
were . In many instances it was my need to understand more about critical incidents 
that prompted deeper examination of the data . 
Summary 39
Part II
Learners Learning
The overall focus in this section is on learners learning . Broadly speaking , my contention is that learning about teaching is based on a complex interplay which rests 
initially on reconceptualising teacher educators and pre-service teachers as 
 ‘ co-learners ’  . The four chapters presented in this section focus on the new strategies I introduced with pre-service teachers and in each chapter I examine one of the 
key assumptions I had formulated about learning and teaching within this environment . Each chapter begins with an assumption and appropriate data is examined as 
a means of uncovering whether my assumption had been supported , challenged 
and / or developed . 
Chapter 5
Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Assumption One : The Integration of Multiple Reflective 
Practices Will Challenge Learners to Reflect Critically 
on Their Learning
This chapter explores our learning about teaching through reflection . My discussion is framed around my assumption that through the integration of multiple 
reflective practices in the Learning and Teaching Mathematics units , pre-service 
teachers would be encouraged to reflect critically on their learning . Reflective 
practices included an introduction to multiple reflective tools ( the ALACT cycle of 
reflection , Freewrites and Critical Incident Questionnaires ) and I discuss why and 
how reflective tools were introduced and utilised ; what we learnt from their implementation and examine the ways in which my initial assumption was supported 
and / or challenged . I begin this chapter with a brief review of the literature relating 
to the impact of reflective practice in teacher education programs and the ability ( or 
inability ) of programs to succeed in the development of critical reflection , in 
particular . 
Introduction
The past decade , particularly , has seen a proliferation of studies related to the initiation , 
integration and sustainability of reflection and reflective practices within pre-service 
teacher education programs ( see , Korthagen , 1985 ; Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ; Loughran 
& Northfield , 1996 ; Russell , 1997 ; Russell & Korthagen , 1995 )  . The criticism that 
commonly arises with any discussion regarding reflection , and the development of 
critical reflection particularly is the lack of evidence to support claims that internalisation , transformation and transportability across learning contexts can be 
developed ( Brookfield , 1995 ; Hatton & Smith , 1995 ; Smyth , 1995 ; Wideen et al .  , 
1998 )  . Other criticisms which relate to the use of reflective practice in pre-service 
teacher education programs arise from that which has been described as a technical 
reflective approach , whereby particular models , frameworks and tools ( which 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 43
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008 
provide a guiding structure to reflective practice )  , become inherently prescriptive 
and restrictive and hence contribute to another form of the technical reductionist 
model of learning about teaching ( Kelchtermans , 2005 ; Kincheloe , 2003 )  . 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach
Prior to introducing an integrated and structured reflective approach within the 
Learning and Teaching Mathematics ( LTM ) units , I conducted a pilot study with a 
cohort of Third Year Bachelor of Education pre-service teachers ( n = 56 ) where 
I explored their current understandings and experiences of reflective approaches to 
teaching and learning , and their ideals related to the use of reflective practices . 
These pre-service teachers had completed two and a half years of a Bachelor of 
Education teaching degree and had already formed firm opinions about the value 
of reflective practice / s for themselves . This pilot study helped to focus my attention 
on issues which emerged as problematic for pre-service teachers about the value of 
reflection in learning about teaching mathematics . For example , in the pilot data , 
some students expressed feelings of resistance to formal written reflective tasks :  
 “ I ’ m reflected out ”  ( Darren )  ; some believed that reflection was the “ latest fad ”  .  
 “ It ’ s like pyramids and crystals ; it ’ s the latest fad .  .  . Reflection is the ‘ in ’ term . As 
I have said previously , I reflect anyway and I don ’ t think this reflection needs to be 
written . I would prefer to talk to you ”  ( Deanne )  ; others saw it as a practice that 
involved writing for a particular purpose which was underpinned by assessment :  “ I 
write what the lecturer wants to hear ”  ( Emma )  ; and some requested more structure 
in reflective practice :  “ It ’ s ad hoc – I want a structured approach . I ’ m sick of writing a description on the left side of the page about what I wrote on the right hand 
side ”  ( Chris )  . This pilot data informed the reflective approach I developed with 
each subsequent cohort . The aim was to introduce reflection so that it might 
become more pertinent to pre-service teachers as a means to further develop their 
learning about teaching . 
In this way , I believed that reflection might have intrinsic value as a practice 
leading to a deeper understanding of learning about teaching and self as learner , and 
be envisaged by pre-service teachers as more than just another routine task to complete . I anticipated , for example , that by introducing partner teaching in schools 
combined with multiple tools by which to reflect on learning , that pre-service 
teachers would come to debrief ( critically ) in more meaningful ways . In this sense 
then ,  “ commonsense reflective practice ” which pre-service teachers were predominantly familiar with might be replaced with “ reflective action stemming from professional thinking ”  ( Pollard , 2002 , p . 23 )  . Because many of the pre-service teachers 
had expressed a discomfort with the teaching of mathematics and many of them had 
negative experiences with their own learning of mathematics they therefore became 
anxious when confronted with the prospect of teaching mathematics . By introducing structured reflection in and on practice , pre-service teachers might be encouraged to unpack such issues related to teaching and learning mathematics in a 
44 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
supportive learning environment and as a consequence be able to articulate the 
ways in which they were learning as a result of their experiences . 
A Triad of Tools for Written Reflection
Reflective practice in my Learning and Teaching Mathematics ( LTM ) units comprised a triad of approaches which included :  ( 1 ) The ALACT Framework ;  ( 2 ) 
Freewrites ; and ( 3 ) Critical Incident Questionnaires ( CIQ )  . 
1 . I selected and adapted Korthagen ’ s ALACT model as it provided a cyclical 
( rather than hierarchical ) framework for reflection . My justification for the 
choice of ALACT was founded on information provided by previous cohorts of 
pre-service teachers , some of whom requested the need for a reflective framework , rather than an ad hoc approach to written reflection on experience . As has 
previously been described , the ALACT cycle comprises five phases : Action ( A )  ; 
Looking back on the action ( L )  ; Awareness of essential aspects ( A )  ; Creating 
alternatives ( C )  ; and Trial ( T )  . The ALACT framework provided a formal structure for written lesson / critical incident / interaction reflections . This framework 
also provided a helpful structure for Roundtable Reflection which focused on 
oral discourse . 
2 . In addition to the introduction of the ALACT framework for reflecting on experience ,  “ Freewrites ”  ( LaBoskey , 1994 ) were chosen as they provided pre-service 
teachers with opportunities to reflect in a structured , but open-ended manner 
about their experiences of learning about teaching . In a Freewrite , pre-service 
teachers were allocated approximately ten to fifteen minutes to write a ‘ snapshot ’ response of their experiences from the LTM units ( including university 
and partner teaching experiences )  . During Roundtable sessions , pre-service 
teachers and I wrote for approximately fifteen minutes ( individually ) about a 
recent vivid experience of teaching and / or learning . These snapshots of learning 
were then discussed and analysed for key points which had emerged from experience and shared in the following week . The purpose for completing the 
Freewrites was to establish a means by which we as a cohort could understand 
more about what was acknowledged by pre-service teachers and myself as being 
both problematic and beneficial from our professional experiences in schools 
and during university classes . In addition to producing a Freewrite summary for 
pre-service teachers , the Freewrite responses were also read for emergent 
themes , coded , categorised and analysed to inform this research . 
3 . Critical Incident Questionnaires ( CIQ )  ( Brookfield , 1995 ) provided a further 
structured approach to gathering ‘ snapshots of learning ’ data related to pre-service 
teachers ’ experiences , and in this case , the questions were specific , referring to 
particular aspects of learning . Each pre-service teacher responded to the following questions :  ( 1 ) At what moment in the class ( es ) this week did you feel most 
engaged with what was happening ?  ;  ( 2 ) At what moment in the class ( es ) this 
week did you feel most distanced from what was happening ?  ;  ( 3 ) What action 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 45
that anyone ( student , teacher ) took in class this week did you find most affirming 
and helpful ?  ;  ( 4 ) What action that anyone ( student , teacher ) took in class this 
week did you find most puzzling or confusing ?  ; and ( 5 ) What about the class ( es ) 
this week surprised you the most ? The CIQ questionnaire was intended to elicit 
elements associated with pre-service teachers ’ emotional engagement with learning , mathematics content and the effect of the learning environment . 
By introducing multiple written approaches to reflecting in and on practice 
( ALACT , Freewrites , CIQ ) it was anticipated that the process of reflecting on one ’ s 
practice would not only become an integral practice in pre-service teachers ’ learning about teaching , but also , provide a range of alternative approaches for reflecting 
on practice and hence , cater for multiple learning styles . 
Data
The analysis presented in this chapter is based on data I collected from three 
cohorts and examines snapshots of written reflections . Table 5 . 1 presents a summary of information that comprises this dataset . The data I have used in my analysis 
included emailed written reflections and Critical Incident Questionnaires ( CIQ , 
Phase One )  ; ALACT reflections ; Freewrite summaries ( Phase Two ) and ALACT 
reflections and written questionnaires ( Phase Three )  . 
Phase One of the research comprised Third Year Bachelor of Education pre-service 
teachers ( n = 36 ) who were required to produce up to four emailed reflections following partner teaching in schools during Semester One , 2003 ( total number of emailed 
reflections received n = 106 )  . CIQs were also collected from the Phase One cohort . 
Phase Two comprised First Year Bachelor of Education pre-service teachers ( n = 47 ) 
who were required to write one written reflection on a critical incident using the 
ALACT framework , during Semester Two , 2003 ( written reflections received n = 47 )  . 
Freewrites were also collected and analysed from the Phase Two cohort . The Phase 
Three cohort ( TJ792 , Semester One , 2004 ) provided written questionnaire responses 
and ALACT reflections ( n = 15 ) which were coded and used as a comparison dataset . 
In the following section I describe the categories which arose from analysis of 
the Phase One ( emailed reflections ) and Phase Two ( ALACT reflections ) data . 
Categories of Analysis
Following multiple readings and coding of the Phase One and Phase Two written 
reflections ( following partner teaching in schools )  , a number of categories emerged 
from the data . These categories were : Mathematical Content ( MC )  ; Student Behaviour 
( SB )  ; Student Engagement ( SE )  ; and , Pre-service Teacher Based Issues ( PSTB )  . The 
following tables ( Tables 5 . 2 and 5 . 3 ) list each of the categories of reflection , the total 
number of instances of each category , the percentage of total instances and an illustrative example of each category from the Phase One and Phase Two data . 
46 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Table 5 . 1 Summary of data types and sources : written reflection 
Total number 
Pre-service Type of Number of of reflections 
Phase teacher level reflection students collected Semester
Phase One Third year Emailed reflections 36 106 Semester
TJ792 about partner One , 2003 
teaching in schools 
Critical incident 30 
questionnaires ( CIQ ) 
Phase Two First year ALACT reflections 47 47 Semester
TJ591 Two , 2003 
Freewrites 30
Phase Three Third year ALACT reflections 15 15 Semester
TJ792 One , 2004 
Semester 
Questionnaire 15 15 One , 2004 
Written Reflection 
on TJ792 
Table 5 . 2 Summary : Phase One written reflections 
Number of 
instances 
Categories of ( total n = Percentage of 
reflection :  ( code ) 106 ) total instances Illustrative example
Mathematical 28 26 The children had to bundle two digit numbers
Content ( MC ) with icy-pole sticks . The children in this 
group found it hard to distinguish between 
units and tens and would read 36 as six 
tens and three units ( Jose ) 
Student 17 16 One student took the opportunity to 
Behaviour misbehave . He tore up his sheet of paper 
( SB ) and tried to distract the other students at 
his table ( Joe ) 
Student 17 16 The students really enjoyed it and many 
engagement commented that it did not feel like they 
( SE ) were doing maths ( Sam ) 
Pre-service 40 38 Felt like we probably both were treading on 
teacher based each others ’ toes and did not give the 
issues ( PSTB ) children clear instructions on who they 
should be approaching for what . We 
decided to come up with some new strategies for this lesson ( Nell ) 
My discussion in the following section is based on my analysis of the data from 
the categories ( above ) as well as two sub-categories from Phase One and Phase Two 
which related to Pre-service Teacher Based Issues ( PSTB )  . These sub categories 
( derived from the main categories listed above ) included :  ( 1 ) partner teaching ; and 
( 2 ) personal attributes . The following discussion includes a comparative analysis of 
Phase One and Phase Two data and identifies outcomes associated with each 
approach to reflection . 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 47
Uptake of Reflective Model
The adoption of the ALACT framework was optional for the Phase One cohort , and of 
the total number of email communications I received ( n = 106 ) only four ( or 4% ) 
of the emailed reflections on partner teaching in schools utilised this framework . 
However , following my explicit intervention by making ALACT a formal assessment requirement ( i . e .  , pre-service teachers were required to reflect using this 
cycle )  , of the total number of Phase Two reflections , 40 / 47 or 85% of pre-service 
teachers presented their reflections using the ALACT framework .  ( The remaining 
seven pre-service teachers did not present their reflections using the ALACT cycle , 
and did not provide reasons for not doing so )  . 
The Phase One reflections typically represented what I interpreted as a traditional lesson reflection which focused on technical aspects of the lesson , such as 
timing , resources , management and student behaviour . It was interesting to note 
that these reflections were generally written as chronological representations of the 
ways in which lessons were experienced , and generally began with the introduction , followed by the procedure , the activities , a statement of a key issue of concern , 
and a conclusion . The following response provides a typical example of what 
I interpreted to be a traditional lesson reflection : 
On Wednesday 21st May Lana and I completed our final lesson at Ranger Primary School 
in the grade prep / one class . 
The lesson involved students forming groups of four , measuring their heights , ordering 
the heights of their group members from tallest to shortest and then completing the 
worksheet . 
Once the lesson started , the students took their time to come to the floor and were quite 
rowdy . 
48 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Table 5 . 3 Summary : Phase Two written reflections
Reflection : number 
of instances ( total Percentage of
Categories ( code ) n = 47 ) total instances Illustrative example
Mathematical 3 6 Percentages : what is 32 / 100 as a 
Content ( MC ) percentage ? Random answers 
provided by students ( Kale ) 
Student Behaviour 15 32 Student holding pen - end broken off 
( SB ) and began harming herself 
 ( Darli ) 
Student engagement 6 13 Female student not wanting to be 
( SE ) part of the activity – shopping 
activity ; negative attitude ( Aaron ) 
Pre-service teacher 16 34 I was not able to explain the concept 
based issues to them effectively so that they 
( PSTB ) could gain an understanding ( Erin ) 
ALACT 40 / 47 85 
Traditional 7 / 47 15 
The problem with the lesson was the absence of the regular class teacher .  .  . the students 
knew that Lana and I weren ’ t fully trained teachers and felt this was a reason for them to 
not concentrate during this lesson . 
Overall , the outcomes of the lesson were achieved .  .  . the students did enjoy the lesson 
and were able to discuss what they had learnt at the end of the lesson .  
( Anne , Phase One , Email reflection , May 2003 ) 
However , pre-service teacher Phase Two reflections ( presented using the ALACT 
framework ) provided data to suggest that reflection was occurring as something 
other than a chronological retell of events as they occurred in their teaching . By 
using ALACT , pre-service teachers focused on an incident , event or interaction and 
examined this in the light of their own learning . In the following section , I compare 
and contrast written reflections which emanate from experience without a required 
framework ( Phase One ) and written reflection using a required framework ( ALACT , 
Phase Two )  . 
Mathematical Content
The Phase One data indicated that one of the key areas for pre-service teacher 
reflection related to Mathematical Content ( 26% of total mentions ) while in contrast , Phase Two recorded only 6% of total mentions related to Mathematical 
Content . These Phase One reflections represented an extensive variety of concerns 
related to issues including :  ( 1 ) using open ended questioning to structure questions 
and elicit multiple student responses :  “ I really needed to go over open-ended [ mathematical ] questions to get some ideas of how to structure the questions , based on 
measurement , to the students ”  ( Amy )  ;  ( 2 ) place value and the distinguishing of 
units and tens :  “ The children had to bundle two digit numbers with icy-pole sticks . 
The children in this group found it hard to distinguish between units and tens and 
would read 36 as six tens and three units ”  ( Jose )  ;  ( 3 ) concepts of time , space and 
location “ Students had to visualise a map of Australia ”  ( Bella )  ; and ( 4 ) using compass points “ Some students weren ’ t quite as comfortable using compass points ”  
( Bec )  . A number of these reflections identified the pre-service teacher ’ s capacity to 
more deeply examine the content and the concepts presented within the teaching 
sessions . For example , Cas stated ,  “ One of the things that hasn ’ t happened in our 
lessons [ during school placements ] is a deeper examination of the subject matter . 
I think we have skimmed the surface but have missed some good opportunities for 
deeper learning ”  . This sentiment was also supported by Ebony who suggested ,  “ I 
felt that much more could have been taken from the lesson by the students on the 
mathematical concepts , which comes from reinforcement and continued discussion ”  . 
This percentage ( 26% ) of reflections related to problems with mathematical content 
would not be entirely unexpected for pre-service teachers at any stage of their 
education course since many experience anxieties with their personal level of 
mathematical conceptual understanding , and lack confidence and / or an ability to 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 49
teach and explore student understanding of mathematical concepts in a deeper and 
more meaningful way ( as Cas suggested above ,  “  .  .  . I think we have skimmed the 
surface but have missed some good opportunities for deeper learning ”  )  . 
However , when utilising the ALACT cycle to guide reflection , the data for Phase 
Two revealed a significant contrast in emphasis ; only 6% of the total instances 
referred to mathematical content as a stimulus for the reflective process . The content areas from this group related only to ( 1 ) percentages :  “ What is 32 / 100 as a 
percentage ? Students gave random answers ”  ( Kale )  ; and ( 2 ) geometry :  “ Triangle 
upside down – not the right way up didn ’ t recognise as a triangle ”  ( Saira )  ;  “ How 
many degrees in a triangle ? If a triangle has 180 degrees and you are given the 
answer to two angles how do you think you would find that angle ? As soon as I had 
finished he looked up and said ‘ Oh , I know ’  ”  ( Breanne )  . 
The above data is interesting because of the difference in emphasis on mathematical content between the two cohorts . This difference might suggest that by 
employing the ALACT model as a framework for reflection , pre-service teachers 
were encouraged to think differently about their practice ; to shift away from a focus 
on content . 
The data discussed in the next section suggests that there was a movement 
towards a focus on student behaviour and engagement . The next two combined 
categories relate to Student Behaviour and Student Engagement , which were 
prominent in both Phase One and Phase Two cohort responses . 
Student Behaviour and Student Engagement
Classroom management styles and learning about student ( dis ) engagement was a 
focus for pre-service teachers from both Phase One and Phase Two cohorts . 
Approximately one third ( 32% ) of the written responses received from the Phase 
One cohort were based around issues of school students themselves ( Student 
Behaviour , 16% ; Student Engagement , 16% )  . Phase Two combined data revealed 
that 45% of the combined responses ( Student Behaviour , 32% ; Student Engagement , 
13% ) related to these categories . Almost half of the total instances of reflections 
from the Phase Two data focused on student behaviour and engagement . Both sets 
of data have approximately the same percentages of instances which referred to 
student behaviour and engagement , however , a noteworthy difference was evident 
in terms of the number of instances of reflection which focused on student behaviour alone ( Phase One , 16% and Phase Two , 32% )  . It is interesting to note that preservice teachers from Phase Two , who were utilising the ALACT framework , 
registered twice the number of instances of reflection about student behaviour compared with the Phase One cohort . 
Student behaviours reported typically represented negative experiences for both 
Phase One and Phase Two pre-service teachers and involved , for example ( 1 ) misbehaviour :  “ One student took the opportunity to misbehave . He tore up his sheet 
of paper and tried to distract the other students at his table ”  ( Joe , Phase Two )  ; 
50 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching 
( 2 ) protestation and tears :  “ He protested and resorted to tears after being allocated 
to a group ”  ( Nat , Phase One )  ;  ( 3 ) student annoyance :  “ The fast students got 
annoyed .  .  . they would get distracted and annoy other students ”  ( Bec , Phase One ) 
and ( 4 ) a lack of student cooperation :  “ They were shouting at each other and didn ’ t 
seem to want to cooperate during group work ”  ( Kes , Phase Two )  . These reflections 
indicate that pre-service teachers in both Phase One and Phase Two could clearly 
identify ( typically ) negative behaviours within their classroom teaching experiences . However , it seems that when pre-service teachers used ALACT as a tool for 
reflection on learning , the number of instances which related to student behaviour 
represented one third of the total number of mentions . This may indicate that the 
ALACT tool may have prompted pre-service teachers to be more likely to identify 
an instance ( especially one related to negative behaviour ) more selectively . It may 
also indicate that pre-service teachers focus more predominantly on negative 
aspects in their learning about teaching as these experiences represent challenges 
for which they may have felt under-prepared to deal with as a neophyte . In this 
sense , their expectations about managing student behaviour had been challenged , 
and the ALACT tool provided a means by which they could unpack the incident or 
interaction and hopefully , understand more about the alternative possibilities for 
dealing with such instances should they arise in future teaching contexts . 
In contrast , instances which related to student engagement represented a ‘ learning 
connection ’ and commonly referred to ( 1 ) student enjoyment :  “ The students ’ faces 
and their verbal amazement , their drawings and words to say how they felt about 
their learning really showed they enjoyed their task .  .  . the students were proud .  .  . they 
all understood and enjoyed the task .  .  . we needed to challenge one child more ”  ( Mel , 
Phase Two ) and ,  “ The students really enjoyed it and many commented that it didn ’ t 
feel like they were doing maths ”  ( Sam , Phase Two )  ; and ( 2 ) the necessity to continuously modify activities to maintain levels of student excitement and enthusiasm :  
 “ We decided to approach the lesson by keeping the activities short and exciting to 
help keep the students engaged as they were at such a young age .  .  . by continuously 
changing the activities slightly , it helped us as pre-service teachers to keep the 
enthusiasm levels of the students high ”  ( Mark , Phase Two )  . 
One way of understanding the student engagement / behaviour data is by reference 
to the affective and emotional aspects of learning about teaching ( for example , see Boud 
et al .  , 1985 ; Korthagen et al .  , 2001 )  . The data presented here illustrates , to some 
extent , the ways in which pre-service teachers could identify and subsequently 
examine the affective dimensions of learning to teach , and in identifying the challenges 
presented in the various contexts , produce alternative practices for future teaching . 
For example , Mark recognised the importance of short , varied activities to assist in 
keeping younger learners engaged in tasks ; Mel noted the “ verbal amazement ” and 
the pride children displayed in their learning when sharing this with their pre-service 
teachers . In this sense , the pre-service teachers were constantly required to reposition 
the focus of their teaching and their learning about teaching . Rather than focusing 
on their delivery as pre-service teachers , they were consciously examining and 
reflecting on the ways in which the children were displaying their learning in affective 
and cognitive ways . 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 51
Pre-service Teacher Based Issues
The final category of analysis relates to Pre-service Teacher Based Issues . More 
than one third of the total mentions in both phases focused on issues related to the 
pre-service teacher themselves ( Phase One , 38% ; Phase Two , 34% )  . On further 
examination , two significant sub-categories emerged from this data . These subcategories were :  ( 1 ) Partner Teaching and ( 2 ) Personal Attributes . The following 
section provides a discussion of this category ( and its subcategories )  . 
Partner Teaching
One of my prescriptive assumptions ( i . e .  , an assumption which reflects what one 
thinks should be happening ) about learning through reflective practice , was based 
on what I determined to be the positive effects of partner teaching in schools . More 
than the traditional single placement for professional experience , I assumed that the 
partner model would allow individuals to plan , teach and reflect on their teaching 
together and in this way , gain multiple and hence , potentially deeper insights into 
their learning . The analysis of the Phase One and Phase Two pre-service teacher 
written responses both challenged and supported my assumption about the value of 
the partner teaching model . 
An initial sub-category identified in the analysis of Phase One and Phase Two 
pre service teacher reflections illustrated the ( unexpected for me ) challenges associated with teaching mathematics with a partner . For some , partner teaching was 
described as a confusing situation for both the pre-service teacher and the student . 
Not only did pre-service teachers need to negotiate their roles in the teaching environment , they needed to be consistent with expectations in order to minimise student confusion . Pete articulates this dilemma in the following response :  “ Having 
two teachers in the one class influenced students ’ behaviour .  .  . Chris and I accidentally told students different instructions and the students became confused . 
Therefore , having a buddy made the lesson difficult at times ”  ( Pete , Phase One )  . 
Another pre-service teacher mentioned that the difficulties in teaching with a partner related to differences in methods and objectives :  “ I find co-teaching difficult . 
I think I will do better when I can manage all a particular lesson by myself . I go in 
to a lesson with clear outcomes and lesson structure and I find it difficult to manage 
with a co-teacher who has different teaching methods and probably different objectives in mind ”  ( Cate , Phase One )  . The differences in pedagogical approach also 
caused consternation for Kim ( Phase Two ) who wrote about her teaching partner ’ s 
approach to a student who was experiencing difficulty pronouncing the word circle . 
Her partner suggested that by getting the mouth ready and saying the word circle 
ten times , the difficulty in pronunciation would be overcome . Kim rejected this 
approach stating that it only drew attention to this student ’ s inadequacy and would 
affect the student ’ s self esteem . Teaching as partners required that these pre-service 
teachers were in tune with each other ’ s thinking , but this was not necessarily the 
52 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
case , and often the equilibrium between teaching partners became unbalanced . 
Further evidence of this is provided in Nell ’ s ( Phase One ) reflection where she 
stated ,  “  .  .  . it felt like we probably both were treading on each others ’ toes and did 
not give the children clear instructions on who they should be approaching for 
what ”  . Nell ’ s response suggests a tentativeness of communication between partners 
where both are collectively responsible for decision making . 
Others however , suggested that the experience of working with a peer had been 
a valuable learning experience . The reflection written by Pete reinforced this sentiment ,  “ I believe I gained much from being able to share my thoughts and ideas with 
someone else , observe different approaches ”  ( Phase One )  . Emma ( Phase Two ) also 
indicated that working with a teaching partner was beneficial when , following an 
incident where students were vying for power while using the Edudome Kit ( practical geometry construction activity kit ) both Emma and her partner felt more 
confident to respond by together conducting a student forum on classroom 
expectations and collaboration . 
These pre-service teacher responses about partner teaching are interesting when 
considered in the light of my intentions for this experience . An assumption I had 
made when introducing partner teaching was that partners would provide support 
for each other in planning , teaching , evaluating and reflecting on teaching , and in 
this sense , there would be a provision for peer critique and opportunities for critical 
reflection . Although some pre-service teachers stated that they gained valuable 
insights into their own and others ’ learning from being able to share thoughts , others were less positive about this partnership and felt that they experienced confusion , frustration and lack of personal and professional control . 
This raised further questions for me . What types of partnerships might be the 
most effective in terms of meeting everyone ’ s needs ? Although some partnerships 
were satisfactory according to pre-service teacher feedback , clearly some partnerships were challenging . What elements of a teaching partnership contribute to 
extending pre-service teachers ’ pedagogy and what elements restrict this growth ? 
If pre-service teachers work in partnership with a friend , what restrictions might 
this place on the levels and types of criticism that one feels is appropriate to offer 
a peer ? If pre-service teachers work with another who is less known to them , is the 
partnership then complicated by not knowing the other , and therefore more time 
must be put in terms of developing a trusting relationship ?  ( The impact of partner 
teaching was also revealed in the Freewrite responses elaborated in the following 
section of this chapter )  . 
Personal Attributes
The second subcategory of Pre-service Teacher Based Issues related to the personal 
attributes of pre-service teachers . Partner teaching demanded an individual confidence in conjunction with the establishment of a working partnership ; the aspects 
of which I had not initially explicitly considered . The personal attributes required 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 53
for this partnership included patience :  “ My teaching patience ”  ( Jim , Phase One )  ; 
identification and acknowledgement of one ’ s disposition and its potential effect :  
 “ I need to be less dominant in a group situation ”  ( Allie , Phase Two )  , the development of confidence as pre-service teachers :  “ We feel our confidence is growing as 
we develop as teachers ”  ( Hollie , Phase One ) and for some , a continued lack of 
confidence :  “ I lacked confidence in teaching ”  ( Mel , Phase Two )  . Pre-service 
teacher identification of personal attributes as important in their thinking about 
teaching correlates with research conducted by Korthagen et al .  ( 2001 ) who suggested that “ an important aim of reflection by teachers should be the development 
of .  .  . teachers ’ self-understanding ”  ( p . 265 )  . 
These pre-service teacher responses raised issues about working in a partnership 
which became pertinent for me as a teacher educator and prompted further questions about the ways in which pre-service teachers were experiencing this aspect of 
their learning . Through their reflections these pre-service teachers were beginning 
to identify and explore their own personal characteristics and the way / s these characteristics seemed to influence their interactions with school students , peers and 
other teachers . Pre-service teachers from both Phase One and Phase Two registered 
an acknowledgement of the role of personal attributes in the development of 
( un ) successful teaching partnerships in schools , regardless of the reflective tool 
( unstructured or ALACT ) they were using to unpack their experiences . 
The following section describes and analyses data related to the Freewrite – 
another reflective tool – introduced to each cohort . This analysis uses data from the 
Phase Two cohort and interestingly , despite the use of a different tool , raises similar 
responses as the ALACT / email responses from pre-service teachers regarding the 
benefits and restrictions of partner teaching . In this sense , different snapshots of 
written reflection provided by pre-service teachers across different cohorts , using 
different reflective tools , served as a means of validating particular concerns 
through their recurrence . 
Freewrites
I introduced Freewrites ( LaBoskey , 1994 ) with each cohort as another means 
of formally eliciting reflective responses on experience . I chose one cohort for 
detailed examination as the data were identified as representative of the issues 
revealed from Freewrites when collated across all of my research . Additionally , 
this particular dataset revealed one category – partner teaching – which 
became ( unexpectedly ) significant in that the responses indicated multiple 
perspectives about the ways in which the partner teaching in schools was being 
experienced by pre-service teachers . The analysis of this Phase Two data ( collected during Week Nine , Semester Two , 2003 , n = 30 ) challenged my assumptions about the impact and experience of partner teaching , which , as previously 
described , was an integral practice within the modified approach to learning 
and teaching mathematics . 
54 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Table 5 . 4 identifies one of the major categories – Partner Teaching – and 
describes the three sub-categories which emerged from the Freewrite data analysis 
for Week Nine , Semester Two , 2003 . This description is accompanied by an illustrative example of each sub-category . The three sub-categories include ( 1 ) New set 
of personal skills ;  ( 2 ) Developing further understandings about learning ; and 
( 3 ) Challenging taken-for-granted beliefs . Each of these categories is then discussed in the following section for the aspects of learning about teaching which 
were revealed through the use of this tool . 
The analysis of this data set yielded some interesting results with reference to 
the pre-service teacher reflective focus ; for example , the main category ( partner 
teaching ) and the subsequent element of surprise for me as a teacher educator . 
From the selected sample ( n = 30 )  , 16 / 30 or more than 50% of the references 
related to the category of aspects associated with partner teaching . This compares 
with the Phase One and Two written reflections ( above ) which identified partner 
teaching as both problematic and supportive in terms of learning about teaching . 
New Set of Personal Skills
The first category – New Set of Personal Skills – correlates strongly with the subcategory identified by Phase One and Phase Two cohorts : Partner Teaching and 
Personal Attributes ( discussed above )  . Pre-service teachers ’ responses reflected the 
requirement that partner teaching demanded a new set of personal skills . Typically 
this new set of personal skills referred to the establishment and maintenance of 
defined roles while planning and teaching , and a belief that at times , partners 
needed to ,  “ resist [ a ] natural urge to take control of the lesson ”  ( Sal )  . This important awareness of the other as teacher was also reflected in Fran ’ s comment when 
she stated ,  “ It [ partner teaching ] was different from team teaching , always being 
aware of another person who was also ‘ in charge ’  . Where I would normally do 
Table 5 . 4 Freewrite sub-categories , Week Nine , Semester Two , 2003
Partner teaching Illustrative example
New set of personal skills While relatively comfortable in the class I did find the team 
teaching required a whole new set of skills and I had to resist my 
natural urge to take control of the lesson
Developing further Team teaching can open you up to how others teach , hence give you 
understandings about some good examples and ideas that you can take on board as a 
learning teacher
Challenging taken-for- A ‘ critical moment ’ was when the activity was taking too long- 
granted beliefs myself and the pst [ pre-service teacher ] taking the class realised 
this ( thought about several possibilities but continued )  . I guess 
thinking about how if this is to happen constantly , future learning will be compromised – kids won ’ t learn and we as teachers 
while able to acknowledge the ‘ problem ’ won ’ t learn anything 
new from it
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 55
something , I had to check myself so as not to ‘ take over ’  ”  . Gemma recognised that 
 “  [ She ] felt uneasy , not wanting to step on my partner ’ s toes ; not wanting to jump 
in too much when the class got too uncontrollable under her .  ” 
What became evident from these responses was that teaching and learning about 
teaching in a partnership situation required constant negotiation of boundaries , discussions related to the content and teaching approaches selected and a respect for the 
other as a teaching partner . For some pre-service teachers this created opportunities 
and experiences which were viewed as positive , such as was evident in Di ’ s reflection :  “ Having a ‘ buddy ’ there was great as we could add bits and pieces as each other 
spoke . I could see what the children were not getting as D spoke , so I could add my 
own information , as I ’ m sure D could when I spoke . It felt as though we were reaching more children as we both had different styles , which different children responded 
to .  ” Yet for others , the partnership experience proved challenging and it was interesting to note that those concerns identified were commonly linked to the partner 
relationship ; referring to the nature of the partnership ( friendship based or random 
pairing )  . For some , this ‘ buddy teacher ’ relationship proved troublesome in that the 
partner was also a good friend and hence , this created an issue as the established 
personal relationship was being reframed as a developing professional partnership . 
For example , Jon wrote ,  “ … the peer assessment is difficult because my partner is 
my friend . I would have liked a [ supervisor ] teacher assessment .  ” Perhaps Jon may 
have been implying in his response that a supervising teacher assessment would 
have been more objective , that it may be difficult to write in an honest and open way 
about aspects of a colleague ’ s teaching approach when one already has an already 
established personal relationship with that person . 
Some pre-service teachers also mentioned the constant challenge of negotiating 
decisions with a peer and not wanting to “ step on my partners ’ toes ”  ( Gemma )  .  
( This response was also evident from the Phase One data , for example , when Nell 
suggested that at times during partner teaching ,  “ … it felt like we probably both 
were treading on each others ’ toes and did not give the children clear instructions 
on who they should be approaching for what ”  .  ) Whilst some partnerships were 
intent on redefining teaching boundaries and considering their partner ’ s learning 
style , others continued to be challenged by working in a partnership selected by me , 
for them . For example , in the following reflection written by Jen ( pre-service 
teacher ) she stated that her expectations of her role changed when she discovered 
at short notice that she had been allocated a teaching partner . 
I was expecting to be going to a school by myself , but when I turned up to meet Robyn , 
I found out that I had been placed with another person as my buddy . Thankfully it was 
someone I already knew . Personally I think that this is the wrong thing to do , by placing me 
with an individual without forewarning … Although my ideals were essentially the same , 
I was experiencing a lot of indecision … The only thing I took away was that my expectations changed as soon as I … found out that I was working with someone .  
( Written reflection , TJ792 , Semester One , 2004 ) 
Jen also wrote at the conclusion of the semester that her preference would be to 
work alone as partner teaching became complicated in that one was constantly 
attempting to focus not only on oneself but also on the ‘ other ’ in the teaching 
56 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching 
partnership . She also mentioned that she would have preferred to be working “ with 
somebody I knew well , trusted and that I had chosen to work with ”  . 
I probably would have preferred to be working by myself so that there was less to be worrying about . It would have been much easier to focus on what I was thinking and working 
towards rather than focusing not only on my thoughts towards myself , but also my thoughts 
towards Sally and her thoughts towards me … I would rather have been working with 
somebody I knew well , trusted , and that I had chosen to work with so that I was able to 
build up a good working relationship .  
( Written reflection , TJ792 , Semester One , 2004 ) 
Clearly , the issues raised by Jen highlight the implications of decisions made by 
me , for Jen , in her teaching experience and elicit deeper understandings for me 
about how the partner relationships worked ( or did not work ) in practice . Her 
response also indicated the need for developing trust with her partner as integral to 
her experience of an effective teaching partnership . 
Analysing this Freewrite snapshot and the pre-service teachers ’ written reflections ( above ) illuminated aspects of :  ( 1 ) pre-service teachers ’ learning about 
practice ; and ( 2 ) my learning as a teacher educator . An underlying assumption I 
had made about partner teaching was that , in essence , a partnership would be 
beneficial for learning about teaching , as each pre-service teacher would have a 
peer with whom they could plan , teach , evaluate and reflect . For some , this 
assumption was supported ; yet for others , clearly , this teaching partnership created tensions . For example , issues of expediency for me ( by way of placing preservice teachers with partners without consultation ) created longer term 
repercussions for pre-service teachers in managing their learning in their professional placements . 
It was through identifying issues and working through these tensions with individual partnerships and with the cohort of pre-service teachers during university 
( de ) briefing sessions that allowed these concerns to be raised and addressed by us . 
In so doing , the challenges of new learning within a teaching partnership could be 
made explicit ; for example , discussions related to the tensions of dealing with a 
friendship in a teaching partnership or tensions related to accommodating the 
 ‘ other ’ in the teaching environment , and these became the basis for subsequent 
Roundtable Reflection sessions . 
Flexibility in a Partnership
The Freewrite analysis and subsequent discussion of the previous two categories – 
New Set of Personal Skills and Developing Further Understandings about Learning – 
highlighted the ways in which partner teaching contributed to pre-service teacher , 
and teacher educator , learning about teaching . There were also multiple examples 
of instances which provided evidence that pre-service teachers ’ needed to be flexible in their understanding of a teaching partnership . 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 57
I illustrate this by way of example . Sue identifies a critical moment in her teaching (  “ taking too long ”  ) and then explains how , together with her partner , they consider alternative possibilities to deal with the problem and how they chose to deal 
with it ( in this case , choosing to proceed with the activity even though they recognised that it wasn ’ t working well )  . 
A ‘ critical moment ’ was when the activity was taking too long – myself and the pst [ preservice teacher ] taking the class realised this ( thought about several possibilities but continued )  . I guess thinking about how if this is to happen constantly , future learning will be 
compromised - kids won ’ t learn and we as teachers , while able to acknowledge the ‘ problem ’ won ’ t learn anything new from it . Perhaps it is an experience thing – ‘ problem ’ – and 
it also results / arises because of the situation we are in .  
( Sue , Freewrite , Semester Two , 2003 ) 
Sue ’ s reflection on her choice to continue with the activity ( even though she knew 
it wasn ’ t ‘ working ’  ) indicates a deeper layer of thinking about her teaching ; that is , 
if this choice is constantly made in teaching , then it may be that “ future learning 
will be compromised ”  ( both her own learning and that of her students )  . The choices 
made in teaching and learning situations have consequences for learning and for 
many pre-service teachers moving out of their comfort zone into an unknown zone 
in order to extend learning opportunities , presents an ongoing challenge . Experienced 
teachers ( and teacher educators ) acknowledge that , integral to teaching practice , is 
the need to respond to learning situations as they occur within the moment of teaching and to alter planned sequences of activities so that the particular needs of learners might be better catered for . In the example above , Sue illustrates her 
understanding that being flexible is important when one is teaching ( evidenced by 
her and her partner ’ s examination of possibilities ) but also extends the challenge 
for herself by suggesting that if she continues to respond rigidly to learning situations such as those experienced with her partner , then learning for all will be 
compromised . 
Summary of Freewrite Data
The opportunity for pre-service teachers to observe their peers teaching was generally identified as a positive aspect of the partner teaching experience . Interestingly , 
this was an outcome that I had not anticipated . For example , Eddie wrote ,  “ we get 
to see someone else with the same background @ uni 3rd year , never taught b4 ”  . 
Similarly , Ellen stated ,  “ I can ’ t wait to see her [ partner ] teach – to see how and 
what peers do – another style of teaching … ” while Dan suggested ,  “ … it has been 
good to see how other psts [ pre-service teachers ] operate . Usually on rounds [ professional teaching ] you only get to see experienced teachers .  ” Ewan stated ,  “ team 
teaching can open you up to how others teach .  ” These comments indicate that partner teaching provided models of practice which enabled pre-service teachers to 
affirm their own progress and to consider other ways of approaching teaching and 
learning by observing their peers which then enabled them to begin to explore a 
58 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
deeper understanding of the range of ways in which teaching might be approached . 
These data suggest that partner teaching might perhaps provide an extension of the 
 ‘ experienced other ’ learning from teaching approach whereby peers learn about 
teaching from peers within a teaching context . 
In summary , in terms of written examples of critically reflective practice ( as 
defined by Hatton & Smith , 1995 )  , the Freewrite data reveals little evidence . 
However , it might also be concluded that the process of writing reflections in a 
Freewrite format assisted pre-service teachers in the clarification of issues of 
importance for them and , at the same time through discussion of such issues , provided a potential bank of knowledge for these pre-service teachers about : the personal skills required when working in a partnership ; the need for ongoing 
negotiation about roles when teaching , and an acknowledgement of the influence 
of peers in learning about pedagogy . 
In terms of my own learning , doing my own Freewrite and analysing pre-service 
teacher responses to the task has enabled me to identify more about the ways in 
which pre-service teachers were experiencing their learning , and particularly their 
learning within a partner teaching mode . My intention was that the partner teaching 
would provide the experience and ALACT , Freewrites and CIQs the reflective 
tools for unpacking experience . In this way we could better understand the meaning 
of our experiences and be supported in our teaching and learning about mathematics . The data suggests that one way that we were learning about our teaching was 
through the impact of our choices as teachers on each other and on learners in a 
teaching situation . The choices we make about how we reflect on our teaching ; who 
we teach with and how learners in classrooms respond indicate that our teaching is 
much more than an evaluation of the ways in which our choices affect us as individuals ( i . e .  , that teaching involves more than just the self )  . As the previous discussion of data has indicated , it also implores us to consciously and systematically 
consider the ongoing ramifications of our actions within the learning environment . 
One key question this raises for me is to consider the ways in which pre-service 
teacher partnerships are defined . This question also is highlighted in the analysis of 
CIQs ; the third reflective tool introduced with each cohort . 
Critical Incident Questionnaire Data and Analysis
The Critical Incident Questionnaires ( CIQ ) provided an approach to reflection 
which , although requiring responses to predetermined questions , allowed for an 
open response in terms of pre-service teachers ’ selection of critical and or problematic events / interactions to analyse . CIQs were ( typically ) completed once during 
the semester , usually mid-semester , during university class time . 
The pre-service teachers were allocated ten minutes to complete the questionnaire , then individually invited to share their responses with the class for approximately five minutes . It was during the CIQ discussion that pertinent issues about 
pre-service teacher learning about teaching were raised . Then , following each 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 59 
session , CIQ responses were read by me ; categories identified and the number of 
mentions for each category tallied for each of the five CIQ questions . To illustrate 
the nature of the learning derived through the use of this tool , the data for this 
snapshot of learning was gathered from the Third Year TJ792 LTM cohort , MidSemester One , 2004 ( n = 45 )  . These data were selected as they represented sentiments that were reported across all cohorts . 
Table 5 . 5 ( below ) summarises the responses for each of the five CIQ questions ; 
the key categories for each question ; the number of mentions associated with each 
category ( and the percentage of the total number of mentions ) and an illustrative 
example from each category . 
The ensuing discussion provides an analysis of the pertinent responses for each 
question and in doing so , it must be noted that in some instances , points of discussion and analysis emerged from a category where , for example , there were only 
two instances recorded .  ( An example of this is in relation to Question Four ,  “ Not 
fitting the Norm ”  )  . This highlights the importance of some less frequent but still 
important data . 
Following is an example of the categorisations and the frequency of responses 
for Question One ( Table 5 . 6 )  : At what moment in the class ( es ) this week did you 
feel most engaged with what was happening ? 
In Table 5 . 5 , I have illustrated the way in which each of the CIQ questions were 
coded and categorised . For example , eleven of the total number of mentions provided by pre-service teachers indicated that they felt most engaged during interactive information sessions , and this represented 24% of the total number of mentions . 
The illustrative example suggests that completing reflective tasks during information sessions encouraged pre-service teachers to analyse how and what they think 
when “ doing maths ”  . 
In the next section I discuss the responses to each of the CIQ questions in turn 
and examine pre-service teacher responses in relation to that which was identified 
as critical for them in their learning about teaching . 
Question One
With reference to the moment in classes where pre-service teachers felt most 
engaged ( Question One , Table 5 . 5 )  , the highest frequency of response ( 51% ) was 
related to Roundtable sessions , as they provided opportunities not only to discuss 
pertinent issues but also to influence the direction of the discussion and hence 
facilitate student engagement as they had some input into the nature and direction 
of the conversation .  ( Roundtable Reflection is discussed in the following chapter ; 
briefly , roundtables were introduced with each cohort of pre-service teachers as a 
means of reflecting orally on experience )  . Pre-service teachers ’ responses to 
moments of engagement experienced during Roundtable Reflection included : sharing ,  “ a time to share ideas and concerns ; we were all engaged in discussing strategies , ideas and problems ”  ( James )  ; relevance and connections :  “ the topics discussed 
60 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Table 5 . 5 Key categories identified from critical incident questionnaire
Critical Incident Number of Percentage 
Questionnaire mentions of total
Questions 1–5 Category of total mentions Illustrative example
At what moment Roundtable 23 51 During the roundtable
in the class ( es ) because you feel more
this week did involved and you also have
you feel most the opportunity to influence
engaged with what is discussed
what was Information 11 24 When we were asked ( at the
happening ? session information session ) to 
complete reflective questions … this required me to 
really analyse how I think 
and what I think when 
doing maths
At what moment Information 17 37 During the lecture , because
in the class ( es ) session like all lectures it follows a
this week did similar format of the
you feel most teacher expending
distanced from information out the front
what was 
happening ? 
What action that Group 13 28 I find it most affirming when
anyone ( student , discussion another student values your
teacher ) took ideas and has some input
in class this into the discussion
week did you supporting what I have said
find most Personal insights from others
affirming and into problematic areas
helpful ? 
What action that No response 15 34 
anyone ( student , Not fitting 2 4 . 5 Being ignored by younger
teacher ) took in the norm students who obviously
class this week have made assumptions
did you find about me and find me
most puzzling not worth talking to or
or confusing ? including
What about the Roundtable 12 25 . 5 I was surprised that we all
class ( es ) this had so much to say about
week surprised everything and kept the
you the most ? roundtable going for so 
long , This reflection stuff 
is only getting better
Interesting 10 21 The thing that surprised me 
and helpful the most … was the effec- 
questioning tiveness simple questioning 
can have on determining a 
student ’ s view or under 
standing of mathematics
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 61
were relevant to our current situation and it helped to see ( hear ) that others were 
experiencing similar things ”  ( Sal )  ; opportunities to contribute :  “ gives everyone a 
chance to contribute ”  ( Nancy )  ; and self-confidence and esteem :  “ I felt an input of 
mine was worthwhile ”  ( Fiona )  ; and the relaxed atmosphere :  “ the atmosphere was 
more relaxed ”  ( Dan )  . 
The second most frequent category of response ( 24% ) related to pre-service 
teachers ’ feelings of engagement was during the information sessions . Information 
sessions were conducted weekly throughout each semester , replacing what was traditionally a lecture . The intention for each information session was to provide 
information , but in an interactive manner . This included short reflective activities ; 
focused questions requiring small group or partner discussion and generally , sharing of pre-service teacher / teacher educator beliefs , opinions and strategies . In the 
session during which the pre-service teachers completed the CIQ ( TJ792 , Third 
Year , Phase One , Week Three ) interaction was developed through asking pre- 
service teachers to respond to the following question :  “ If mathematics were a fruit / 
colour / animal , what would it be for you ?  ” CIQ written responses to this question 
were then shared with the group during this information session and the ensuing 
discussion raised insightful thinking and positive feedback . For example , Sam 
wrote :  “ I felt most engaged when we were discussing things in relation to what they 
would be … it was interesting and engaging and I really had to think about it ” while 
Jenny stated ,  “ this [ information session ] required me to really analyse how I think 
and what I think when doing maths .  ” These responses suggested that the interactive 
Table 5 . 6 CIQ responses to Question One :  “ At what moment in the class ( es ) this week did you 
feel most engaged with what was happening ?  ” 
Number of Percentage of 
Categories mentions total mentions Illustrative example
Roundtable 23 51 During the roundtable because you feel more 
session involved and you also have the opportunity 
to influence what is discussed ( Jim ) 
Information 11 24 When we were asked ( at the information 
session session ) to complete reflective questions … 
activity this required me to really analyse how I think 
and what I think when doing maths ( Tess ) 
Not a moment , 3 7 Most of the time because I find it interesting to 
general learn how to teach maths ; how children learn 
positive yes and the different ideas and strategies that 
will be valuable for my effective teaching 
future ( Jane ) 
Tutorial 8 18 Actually presenting assessment tutorial 
presentations presentation to the class ; talking and discovering myself made clear in my mind the gaps 
in my own knowledge and that I have to plan 
for it – I thought it would just happen ( Sam ) 
Total number 45 100 
of instances
62 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
information sessions provided a means by which pre-service teachers could engage 
with their learning about mathematics teaching . Rather than be recipients of information , pre-service teachers were encouraged to connect with the discussion via 
activity , short written reflections and discussions . 
Question Two
In direct contrast with their responses to question one , pre-service teachers 
responses to question two :  “ At what moment in the class ( es ) this week did you feel 
most distanced from what was happening ?  ” indicated that more than one third felt 
most distanced during the information sessions ( 37% of total responses )  . This time , 
their reasons included lack of personal input from them , their inability to have an 
opportunity to influence what was being discussed . For some , they were distracted 
by the requirement to “ copy notes ” and in doing so , lost contact with the conversation :  “ I seem to concentrate more upon getting the notes down rather than taking in 
information ”  ( Sue )  . Other responses were based on students ’ experiences of lectures ( or information sessions ) generally :  “ like all lectures , it follows a similar format of the teacher expending ( sic ) information out the front . The maths lectures are 
more interactive though ”  ( Toby )  . Although this pre-service teacher stated a concern 
about the format of the information sessions ( i . e .  , that they seem to be only about 
information giving )  , he also recognised that an effort had been made to make the 
mathematics sessions more interactive . Some other pre-service teachers specifically identified my teacher educator approach as being problematic for them . For 
example , my request for them to copy material from the overhead , respond to questions and at times remain unheard :  “ half the time I didn ’ t hear her ”  ( Helen ) created 
a sense of frustration for some . 
Question Three
In response to Question Three – “ What action that anyone ( student , teacher ) took 
in class this week did you find most affirming and helpful ?  ” – it was interesting 
to note the impact that group discussion had on pre-service teacher learning . 
Twenty-eight percent of the total mentions referred to the importance of 
discussion as a means of support and eliciting problematic areas for pre-service 
teachers . For instance ,  “ I find it most affirming when another student values your 
ideas and has some input into the discussion supporting what I have said ”  ( Fran )  ;  
 “ Personal insights from others into problematic areas ”  ( Sue )  ; and ,  “ it was great 
when our peers can give us advice and you actually learn from that ; more than 
you do from a teacher ”  ( Dan )  . The most frequent response to this question 
referred to the connections with peers and the relationship to pre-service teachers ’ 
own experiences as well as shared concerns ;  “  [ you ’ re ] not alone : when we sit 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 63
down to discuss topics or aspects of our teaching I learn a great deal and realise 
that I am not the only one ”  ( Sally )  .  ( The notion of the impact of discussion with 
peers is further developed in the section , Pre-service Teachers ’ Reflective 
Preferences )  . 
Question Four
Pre-service teacher responses to this question ( which required written responses to 
what was identified as the most puzzling or confusing action which had occurred 
during the previous week ) were revealing in two ways : First , in relation to the 
number of mentions with reference to the “ no response ” sub-category and second , 
the belief expressed by two pre-service teachers ( perhaps insignificant in terms of 
the total number of mentions )  , that they felt that they did not “ fit the norm ” in terms 
of peer expectations . 
The “ no response ” category was the sub-category with the highest percentage of 
the total responses ( 15 / 44 or 34% ) of the pre-service teachers ’ responses to this 
question indicating that they could not identify or did not experience a puzzling 
and / or confusing situation in the previous week . It might also be concluded from 
these responses that pre-service teachers were either unable or unprepared to articulate such an instance . 
Although “ not fitting the norm ” was mentioned by only two pre-service teachers , I selected their comments for analysis as they identified sentiments that other 
pre-service teachers might have felt , both within their cohort as well as those in 
other cohorts . In this way , the two comments formally articulated puzzling and / or 
confusing situations which had impacted on the way pre-service teachers assumed 
others had perceived them and their contributions . An example of this is provided 
by Jan ( a mature age pre-service teacher ) who wrote that the most puzzling aspect 
for her was :  “ Being ignored by younger students who obviously have made 
assumptions about me and find me not worth talking to or including ”  . 
Interestingly , other data provided in her peers ’ responses suggested that Jan ’ s 
perceptions of herself within the group were not necessarily those shared by her 
peers . For instance Jim wrote :  “ When discussing the mathematics of measurement , Jan said it was like grapes . I thought the way she interpreted it was a very 
good way to look at maths and break it down ”  ( Jim , CIQ )  . Toni stated that :  “ Jan – 
she had a really innovative idea about mobile phones . I thought this was a good 
idea that would have many worthwhile adaptations ”  ( CIQ )  . These two references 
to Jan in Jim and Toni ’ s CIQ responses to Question Four about Jan as a participant seem to suggest that her peers had formed positive views about her contributions and valued her creative and innovative insights compared to her own more 
self-consciously critical self perception . Analysing the responses provided by 
two pre-service teachers regarding one of their peers has highlighted for me the 
multiple layers of interaction which might be occurring during class discussions 
and interactions . 
64 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Question Five
The final question from the critical incident questionnaire – Question Five – related 
to the identification of the most surprising element of classes during the past week 
for these pre-service teachers . Two key sub-categories from this question were references to Roundtable Reflection sessions ( 25 . 5% ) and the importance of interesting and helpful questioning ( 21% )  . As Vincent mentioned , with reference to 
roundtable reflection “ I was surprised that we all had so much to say about everything and kept the roundtable going for so long . This reflection stuff is only getting 
better ”  . Also , a discussion based on questioning enabled ( at least some ) pre-service 
teachers to understand more about the role of questioning , and probing , in learning 
about teaching :  “ The thing that surprised me the most … was the effectiveness 
[ that ] simple questioning can have on determining a students ’ view or understanding of mathematics ”  ( Gina )  . 
Summary of Learning from CIQ Responses
Analysis of the CIQ responses has helped me better understand what it means for 
pre-service teachers to learn about their learning , and exemplified for me the ways 
in which I have learnt about teaching through reflecting on pre-service teachers ’ 
written responses . For instance , pre-service teacher ’ s written CIQ responses have 
highlighted the multiplicity of the ways in which experiences are interpreted ( for 
instance , the ways in which information sessions are perceived )  ; and pre-service 
teachers themselves are perceived ( for example , Jan )  . The importance of discussion 
amongst peers as a means of supporting learning , although not surprising , reinforced my assumption that shared discourse related to pre-service teacher experience provides opportunities for constructive de-briefing . De-briefing in this way 
exposed the notion that other pre-service teachers shared some of the same dilemmas in teaching and learning about teaching and therefore , pre-service teachers 
found solace in the fact that they were not the only ones grappling with often problematic issues . 
Discussion of Tools for Written Reflection
Analysis of pre-service teachers ’ written reflections ( Freewrites , ALACT , Critical 
Incident Questionnaires ) has helped me better understand a number of issues 
related to my assumption , that a triad of reflective tools would enhance pre- service 
teacher reflection and ( specifically ) lead to critical reflection about teaching . I 
anticipated that partner teaching would be an effective means for pre-service 
teachers in each cohort to maximise their teaching ( and learning about teaching ) 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 65
experiences by sharing planning , teaching , evaluation and reflection with a peer . 
Two important outcomes emerged for me in terms of this assumption . First , systematic reflection ( using multiple approaches ) revealed instances whereby both 
pre-service teachers and the teacher educator experienced states of doubt , hesitation and perplexity which were frequently problem-based ( Loughran , 2002 )  . 
Second , multiple reflective practices encouraged pre-service teachers to reflect 
selectively , rather than critically , on their learning . 
Our experiences provided the basis for our reflections and in this sense , related 
to the Deweyan ( 1933 ) focus on the role of experience in reflection , and to the 
benefits of structured ( models , cycles ) and unstructured reflective approaches 
which emphasised the importance of the experience had ( Munby & Russell , 1994 )  . 
Further to this , it appears that when pre-service teachers reflected on their teaching , 
using a traditional unstructured approach ( i . e .  , prior to the introduction of these 
tools )  , their reflections were frequently descriptive ( Hatton & Smith , 1995 ) linear 
and chronological , i . e .  , as they experienced it . This descriptive writing related to 
Hatton & Smith ’ s ( 1995 ) Stage One ( of four stages ) of reflective writing which 
refers to descriptive writing as a report and which answers the question : What did 
I do ? The nature and form of these reflections also can be related to van Manen ’ s 
( 1977 ) Stage One , Technical Rationality in which the focus of writing is on classroom practice , and reflections frequently linked to the success or failure of particular strategies . Both stages ( i . e .  , Hatton & Smith ’ s and van Manen ’ s ) are 
representative of rudimentary or initial levels of reflective practice and as such , are 
not indicative of critical reflection ( Brookfield , 1995 ; Gore & Zeichner , 1991 ; 
Hatton & Smith , 1995 ; van Manen , 1977 )  . Therefore , with reference to the analysis 
of the data of the Phase One cohort , it might be concluded that reflection was 
indeed occurring in a systematic manner throughout the semester ; that it emerged 
from pre-service teachers ’ experiences , was generally problem–based and typically 
descriptive in nature . However , there was little evidence of critical reflection occurring , in the sense defined by Hatton & Smith ( 1995 ) as ,  “ involving reasons for 
decisions or events which takes account of the broader historical , social and / or 
political contexts ”  ( p . 11 )  . 
When pre-service teachers employed the ALACT framework and were required 
to identify and explore a critical incident , interaction or event from their teaching 
experience , the focus seemed to shift from content , for example , and was more 
related to issues associated with student behaviour and student engagement . 
According to Hatton & Smith ( 1995 ) this would not be classified as critical reflection , but perhaps displayed more of a critical orientation towards selecting and 
exploring an incident , interaction or event which proved problematic . By identifying 
these interactions as critical , these pre-service teachers might be illustrating the use 
of a precursor to a critically reflective orientation . 
Pre-service teachers ’ written reflections provided some evidence to suggest that 
they were developing their skills and understandings of teaching through their 
experiences of teaching , and were beginning to be able to specify and articulate 
their new learning . For example , Paul stated ,  “ It [ buddy teaching ] was a great learning 
curve for us as pre-service teachers as we had noticed a progression in our teaching 
66 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
and had strengthened our abilities in observing and questioning and observing in 
the different techniques they used in maths ”  . Paul ’ s insight about his “ progression ” 
indicates something more about the way he is thinking as a teacher / learner and 
terms such as “ learning curve ” and “ progression ” provides evidence to suggest 
there is movement in his thinking about teaching , as a result of his experiences . 
This pre-service teacher articulation of learning through reflection was also evident 
in the following responses which suggested , for example , that experience in schools 
had indeed been crucial in stimulating thoughts and discussions about a range of 
issues including understanding more about learning as a pre-service teacher :  
 “ Sometimes working backwards enables a student to develop a concept ”  ( Mich )  ; 
the impact of student feedback on teaching and learning “ As I am learning I like to 
hear the students ’ feedback as the more feedback we get the better we will be ”  
( Anni )  ;  “ Getting the students to give feedback is a great resource and I think it will 
be one I will use in teaching more often ”  ( Aimie )  ; core professional traits which 
become crucial in the day-to-day management of classroom dynamics :  “ Being a 
friend to the students can be counter-productive . We need to strike a balance 
between respect ( so we don ’ t have to manage behaviour all the time ) and having 
fun and knowing the boundaries ”  ( Cass )  ; and a recognition that negative experiences may be reframed to inform future actions :  “ Mel and I decided to take the 
negatives from the last lesson and turn them into positives ”  ( Allie )  . 
In relation to my second outcome ( i . e .  , multiple reflective practices would 
encourage pre-service teachers to reflect critically on their learning )  , it may be that 
a variety of reflective tools may provide the potential for reflection to occur and 
perhaps by employing a tool of preference , pre-service teachers might begin to 
develop competence in the use of that tool which might then provide a precursor to 
critical reflection . The data presented in this chapter would suggest that this is 
indeed the case . 
Which reflective tools are preferred by these pre-service teachers ? In the next 
section of this chapter , I discuss and evaluate pre-service teachers ’ preferred reflective styles ( and the tools that support them ) and , elaborate on the ALACT framework as a guide for reflection . 
Discussion of Preferred Reflective Tool
Introducing and implementing reflective tools to assist in reflective practice was 
intended to provide pre-service teachers with a framework to guide their approach 
to reflection , hence reflecting my assumption that pre-service teachers required a 
structured approach to reflecting on their experiences and practices in learning 
about teaching . Responses provided by the Phase Three cohort ( TJ792 , Third Year ; 
n = 46 ) to the question :  “ What is your preferred reflective mode ?  ” are discussed 
here as a means of illustrating the preferences of pre-service teachers . 
In the following section I describe the data which were selected as they were 
considered representative of the views expressed by the pre-service teachers 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 67 
generally , across the cohorts who participated in this research . Following the coding of the responses , five categories emerged . These were : ALACT ( A )  ; Discussion 
with others ( D )  ; Writing ( W )  ; Self ( S ) and Not ALACT ( NA )  . Table 5 . 7 ( above ) 
lists the five categories with their corresponding number of instances of mentions , 
the percentage of the total mentions ( n = 46 ) and an illustrative example of a preservice teacher written response related to their preferred learning style . 
The ALACT Framework as a Guide to Reflection
These pre-service teachers ’ most frequent response to the question about their preferred reflective style was related to the ALACT framework ( 37% )  . Each of these 
written responses specifically identified ALACT as their preferred reflective tool 
and indicated support for both the structure , with its focus on learning about the 
learning through trial and discovery e . g .  ,  “ it [ ALACT ] gives you the chance to try 
again in a classroom situation ; you could continue to trial until you come up with 
a good solution ”  ( Pat )  ;  “ we are able to go through a process of discovering what 
happened and then attempting to improve this ”  ( Tom )  . Pre-service teachers commented on the ease and naturalness of the cycle ; e . g .  ,  “ I referred to the ALACT 
model as it seemed to be similar to what I do whilst teaching ”  ( Michele )  ;  “ ALACT 
is a great guide but I think it almost just reflects what should be a ‘ natural ’ process 
of reflection ”  ,  ( Emma )  . The naturalness ’ of the framework was commonly mentioned as an important factor across all cohorts . For example , Kelsy stated :  “ I want 
knowledge and I ask myself ‘ why ?  ’ and reflect all the way and evaluate how it ’ s 
going … I like the ALACT because it feels natural ”  ( personal communication via 
telephone conversation , July , 2003 , one year later )  . 
Analysis of the data suggested that pre-service teachers ’ developing understanding of pedagogy seemed to be influenced by experiential learning ( Jamieson , 1994 ; 
Kolb & Fry , 1975 )  ; that is , based on a :  “ cyclical process of concrete experience , 
Table 5 . 7 Responses by pre-service teachers to most preferred reflective model
Preferred Number of Percentage 
reflective instances of total
mode ( n = 46 ) instances Illustrative response
ALACT ( A ) 17 37 ALACT is a great way to reflect on the activity as 
you realise where the students are expanding 
their learning and it helps you plan your next 
activity ( Sal ) 
Discussion with 13 28 Discussion – talking about what went well , what 
others ( D ) didn ’ t and what could be improved ( Neal ) 
Writing ( W ) 5 11 Written journal ( Jim ) 
Self ( S ) 8 17 I prefer to use my own method of reflecting 
 ( Evan ) 
Not ALACT 3 7 ALACT can be limiting ( Roger )  
( NA ) 
68 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
reflective observation , abstract conceptualisation and active experimentation ”  
( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 , p . 43 )  . Some pre-service teachers , in their reflections , 
revealed the reflexivity of learning cycles based on experience and active experimentation . For example , Sal stated “ ALACT is a great way to reflect on the activity 
as you realise where the students are expanding their learning and it helps you plan 
your next activity ”  . In this situation , the focus was dually on the students ’ expansion of learning and the pre-service teachers ’ identification and planning of meaningful and connected learning activities . 
Reflection utilising the ALACT model provided a framework for monitoring 
this process and it also encouraged learning to be explicated from the experience . 
In this sense the ALACT model supported “ the ideal process of experiential learning as an alternation between action and reflection ”  ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 , p . 43 )  . 
This cycle of reflection on experience is akin to the Deweyan ( 1933 ) process when 
one is confronted by a puzzling experience , or a problem ( Action )  ; the mind immediately explores alternative possibilities which are referred to as suggestions and 
the exploration of multiple ideas ( Creating Alternatives )  ; the reasoning phase 
where one mentally elaborates on the ideas ( Looking back on the Action ) and the 
testing of a hypothesis which may take the form of an imaginative or a covert action 
( Trial )  . 
The majority of reflective frameworks and tools refer to stages and / or phases 
within the reflective process which progress in a hierarchical manner . The 
beginning stages relate to initial reflection levels , which imply descriptive 
recall of events and experiences , these then develop in a progressive manner as 
the reflection increases in sophistication , ultimately leading to critical reflection ( as described , for example , by van Manen , 1990 ; Valli , 1992 ; Hatton & 
Smith , 1995 )  . For some pre-service teachers , the ALACT framework operated 
in way that allowed them to develop a critical orientation in terms of selection 
and identification of a problem focus . As Jim stated :  “ I believe that I will continue to use the ALACT model of reflection as I will be able to identify single 
aspects and change them accordingly , rather than trying to change the whole 
lesson ”  . 
It could be inferred from the data from the ALACT responses ( Phase Two ) 
which represented reflection based on a structured analysis of an incident / interaction ( rather than a description of events as they were experienced in a linear and 
chronological manner ) that these pre-service teachers were prompted to reflect in 
an analytical manner . The intervention , based on the introduction of a structured 
framework for reflection , impacted on these pre-service teachers ’ ways of thinking about incidents / interactions and in this sense , required a critical selection 
which then provided the basis for a more detailed consideration of the problematic experience , event and / or interaction . Rather than recount and retell the experience , more was required in terms of the selection of the focus and / or stimulus . 
It was also interesting to note that the focus for pre-service teacher reflection 
transferred from issues associated with mathematical content to school students ’ 
behaviour and levels of engagement ( 45% , or the majority of instances reported 
in Phase Two )  . 
An Integrated and Structured Reflective Approach 69
This shift in focus was further supported by a random sampling of a Phase 
Three cohort ( TJ792 , Semester One , 2004 )  . Reflections were coded ( n = 15 )  , 
categorised and analysed utilising the four categories : mathematical content 
( MC )  ; student behaviour ( SB )  ; student engagement ( SE )  ; and , pre-service 
teacher based issues ( PSTB )  . In this sample , only 13% or 2 / 15 instances 
focused on mathematical content . The most frequent focus for the pre-service 
teachers within this sample in their reflective writing was student behaviours 
( 47% or 7 / 15 ) and student engagement ( 20% or 3 / 15 )  . These categories combined provide evidence that suggests two thirds ( or 67% ) of the instances of 
reflection were stimulated by a focus on student behaviour / engagement . This 
may provide further evidence to suggest that the ALACT frame directed preservice teacher thinking . 
Discussion with Others , Writing , Self and Not ALACT as Modes 
of Reflection
Almost one third of the total instances of preferred reflection mode related to a 
preference for reflection based on discussion with others ( 28% )  . Ted ’ s response 
perhaps epitomises these :  “ I find it easier to talk with someone who was there and 
then write it down ”  . Others referred to a mental capacity to “ file it away for 
improvement for future lessons ”  ( Bec ) and yet others mentioned the power of 
working through issues together , as can be seen in Pete ’ s comment :  “ coming up 
with solutions together is very effective practice ”  . 
Eleven percent of the total number of instances referred to writing as pre-service teachers preferred style of reflective practice . This raises an interesting 
dilemma for me as a teacher educator which highlights a discrepancy between my 
expectations related to written reflection on experience and learner willingness 
and preference in terms of reflective learning styles . Clearly writing was not the 
preferred mode of this group of pre-service teachers . Recognising this difference 
between me and my students causes me to ask the question : Whose needs are 
being met through the reflective practices and how ? Other pre-service teachers 
suggested that there be less emphasis on written reflection as “ some people just 
process things in their heads ”  ( Ian )  . Seventeen percent of the total responses 
mentioned a preference that pre-service teachers use their own style while 7% 
stated that they would not use ALACT as a model for reflection as it was 
restricting :  “ I don ’ t find using a predetermined frame all that helpful – it ’ s too 
restricting ”  ( Tim )  ; and ,  “ very regimented and I write for the ALACT and not for 
my own teaching benefit ”  ( Wendy )  . These responses raise the issue of the need 
to cater for individual reflective styles by presenting a range of alternatives , and 
the notion that adhering to a framework ( for example , ALACT ) can be interpreted by pre-service teachers as yet another form of technical reductionism 
( Kelchtermans , 2005 )  . 
70 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Summary : Challenging My Assumption
Prescriptive assumptions ( Brookfield , 1995 ) are assumptions which reflect what 
one believes ought to be happening in an educative experience . In this case , my 
prescriptive assumption that the integration of multiple written reflective tools – 
ALACT , Freewrite and CIQs – would stimulate learners to reflect critically on 
learning has been challenged . My prescriptive assumption was grounded in the 
paradigmatic assumption that the promotion of critical thinking in teacher education is integral to educational , social , moral and academic advancement ( Brookfield , 
1995 ; Gore & Zeichner , 1991 ; Korthagen , 1985 ; Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ; Loughran , 
2006 )  . The analysis presented in this chapter has focused on the impact of multiple 
written approaches for instigating reflection and on the consideration as to whether 
or not there was any discernible evidence of a movement toward the development 
of critical reflection for pre-service teachers as they learnt about teaching through 
reflection . 
Three key outcomes have resulted from the analysis of the written reflections 
provided by the pre-service teachers : first , written reflection using a framework 
can interrupt the habitual pre-service teacher propensity for reflection-as-retell ; 
second , multiple approaches , using an eclectic range of reflective tools can induce 
reflective traction , which may become a precursor to critical reflection ; and third , 
teacher educator learning can be enhanced by systematically exploring snapshots 
of reflection . 
Reflection as Retell
The analysis of the data in this chapter provided evidence to suggest that written 
reflection in teacher education , although an ideal of , and integral to teacher education programs , remains at least in this case , problematic . Intentions for practice are 
not always mirrored in the reality of practice . Reflection may simply be interpreted 
as description , and taken in this sense , can become a linear , chronological account 
of events as they were experienced . It could perhaps be concluded that the majority 
of written reflections provided by these pre-service teachers could be classified in 
this way and represented little more than recall . And , as Hatton & Smith ( 1995 ) 
have suggested , such pre-service teacher response may not therefore genuinely 
register as reflection ; rather it is descriptive writing . 
However , it might also be concluded from this analysis , that the implementation 
of reflective frameworks that provided a structure for reflection ( ALACT , 
Freewrites and CIQs ) obliged pre-service teachers to be critically selective about 
the incident / interaction and / or event that they reflected about and as such , encouraged reflection through an analytical , rather than a descriptive lens . Pre-service 
teachers through their structured written reflections , identified their locus of concern in their developing pedagogy . These concerns included , for example , the 
Reflection as Retell 71 
supports , scaffolds and anxieties associated with partner teaching ; knowledge of 
mathematical content and concepts ; student engagement and behaviour ; and , the 
benefits and limitations of reflective models . 
Reflective Traction
With reference to learning about reflection in teaching , it seems that what might 
further enhance reflection in teacher education is not only the integration and systematic scrutiny of written reflective practice / s , but also the provision of opportunities for learners to establish a connection with reflection . Reflective traction is 
intended to mean an entry point , or a beginning point which allows for the initiation 
of a connection to the reflection process . This traction may then provide an impetus 
for further critical examination of experience as well as creating new ways of 
encouraging teacher educators to be equally challenged by a process that captures 
the thinking of both the teacher and the student and minimise the possibility for 
reflection being a routine . 
It might also be concluded from the data examined in this chapter that an eclectic 
approach ( i . e .  , offering several different tools for reflection ) provided opportunities 
for pre-service teachers to establish reflective traction . For example , reflective 
traction might be provided for pre-service teachers by the ALACT framework ( 37% 
of these pre-service teachers identified the ALACT framework as their preferred 
mode of reflecting on practice )  , while for others it was the free write or roundtable . 
In terms of the ALACT model , as the data has shown , when utilising this framework , the style of reflection was exemplified by discrimination in terms of the 
incident / interaction / event selection and subsequent analysis , rather than the 
traditional description and recall of an event . A systematic reflective approach may 
lead to a more formalised structure for reflecting on experience which then may 
minimise the ad hoc nature of reflection and in doing so , provide a cyclical framework ( ALACT , for example )  . Conversely , implementation of a structured reflective 
approach to practice using various tools can ( and was ) experienced by some preservice teachers as an imposition and perhaps as Kelchtermans ( 2005 ) has 
suggested , yet another form of reflective technical reductionism . 
Being intimately involved with the implementation of the selected approaches , 
the assessment related to the reflective approaches and the evaluation of learning , 
demands ongoing management and scrutiny of my practice . Through the process of 
retrospective reflection and in responding to this data , albeit with time as a filter , 
issues associated with reflective practices in teacher education have been foregrounded , which have informed my pedagogy . For example , I can now confidently 
state that the intervention by means of selected and multiple innovative reflective 
practices ( ALACT ; Freewrites ; CIQ ) while based on educationally sound intent , 
will not necessarily lead to effective reflective practice ( Loughran , 2002 )  . It may , 
however , provide a means by which pre-service teachers establish reflective 
traction , opening a window to , and creating an impetus for , critical reflection . 
72 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Teacher Educator Learning
New understandings of the impact of reflective tools prompt further questioning of 
my taken-for-granted assumptions , practices and beliefs . For instance , is the implementation of structured reflective practice cognizant of that which some scholars 
have argued is more indicative of a form of technical reductionism ( Kincheloe , 
2003 ; Kelchtermans , 2005 )  ? As Loughran ( 2003 ) has suggested , quality learning 
requires learner consent , and some pre-service teachers , regardless of the expectations of the program remained unaffected by the reflective process . The importance 
of learner consent is evident . For example , consider the following ( unsolicited 
email )  , forwarded to me by Alan ( Phase One ) at the conclusion of the semester : 
In this self-initiated entry I wanted to look at all the reflection we have been doing and look 
at whether it is worth it . Because we have done so much reflection it has been an issue for 
me because I believe it is a waste of time … I reflect better by thinking about what I have 
done , not by writing it down . The only reason I do them is because I have to . I don ’ t find 
any use in doing them and I don ’ t like them … I hate being pressured into writing something … I have enjoyed the professional practice in maths this semester but I have not 
enjoyed all the reflection .  
( Alan , Phase One , Semester One , 2003 ) 
Alan raises an important issue for me as teacher educator ; that is the negative impact 
on him of multiple tools used in an attempt to elicit more about his learning . In his 
case , multiple approaches may have created a problem whereby he felt “ pressured ” 
and only completed the written tasks because “ I have to . I don ’ t find any use in doing 
them ”  . Perhaps fewer tools or even a choice of tools may have been more appropriate for pre-service teachers such as Alan . This instance highlights the need for 
reflective balance and ongoing teacher educator scrutiny of the effect of these modified approaches to teaching and learning about learning through reflection . I need 
to be open and sensitive to pre-service teacher preferences and be prepared to adapt 
my program to include pre-service teacher choice of reflective tools . 
Learning About Reflection in Teaching : Overview
This chapter has examined the ways in which written reflections can provide insights 
into understanding how reflection in learning about teaching is experienced , integrated and interpreted within the Learning and Teaching Mathematics Units within 
the Bachelor of Education Course . The interrogation of snapshots of written reflection based on an eclectic range of reflective tools provided for pre-service teachers 
across cohorts suggests that although it is possible to integrate written reflection in 
learning about teaching , the outcomes , at least in this case , are variable . 
In situ and retrospective analysis of the written reflections exemplified key issues 
associated with these pre-service teachers ’ learning within the mathematics units ; 
for example , the challenges associated with partner teaching ; the impact of student 
engagement and behaviour in learning about teaching ; and , the identification and 
Learning About Reflection in Teaching : Overview 73
examination of both professional and personal attributes . The aspects of learning 
represented in the written reflections relate directly to having the experience 
( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ; Munby & Russell , 1994 ) and the determination of a locus 
of concern which were perceived by the pre-service teachers as problematic . 
In situ and retrospective analysis of the data has challenged my assumptions as 
teacher educator about the nature of written reflection and of the construct of critical reflection . In this sense , perhaps the data has had more impact on my modus 
operandi as it has helped to expose the questions associated with ‘ why written 
reflective practice ?  ’ in terms of whose needs are being met and whose questions 
matter , rather than the ‘ what ’ and the practical implications of written reflections . 
Reflective traction has much to endear itself to both the teacher of teaching and the 
learning of teaching if teacher education is to genuinely claim to encourage and 
enhance teacher education practices . 
74 5 Learning about Reflection in Teaching
Chapter 6
Roundtable Reflection
Assumption Two : Roundtable Reflection Will Provide 
Opportunities for Pre-service Teachers to Challenge 
Taken-for-Granted Assumptions About Learning 
and Teaching Mathematics
This chapter explores my assumption that the practice of Roundtable Reflection 
would not only provide structured opportunities for pre-service teachers to share 
their teaching experiences , but also challenge their taken-for-granted beliefs about 
learning and teaching mathematics . I begin this chapter with a brief overview of the 
literature related to the examination of voice in pre-service teacher education . 
Voice in Teacher Education
Voice has been widely researched in the literatures of teacher research ( Clandinin 
& Connelly , 1990 ; Hamilton & Pinnegar , 1998 ; Loughran et al .  , 2002 )  , reflective 
practice ( Alerby & Elidottir , 2003 ) and self-study ( Bodone et al .  , 2004 ; Berry & 
Loughran , 2002a ; Elijah , 2004 ; LaBoskey , 2004 ; Loughran & Russell , 2002 ; Tidwell & 
Fitzgerald , 2004 )  . The initial impetus for examining the role of voice in my 
Learning and Teaching Mathematics context emerged from early in the research 
feedback received from pre-service teachers . From my analysis of the feedback , I 
had identified two key understandings about my teaching : first , that my voice as a 
teacher educator had been privileged within the discourse of mathematics teaching 
and , second , that I needed to teach so that pre-service teachers learnt about teaching 
through verbally reflecting on their own experience . Establishing the practice of 
Roundtable Reflection ( RR ) was a direct response to this feedback . I wanted to 
move away from the notion of teaching as telling and listening as learning ( Berry , 
2007 ; Berry & Loughran , 2002 )  . 
Although minimal research exists about the day-to-day functioning and analysis 
of teacher education classrooms utilising a RR approach to learning ( in this context , 
participating in group discussions in a circle arrangement )  , scholars such as 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 75
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008
Brookfield ( 1995 )  , Kincheloe et al .  ( 1999 ) register caution when implementing oral 
reflective practice based in circle arrangements . These researchers suggest that 
although the intention of oral reflection might be to promote inclusion of all pre-service 
teachers in reflective discussion , the reverse effect may occur , in that pre-service 
teachers may feel vulnerable and disabled in their thinking and hence their learning . 
This is because , for some pre-service teachers , this physical restructuring of the 
learning environment ( i . e .  , as Roundtables ) could be interpreted and experienced as 
a form of oppression and become confronting . The circle , by its very structure may 
create “ pressure to participate and perform ”  ( Brookfield , 1995 , p . 10 ) and in doing 
so , restrict the establishment of the development of trust among peers and teacher 
educators . Brookfield ( 1995 )  , for example , also suggests that de-centering the 
teacher and devolving teacher educator authority can sometimes be interpreted as 
false modesty and “ induce mistrust and shut down learning ”  ( p . 14 ) by pre-service 
teachers and therefore actively work against developing a trusting environment . 
This chapter examines my prescriptive assumption that pre-service teachers 
would be maximising their opportunities for learning about teaching by being 
encouraged to verbally unpack their experiences in a supportive environment . The 
context for this reflective unpacking was during RR sessions , which were conducted weekly , following partner teaching in schools , for up to six weeks per 
semester . Both mine and my pre-service teachers ’ involvement in , and close 
examination of , RR sessions provided insights into the ways in which pre-service 
teachers chose to learn about teaching as well as insights into my role as teacher 
educator ( including the ways in which I needed to constantly negotiate my boundaries as a teacher educator )  , and raised challenges associated with learning about 
teaching through reflective discourse . Throughout this chapter , I describe how RR 
sessions became opportunities for me ( and pre-service teachers ) to learn more 
about multiple perceptions of experience and hence , expose us to others ’ ways of 
understanding interactions , events and incidents which had been experienced in 
our teaching . 
Roundtable Reflection as Inquiry into Practice
Integral to reflective practice is the notion of inquiry ( Clarke & Erikson , 2004 ; 
Cochran-Smith & Lytle , 2004 ; LaBoskey , 2004 ; Loughran & Russell , 2002 ; Schön , 
1983 , 1987 )  . The inquiry process within my Learning and Teaching Mathematics 
context reflects a systematic , formal explication of puzzling or problematic situations which emerged from pre-service teachers ’ experiences . The puzzling and 
problematic situations did not present an immediate or obvious solution at the time 
( Dewey , 1933 ; Korthagen , 1985 , Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ; Loughran , 1996 )  . As a 
means of integrating inquiry into practice , RR sessions were introduced with each 
cohort of pre-service teachers . Inquiry , supported by a RR approach moved away 
from an extensively researched traditional expectation in teaching and learning 
about teaching that valued answers rather than questions ( Richert , 1995 )  . In this 
76 6 Roundtable Reflection
way , by participating in RR , pre-service teachers were encouraged to inquire into 
and about their own practice , in a more formal way . 
The “ commuting experience ”  ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 , p . 150 ) involved pre-service teachers along with their partners , commuting between the university and the 
school settings ; teaching mathematics in Prep – Year Ten classrooms and reflecting 
weekly in group seminars , known as Roundtables . These RR sessions were 
intended to encourage peer interaction , within a supportive space which was 
designed to enable participants to verbally reflect on experience ( s ) and challenge 
assumptions about learning and teaching . Integral within this definition of RR is the 
nature of the Roundtable as a forum designed for ongoing identification , reflective 
discussion and interrogation of issues associated with both the practice of teaching 
and learning about teaching . 
Roundtables replaced some of the traditional tutorial sessions within the semester long units ( typically of thirteen weeks duration )  . Traditional tutorial sessions 
within this teaching context consisted of teacher educator selected readings as an 
extension of the weekly lecture with the session structure pre-planned with predetermined outcomes ; activities are linked to the topics and set learning tasks , based 
on group work , are completed . Tutorial sessions were conducted during the first 
half of each semester , and RR sessions replaced tutorial sessions during the second 
half of the semester as it was during this time that pre-service teachers completed 
their weekly partner teaching in schools . 
In contrast to more traditional forms of tutorial based debriefing , during RR sessions pre-service teachers themselves established the agenda for discussion based 
on their teaching experience in schools . Extension readings and resources provided 
in the subsequent Roundtable were then based on the needs of the pre-service 
teachers which have been previously identified through the RR .  ( For example , if 
teaching the concept of ‘ time ’ was problematic , I would then provide supplementary reading by way of articles related to teaching this concept during the following 
Roundtable )  . Numbers of Roundtable sessions and times of these sessions varied 
with each cohort , but typically each cohort experienced four roundtable sessions , 
with each session averaging approximately one hour . 
It was also anticipated that the identification of ( often ) problematic pre-service 
teacher experiences would then prompt pre-service teachers to challenge their own 
and their peers ’ taken-for-granted assumptions regarding learning and teaching 
mathematics . Alternatives could then be explored from varying perspectives ( i . e .  , 
taking a problem which arose from practice and examining it in the light of alternative and future possibilities for practice )  . Roundtables were developed to offer an 
approach to learning about teaching based on eight teacher educator assumptions 
which I developed as a result of analysing the data collated from my pilot study . 
These assumptions are : 
1 . RR will provide opportunities for pre-service teachers / teacher educator to make 
sense of experience / s in a supportive environment
2 . Pre-service teachers will generate discussion by raising issues related to their 
experience
Roundtable Reflection as Inquiry into Practice 77
3 . The role of the teacher educator will be to introduce the session , clarify the 
framework and consciously refrain from dominating discussion
4 . All pre-service teachers will be provided with an opportunity to raise an issue , 
and hence , encourage development of their voice
5 . Learning outcomes cannot be predetermined
6 . Learning / s will be made explicit
7 . Opinions will be respected
8 . References will be made to the ALACT model of reflective practice ( Inner / 
Outer cycle )  . 
During the first roundtable session for each cohort , the structure and expectations 
for roundtables were explained , including the important underpinning principle that 
pre-service teachers maintained personal choice about their oral contributions . 
The ALACT framework provided an overlay for the verbal discourse of roundtables such that pre-service teachers were required to consider the ALACT cycle 
when reflecting within the group . As a way of monitoring my involvement in the 
reflective discourse , I was guided by the Outer Cycle of the ALACT framework . 
The ALACT Framework and Roundtable Reflection
I introduced the ALACT model for reflective practice as a way of implementing a 
formal reflective structure within roundtable sessions and as such it provided an 
overlay , or guide for the reflective process . Pre-service teachers were encouraged 
to consider this cycle as an approach to reflecting on the teaching experience / s with 
their teaching partners and as participants in the RR sessions . I anticipated that by 
providing a framework for oral reflective discourse , the ad hoc nature of reflection 
on practice ( suggested by pre-service teachers in their pilot study responses , and 
which indicated a developing resistance to reflection ) might be curtailed and in this 
way , perhaps become more meaningful to pre-service teachers as a means of understanding their learning about teaching . 
The ALACT framework also provided a reflective tool for me as teacher educator during the Roundtable sessions . The ALACT framework consists of both an 
Inner and an Outer Cycle . The appeal of this approach for me was in the structure 
of the Outer Cycle , particularly , as it became my guide for my role while participating in RR sessions . Each phase of the Inner Cycle has corresponding expectations 
within the Outer Cycle . For example , in the Outer Cycle , Phase One requires the 
teacher educator to assist pre-service teachers in finding useful experiences to 
reflect upon ; Phase Two suggests that teacher educators display acceptance , empathy , genuineness and assist in making the issues concrete ; Phase Three is represented by all of Phase Two qualities , and specifically calls on the teacher educator 
to make learning explicit ; Phase Four revolves around teacher educator help for 
pre-service teachers if they experience difficulty in finding and choosing solutions 
to problems ; and Phase Five is based on helping the continuation of the learning 
78 6 Roundtable Reflection
process . Further skills which are suggested as desirable for facilitating effective 
learning through using the outer cycle include an expectation that teacher educators 
will attempt to remain silent and allow pre-service teachers to pursue discussions 
related to their needs as learners .  ( Refer to Chapter 4 for diagram of Outer Cycle )  . 
The Physical Structure of the Roundtable
For each Roundtable session , traditional rows of tutorial seating were restructured 
to form a shape representing a roundtable . The intention of this arrangement was 
threefold : first , to physically decentre the teacher educator , and thus challenge the 
traditional practice of the physical centrality of the teacher in learning ; second , to 
establish an environment where participants have increased visual contact with others thus increase likelihood of engagement and third , to divest authority for learning 
to all members of the group and hence model reflective practice as a process in 
which all participants might contribute to the discourse . 
Guidelines for Conducting Roundtable Sessions
Expectations associated with RR included an understanding that the sessions were 
to be regarded by participants ( pre-service teacher / teacher educator ) as both listening and speaking spaces and that pre-service teachers could choose to verbally participate in the discussion , but were not compelled to contribute . Although 
pre-service teachers were required to attend the session as an assessment task , their 
verbal contributions were not formally assessed . The aim for each session , as 
explained to the pre-service teachers , was to establish and maintain a learning environment where members felt supported , and yet challenged in their thinking and 
where they could therefore express concerns and expose issues regarding learning 
about teaching . In doing so , assumptions about learning and teaching could then be 
identified and challenged . The challenge for both the pre-service teachers and for 
me in this situation was to constantly fine-tune and monitor the balance between 
feelings of safety ( that is taking professional risks and experiencing vulnerability ) 
and developing and maintaining a professional respect and confidentiality amongst 
the group . This situation relates to research conducted by Berry ( 2004a , b ; 2007 )  , 
who refers to the experience of learner vulnerability manifested as a tension within 
learning environments , where learners challenge both self and others . 
I introduced each RR session often with a summary of the key points from the 
previous Roundtable session . I then discussed the expectations associated with the 
function of RR and invited pre-service teachers to identify an issue which they 
might like to examine further within a group learning environment . It was the content of these discussions which led to a deeper understanding of the ways in which 
Roundtable Reflection as Inquiry into Practice 79
we ( pre-service teachers and me ) were identifying and examining a range of issues 
associated with learning and teaching mathematics . 
Pre-service Teacher Feedback About Roundtable Reflection
As I analysed all of the data sources across all cohorts , pre-service teachers suggested that Roundtable Reflections were one of the most engaging aspects of the 
Learning and Teaching Mathematics units . For example , this was evident in the 
pre-service teachers ’ response to the question ,  “ At what moment in the class ( es ) 
this week did you feel most engaged with what was happening ?  ”  ( CIQ , Question 
One , 2003 )  , where 51% of the total mentions referred to the Roundtable sessions . 
Further , in response to the question :  “ What is your preferred reflective mode ?  ”  
( Questionnaire , TJ792 , 2004 )  , almost one third of the responses referred to discussion with others during Roundtables . 
In the next section , I specifically discuss data I collected from Roundtable sessions ( Roundtable One , Semester Two , 2002 , n = 24 ; Roundtable Eleven , Semester 
Two , 2003 , n = 12 ; Roundtable Twelve , Semester Two , 2003 , n = 12 )  . Each 
Roundtable session was conducted in the week following the first partner teaching 
session in schools . Each session was audio-taped , transcribed and the data were 
coded . Through this coding of the data across three sessions I identified two key 
categories ;  ( 1 ) Roundtable Reflection as Problem Identification and Problem 
Solving , and ( 2 ) The Nature of my Role as Teacher Educator . Sub-categories 
related to Category One refer to ( 1 ) the Affective Dimension of Teaching and 
Learning , and ( 2 ) Positive and Negative Assumptions . 
Roundtable Reflection as Problem Identification 
and Problem Solving
Pre-service teachers , through inquiry during RR sessions , were identifying and 
attempting to explore problematic situations which they had experienced while 
partner teaching in schools . For example , Sam ( Roundtable Eleven ) illustrates this 
in the following quote by indicating that the session allowed him to unpack authentic problems and issues which emerged from his own experiences : 
It ’ s good [ RR ] because we can really play to it , because they ’ re our own problems they ’ re 
not … a case scenario ; we can find out different ways to sort out our problems in relation 
to schools and work ; and , we don ’ t do it anywhere else like how to deal with that sort of 
thing… this is all we do about dealing with problems .  
( Sam , Roundtable Eleven , August 2003 ) 
Sam ’ s response speaks of the power of the authenticity of experience in learning 
about teaching , meaning that unpacking his own problems is preferable to responding 
80 6 Roundtable Reflection
to artificial , teacher provided case studies and / or scenarios . He appreciates and 
prefers the opportunities provided in the roundtables to discuss his learning in a 
way that he does not experience in any other part of the teacher education 
program . 
My rationale for selecting Roundtable One for detailed analysis was based on 
the positive comments by the pre-service teachers who had participated in the session ; for example ,  “ This was the best session I have attended at uni .  ”  ( Jill ) and ,  
 “ There ’ s a real buzz out there about the Roundtable session ”  ( Liz )  . My curiosity led 
me to ask why this session had left such an impression on these pre-service teachers .  ( Similar comments were also made by pre-service teachers following sessions 
with subsequent cohorts .  ) 
Roundtable reflection encouraged pre-service teachers to identify the problems 
associated with their practice and provided a space for an attempt to problemsolve . I begin my discussion of problem identification and problem solving by 
exploring an issue faced by Jess as she attempted to teach subtraction to a class of 
Prep / One students ( 5 and 6 years old ) and the ways in which her peers attempted 
to offer multiple possibilities for both understanding and solving her problem . 
This was a typical scenario where a pre-service teacher attempted to teach a concept she felt she was well prepared to teach and multiple issues prevented this 
from being a successful experience for both her and her students . I as discuss 
Jess ’ s dilemma , I make explicit links to the ALACT reflective framework and 
identify the reflective cycle which becomes evident during the Roundtable reflection discourse . 
A Problem for Jess : Teaching the Mathematical 
Concept of Subtraction
Jess ’ s problem which prompted the reflective discussion revolved around Jess ’ s 
attempt to teach about the subtraction concept with a group of six year one students .  
( This is ALACT , Phase One )  . Looking back on the action ( ALACT , Phase Two ) Jess 
identified that her planned strategy was ineffective for the majority of the group : 
I had six in my group and one or two of them knew what the take-away sign [ was ] … I 
assumed that they [ all knew it ] I used the big tree I made in the teaching aids last semester , 
and I asked “ Can anyone tell me what you know subtraction or take away means ?  ” And 
they ’ re all … “ it ’ s like when someone steals apples ” or they just had no idea … and I 
thought … they were just making up things [ pre-service teacher laughter ] it was things you 
have in a tree . They just had no idea … I thought they would have a much bigger understanding of what subtraction was .  
( Jess , Roundtable One , July 2002 ) 
In ‘ Looking back ’ on the incident Jess is able to identify her awareness of the 
essential aspects ( ALACT , Phase Three ) of the problem which include a lack of 
understanding by the students of her questions and a difference between what she 
Roundtable Reflection as Problem Identification and Problem Solving 81
expected the students to know and what they actually knew . As she was speaking 
to the group during this roundtable , I noted that Jess seemed to become anxious 
when describing her scenario . She mentions that the students seemed to have “ no 
idea ” of the word “ subtraction ” or “ take-away ” and the concrete materials Jess had 
provided ( a felt tree with fruit attached ) instead of helping to make the concept 
concrete , only confused the students . In fact , the concrete aid became a distraction , 
as Jess continued , to explain : 
I took the tree away . … I didn ’ t have an answer of what subtraction was … I gave one sort 
of answer and then I sort of had … to explain … give them , yeah , tell them what it was and 
then a lot still couldn ’ t [ understand ] so I put three apples [ up ] and said I was hungry and 
ate two and took two away and they couldn ’ t even write … in their books , like three take 
away one equals two … They just , they just , I just thought they ’ d be able to do that pretty 
easy . I thought they ’ d be able to participate .  
( Jess , Roundtable One , July 2002 ) 
In her articulation of this problem to the group , Jess displayed signs of frustration 
and agitation , which were evident in the quiver in her voice , the speed of her speech 
and her inability to complete sentences . Her frustration also revolved around the 
pre-organised way in which she had approached her teaching ; for example , she had 
met the classroom teacher prior to teaching the class to discuss the students ’ knowledge of the content area ; she had volunteered time to meet the students in advance 
and she had planned the session and created teaching aids to assist in the teaching 
of the subtraction concept . In short , she had tried to do everything she could to 
make the concept work . But , even with detailed preparation , her session had 
become unexpectedly problematic . The Roundtable format then allowed for alternative approaches to be suggested by other group members , including some that 
had been trialed by pre-service teachers in similar situations ( ALACT , Phase Four , 
Creating Alternatives )  . For example , Sally suggested the use of a counting book for 
student clarification , an alteration of the terminology of :  “ take-away ” in order to 
assist student understanding through a visual stimulus and a description of her 
experience where the students created their own subtraction algorithms : 
On my last teaching round I had preps and I did subtraction and used my book that we 
made . We didn ’ t work with subtraction , we used take away but my teacher suggested to 
allow them invent their own [ subtraction algorithms ]  . We used apples and when they cut 
it , it was like you know when you invent spelling and they were inventing their own sort of 
little algorithms . A lot of them did things back to front and … some were just [ using ] a 
slash through the three and one take away three oh , three take any one or something , they ’ d 
do a three with a slash then a two and it was when you went to them they explained to you 
that you could see that they were totally on track .  
( Sally , Roundtable One , July 2002 ) 
Sally was reporting on a practice which she used , which was based on an approach 
to teaching that encouraged students to develop and explore their own algorithms , 
under guidance , rather than be taught using specific terminology and structured 
steps . Sally ’ s approach was in contrast to Jess ’ s expectations for her teaching of the 
subtraction concept that included a linear process of developing a concept with a 
82 6 Roundtable Reflection
group of students and creating understanding by staging group conversations in a 
sequential manner . Sally however , suggested a somewhat less widely acknowledged approach to teaching the concept of subtraction , i . e .  , by allowing students to 
explore the creation of algorithms using trial and error . 
Julie , another pre-service teacher , at this point during RT1 , suggested that learning 
was like “ rungs of a ladder ” and that learning was a process of climbing until the “ wow ” 
moment was reached ; while Anita recalled her experience of the successful use of a 
counting frame combined with peer teaching from students within the class as a means 
of encouraging students to create their own subtraction stories . Adding her idea , Shonia 
suggested that perhaps Jess could refer again to the teacher and to also ask the students 
what they had remembered and begin with the “ familiar ”  . This could be accomplished 
by asking the students to explain their understandings . Further to this suggestion , Shonia 
highlights the role of prior learning , student entering behaviour and revision as a way to 
further ascertain group understanding of the concept of subtraction : 
You could get some of those activities , ask her [ teacher ] what activities they have done and 
go back over it with them and get them to explain … to you know and say , oh , y ’ oh ,  “ Your 
teacher said that you did this activity a couple of weeks ago . Do you remember what it 
was ?  ” Get them to explain that to you , the activity , to you , and then see what their understandings are and then you if you have to re-go over the activity again . It ’ s a good place 
to start , because they ’ ll have familiar , like be familiar with it .  
( Shonia , Roundtable One , July 2002 ) 
Anita discussed her successful use of a counting frame combined with peer teaching 
from students within the class . Unpacking this problematic situation revealed challenges 
pre-service teachers were facing in terms of challenging taken-for-granted assumptions about teaching . As different pre-service teachers contributed their experiences , the 
problematic aspects related to Jess ’ s situation were being examined and alternative 
possibilities were being articulated within the Roundtable session . As a result of this 
discussion with her peers about subtraction , Jess was exposed to some contributing 
factors associated with learning and teaching new concepts which included : 
● Individual levels of understanding mathematical concepts within a class group vary
● Inadequacy of her language and explanations in relation to helping students to 
learn about a new concept
● The possibility that concrete teaching aids may become distractions for students 
rather than enabling scaffolds for learning
● Jess ’  [ self-identified ] lack of knowledge about alternative approaches [ other 
than telling ] to clarify the learning for both the students and for herself . 
Jess ’ s sharing of her dilemma and subsequent interactions with her peers indicates 
that RR sessions provided opportunities for pre-service teachers to unpack problematic issues and consider alternatives for practice . Pre-service teachers followed 
the ALACT framework to reflect on their experiences and what became clear in this 
discussion were the ways in which the pre-service teachers interacted with one 
another and the multiple alternatives ( ALACT , Phase Three ) which emerged for 
Jess as a result of the discussion . 
Roundtable Reflection as Problem Identification and Problem Solving 83
Satisfaction for Diana : Probability and Grade Three
Predominantly , the issues discussed during RR sessions reflected challenges faced 
by pre-service teachers . However not all of these were negative and frustrating 
experiences . For example , the following excerpt from RT11 reflects Diana ’ s satisfaction with her attempt to teach probability to a class of Grade Three students . This 
refers to another aspect of Category One , whereby pre-service teachers identified a 
problem in their practice but adapted their teaching to achieve a successful outcome . In this excerpt , she identifies the ways in which she questioned the students 
in order to clarify for her , their levels of understanding . She refers to the previous 
Roundtable session ( RT10 ) where Jan had spoken about a student ’ s blank expression as a critical moment : 
She [ Jan ] made me look for those little key moments … they [ students ] didn ’ t understand 
it so I kept trying to reiterate to them ;  “ Do you understand it ? Is there anything more you 
want me to explain ?  ” It made me a bit more aware of what to look for … the blank looks 
and if they didn ’ t understand it I kept on questioning right throughout .  “ Do you understand 
this ?  ” and I kept on asking more questions . After each time they took a counter out of the 
bag I said ,  “ Now what [ colour ] has the highest chance ? What has the least chance ?  ” and 
when it got to when there were only two counters left in the bag I asked ,  “ What has the 
most chance now ?  ” and they said “ fifty-fifty ” and I was so happy that they realised , that 
they understood . They understood .  
( Diana , Roundtable Eleven , August 2003 ) 
Analysis of this experience within this Roundtable session highlights Diana ’ s sensitivity to introducing the topic of probability to her students as she took her cues 
about how to proceed with her teaching from the students ’ physical expressions ( in 
this case , blank looks from the students led her to persist with her questioning )  . 
Through exploring the level of connection and engagement of pre-service teachers during RR sessions , it was interesting to note the intonations and strength of 
voice when pre-service teachers raised their concerns . This became even more evident to me during the transcription of sessions as I listened again to the dialogue . 
In some cases sharing experience amongst peers during RR sessions prompted passionate responses .  ( Affective dimensions related to challenging assumptions are 
discussed later in this chapter )  . As much of what had been shared with the group 
represented challenges for the pre-service teachers in their initial stages of teaching , 
exploring their learning in a public forum reflected the affective and emotional 
dimensions evident when revisiting challenging learning and teaching situations . 
Julie :  “ Learning is like Rungs of a Ladder ” 
Other pre-service teachers , such as Julie , for example , articulated her problems 
with multi-age classrooms ( classrooms which comprise multiple age levels , and in 
this case , a class of Prep , Tear One and Two students )  . 
84 6 Roundtable Reflection
I have a real problem with [ the multi-age classrooms ] particularly the Prep-Two area 
because my personal belief is that preps . are a special breed and they need that year , that 
whole prep [ aratory ] year to really establish … you know , being at home and kinder [ garten ]  , 
into the school system … [ I ] would have to separate the preps .  
( Julie , Roundtable One , July 2002 ) 
In this reflection , Julie had both identified her problem which related to multiage classrooms which emerged from her teaching experience in schools , and 
moved towards articulating her approach to addressing this problem which 
reflected her philosophy about the ways in which new students should experience the transition into a school system . Julie ’ s view of transition meant a separation from older age groups so that new students could gradually establish their 
own ways of operating and in this way , the transition process might become less 
stressful . Julie , in questioning the status-quo in her school , reflected an inquiry 
stance as she explored alternatives and possibilities for class composition which 
related not only to the practice of teaching , but also to student learning outcomes , the educational policy of the school and the ethical dimensions of an 
approach based on this practice . 
Guy :  “ Act It Out ” 
Often pre-service teachers who chose not to orally participate in the discussion 
wrote their responses post-session . For example , Guy who had chosen not to 
contribute orally during the session wrote :  “ What happens when children show 
no understanding of a topic ? Problem : Children didn ’ t understand takeaway 
sign / no understanding of subtraction Solution ? – drama , real-life situation ”  
( Written evaluation , 2002 )  . My interpretation of Guy ’ s reflection suggests that 
to aid in the learning of a concept such as subtraction , another approach might 
be to dramatise a real life situation so that students could participate in a physical activity in order to develop understanding of the concept . It seems that it was 
within the ‘ Creating Alternatives ’ Phase that this reflection proved meaningful 
for those involved . 
The above examples suggest that pre-service teachers were prepared to articulate 
and write about alternative possibilities for solving problems associated with their 
own and their peer / s ’ practice . RR sessions provided opportunities for pre-service 
teachers to identify and explore problematic situations which arose from practice 
( Jess , Subtraction )  ; identify satisfactory achievements in teaching concepts ( Diana , 
Probability ) and articulate and explore metaphors for learning ( Julie ,  “ Rungs of a 
ladder ”  )  . 
Analysis of the RR sessions provided some evidence to suggest that guided 
reflection ( i . e .  , by using ALACT as a framework for verbal reflection on teaching ) 
enabled us to focus on a reflective process by identifying particular stages of the 
Roundtable Reflection as Problem Identification and Problem Solving 85
cycle ( for example , the Action Phase or the Creating Alternatives Phase ) as we 
participated in the roundtable , so we could maintain a reflective focus based 
on structure . 
ALACT Framework as a Guide for Reflection during 
Roundtable Sessions
The ALACT framework provided a formal structure for unpacking pre-service 
teacher problems experienced in practice and was intended to support the development 
of a deeper understanding of their own developing pedagogy . Following the 
 ‘ Creating Alternatives ’ phase , for example , some pre-service teachers were able to 
identify new perspectives and positionings for understanding their problems of 
practice and possibilities for future teaching . By unpacking their experiences during 
RR and adopting an inquiry stance to practice , these pre-service teachers were provided with opportunities to develop what Korthagen et al .  ( 2001 ) refer to as “ small 
t ” theories ( p . 124 ) about teaching and learning . These “ Small t ” theories are examples of phronesis , or practical wisdom , which emerged as a result of analysis of 
experience and reflect personal philosophies about teaching and learning . Julie 
provided an example of the development of her “ Small t ” theory when she articulated her belief following her teaching in a multi-age classroom , that multi-age 
classrooms were inappropriate for students in their first year of formal schooling . 
In taking this learning from and about reflection further , I was challenged to ask 
of this analysis ( as Korthagen et al .  , 2001 asked of their analysis of data )  , did [ RR ] 
help pre-service teachers ? And , was there “ an unbridgeable gap between our 
[ teacher educators ] words and the students ’ experiences ?  ”  ( p . 22 )  . My response to 
this question about an “ unbridgeable gap ” is based on an examination of the way 
in which teacher educators assume their role within the reflective process . I have 
some evidence to suggest that some pre-service teachers did indeed attempt to 
either try new approaches to practice , or modify their own teaching approaches as 
a result of sharing alternatives during RR .  ( For example , Diana refers to Jan ’ s discussion during the previous Roundtable , of a student ’ s “ blank look ” and what this 
meant for her as a teacher . In the transcript of the dialogue , Diana refers to Jan and 
states that “ She [ Jan ] made me look for those little key moments ”  ( Roundtable 
Eleven , August , 2003 )  )  . 
Pre-service teachers interacted with each other during RR sessions . For example , during RR1 , there were seven episodes of sustained peer-to-peer dialogue , 
rather than teacher-to-pre-service teacher dialogue . This dialogue is defined as 
those episodes of talk without teacher educator voice or input . Perhaps then 
rather than a gap which Korthagen et al .  ( 2001 ) suggest that may exist between 
the words of the teacher educator and the experiences of the pre-service teacher , 
pre-service teachers were building bridges across issues through their dialogue 
which had emerged from their experience and which had meaning for them . This 
understanding then led me to a deeper examination of another key category which 
86 6 Roundtable Reflection
emerged as a result of the examination of the RR data and this refers to the ways 
in which I needed to re-frame my teacher educator practice within this learning 
environment . 
Re-Framing My Role as Teacher Educator
During LTM units in previous years , pre-service teachers had been recipients of my 
knowledge about teaching ; tutorial sessions were teacher educator input based and 
minimal dialogue had occurred between pre-service teachers . Consequently preservice teachers had become increasingly reliant on my input , and on my experiences , as their source of guidance and knowledge about teaching . A key change for 
me was in my conscious attempts to remain silent or less dominant in the reflective 
discourse . The analysis of the transcript of roundtable sessions suggests that , even 
within the initial stages of their introduction to RR , the frequency of pre-service 
teachers conversing directly with each other increased . Analysis of Roundtable 
One , for example , indicated that there were seven episodes of pre-service teacher 
to pre-service teacher sustained interaction ( i . e .  , verbal interactions between preservice teachers which comprised dialogue without teacher educator input ) within 
a forty-five minute period . These episodes of sustained dialogue between pre-service teachers during Roundtable sessions were notable ; the issues were raised and 
explored by pre-service teachers and hence , emerged from their own experiences as 
teachers of mathematics , not mine . 
My role during RR1 , for example , was multifaceted . Many teacher educator 
competencies are linked to specific phases of the ALACT cycle and it was within 
Phase Three ( Awareness of Essential Aspects ) that my role was instrumental in terms 
of scaffolding pre-service teacher interactions ( Palinscar , 1986 )  . My intention was 
to show empathy , confront , generalise and generally help to make the learning that 
was being discussed explicit . This is in stark contrast with my previous role of 
telling pre-service teachers what they should be thinking and doing . For example , 
in responding to Jess and her dilemma ( described above )  , I questioned her :  “ So my 
question would be , is exposure [ of concepts ] enough ?  ”  . And to help in making 
things explicit , I then synthesised the issues : 
There ’ s some interesting issues aren ’ t there ? There ’ s some assumptions that you made about 
where the kids were at ; there ’ s ,  ‘ you ’ ve been there ’ so you ’ ve seen them and you ’ ve listened 
to the teacher expectations so you had some idea of where you thought they might be . They 
weren ’ t at the point of where you thought they might have been . You thought about that at the 
time so you modified , you changed , what you were going to do ? You put your felt board away . 
Then you thought “ What am I going to do now ? I ’ m going to expose to them what I think they 
need to know ”  . So you actually stood there and you did show them . Is that right ?  
( Roundtable One , Robyn ) 
In this excerpt from the Roundtable transcript ( above )  , I synthesise the issues Jess 
had discussed with the group . This synthesis ( ALACT , Phase Three , Awareness of 
Essential Aspects ) included re-stating the issues in my attempt to make the issues 
Re-Framing My Role as Teacher Educator 87
explicit for her and for the group . A key issue that I recognised in Jess ’ s explanation 
of her problematic situation was that she had made assumptions about her students 
which had been based on her discussions with the classroom teacher and , in the 
delivery of her lesson she had been challenged to alter her plan . It was then that she 
realised she had few options and at this point , reverted to telling the students about 
the concept of subtraction . A key realisation for me in hearing Jess recount her 
thinking in this session belonged to the value of the pre-service teachers identifying 
issues emerging from their own experiences ; their experiences provided the basis 
for discussion and my reframed role included a focus on clarification , synthesis of 
issues and in this way , one who attempted to make the learning explicit . 
Interrupting Our Habitual Routines
Establishing RR sessions as a medium for deconstructing experience required an 
interruption to our habitual ways of operating as learners ( Segall , 2002 ) because the 
structure of the sessions forced us to operate in a way that not only challenged our 
routine habits but also our ( often ) taken-for-granted assumptions about the ways we 
had all previously participated in learning environments . Jill ’ s comments ( below ) 
suggest that the type of talk , the amount of talk and the content of talk became a 
focus for all during the RR sessions . This change in vocal routine ( i . e .  , from passive 
to active contributor ) is evident , for example , in Jill ’ s written reflection in which she 
identifies her initial apprehension about participating in RRs . Her participation eventually led to her identifying that through contributing to Roundtable discussions she 
was able to combine both her wants and her needs in learning about teaching .  
[ RR ] was so different to anything we had previously experienced at university … I had 
never experienced [ the format ] before . I was a little apprehensive at first about the concept 
but feel that by making a contribution we ’ ve been able to learn about things we wanted to 
learn about as well as things we needed to learn about .  
( Written reflection , Jill , 2003 ) 
In the following section , I examine in detail , an interaction with Sam ( Roundtable 
Eleven ) which exemplifies the ways in which my teacher educator routines were 
interrupted . I also examine the ways in which this particular critical interaction 
contributed to my deeper understanding of the multiple perspectives of learners , the 
value of reflection in and on practice and the ways in which we all experienced 
feelings of vulnerability in coming to know more about ourselves as learners . 
Critical Interaction with Sam
Sam was a mature age pre-service teacher completing his first year of the Bachelor 
of Education and was a frequent contributor during Roundtable sessions . In the 
88 6 Roundtable Reflection
interaction described below , Sam responds to my question posed during RR11 with 
an unanticipated response . 
Robyn : Okay now I ’ ll ask you a question about my role . Now I know this is fairly new 
to you people ; you ’ re saying you don ’ t have anything like this in other units , so 
how do you see my role ; how do you see me ? 
Sam : Annoying . Only because you are too sensitive to it on the flip side - well I reckon 
( Group gasp , laughter ) 
Robyn : No tell me because I need to know 
Sam : Well ! 
Jen : Would I do that ?  ! 
Sam : No … I think she ’ s sensitive to our situation and to the way that we learn … but 
it ’ s another to harp on it all the time to the point where I ’ m now getting out of my 
own natural field of development to keep thinking ,  “ Am I fine with this ? Yeh , I ’ m 
fine with this ”  . Like I think sometimes you [ should ] just relax and let it happen .  
( Roundtable Eleven ) 
At the time I was surprised by Sam ’ s reference to my role as “ annoying ”  . I was 
interested to know more about what he meant , so I invited him to further explain 
his thinking . I was aware during the interaction ( described above ) that I was simultaneously attempting to make sense of his comment ; respond to his comment , and 
synthesise the other pre-service teachers ’ responses . The laughter from the group 
during this exchange may have indicated surprise and / or discomfort ; surprise in 
that Sam had responded using the term “ annoying ” and discomfort in that as participants in a group discussion , we did not know how we were meant to deal with 
the response . I left the Roundtable session that day , feeling perplexed . Two days 
post this session , Sam sent me an email explaining why he had responded this way . 
He suggested that he felt he had been misinterpreted and that he did not intend to 
offend me in any way by his comment . 
I had asked the question about my role and when I received a response I had not 
anticipated , I felt challenged . The following journal entry , completed post-session , 
reflected my sentiments and represents my attempt to understand and interpret my 
interaction with Sam : 
Perspective is important . Maybe I am too passionate , zealous and this can be interpreted 
as both imposition and over-sensitivity . The flip to under-sensitivity . Keep the balance . 
Researching practice in this systematic way and scrutinising practice and implications of 
practice on learners requires intense self-investment . It means initially identifying and then 
confronting ( especially the unexpected ) with a willingness to reflect on alternatives – to 
view from other perspectives . So in asking about my role as teacher educator , for example , 
I was opening the conversation to psts [ pre-service teachers ] in anticipation that they 
would respond truthfully . 
Sam - ‘ annoying ’ … In explaining his reasoning it became clear that his impression had 
developed from a sense of frustration - of him having to constantly ask “ Am I fine with this ? 
Yeh , I am ”  . I saw this from multiple perspectives . Firstly , that Sam felt comfortable in 
expressing an opinion . This may indicate the characteristics of the environment created as 
underpinning the roundtable format . Secondly Sam was involved in what could be understood as meta-reflection : an explicit aim of this approach . By constantly asking himself 
 “ Am I fine with this ? Yeh , I am ” then the engagement in this process is ( or could be ) interpreted as reflection , hence connection . The fact that this was frustrating him is an issue for 
me . Stating the fact that there is an over-sensitivity to reflection on my behalf was an 
Interrupting Our Habitual Routines 89
insight - hadn ’ t interpreted enthusiasm as over-sensitivity . And this over-sensitivity could 
then become a learning barrier . There is professional expertise in identifying a balance .  
( Journal entry , Wednesday August 27 , 2003 ) 
Sam ’ s response to my question about my role in this learning environment 
challenged me . I had been expecting positive responses about my attempts to integrate reflection within the Learning and Teaching Mathematics units . From my 
perspective , RR provided an appropriate means by which pre-service teachers 
could reflect on their experiences and thereby identify their new learning . However , 
from Sam ’ s perspective , the reflective process was not only “ frustrating ” but my 
constant referral to reflection was “ annoying ” to him . This experience leads me to 
recognise that in many ways Roundtables had served an effective purpose ; Sam felt 
that he could voice an opinion and felt safe in doing so ; Sam was engaging in metareflection ( reflecting on reflection ) by stating his feelings he was emotionally 
engaged , as demonstrated through his response during the Roundtable . However , 
this interaction with Sam also revealed the need for me to explicitly consider other 
perspectives about aspects of learning , and about the impact ( and unintended 
effects ) of my approach to reflective practice , particularly . 
Multiple Perspectives Tasks
The interaction with Sam led me to consider other ways in which I might better 
access pre-service teacher thinking about their experiences of learning about reflection in my classes . The interaction provided a stimulus for the development of 
Multiple Perspectives Tasks ( described in Chapter 4 )  . Briefly , I designed these tasks 
as a means of eliciting multiple perceptions about events , interactions and incidents 
which occurred during Roundtable sessions . I randomly selected between two and 
four pre-service teachers and invited them each to complete a retrospective reflection on a critical interaction from the session .  ( Participation was voluntary , and in 
both cases , two pre-service teachers completed each task )  . A brief excerpt from the 
Roundtable session was provided for each pre-service teacher and they were asked 
to respond in writing to lines of the transcript about a particular incident ( chosen by 
me )  . I also completed the task . Our responses were guided by the following questions : What were you thinking at this time ?  ( i . e .  , time of the incident )  ; What did 
you want at this time ? How were you feeling ? The responses were then collated and 
analysed for meaning . The aim of this process was to elicit multiple perspectives 
and points of view about the interaction so as to enrich my understanding of a specific roundtable interaction . These insights were then individually shared with the 
pre-service teachers who had completed the multiple perspectives tasks four 
months post-session . This task was completed after the semester had concluded and 
was non-assessable . 
Table 6 . 1 presents a summary of an excerpt from the transcript of RR11 . 
90 6 Roundtable Reflection
The MPT responses were provided by Mary , Sophie and me ( all participants 
during Roundtable Eleven ) and the focus was the interaction with Sam ( described 
above )  . The table presents the excerpt from the transcription . Next are three individual responses to that section of the transcript . 
Discussion of Multiple Perspectives Task
Roundtable Eleven provided evidence to suggest that we were all confronting new 
challenges in our roles as learners . We were constantly attempting to negotiate 
boundaries and feel our way through what was being experienced during RR as 
uncharted territory . Whilst needing to be respectful of our differences , it could be 
seen that we were all seeking truthful , honest feedback to help us to move forward 
in out learning about teaching . 
Table 6 . 1 Excerpt from multiple perspectives task ( December 2003 ) 
Transcript Robyn Mary Sophie
R11 . 033 Okay now I ’ ll ask Taking a risk with My thoughts at No response
Robyn you a question the open invitation this stage were : to this 
about my role . to express opinion ; Does she really section
Now I know this anticipating a want to know of transcript . 
is fairly new to comparison with the answer
you people you ’ re past experience ; to this ? Shall
saying you don ’ t clarification of my I say what I
have anything like role ( the anticipated think or just what
this in other units , and the actual – are I think she wants
how do you see my there contradictions to hear ? 
role ; how do you in my modelling , 
see me ? delivery , practices ?  ) 
Felt I had established 
a trusting ,  
supportive 
learning 
environment . 
R11 . 034 Annoying . Only The word ‘ annoying ’ Well at least he is My thoughts 
Sam because you are – what did he mean truthful but it – Bloody 
too sensitive to it by annoying ? Was I takes courage hell Sam ,  
on the flip side – annoying him or to really say that ’ s a bit 
well I reckon was the process what you think confronting . I 
 ( Gasp , laughter annoying him and no matter how wonder how 
from the group )  . why ? Shock laughter much the tutor she will 
from the group . or lecturer tells handle it . 
I am surprised . This you so . I am 
was an instan- amazed 
taneous response . he talks so . 
Interrupting Our Habitual Routines 91
In this section , I analyse the responses from the MPT ; a task based on researching multiple perspectives associated with the critical interaction with Sam during 
Roundtable Eleven . My asking of the questions ,  “ How do you see my role , how do 
you see me ?  ” represented a risk for me as teacher educator because often feedback 
about effectiveness as a teacher educator is provided in a written ( often anonymous ) format at the completion of the teaching semester . 
Taking a risk with the open invitation to express opinion ; anticipating a comparison with 
past experience ; clarification of my role ( the anticipated and the actual ) – are there contradictions in my modeling , delivery , practices ?  
( Robyn , MPT , December 2003 ) 
My thinking here shows that I was expecting positive feedback related to my 
attempts to integrate reflective practice within the Learning and Teaching mathematics units . There was risk also for pre-service teachers as the transcript 
reveals as they were evaluating the level of risk they were willing to be exposed 
to within this environment . For example , in response to my initial question , 
Mary stated that :  “ My thoughts at this stage were : Does she really want to know 
the answer to this ? Shall I say what I think or just what I think she wants to 
hear ”  ? Mary ’ s response is interesting for a number of reasons . First , she 
expresses her questioning of my intent and responds with what has been reported 
in research on pre-service teachers as saying what the lecturer wants to hear :  
 “ Shall I say what I think or just what I think she wants to hear ”  . For Sophie , 
there was also a questioning evident when she wrote “ Bloody hell Sam , that ’ s a 
bit confronting . I wonder how she will handle it ”  . 
Mary stated : 
At least he [ Sam ] is truthful but it takes courage to really say what you think no matter how 
much the tutor or lecturer tells you so . I am amazed he talks so . What else can you say but 
your expression doesn ’ t change and I felt you really wanted the answer .  
( Mary , MPT , December 2003 ) 
The “ annoying ” remark prompted Mary to acknowledge Sam ’ s “ courage ” and to 
continue to question my intent and she suggests that as my “ expression doesn ’ t 
change ” she is now convinced that I “ really wanted the [ Sam ’ s ] answer ”  . I had not 
previously intentionally analysed the impact of my non verbal expressions within 
the learning environment , but Mary ’ s response indicated that she at least was reading my non verbal signals as a means , for example , of evaluating the authenticity 
of my request to know more about Sam ’ s response of “ annoying ”  . Pre-service 
teacher laughter as a response to Sam ’ s remark also seemed to have been interpreted as nervous laughter . For example , Sophie suggested that the laughter from 
the group represented nervousness :  “ People were feeling nervous ; I think the laughter was out of nervousness ”  . 
It was at this point that Mary also suggested that she felt Sam was beginning to 
feel uncomfortable : 
Sam was starting to feel a bit uncomfortable now realising that you really did want to know 
and that you were not just going to brush it off . I agreed with Sam at this stage and felt that 
92 6 Roundtable Reflection
often you encouraged us to discuss with each other how we felt but then there were times 
when you interrupted the conversations .  
( Mary , MPT , December 2003 ) 
The range of perspectives related to this critical roundtable interaction indicated the 
multiple ways in which the incident had been interpreted , and this led to a deeper 
understanding for me , of the views of others . It also prompted further self questioning about my ongoing challenges when introducing new practices to cohorts of 
pre-service teachers and my propensity to view this from a singular and well 
entrenched lens of questioning . For example , I asked : Was I interrupting ? Do preservice teachers feel comfortable ? Do all pre-service teachers feel they have equal 
access within this forum ? Were pre-service teachers connecting with this reflective 
format ? Sam suggested that my constant questioning forced him out of his comfort 
zone and when I read back through the transcript I recognised this and noted this in 
my MPT task : 
Good . He ’ s uncomfortable in his space - then this is connecting . I feel better - he probably 
feels worse . He seems agitated and is becoming defensive about his position . Do I need to 
let things go through to the keeper ? No , I need to challenge . If I challenge too hard , do I 
lose pre-service teacher goodwill - do they then disconnect ? How much probing is too 
much ?  
( Robyn , MPT , December 2003 ) 
Sam clearly felt that he was being constantly challenged and forced to move “ out 
of [ his ] own natural field of development ”  . My response at the time indicates that 
I was struggling with the tension between challenging pre-service teachers to 
reflect , and probing constantly which may have led at least some learners to disconnect . The realisation for me was that I needed to balance my approach when reflecting with students and become selective about what to probe , how far , with whom 
and when . 
During RR11 , and on reflection , Sam ’ s comment interrupted our ( i . e .  , mine and 
the group ’ s ) habitual ways of operating because we needed to find alternative ways 
to accommodate each others ’ needs . In so doing , discomfort was created for some . 
One outcome to emerge from this critical interaction was that learning about ourselves as learners and teachers not only exposed our vulnerabilities as learners 
( Berry , 2004a , 2007 ; Berry & Loughran , 2002 ) but revealed that reflective 
approaches such as RR could be an uncomfortable experience and required one to 
have what Finkel ( 2000 ) describes as a developing “ faith in indirection ”  ( p . 131 )  . 
In other words , we need to constantly monitor and adjust our learning and be more 
prepared to expect the unexpected ; deal with challenges and not hold preconceived 
ideas and expectations about what it means for individuals and groups to learn from 
reflection in teacher education . 
I learnt through this interaction that attending to multiple perspectives matters 
and by exploring others ’ perceptions I realised that the lens attached to understanding learning was as individual as the learner . In order for those different lenses to 
be examined , the establishment of a learning environment based on trust and support is essential . If the environment functions as one which is based on trust and 
Interrupting Our Habitual Routines 93
support then it may provoke more genuine discussion about issues faced by 
pre-service teachers / teacher educators in learning about teaching . It might be 
concluded from this data that the learning environment was under constant construction and reconstruction and as such , represented states of negotiation and flux 
for all participants . 
Summary
The idea of the RR was to help pre-service teachers to identify real problems . These 
problems were then shared and discussed and through this discussion , assumptions 
about learning and teaching mathematics were shared . My role in this practice was 
to identify and clarify these experiences and assumptions and to challenge them . 
The RR sessions became important in this process as they were intended to be 
democratic sessions which invited pre-service teacher participation and choice , and 
hence increased ownership of the reflection process . 
Challenging Assumptions as Learners
A key challenge identified as integral to improving my practice was related to 
understanding and meeting pre-service teachers ’ needs in terms of identifying and 
discussing problems . One of the ways of exploring pre-service teacher ’ s needs and 
concerns was through identifying and challenging various assumptions they held 
about teaching and learning . This was done ( as described previously ) through RR 
sessions . An additional focus for experiences which underpinned practices within 
these units was an initial identification of assumptions related to the teaching and 
learning of mathematics , followed by a revisiting of these assumptions at the conclusion of the semester . 
Assumption writing was included within the mathematics units as a means of 
identifying whether or not pre-service teachers ’ assumptions had been challenged 
and / or supported during the semester . What contexts , then , led to an exploration of 
assumptions ? And , how did the pre-service teachers respond to the supporting and / 
or challenging of taken-for-granted assumptions ? 
Each cohort was required to identify three assumptions during Week Two and 
reflect ( Written Questionnaire ) during Week Twelve , on whether their original 
assumptions had been supported and / or challenged as a result of their experiences 
throughout the semester . The following data were randomly selected from the 
cohort who completed the Mathematics Unit TJ792 during Semester One , 2004 . 
Eleven pre-service teachers ’ Week Twelve responses were tabulated and analysed . 
Initially the three assumptions from each respondent were identified , then pre-service 
teacher responses to whether their assumptions had been supported or challenged 
94 6 Roundtable Reflection
were read for themes and coded and following coding of the assumptions responses , 
five categories emerged from the data . 
The five categories related to :  ( 1 ) the affective dimension of teaching and learning mathematics ;  ( 2 ) mathematics content ;  ( 3 ) the relationship between mathematics and everyday / real-life situations ;  ( 4 ) catering for individual needs ; and ( 5 ) 
pre-service teacher beliefs about learning and teaching mathematics . The affective 
dimension was most frequently referred to in the data ( 12 / 37 or 32% of total mentions ) and I chose to examine this category particularly as it represented the most 
dominant category . Category one which reveals pre-service teachers ’ affective connections with learning and teaching mathematics and a key sub-category which 
emerged as a result of examining the written assumptions data relates to an exploration of Positive and Negative Assumptions . 
Challenging Assumptions : An Affective Experience
Analysis of the assumptions data suggests that approximately one third of pre-service 
teacher mentions ( 32% ) referred to a typically affective dimension / response when 
taken-for granted assumptions were challenged . It was interesting to note that preservice teachers , when reflecting on having their assumptions challenged , referred 
to their feelings . I did not anticipate the strength of the affective responses provided 
by some pre-service teachers in both their oral and written responses . For example , 
in the following written reflection , Sally identifies words such as feeling “ overwhelmed ” and yet similarly “ pleased ” when her assumptions are challenged . She 
states that through having her assumptions challenged she realised that there are 
multiple interpretations of events and incidents and that as a life-long learner her 
approach to understanding developing pedagogy is to gain “ different insight [ s ]  ” 
about her beliefs about learning and teaching mathematics . 
When my assumptions are challenged I feel overwhelmed at first but realise that this is 
probably a good thing as I am now putting a lot more thought into thinking ; I feel pleased 
when assumptions of mine are being challenged because it proves I am always learning , 
that I don ’ t have all the answers and when one of my assumptions was first challenged I 
felt as if I was in some way ‘ wrong ’  . But then I realised that there is no right answer and 
no right way of teaching . From this experience I have gained a different insight into what 
I believe teaching and learning maths is about .  
( Sally , Written Reflection , Semester One , 2004 ) 
The notion of challenging one ’ s assumptions could be reframed as challenging 
one ’ s ideals about teaching and perhaps roundtables provide a reflective space 
where pre-service teachers ’ professional identity is constantly being formed and 
re-formed through the challenging of their ideals . If assumptions reflect our ideals 
as learners and teachers of mathematics , then challenging assumptions may provide 
opportunities for pre-service teachers to constantly reconsider their ideals through 
Challenging Assumptions as Learners 95
the medium of assumption hunting and challenging . The individual , through systematic reflective discussion about teaching based on experience , might then be 
prompted to learn more about self through a process of self-filtering , meaning that 
they consider the actual assumption together with alternative possibilities and 
through discussion , filter to either confirm or challenge their belief . This process of 
self-filtering is evident , for example , in Anna ’ s written reflection about the way in 
which she interprets the experience of assumption challenging :  “ … rather than 
reject her [ peer Jane ’ s ] ideas totally , it made me think more about my assumptions 
to validate and justify what I believed to be right ”  ( Anna , Written Reflection , 
Semester One , 2004 )  . Anna suggests that by listening to another ’ s assumptions , she 
is encouraged to reassess her own assumption which is helpful for her as a means 
of validation or justification , rather than alteration . 
The written assumption data provided by pre-service teachers was also analysed 
in terms of whether the assumptions reflected positive and / or negative assumptions 
about learning and teaching mathematics . I now explore the ways in which assumptions were identified by pre-service teachers ; whether they reflected a positive and / 
or negative view of mathematics and whether , according to pre-service teachers , 
their assumptions had been supported or challenged . 
Written Assumptions : Positive and Negative
The nature of the affective dimension was portrayed in pre-service teacher feedback 
as being both positive and negative . Of the eleven respondents ( Week One , Semester 
One , 2004 )  , four pre-service teachers wrote three positive assumptions about the 
teaching and learning of mathematics ; three pre-service teachers identified three negative assumptions about the teaching and learning of mathematics and the remaining 
four had identified a combination of assumptions ( both positive and negative )  . 
Positive assumptions , for example , reflected a belief that mathematics should be 
both engaging and “ fun ” and in this way school students would be provided with the 
maximum opportunities for learning and “ the teacher has to enjoy maths . If the teacher 
lacks enthusiasm for the subject then they can expect the same from their students ”  
( Dan )  . Negative assumptions related , for example , to the belief that learning mathematics 
was “ boring ” for teachers and students and therefore there was a lack of engagement . 
At the conclusion of the semester , during Week Twelve , pre-service teachers 
were required to indicate whether their initial assumptions had been challenged or 
supported . It was interesting to note that all the positive assumptions the pre-service 
teachers had identified were supported and all the negative assumptions had been 
challenged . This provides some evidence to suggest that even within a relatively 
short time ( i . e .  , one semester ) certain experiences can contribute to pre-service 
teachers revaluating their assumptions as learners and teachers of mathematics . 
The primary , but not exclusive , context for this challenging and / or supporting of 
assumptions was identified as experiences of teaching in school environments . For 
example , Al wrote : 
96 6 Roundtable Reflection
When I was teaching time to grade three / four I realised that my assumptions affected my 
teaching and preparation … the students were not of the attitude “ oh no we ’ re doing maths ” 
but they were engaged , interested and constantly questioning with a buzz about a concept 
they felt important , real … this made me realise how wrong my assumptions were .  
( Al , Assumption Writing , Week Twelve , 2003 ) 
Al ’ s initial negative assumption ( that students would not be engaged with mathematics ) was challenged when he taught his time lesson in schools and he highlights 
that the students were “ engaged , interested and constantly questioning with a 
buzz ”  . The combination of identifying assumptions , teaching in schools and 
reflecting by way of revisiting written assumptions proved to be an effective means 
for Al , of learning more about the ways in which pedagogy develops . This correlates with Nicki ’ s reflection on her initial three negative assumptions written during 
Week Two ( Semester One , 2004 )  . Her three assumptions suggested that :  ( 1 ) mathematics was difficult ;  ( 2 ) mathematics was boring ; and ( 3 ) it was difficult to cover 
all the content . She stated in her Week Twelve response that all her assumptions 
had been challenged and suggested that “ maths can be made fun and creative ”  . She 
wrote : 
I had negative assumptions and I was happy when they were challenged as it opened my 
eyes and allowed me to see that maths is what you make it … New perspectives keep me 
constantly thinking . 
Conversely , Cassie initially stated three positive assumptions :  ( 1 ) teachers enjoy 
teaching maths ;  ( 2 ) maths is related to real-life ; and ( 3 ) maths is fun and engaging . 
Her written reflection states that all her assumptions were supported . She wrote : 
my maths assumptions have not changed dramatically over the course of this semester … 
students need to see the relevance of what they do in maths and how and why it will benefit 
them … this assumption has a lot to do with the feeling and wanting on behalf of both the 
teacher and the students . 
Here she refers to the importance of “ feeling and wanting ” in relation to both the [ preservice ] teacher and the students . An important issue for her is identifying some form 
of congruence or connection with the individuals within the learning environment . 
Pre-service teachers who identified a combination of assumptions - both positive 
and negative – isolated the positive assumptions and stated that they had been supported and identified the negative assumptions , suggesting they had been challenged . 
For example , Kate ’ s initial assumption was that :  ( 1 ) mathematics was boring and this 
assumption had been challenged ; her two further assumptions were positive :  ( 2 ) it 
[ mathematics ] related to real-life ; and ( 3 ) teaching mathematics is affected by teacher 
engagement . Both positive assumptions were identified as being supported as a result 
of her experiences during the semester . This may indicate that it is possible to challenge the negative assumptions which often underpin the teaching and learning of 
mathematics and hence , promote more positive attitudes and approaches through 
reflecting on teaching experience during RR sessions . Generally , it could be concluded 
from the data that positive assumptions articulated by pre-service teachers in this 
group , remained unchallenged . 
Challenging Assumptions as Learners 97
Summary : Challenging My Assumption
Altering my approach to teacher education practice , by closely integrating the teaching experience with systematic reflection , appears to have had an impact on preservice teachers ’ and teacher educator assumptions about learning about mathematics 
teaching . As one pre-service teacher commented with reference to RR :  “ it ’ s good 
because we can really play to it [ round tables ]  , because they ’ re our own problems 
they ’ re not … they ’ re not a case scenario ( James , Written Reflection , Roundtable 
One , July 2002 )  . Another student , Lia suggested ,  “ I think that I really benefited from 
the way we were required to critically analyse our beliefs ”  ( Written Reflection , 
Roundtable Twelve )  . A combination of RR and assumption writing provided opportunities for pre-service teachers to not only unpack experiences but identify their 
own underpinning assumptions about learning and teaching mathematics and discover more about the ways in which assumptions influenced learning . 
My initial assumption was that RR would provide opportunities for pre-service 
teachers to verbally deconstruct experiences in a systematic manner and in so 
doing , challenge taken-for-granted assumptions about teaching and learning mathematics and create alternatives for future practice . It seems evident from the data 
that roundtables provided opportunities for pre-service teachers to make their concerns explicit , to deconstruct experience , and to consider alternatives which might 
inform understanding and future action ( two examples of this were Jess ’ s 
Subtraction Problem , RR1 and my critical interaction with Sam , RR11 )  . 
Learning about pedagogy was integral to the sessions and several pre-service 
teachers voiced sentiments similar to the following : 
For me the roundtables were the highlight of this unit . They enabled people to voice their 
opinions , challenge assumptions and discuss concerns . The concept of the roundtable has 
been really good and would be of benefit to other classes .  
( Jane , Written reflection , Semester One , 2004 ) 
Roundtable sessions became spaces where experiences were not only unpacked , but 
pre-service teachers began to see themselves as developing professionals , conducting and owning the discourse , as Deanna noted :  “ I was finally in control of my own 
learning ”  ( Written reflection , Semester One , 2004 )  . 
Identifying who we are as learners is imperative as this seems to be prerequisite 
for potential transformation .  ( For example , when asked to respond to the question 
 “ Were you aware of your assumptions about the teaching and learning of mathematics prior to this unit ”  ? 65% of the pre-service teachers responded with “ No ”  
( Written reflection , May 2004 )  . And , in response to the question ,  “ Is it important 
to identify your assumptions ? Why / Why not ”  ?  , 95% stated “ Yes ” and identified the 
following reasons : self-understanding ; student insight , as an “ opening for critical 
thinking ”  ( Emma )  ; as a “ basis for investigation ”  ( Ursula )  ; to “ test against a baseline ”  ( Guy ) and “ to challenge assumptions ”  ( John )  . 
I conclude from my data that taken-for-granted assumptions , rather than remaining 
implicit , need to be exposed . Exposure of taken-for-granted assumptions about learning 
and teaching mathematics does not necessarily imply altered practice for pre-service 
98 6 Roundtable Reflection
teachers , and in many ways , remains unquantifiable . However , the data does provide 
some information about the ways in which the positive assumptions about teaching and 
learning mathematics were generally supported and the negative assumptions were typically challenged . This research indicates that assumptions should be identified and 
challenged within a supportive learning environment , and that RR sessions provide 
opportunities for pre-service teachers / teacher educators to do so . 
Although the focus for RR was to provide pre-service teachers with opportunities to unpack their experiences in a supportive environment , there have been multiple repercussions for me as a teacher educator . First , my initial assumption 
regarding the inherent value of Roundtables was predominantly supported as evidenced by data collected in multiple ways from pre-service teachers across cohorts . 
Second , my assumption that my role as teacher educator needed to be reframed was 
supported , although the challenges associated with reconceptualising and altering 
my practice were more confronting at times than I had anticipated . Third , my 
assumption that experience must be had ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 , phronesis ; Munby 
& Russell , 1994 , authority of experience ) in order to develop practical wisdom , was 
supported . In the next section I discuss the generative nature of Self-Study and the 
ways in which I learnt more about pedagogy by closely examining and questioning 
my practice . 
The Generative Nature of Self-Study
The interaction with Sam provided a catalyst for examining the effect of reflective 
practice on pre-service teachers and fore-grounded for me , the generative nature of SelfStudy .  ( Generative within this context is defined as knowledge derived from experience 
which contributed to my knowing .  ) As such , it related to me coming to know more as 
a teacher educator . Coming to know for me was regarded as more than teacher educator 
knowledge . Knowing implied incremental development ( Clarke & Erickson , 2004 )  ; it 
was intrinsic to my way of being and understanding ( Dalmau et al .  , 2002 )  ; it was nonstatic ; it evolved over time and was deeply influenced by exploring experience , and 
critical moments / incidents / interactions within experiences led me to extract learning 
and new knowledge . It prompted , and cast into relief , the question :  “ How am I learning 
as a teacher educator ?  ” My experiences which have been described and analysed above , 
related to the methodological features of self-study practice which according to 
Feldman et al .  ( 2004 ) should incorporate the following features : 
1 . A self-study would bring to the forefront the importance of self
2 . It would make the experience of teacher educators a resource for research
3 . It would urge those who engage in self-study to be critical of themselves and 
their roles as researchers and teacher educators ( p . 959 )  . 
The ways of knowing ( for example , the knowledge acquired as a result of my participation during Roundtable sessions ) developed over time and were the result of 
often “ messy and non-linear ” pathways ( Mitchell , 2002 , p . 252 )  . 
Challenging Assumptions as Learners 99
An important outcome of this process for me was my recognition of the generative 
nature of self-study . For example , my critical interaction with Sam became a catalyst 
for further exploration into understanding multiple perspectives of the learners . The 
development of the multiple perspectives task was a direct response to my desire to 
know more about pre-service teacher perceptions . In many ways our experiences as 
learners fore grounded the process by which our knowledge about teaching and 
learning reflected one of phronesis ; phronesis being grounded in perception and a 
 “ knowledge of concrete particulars ”  ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 , p . 25 )  . To develop 
 “ practical wisdom ”  ( p . 27 ) one must have : 
enough proper experience . For particulars only become familiar with experience , with a 
long process of perceiving , assessing situations , judging , choosing courses of action , and 
being confronted with their consequences … such insights cannot be transferred ( p . 27 )  . 
In assessing our learning as a result of RR , in particular , we were involved in a 
cyclical process of :  
( 1 ) Having an experience ( partner teaching ; RR )  
( 2 ) Identifying and assessing particular situations ( Jess , Subtraction ; Sam , 
Annoying ; Diana , Probability )  
( 3 ) Selecting courses of action ( creating alternative actions ; identifying multiple 
perspectives )  
( 4 ) Confronting consequences ( applicability in new situations )  . 
All of this was underpinned by a belief ( and evidenced in practice ) that we construct our own realities through these learning experiences and that the development of pedagogy is not based on a transfer of skills and understandings . 
Roundtable Reflection : Overview
In this chapter I have explored the ways in which RR sessions assisted in the development of pre-service teacher and teacher educator pedagogy . RR sessions enabled 
pre-service teachers to deconstruct experience , develop their understanding of 
experience and consider alternatives ; the result being that pre-service teachers were 
learning about teaching mathematics through their experiences , not mine . RR 
sessions provided a forum for a pre-service teacher inquiry approach to problem 
identification and problem solving with relation to teaching and learning about and 
from mathematics teaching . 
Further questions however , arose regarding the practice of explicating 
assumptions . One comment written by one of the pre-service teachers regarding the 
support and challenging of assumptions , provided an insight into what could be 
crucial for me as an educator – that of pre-service teacher censorship of assumptions . Dennis , in his reflection , wrote : 
100 6 Roundtable Reflection
I am surprised that my assumptions haven ’ t been challenged . I believe that I thought about 
them too long when writing them , and actually censored what I thought at the time , to 
something that might be desirable to the unit coordinator . This being said , I now believe 
these assumptions … have been challenged and changed through this unit .  
( Dennis , Written Reflection , Semester One , 2004 ) 
Dennis reveals something more about the nature of learning and the ways in which 
pre-service teachers respond to requests about identifying their own assumptions . 
While I presumed that pre-service teachers would respond with their learning in 
mind , it is obvious from Dennis ’ s response that for him , multiple expectations were 
in play as he completed this task . His audience included me as teacher educator 
( and assessor ) and him as pre-service teacher learner . His response was to initially 
filter his responses so that in essence , they would satisfy my expectations . However , 
he also indicates that even though he had censored his initial response to identifying 
his assumptions , they had still been “ challenged and changed ” through his participation in the unit . Although this statement was not representative of the data presented and analysed in this chapter , it suggested caution for me in what way , and 
raised questions for me such as : What impact did RR and Assumption Writing as 
assessment tasks have on the authenticity of the data ? How much thinking time is 
too much thinking time in terms of pre-service teachers responding to questions 
about assumptions ? 
A key outcome for me of closely examining RR and assumption data became a 
growth in my understanding about the ways in which conducting research on teaching ( when the teacher is also the researcher ) creates an ongoing need to recognise 
incidents and respond to data through reflection in and on practice ( Brandenburg , 
2005a )  , thus continually leading to new and richer questions about the nature of 
learning from reflection in and on practice . 
Roundtable Reflection : Overview 101
Chapter 7
Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing 
Silence and Reconstructing Self
Assumption Three : Pre-service Teachers Maximise Learning 
Opportunities by Participating Verbally in Roundtable 
Reflection Discourse
This chapter examines a third assumption which reflects my belief that pre-service 
teachers who contributed verbally to the reflective discourse would be maximising their learning opportunities . This third assumption frames the analysis in 
this chapter . The process of examining this assumption began with my recognition of , and curiosity about , the role of dominant voices during Roundtable 
Reflection sessions . I begin with a brief summary of the literature related to the 
ways in which silence has been conceptualised in teacher education . This is followed by an examination of the theme of silence as it emerged in my practice and 
the ways in which silence was recognised , experienced and interpreted by the 
pre-service teachers / teacher educator . The examination of silence and of that 
which remains unsaid explicates more about the ( re ) construction of self as a 
teacher educator and raises questions about how an increased awareness of 
silence can influence our awareness of all learners and contribute to new ways of 
being a teacher educator . 
Understanding Silence
The only wise one , is the one who understands silence ( Erik Gustaf Geijer , 1840 , 
cited by Alerby & Elidottir , 2003 , p . 41 ) 
It seems almost ironic that to understand more about learning and teaching 
mathematics , which I considered to be a predominantly verbal and interactive 
endeavour , I needed to identify and explore that which remained unsaid . Throughout 
the conduct of this self-study , silence emerged as an issue of interest because of its 
pervasiveness in my mathematics classrooms . It was initially my concern with 
dominant voices during forum discussions and Roundtable Reflection sessions 
which led to a deeper exploration of silence , and that which remained unsaid . 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 103
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008
Learning about ourselves as learners can often be found in the unsaid . As Brown 
and Coupland ( 2005 ) suggest , silence within organisations is a “ phenomenon that 
has been largely overlooked by conventional analysis of organisations which focus 
on them as sites characterised by talk ( polyphony ) rather than its absence ”  ( p . 2 )  . 
Studies related to silence have included research about how particular cultural 
groups utilise silence ( Plank , 1994 )  ; discourse processes which have focused on 
turn-taking and on temporal dynamics , and alternative approaches , such as silencing being :  “ accomplished through processes of social space … [ whereby ] participants position themselves and others such that they are more or less privileged or 
silenced ”  ( Leander , 2002 , p . 194 )  . There are also case studies of classroom teachers 
who , through narrative , explore / examine the ways in which voice as a teacher is 
found ( Gitlin & Russell , 1994 )  . Alerby & Elidottir ( 2003 ) suggest that silence can 
be explained by representing it as “ internal silence ” and “ oppressed silence ”  ( p . 49 ) 
in which the internal silence is private and a space where , through reflection , 
knowledge and meaning making take place . Oppressed silence , on the other hand , 
relates to force and minimises opportunities for voice , and in this respect , the political / power dimension of silencing is acknowledged ( Freire , 1970 )  . Van Manen 
( 1990 ) speaks of three categories of silence :  ( 1 ) literal ;  ( 2 ) epistemological ; and ( 3 ) 
ontological . Literal silence refers to the “ absence of speaking ”  ( p . 112 ) and within 
this space a qualitative judgment is made that in this instance , it is more effective 
to remain silent , to “ leave things unsaid ”  ( p . 113 )  . Epistemological silence is the 
silence created when we face the “ unspeakable ”  ( see also , Polanyi , 1958 )  ; this 
being a state where there is a “ rich domain of the unspeakable that constantly beckons us ”  ( p . 113 ) and that oftentimes , what may be unspeakable at that moment , 
may :  “ be captured … in language the next moment ”  ( p . 114 )  . The third category , 
ontological silence , is the :  “ silence of Being or Life itself ”  ( p . 114 ) which states that 
at some point , we always return to silence ( see Dauenhaeur , 1980 )  . Leander ( 2002 ) 
suggests that there are three categories of research which provide a useful framework for understanding silence : the first is concerned with the documentation that 
silence / ing occurs ; the second category refers to how silencing occurs and the third 
category explores why . 
However , although the concept of silence has been referred to in the educational 
literature ( for example , van Manen , 1990 ) it remains largely under-considered and 
under-theorised in terms of the way it impacts on the day-to-day realities of teacher 
education classrooms . 
My research in this self-study was underpinned by examining the ways in which 
silence was recognised , enacted and interpreted in my mathematics classroom and 
as such , was a result of my curiosity about how dominant voices contributed to 
classroom discussions and particularly reflective discourse . Following an analysis 
of what was said during these sessions , I became more curious as to what remained 
unsaid , and why this might be so . In seeking to find out more with respect to that 
which remained unsaid , I was guided by the following questions : Do pre-service 
teachers elect to remain silent or is this silence imposed ? Would the roundtable 
approach to reflecting on learning alienate learners and therefore provide a barrier 
for some ? Were pre-service teachers engaged , yet silent ? How would dominance be 
104 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
perceived by pre-service teachers ? And , what was my role as teacher educator in 
managing silence ? My discussion and analysis of the data in this chapter has been 
based on Segall ’ s ( 2002 ) belief that our “ ways of being are dependent , in part , on 
student teachers ’ ways of becoming as they go through and are constructed by the 
apparatus of teacher education ”  ( p . 7 )  . Examining silence reveals deeper understandings about the complex nature of participation and learning in teacher education classrooms . 
Assumptions Underpinning Verbal Classroom Interactions
One of my key assumptions underpinning Roundtable Reflection was that pre-service teachers who were verbally engaged in the reflective discourse would be maximising their opportunities for learning . My colleague and I had numerous 
conversations regarding pre-service teacher inclusion as represented by engagement with the discourse and , in creating this reflective environment , it was imperative ( for us ) that all learners were provided with an opportunity to voice an opinion ; 
to verbally engage . These assumptions had perhaps been based on our enculturation 
as teachers . With reference to teaching , classrooms are primarily represented as 
places where learning is based on dialogue and verbal interactions and these verbal 
interactions are often represented by teacher questions and student answers . In this 
way by interacting in a verbal manner , teachers can make judgments about learners , 
the knowledge being constructed and hence , the learning . Therefore when teaching , 
a lack of ( verbal ) participation / interaction became significant for me , as I believed 
that it consequently minimised the development of the learner ’ s understanding and 
therefore , that which could be measured , judged and acknowledged . On the other 
hand , pre-service teachers who were verbally engaged in the reflective discourse 
would not only be maximising their opportunities for learning , but provide learning 
indicators for the teacher educator . The following journal entry reflected an early 
( in the study ) concern of mine related to “ conversational fringe dwellers ” and of 
my own and my colleague ’ s direct efforts to encourage pre-service teacher voice 
and hence , we anticipated , ownership of the discourse : 
We have both [ colleague ] commented on the willingness of students to participate in discussions and we have been aware of the ‘ conversation fringe dwellers ’ - will make efforts 
to include , so that all students have a voice and ownership of the process .  
( Robyn , Journal entry , July 2002 ) 
Graeme ( pseudonym )  , my colleague , suggested that :  “ I still believe that those who 
verbally contribute gain more from these roundtable sessions ”  ( Personal email 
communication , July 2003 ) and again later ,  “ I do feel that the ones who choose to 
contribute do gain more than the ones who are more reserved ”  ( Personal email 
communication , January 2004 )  . Our orientations as teacher educators reflected a 
strong belief in , and commitment to , encouraging learners to engage verbally in 
classroom discourse as a means of facilitating their learning about teaching . 
Understanding Silence 105
The Search for Silence
Just as pre-service teachers were challenged to begin rewriting their own script 
about what it might mean to participate in learning about teaching through their 
experiences in the Learning and Teaching Mathematics unit , so too was I as their 
mathematics teacher educator . The notion of teacher educators scripting and 
rescripting their roles is well supported in the teacher education literature ( Russell 
& Korthagen , 1995 ; Loughran & Russell , 1997 ; Mueller , 2003 ; Berry , 2004a , b )  . 
Accounts of teacher educators ’ induction into , and learning about their role commonly refer to a trial and error approach to the development of pedagogy . As 
Hamilton suggested , for her , there were :  “ no class [ es ] at the university [ that ] discussed the process of becoming a teacher educator ”  ( Guilfoyle et al .  , 1995 , p . 40 )  . 
For me , learning about teaching about teaching came through my experiences of 
teaching at university , and led me to see changes that I needed to make : changes 
that moved beyond simple external measures such as modifying the curriculum , but 
instead , required an intrinsically different way of understanding and approaching 
my practice . One of those changes related to the way I understood classroom 
discourse . 
My initial challenge in examining the verbal / silent continuum was to consciously acknowledge the presence of silence in my mathematics classroom . As 
Brown and Coupland ( 2005 ) have suggested , members of professional organisations [ including teacher education ]  , can be seduced by the polyphony of talk . 
Although I was aware that silence did permeate my classroom , I had not considered 
the ways in which this silent space was being constantly ( re ) constructed by preservice teachers . In conjunction with noticing and acknowledging silence and the 
silent , I felt compelled to examine the implications of silence as choice , and to 
modify my practice so that the learning environment represented inclusive , rather 
than exclusive practices , so that those who were choosing silence might be more 
equitably accommodated . For me this entailed learning how to remain silent or at 
least less vocal , so as to provide opportunities for pre-service teachers to voice their 
opinions and challenge their taken-for-granted assumptions and practices . It also 
involved my listening much more carefully to the silences that occurred within a 
session in order to better understand their meaning and so that I might respond 
more sensitively to them . My experiences of learning about silence are explained 
in the remainder of this chapter . The primary source of data relates to excerpts from 
two Roundtable reflection sessions which made explicit reference to silence . In 
conjunction with the excerpts from Roundtable transcripts , related data sources 
analysed in this chapter include : pre-service teacher written reflections ( Critical 
Incident Questionnaires : CIQ , completed in May 2004 )  ; teacher educator journal 
entries ; and , the Multiple Perspectives Task ( MPT ) which was completed by the 
teacher educator and two pre-service teachers ( who were Roundtable participants ) 
four months post roundtable session ( December 2004 )  . 
The Multiple Perspectives Tasks ( MPT , described in Chapter 4 ) and the CIQs 
enabled me to gain access to multiple viewpoints . The use of multiple sources was 
106 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
important for my analysis as I acknowledged that , for example , any explicit asking 
about experience , understanding and enactment of silence during Roundtable sessions might be confronting for some pre-service teachers and as such , silence them 
as contributors . References to written reflections and the MPT throughout this discussion highlighted those pre-service teacher voices . 
Examination of the Data : Learning About Silence
A focus on learning about silence in my mathematics classroom emerged as a result 
of researching my practice . I did not initially seek to examine silence , per se , but 
rather my awareness of its presence prompted my curiosity to further investigate its 
enactment and effects . Therefore , although the analysis presented in this chapter 
reflects a somewhat structured and sequential analysis of the way I now understand 
silence , this does not reflect that fact that my learning about silence gradually 
unfolded over time . Reflecting in retrospect has enabled me to clarify some specific 
impacts of silence and the multiple ways in which it was enacted in my mathematics classrooms . 
I was able to identify four key categories from the examination of the multiple 
data sources related to silence , as it was experienced within my teacher education 
classroom . These categories included :  ( 1 ) Explicit Teacher Educator Questioning 
about Silence ;  ( 2 ) Responses by Pre-service Teachers about Silence ;  ( 3 ) Learning 
Styles ;  ( including two sub-categories ,  ( a ) Silence as Active Resistance ; and ( b ) 
Choice ; and ( 4 )  ( Re ) developing Identity . Each of these categories represented a 
specific focus on the ways in which silence was experienced and interpreted by 
both pre-service mathematics teachers and me . 
Explicit Teacher Educator Questioning About Silence
My desire to understand the silent and less vocal contributors to verbal discussions 
arose as a result of my questioning the more dominant contributors during Roundtable 
Reflection sessions . My initial prompt occurred as a result of transcribing the audiotape of the first Roundtable Reflection session , conducted during July , 2002 . 
Examination of this transcript revealed that of the twenty-four participants , twelve had 
verbally contributed to the dialogue and of that twelve , three were identified as dominant voices ( dominant voice in this context refers to one which contributes both in 
terms of amount of talk and frequency of talk during reflection sessions )  . Although 
there was not a predetermined number of contributions per se which then became the 
threshold for identifying a dominant voice , the definition included a combination of 
traits which were evident during roundtable sessions . These traits included an eagerness to share experiences within the group ; a willingness to contribute suggestions ; 
The Search for Silence 107
as well as ( at least ) several contributions to the total talk in the sessions . Given these 
criteria , I too , represented a dominant voice within this group . Whilst at the time , I was 
more than satisfied with the progress of the discussion , in retrospect I have come to 
recognise that , my feelings of satisfaction at the time may have been linked to a sense 
of relief that the pre-service teachers had indeed participated in something which was 
new and challenging ( i . e .  , roundtables ) hence I was less aware of who or how many 
were contributing compared with my concern for the approach itself , working . 
As I became more familiar with the approach during the following year with 
each subsequent cohort , I began to notice similar patterns of talk in terms of preservice teacher verbal / non-verbal interaction during RR sessions . As a result of my 
growing ability to identify patterns of verbal behaviour during RR sessions , one 
year later I explicitly questioned pre-service teachers during RR11 and RR12 about 
the ways in which for them , silence was both experienced and interpreted . 
Silence is Perplexing
As I began to examine the data more closely I could see that I was developing a 
strong interest in the notion of silence and that I pursued this interest more and 
more explicitly with pre-service teachers . In fact , I came to see silence as perplexing . An examination of the comparative data from the Roundtable transcripts indicated that for this part of the Roundtable session , questions about silence and the 
silences themselves had remained perplexing for me . This perplexity was evident 
through not only my explicit questioning , but also by the total number of questions 
I asked related to exploring silence ( R11 , twelve questions ; R12 , five questions , 
Appendix 5 )  . For example , during RR11 , I asked three introductory and consecutive questions related specifically to exploring the meaning of silence :  “ So do you 
learn from listening and participating in a group ?  ”  ;  “ Now I ’ m aware that some 
people didn ’ t make a comment in that roundtable , but I want to know what the 
silence means ?  ”  ;  “ I ’ ve made some assumptions , but I want to know what that silence 
means ?  ”  ( Robyn , R11 )  . Eight lines later , a further question :  “ What about those that 
aren ’ t verbal . Can I put them on the spot ?  ”  ( Robyn , R11 )  . Similar explicit questions 
regarding silence were asked during R12 :  “ What does silence in a group like this 
mean ?  ”  ( Robyn , R12 )  . During RR11 , twelve teacher educator questions were asked 
about silence , which may indicate , by sheer numbers alone , that although the 
Roundtables were established to encourage pre-service teacher reflective discourse , 
the reality was that the agenda had been determined and based on my explicit 
exploration of silence , because of its perplexing nature for me . 
My desire to understand silence was also evident when , as an aspect of the written Multiple Perspectives Task ( MPT , completed by two first year pre-service 
teachers in December 2004 ) I asked pre-service teachers to specifically address the 
following questions :  “ I noticed that you were almost silent during this discussion . 
Why ?  ” And ,  “ Do you learn when not verbally participating ? Do you think others 
learn when not [ verbally ] participating ?  ”  ( MPT , December 2004 )  . 
108 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
Clearly , then , the meaning of silence had remained puzzling for me , evidenced 
by my explicit questioning about it , specifically during RR sessions . This ongoing 
questioning indicated more than a curiosity or inquiry ; it indicated a desire to understand more about how the different episodes of silences were being constructed and 
interpreted . I was concerned to know : Did pre-service teacher constructions and 
interpretations correlate with my understandings as teacher educator ? How could I 
monitor , assess and judge the effectiveness of roundtable reflection , and the assumed 
subsequent learning , if some pre-service teachers chose not to participate in the verbal discourse ? And if knowledge is socially constructed through interaction , are 
those who choose not to interact verbally , not constructing knowledge ? These questions underpinned the focus on exploring the silences and it was through reflection 
on the pre-service teachers ’ responses that my deeper understanding related to these 
questions of how silences were being constructed and interpreted emerged . 
The previous category ( Explicit Teacher Educator Questioning about Silence ) 
highlighted for me the ways in which I had identified silence in my teacher education 
classroom and the ways in which I was attempting to understand more about what 
silence meant in terms of my teaching and pre-service teacher learning . One key way 
I gained a deeper insight into silence was through explicit questioning during RR 
sessions Eleven and Twelve . The second category in my discussion relates to preservice teacher responses to my questions about silence and in this way , illuminates 
the ways in which pre-service teachers understood silence during RR sessions . 
Pre-service Teachers ’ Responses About Silence
During both Roundtables Eleven and Twelve , twelve instances of talk were directly 
related to a consideration and explanation of what silence might indicate during 
classroom discussions . Pre-service teacher responses to questions combined with 
the data from CIQs , written reflections and the MPT indicated there were five key 
reasons for pre-service teacher silence : 
1 . Fear
2 . Flow and pace of the conversation
3 . Waiting
4 . Contemplation
5 . Nothing to contribute . 
Fear
One explanation provided by pre-service teachers for not verbalising their thoughts 
during RR sessions was identified as fear of being “ wrong ”  . As one pre-service 
teacher wrote ,  “ they ’ re [ pre-service teachers ] are frightened they could be wrong ” 
The Search for Silence 109 
( Gen , R12 )  . This sentiment was also reflected by another pre-service teacher , 
Christie , who stated that although she found the session helpful , she was also 
daunted by the thought of contributing to the group discussion :  “ I found the session 
helpful and interesting but I found the group a bit daunting to talk in front of ”  
( Christie , CIQ , May 2004 )  . Other pre-service teachers also identified that they 
monitored their contributions to discussions as they were afraid that they could be 
wrong or that they felt daunted simply by the thought of contributing to 
discussions . 
Flow and Pace of the Conversation
The second explanation identified by pre-service teachers referred to the flow and 
pace of the conversation and refers to the ways in which the combination of flow 
and pace in conversations can preclude verbal involvement in the conversation as 
the possible contribution becomes irrelevant once the ‘ moment ’ has passed . Lin 
expresses this dilemma , as she experienced it , in the following way :  “ it ’ s just that 
every time sort of I go to put something in , the conversation … changes and you 
move away so it sort of becomes irrelevant pretty quick ”  ( Lin , R11 )  . The reference 
to pace and missing the moment is mentioned by Hannah who states ,  “ sometimes 
you get off track and then it gets too late ”  ( Hannah , R12 )  . For these and some other 
pre-service teachers , the pace of the conversation became a limiting factor when 
attempting to engage in verbal discussions so that by the time they were prepared 
to contribute , the conversation had moved onto another topic . 
Waiting
A further reason provided by pre-service teachers about why they remained silent 
during discussions was that they were ‘ waiting ’  . Waiting occurred for several different reasons . For example , a pre-service teacher may wait without intention to 
contribute ; it may mean that there is an intention to contribute but that an opportune 
moment has not yet arisen ; or it may mean that a pre-service teacher is holding 
back , waiting for the first contribution before s / he speaks . Joe describes silence as 
a space where one is waiting for another to “ jump in ” and contribute to the conversation :  “ it [ silence ] can mean you are waiting for someone to jump in ”  ( Joe , R12 )  . 
Joe ’ s response indicates for me , that there may be multiple interpretations of what 
it means to “ wait ” as a pre-service teacher involved in RR sessions . From Joe ’ s 
response I can only infer what I think his intentions may have been but considering 
he used the word “ can ”  , he may be suggesting that this (  “ waiting for someone to 
jump in ”  ) is only one possible explanation of silence . The latter notion of the first 
contribution or as many would understand , the ice-breaker comment , was raised in 
a recent RR session ( 2005 ) whereby pre-service teachers suggested that they 
110 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
specifically waited for another pre-service teacher to contribute the first comment , 
as a means of establishing whether their thinking was “ on the right track ”  ( Sam , RR 
session , May 2005 )  . Pre-service teachers would then evaluate whether they would 
then contribute to the discussion or , in some cases , feel disappointed and withdraw , 
because someone else had “ stolen their thunder ”  ( Jen , RR session , May 2005 ) by 
saying what they had intended . 
Discussing silence in this way with each cohort of pre-service teachers raised 
awareness for us all that oftentimes , more is happening in what we do not hear than 
we may have previously realised as teachers and learners within this context . 
Contemplation
A further explanation provided by pre-service teachers in response to the questions 
about what silence may indicate was the recognition and acknowledgement that silent 
spaces were times of contemplation . Jim suggests that some pre-service teachers may 
need to have both physical distance and more time in order to contemplate what has 
been discussed during RR sessions . Jim states :  “ they might not want to express [ their 
ideas ]  ; they want to go away and think about it ”  ( Jim , R12 )  . Jim ’ s suggestions also 
correlate closely with the reflections provided by Justin ( pre-service teacher , 2004 )  . 
When reflecting on the RR session in his MPT , he stated that he : 
tuned out of what was happening after this comment , because my own thoughts were 
focused on this remark . The roundtable format allowed me to sit in the shadows and have 
this time to think to myself .  
( Justin , R15 , December 2004 ) 
Contemplation through “ tune-out ” was an important practice for Justin . In this 
sense then , the tuning out and the opportunity to “ sit in the shadows ” might suggest 
that this inner thinking might be indicative of a deeper personal exploration of the 
learning associated with his experience . 
Nothing to Contribute
Pre-service teachers also suggest that at times , their silence was because they felt 
they did not have anything to contribute to a discussion . In the following statement , 
Don justifies his silence by stating that rather than not understanding the content or 
experience being discussed , he had nothing to say :  “ …you don ’ t always have something to talk about . You might just sit there . You can still … understand what ’ s 
going on … but you just don ’ t have anything to contribute to that class … you know 
you haven ’ t had that happen to you at school ”  ( Don , R11 )  . Don ’ s comment suggests 
that if the experience discussed connected way in some way with his own experiences , then he may be more likely to contribute . 
The Search for Silence 111
The pre-service teacher responses discussed above , indicate that the silence 
experienced in the roundtable sessions was more than Literal Silence ( van Manen , 
1990 , p . 112 )  . It was more than a void , emptiness or an absence of speaking . It was 
clear that the silent space was rich ( in terms of what was happening ) and actively 
constructed by pre-service teachers . Pre-service teachers ’ responses referred to an 
activity within the silence ; that of multiple layers of constant ( re ) construction by 
individuals in multiple ways . Rather than being identified as a deficit or disengaged 
space , there was both more and less happening than I / we had expected . 
This knowledge of the multiple meanings of silence then led to an examination 
and deeper understanding of the complex nature and impact of individual learning 
styles within the reflective practice discourse . With reference to my assumption that 
pre-service teachers who contribute to the verbal discourse would be maximising 
their learning opportunities , my analysis also reveals more about the ways in which 
dominant / less verbally dominant contributors were accepted by their peers . It suggested that from some pre-service teachers , dominance was accepted and acceptable ; from others , it was tolerated . For example , those less vocal contributors to 
discussions suggested that dominant voices were essential to group dynamics as 
they often instigated the talk , and maintained the flow of conversation . Conversely , 
the dominant voices indicated that less vocal pre-service teachers should be catered 
for in that they have a different learning style , and that their personal expectations 
regarding RR sessions should be accommodated . In the following section I examine 
Learning Styles , the third category . This category examines the ways in which preservice teacher learning styles reflected the ways in which pre-service teachers 
contributed to RR sessions . 
Learning Styles
Pre-service teachers preferred learning styles affected the ways in which they ultimately contributed to RR sessions . Pre-service teachers in my study suggest that 
not only was the group differentiated by their variety of learning styles but that this 
difference in learning style should be accommodated within the roundtable reflective structure . Pre-service teachers also provided evidence to suggest that different 
learning styles were acknowledged and accepted by pre-service teachers as an integral part of group dynamics . For example , one pre-service teacher acknowledged 
that a formal and structured roundtable approach “ plays to peoples ’ strengths ”  
( Richard , R11 ) and another commented “ whether people are talkative or not , that 
still helps the learning ”  ( Emma , R11 )  . Yet another suggested that the structure , by 
its “ cozier ”  ( Jess , R12 ) nature provided a “ more comfortable ”  ( Jess , R12 ) environment for those who were really quiet as they still had “ an opportunity to say things 
and they ’ re not going to worry ”  ( Jess , R12 )  . 
In a number of verbal and written responses , pre-service teachers who themselves were less vocal , elaborated their reasoning for their stance . For example , 
Adam spoke of what happens for him in terms of the ideas “ bubbling around ” and 
112 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
he stated that “ although I may not say a lot I think I ’ ve got a lot of ideas bubbling 
around in my head and still like when Sophia talks and when other people talk I 
still think ‘ Oh yeah that was like something I had an experience with ’  ”  ( Adam , 
R11 )  . Adam refered to Sophia ( a dominant contributor ) and suggested that by listening , he was able to link others ’ experiences with his experiences in similar situations . 
Justin , in his MPT response indicated that he was naturally a “ less vocal learner ,  
[ and ] from a personal viewpoint , I know that I continue to learn when not verbally 
participating . Sometimes I feel that I learn more by listening as opposed to trying 
to have a say myself ”  ( Justin , Written reflection MPT , December 2004 )  . Learning 
through listening challenged me to further consider the complexity of learning by 
coming to understand more about the ways in which listeners learn . For example , 
a number of pre-service teachers mentioned that they were learning , and making 
sense of their own experiences , by listening to others . In the following comment , 
Linley explained this connection explicitly and described her abstract learning 
process , beginning with an initial response of pondering alternatives for them [ preservice teachers ] in their situation :  “ I immediately think what else they could have 
done … but it means that when other people share what they have done in certain 
circumstances then I can remember those and … all these things pop into my head 
… so I am learning from other people ’ s experience in that I can adjust those to my 
situation ”  ( Linley , Written reflection , R11 )  . Adam , Justin and Linley stated that 
their preference for learning about teaching and learning was primarily though 
listening to experiences raised by their peers during RR sessions . 
Dee , a dominant contributor during RR sessions displayed her obvious curiosity 
about the multiple learning styles of her peers which were represented within these 
sessions :  “ I ’ m sure it ’ s true that each individual learns in their own way . I ’ m in awe 
of those students who are so internally motivated that they can listen and rarely 
comment or question aloud ”  ( MPT , December 2004 )  . Dee recognised her own preferred learning style ( being a vocal contributor to reflective discourse )  . She not 
only acknowledged the preferred learning styles of other members of the group but 
stated that she was “ in awe ” of internally motivated pre-service teachers who could 
self monitor to the point where they did not contribute . This response may indicate 
a tension that Dee felt about her own contributions to verbal discourse . On the one 
hand , she disclosed that she needed to talk but on the other hand , she considered an 
alternative , i . e .  , to be less dominant . But this is one alternative she struggled with 
in her practice .  ( In the following section I describe in detail one of Dee ’ s dominant 
RR interactions and her attempts to remain less dominant as a result of what she 
considers to be her guilt she experienced when dominating both the time and the 
content of the discussion during R15 )  . 
Although my data suggests that different individuals displayed a propensity for 
a particular style of verbal contribution ( verbal , less verbal , silent ) these styles were 
also fluid and contextually influenced in that , in particular situations , atypical contributions created surprise for members of the roundtable sessions . This atypical 
contribution was evident from Trent ’ s written response when he stated ,  “ a friend of 
mine was unusually vocal in asking questions and giving comments and what he 
had to say was really clever . It actually surprised me ”  ( Trent , CIQ , May 2004 )  . This 
The Search for Silence 113
sense of surprise is again evident in Chele ’ s response where she wrote about her 
own behaviour , and “ how talkative I was first thing in the morning and that maybe 
it was because no-one else seemed to say much ?  ”  ( CIQ , May 2004 )  . Chele ’ s 
response raises yet another issue for me in learning more about not only what 
silence might represent , but what some forms of talk during roundtable sessions 
might indicate . Some pre-service teachers may have an aversion to silence and 
therefore a natural response within this situation is to talk to fill the space , as it 
were . There was an expectation that discussion would underpin the RR process and 
when talk did not readily eventuate , some pre-service teachers filled the void with 
talk . This may have been the result of feeling uncomfortable in the silence , the 
result being talk for talk ’ s sake , rather than being prompted by genuine need to 
establish a genuine concern or to contribute to the content of the conversation . 
Chele provided further insight into her motivation to talk when she suggested that 
she even surprised herself with regards to her input “ first thing in the morning ” and 
her prompt was that her peers , at this early stage , were not inclined to say much . 
Just as the less verbal members of the group were acknowledged within the RR 
sessions , so too it seems were the more dominant voices . Some pre-service teachers 
suggested that having dominant voices was essential as “ they stimulate [ d ] conversation and discussion ”  ( Mary , R11 )  , and although others recognised these more 
dominant contributors clearly “ felt confident in sharing their experiences ”  ( Jim , 
R12 )  , it was also suggested by one pre-service teacher that not contributing to the 
discourse did not “ necessarily mean that other people [ hadn ’ t ] had equally as 
important experiences ”  ( Amy , R12 )  . 
Within the RR context dominant voices were both group and self-identified . For 
example , Maria , as a member of the group comments that she appreciates the way 
in which the dominant contributors can self regulate and therefore be explicit about 
the way that they operate within a conversation , by suggesting that they can , if need 
be , refrain :  “ It ’ s good if you ’ ve got someone like Sophia who will talk but [ who ] 
will also say “ you know I don ’ t have to talk because sometimes you get those people who just talk , talk , talk and other people can ’ t get a word in ”  ”  ( Maria , R11 )  . The 
dominant contributors also self-identified their propensity to dominate and humorously stated that :  “ I ’ ll shut up now !  ”  ( Mary , R12 ) and “ we have another problem 
though , we can ’ t shut up !  ”  ( Sophia , R11 )  . 
Some pre-service teachers were able to explain their vocal contributions in terms 
of their needs as learners . For example , Emily recognises that for her , talking was a 
way of thinking :  “ I verbalise it [ my thinking ] like I have a verbal concept map and like 
that ’ s how I put all my concepts out and as I ’ m saying them and I catch them back 
sort of thing ”  ( Emily , R12 )  . Emily identifies her verbalising as a reflexive approach 
to understanding her learning ; i . e .  , verbalising helped her to consolidate her understandings . Dee was also able to articulate that her way of processing her thinking was 
through talking as well as listening . She commented :  “ I learn best when communicating . Talking and listening allows my head to clear of everything else – space is made 
and I can grasp things ”  ( MPT , December 2004 )  . Both Emily and Dee ’ s comments 
make reference to making their thinking explicit which then clears a space for a reentry into the conversation or as a way of grasping a new idea . 
114 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
My examination of the data revealed that Silence can be seen as Active 
Resistance . Dee , a dominant ( and eventually self-regulated voice ) monitored her 
vocal contributions following a RR session where her teaching problem had dominated not only the content of the session , but also the time . 
Silence as Active Resistance
It was interesting for me to note that some dominant individuals either imposed 
self-control or were silenced , and this became obvious at times during RR sessions 
by the lack of group response and verbal interaction . The group response could be 
interpreted as an “ active silence ”  ( see , for example , Brown & Coupland , 2005 ) in 
that it indicated that something intentional was happening in the silent spaces . Preservice teachers ’ lack of responses to Dee ’ s questioning provided an example of 
silence as being represented by an active resistance . 
During Roundtable 15 , Dee discussed an issue she had experienced with a Year 
Eight male student who had refused to complete Place Value mathematics activities at his desk ; instead he chose to complete the task on the floor , under the desk . 
Dee asked questions of her peers at the RR session about their response to this 
incident and the pre-service teachers generally remained silent . Some examples of 
her questions to the group included :  “ Whose problem is it ?  ”  [ referring to moderating student behaviour ]  ;  “ Am I at the beginning of chaos , the middle or the end ?  ” 
and “ How do I get my brain to work on all these areas ?  ”  . The lack of pre-service 
teacher response to her questions caused a degree of frustration for her as she 
expressed later , in her MPT : 
It ’ s me again , stating something different at the discussion table . Real problem here but 
unsure if my peers relate or even care about this issue . Desperate for the quiet people at 
the table to share , give me something in return . Two other students talk over the top , others 
looking down , and two very encouraging . Oh well , I ’ ll keep going and see what happens 
( bit of a risk- feeling a little nervous )  . Ahhhh am I revealing too much of my own vulnerability as a PST [ pre-service teacher ]  ?  
( Dee , MPT , December 2004 ) 
It seems from this comment that Dee was anticipating some verbal response to her 
questions , and was keen for contributions from those less vocal members , but 
received only minimal feedback . In spite of this lack of feedback , she continued 
sharing her problem , even though she was feeling vulnerable . 
Stating the obvious , I might shut-up now . Another female giving me body language suggesting she ’ s bored . I look to a quiet student who I know is interested in this topic , but he 
won ’ t meet my eye , instead stares at his desk . I know from previous chats he ’ s got heaps 
to offer .  
( Dee , MPT , December 2004 ) 
As Dee reconsidered her verbal input into the RR session through her MPT 
response she also considered the effect of pre-service teachers ’ body language . She 
The Search for Silence 115
identified a female pre-service teacher who , by her actions suggested she was 
 “ bored ”  . Dee turned to another quiet pre-service teacher hoping to receive feedback 
but he did not “ meet [ her ] eye ”  . These two gestures prompted Dee to then alter her 
actions , which meant that for her , she would only contribute once in the next RR 
session and then refrain from speaking . 
This example of the effect of non verbal interaction concurs with research conducted by Swann ( 1988 ) who suggests that teachers and students powerfully use 
nonverbal communication ( eye-gaze , gesture , posture ) as silencing strategies .  ( The 
impact of nonverbal communication and gestures was also highlighted by pre-service teachers during RR sessions ; for example , Chapter 6 , Interaction with Sam )  . In 
this case , the pre-service teachers appear to be silencing Dee in a conscious and 
active way . Clearly she had experienced some discomfort throughout the session , 
as a result of the responses she received . Her reflection post-session , suggested that 
this caused her to later feel some guilt regarding her domination of both time and 
content during R15 . She wrote : 
After I left uni [ versity ] that day I spent some time reflecting on the RT [ Roundtable ] discussion . Although I felt passionate about the discussion and remained convicted ( sic ) in my 
beliefs , I also carried some guilt . My guilt was around having spoken for too greater a 
length during the discussion . In addition to this I was aware of not overstepping some clear 
boundaries that had been set by some of the older students in my peer group , in that ‘ they ’ 
are the ‘ experts ’ etc . Part of me wished I could take back a lot of what I had said . I made 
a decision that the following week I would refrain from commenting more than once in 
order to lessen some of the potential tensions made by me talking too much .  
( Dee , MPT , December 2004 ) 
Dee raised an important issue in her reflection , both for her as a pre-service teacher 
and me as teacher educator . She clearly recognised that she had dominated the 
Roundtable conversation with respect to both time and content and felt some “ guilt ” 
for doing so . Interestingly , my interpretation of the session , at the time , was vastly 
different from Dee ’ s perception . I had encouraged her to elaborate and continued to 
ask questions of her regarding her situation as I felt it would have application for 
other pre-service teachers in the group . I was also consciously attempting to decenter myself and encourage pre-service teachers to take the lead in instigating and 
maintaining a focused discussion about their experiences in schools . To me , her 
input reflected someone who was truly grappling with a problematic situation 
which arose in her practice the focus was on her problem which had emerged for 
her experience and she was the one leading the discussion and questioning her 
peers . 
Dee ’ s MPT response however prompted a deeper exploration of other levels of 
learning for me , which revolved around the effects of my encouragement for Dee 
to speak , i . e .  , the way / s in which her peers responded to her . Dee stated that she 
was constantly aware of not “ overstepping some clear boundaries ” set by older 
members of the group . These boundaries had not been obvious to me , but were 
certainly a reality for her . In addition to self-identifying as a dominant voice , Dee 
made a decision to modify her actions in subsequent RR contributions . In her MPT 
she wrote that she “ would refrain from commenting more than once in order to 
116 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
lessen some of the potential tensions made by me talking too much ”  ( Dee , MPT , 
December 2004 )  . A key reference in her reflection is to those pre-service teachers 
whom she considered had established “ clear boundaries ” about contributions and 
verbal participation . She related this to the “ older ” members of the group , who ( she 
perceived ) had achieved in their own eyes the status of “ experts ”  . Clearly , for Dee 
she experienced some intimidation and perhaps some subtle exercising of pre-service teacher power , which became obvious for her during this RR session . She faced 
a dilemma of wanting to contribute , but not wanting to dominate and yet at the 
same time , balance her contributions so that she didn ’ t overstep boundaries she 
believed were in place during RR sessions . 
The above interaction fore-grounded a dilemma for me which emerged as a 
result of understanding more about silence and the ways pre-service teachers participate in RR sessions . By decentering myself and encouraging Dee , for example , 
to take the opportunity to speak , I was encouraging what I believed to be effective 
practice and this was essentially based on the belief that speaking equalled better 
learning . When Dee spoke up and received minimal feedback from her peers , she 
indicated that she felt some guilt about the experience and perhaps this may have 
compromised her own learning , at the time . However , completing the MPT allowed 
her to retrospectively reflect and perhaps it was during this retrospective reflection 
that Dee identified key factors associated with her experience and her learning 
through roundtable reflection . 
One of Dewey ’ s ( 1933 ) three attitudes associated with a reflective orientation is 
responsibility . I therefore needed to reconsider the complexity of learning as represented by pre-service teacher orientations towards reflecting orally on their experience . Reconsidering my own assumption that speaking maximises learning was 
perhaps a simplistic understanding of the complexity of the learning process , as 
exposed by the multiple interpretations of how silence was interpreted and enacted 
during RR sessions . Silence does not mean that pre-service teachers are not learning ; 
and speaking does not always suggest that pre-service teachers are learning . In 
essence , learning was occurring differently according to the inclination of the learner 
and the impact of the context . As a teacher educator , my way of operating required 
that I needed to hear the talk so as to monitor learning ; some pre-service teachers 
needed to listen to talk and other pre-service teachers need to talk . I also had a responsibility to actively monitor verbal contributions and ensure that pre-service teachers 
were not constantly exposed and / or vulnerable when participating in RR sessions . 
Learning as Choice
Pre-service teacher choice about engaging in the verbal dialogue remained paramount for me – involvement in RR sessions would / could not be forced . Although 
pre-service teachers were invited to participate , I maintained a belief that they could 
not and should not be placed under any pressure to do so . When examining choice , 
there were two aspects to consider . The first related to whether or not pre-service 
The Search for Silence 117
teachers felt that a genuine choice did exist in terms of participation and second , 
that personal choice was respected with reference to the extent of one ’ s involvement in the RR dialogue . Emma provided an insight into her thinking about preservice teacher silence when she suggested that some pre-service teachers , by 
remaining silent , reflected the ways in which “ they choose to operate ”  ( R12 )  . Other 
Pre-service teachers also indicated that there did exist a real choice in terms of participation . As Lyn suggested ,  “ I think it [ choice ] is there for sure ”  ( R12 )  . These 
statements reveal that learners within this environment made choices in terms of 
whether or not they would contribute to the discussion , and if so , when . Some preservice teachers elected to generally remain silent ; others chose to contribute intermittently to the discussion ; others chose to verbalise and constantly responded in 
this way . 
One important outcome of understanding more about choice is the implications 
of pre-service teacher choice on their learning , and my understanding of their learning . With reference to the pre-service teachers who constantly elected to refrain 
from contributing to the dialogue I wondered whether I might be avoiding confrontation about this choice by not explicitly inviting individuals to participate . Might 
my refraining from specifically inviting less vocal pre-service teachers to contribute 
to reflective conversations be interpreted as protecting them and in doing so , possibly limit opportunities for growth by not encouraging them to move beyond their 
comfort zones ? However , if I chose to encourage particular individuals to contribute by way of direct questioning , am I then modeling a contradiction , since I have 
made it explicit that it is their choice to whether to contribute ? My responsibility as 
a teacher educator was to promote learning about teaching and my aim was to create a democratic classroom based on pre-service teacher choice . However , choice 
was more complex than it would ostensibly appear ; choice can restrict learning just 
as it can promote it . My understanding about the ways in which choice was exercised by pre-service teachers in reflective discourse has parallels with my learning related to pre-service teachers ’ verbal contributions . Underpinning assumptions 
are constructed as sets of minor assumptions which relate to a prescriptive assumption , for example . Although with each of the assumptions there is the antithesis , 
there is also a continuum which needs to be considered . The points along this continuum are interestingly complex .  
( Re ) Developing Identity
The notion that pre-service teachers are both developing and protecting an identity 
in the process of learning about teaching is consistent with research that suggests 
that some learners both protect and project a particular identity and that this projection may be self-modified according to the context ( Brown & Coupland , 2005 )  . 
Such identity protection is consistent with comments made by Dee ( discussed 
above ) about the way in which pre-service teachers act in their teacher education 
classes . For example , some may remain quiet as a protective mechanism ; others 
118 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
speak but then suggest that they reveal perhaps too much of their vulnerability as a 
pre-service teacher . Pre-service teachers identities are forming and reforming and 
they then choose to either project and / or protect that identity , as seen in the multiple 
ways that they interact during RR sessions . Perhaps it may be that some pre-service 
teachers did not feel comfortable within this environment to express an opinion , or 
share an experience , and so in this sense the silent response may have been imposed 
by the very structure of the roundtable reflection session . Finkel ( 2000 ) suggests 
that some pre-service teachers may need to initially “ come together as a group , 
deliberate with each other , hear each other ,  [ and ] make decisions and act together ”  
( Finkel , 2000 , p . 130 )  . Perhaps a more effective way of scaffolding and supporting 
learners like Dee , for example , might be to make the process and the individual 
pre-service teacher learning styles explicit . Perhaps I could have spent more time 
in setting up opportunities for pre-service teachers whereby they could come 
together to deliberate and work together to discover their own ways of interacting 
within a group situation . By focusing on developing a community of inquiring 
learners , the emphasis would then be on a cooperative unpacking and sharing of 
experience , rather than what has been described by Dee as an individual , and at 
times competitive , pursuit . As Dee suggests , the RR sessions are a bit like the 
school issue :  “ We are all so worried about failing , impressing , out doing … it ’ s 
fake for some of us . Just like students in the class room ”  ( Dee , MPT , December 
2004 )  . Her articulation that it is “ fake for some of us ” indicates that I need to be 
aware of the ways in which identities are being both projected and protected within 
the RR sessions and I need to constantly reassess the types and the quality of 
pre-service teacher contributions . 
Summary of Learning About Silence
Silence , and its impact on the development of pedagogy , may remain under-considered 
due to its pervasiveness and oftentimes , seamless integration into the dayto-day classroom life . An initial step for me was to acknowledge silence . Once 
identified and examined , silence was shown to be interpreted in multiple ways . For 
example , silence may be indicative of fear , where pre-service teachers are afraid to 
speaking for fear of being incorrect ; it may be a time of waiting , a time of contemplation ; it may represent lost opportunities which are a result of the pace of the 
conversation ; and it may be an acknowledgement that “ you don ’ t always have 
something to talk about ”  ( Don , R11 )  . These silent spaces , however , can also be 
interpreted as spaces that were actively constructed and in this sense , represented 
more than a void , an emptiness or an absence of speaking ;  “ literal silence ”  ( van 
Manen , 1990 , p . 112 )  . 
An active construction of silence could indicate a deliberate withholding of pre-service teacher speech , or a resistance to speaking , as that experienced by Dee from her 
peers , and this type of silence might be experienced in a manner that connected a lack 
of response to questions with body language , which may have indicated disengagement .  
( Re ) Developing Identity 119
Multiple issues have been raised in terms of my understanding about the construction 
of silence and I pursue these issues in the following section . 
Teacher Educator Learning About Silence
Kosnik ( 2001 ) suggests that an often unexpected outcome of pre-service teacher 
education is teacher educator enrichment and change . She states that ,  “ So often we , 
in teacher education , see ourselves as agents for our student teachers : motivating 
them , informing them , guiding them , preparing them . We do not think of it as a 
process that will also change and enrich us ”  ( p . 65 )  . There were two specific aspects 
which relate to my learning about silence and these include the ways in which I 
attempted to be intentionally and strategically silent and the role of wait-time in my 
teaching . 
Actively , Intentionally and Strategically Silent
One key way in which my learning about silence became apparent was through 
systematically examining my role during RR sessions . An underpinning intention 
for me during RR sessions was to consciously refrain from dominating the discussion so as to provide opportunities for reflections to both emphasise and foreground 
the pre-service teachers ’ experience . This practice refers to the adaptation of one 
aspect of the Outer Cycle of the ALACT reflective framework ( Korthagen et al .  , 
2001 ) where it is suggested that the teacher educator maintain a strategic silence . 
Therefore , in modifying my practice to support the intention of pre-service teacher 
instigation and exploration of experiences , I attempted to remain purposefully , 
selectively and actively silent . Evidence of this intention is illustrated below , when , 
during Roundtable Twelve , the issue of voice and my deliberate withholding was 
explicitly expressed : 
So we get back to that point about having a voice - this is one of the assumptions of the 
roundtable . … you are actually saying that and it ’ s not my voice that matters I ’ m not sure 
if you are aware but I intentionally withhold from speaking … to allow you … to have a 
voice … in the past I would come into a group like this and I would have readings , some 
activities , maybe a video and I ’ d share … my experiences and I would be thinking that that 
was a non-transmissive way of teaching … I can ’ t do that … So what this reflective process 
has done for me is to refine the way I think about my role here … your experience is most 
important to you and debriefing and voicing opinions about that experience is imperative 
for you as learners .  
( Robyn , R12 ) 
This excerpt was representative of how the roundtables were intended to operate : 
as exploratory spaces , whereby the discourse was initiated by pre-service teachers 
and their concerns , with an inherent position of choice to participate . For some , the 
120 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
reality was experienced differently . Whilst I intended for this to be the case , one 
pre-service teacher expressed frustration at my dominance . While this was an atypical response , it warranted consideration as it provided further understanding about 
the multiplicity of ways teaching and learning can be interpreted . In his response to 
the question ,  “ At what moment in the class ( es ) this week did you feel most distanced from what was happening ?  ”  ( CIQ , Question Two )  , Jay wrote :  “ In my first 
roundtable . Sometimes I think people really want to speak and we can learn from 
each other but Robyn takes over and talks too much and cuts us off ”  ( Jay , CIQ , May 
2004 )  . Although this was the only written response which referred to a level of 
frustration ( 1 of a total of 57 ) it also indicates an experience which was not intended 
by me as a teacher at the roundtable . In coming to understand more about my role 
in the RR sessions , the issue of intention and reality surfaces , and this relates to 
what Whitehead ( 1993 ) suggests is indicative of a living contradiction . Altering 
embedded ways of being a teacher educator takes both acknowledgement and persistence . Although my intention was to remain strategically silent , the reality was 
that I did not always achieve my aim . In Jay ’ s criticism of my involvement in RR 
sessions , he refers to my propensity to not only “ take over ” but “ talk too much ” and 
to cut pre-service teachers off . Jay ’ s frustrations caution me to continue to monitor 
my practice and to examine the ways in which my practices impact on pre-service 
teacher learning . 
Teacher Educator Wait-Time
My learning about myself through examining silence also occurred through better 
understanding silence as wait-time ( Rowe , 1974 )  . Rowe ’ s research is particularly 
relevant for me in terms of my self-study and the way that I interpreted silence and 
identified wait-time as an increasingly important teaching tool . Questioning during 
RR sessions allowed me to both explore learning and teaching issues more deeply 
and provide some indication for me as to the level of pre-service teacher understanding . As I have previously indicated I continually asked questions and also 
asked multiple questions , leaving minimal response time . Rowe ’ s ( 1974 ) research 
indicates that the typical teacher pauses , on the average , between 0 . 7 and 1 . 4 seconds after his / her question and the assessment of my question asking indicates that 
I would represent the norm in terms of the way in which I asked questions . 
Loughran ( 1996 ) draws on Rowe ’ s ( 1974 ) notion of wait-time whereby , teachers and teacher educators need to provide appropriate time for responses from their 
students and pre-service teachers , prior to the teacher or teacher educator filling the 
void . In this sense , wait-time is a conscious strategy to impose silence in order to 
elicit thoughtful responses . My understanding of wait-time in this teacher education 
context emerged as a gradual process . The identification and practice of wait-time 
emerged in conjunction with , and in response to the silences . Wait-time emerged 
for me , as multi-dimensional practice . There were two aspects associated with my 
wait-time ; the first related to my deliberate attempts to remain silent or less vocal 
( Re ) Developing Identity 121
and the second , to provide more time between asking a question and waiting for the 
pre-service teacher response . 
An examination of the excerpts of transcripts indicates that there was a critical 
lack of wait-time which became evident during Roundtable One ( 2002 ) and this 
was exemplified by the constant and ongoing stream of questions I asked of the 
group . An example that illustrates this type of questioning follows : 
We spoke before about exposure not being enough … . We had a question about that – the 
preps getting lost in the ‘ busi-ness ’ of the ones and twos . What would you do next time ? 
What , maybe not even next time , what could you have done then ?  [ No wait-time ] For me 
you ’ ve identified a concern that you ’ ve had and you had that concern while you were 
teaching the lesson .  
( Robyn , R1 ) 
Allowing time between questions and perhaps asking fewer questions , provides 
pre-service teachers with greater opportunities to reflect on their thought and formulate responses and therefore contribute to the discussions in more meaningful 
ways . In recognising the importance of wait-time , I consciously attempted to provide greater lengths of time between asking questions and also asking singular 
questions . Analysis of the transcripts of later Roundtable sessions , during the following year , feature a somewhat altered approach to my questioning in particular 
where , although questions instigated by the teacher educator are evident in the data , 
oftentimes only one question was asked , and there was a more deliberate attempt to 
ask a question and elicit a response . For example , during R11 , I asked : 
Robyn : My question is “ Do you learn from that ?  ”  ( pause ) 
Jane : yeh
Robyn : how ?  ( pause ) 
Jane : we try
Robyn : how ?  ( pause ) 
Jane : because we ’ re reflecting on …
Emma : well you relate it to your experience … and then when something like that comes 
up in the future you might remember what Dina did or what someone else did 
Adam : when someone says something … I immediately think what else they could 
have done…but it means that when other people share what they have done in 
certain circumstances then I can remember those and … all these things pop 
into my head … so I am learning from other people ’ s experience so that I can 
adjust those to my situation or for next year
Robyn : so listening to other peoples ’ experiences helps you to think about alternatives 
… so as that person is talking , you are thinking what you might be doing . Is that 
what you are saying ?  
( R11 ) 
Deliberately asking questions and waiting for responses was evident from the analysis of the data . However , the MPT I completed four months later which was based 
on the roundtable session above ( R11 ) revealed the struggle I continued to 
have ( and displayed ) about silence as unsettling . I wrote in my MPT response :  
 “ Do I break the silences ? This was not the intention . Am I still uncomfortable with 
silence – do we learn when we are silent ?  ” Even though silence had been identified , 
122 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
acknowledged and explicitly pursued as an influential factor in learning for three 
years it continues to remain perplexing
Summary : Challenging My Assumption
Three key outcomes emerged for me which were related to my assumption about 
pre-service teacher verbal participation in RR sessions and my practice as a mathematics teacher educator . First , analysis of my data related to verbal interactions 
indicated that I felt some discomfort within , and about silence . This is evidenced 
by my ongoing questioning and by my explicit attention to silence and the dominant voices at the roundtables . Changing embedded patterns of behaviour is a slow 
process ; acknowledgement , however , is an initial step . 
Second , my assumption that those who verbally participated in reflective discourse are in a privileged position in terms of their growth as learners , has been 
challenged . Some pre-service teachers who were not verbal indicated they were 
still learning , engaged and ( re ) constructing their identities within the reflective 
space , albeit in another mode . My challenge then is to withhold judgment about 
those who choose not to verbally participate in roundtable sessions and continually attempt to cater for all learning styles within RR sessions .  ( Although I still 
promote pre-service teacher choice , I now require that as each RR session begins , 
each pre-service teacher must write briefly about an experience they would like 
to share with their peers ; they then articulate this with their group and it is then 
the group that determines which issue will lead the RR session . This ensures that 
each pre-service teacher must contribute at least once to the dialogue . This modification also ensures that each pre-service teacher hears their own voice early in 
the session )  . 
Third , the micro-analysis of the transcripts particularly , exposes the complexities associated with the everyday experiences of learners in the teacher education 
classroom . Rather than interpreting silence and speech within RR sessions as 
opposing extremes of a continuum or a dichotomy ( Jaworski , 1993 ) it might be 
more meaningful to consider more closely the orientations of the learner combined with the compatibility of the reflective approach . In understanding more 
about the existence of these orientations one can then direct and inform teacher 
educator practice and understanding . For example , some pre-service teachers 
may be in harmony and feel comfortable with a RR approach to unpacking experience and therefore may have the confidence to express and discuss their experiences . Hence these pre-service teachers connect verbally within this framework 
thus making meaning through social discourse ( for example , Dee )  . Others may 
connect with two dimensions – the experience and the ( re ) organisation , but not 
with the verbally based roundtable reflection approach and these learners primarily make meaning through listening ( for example , Justin and Adam )  . Their learning styles require time and space to further develop and the learning might not 
( Re ) Developing Identity 123
yet be explicable ; an “ epistemological silence ”  ( van Manen , 1990 , p . 112 )  . In this 
sense , what may be unspeakable at that moment , may “ be captured … in language the next moment ”  ( p . 114 ) and therefore time and timing is an influential 
factor in learning about learning through an examination of silence . Analysing 
the role of silence in learning has fore grounded for me that my learning about 
silence was a process consisting of six phases :  
( 1 ) Identification of silence , commonly through a critical interaction / incident 
which was perplexing 
( 2 ) Acknowledgement that this silence existed and permeated classroom 
interactions 
( 3 ) Focused exploration , inquiry into , questioning about and examination of the 
silences 
( 4 ) Tentative conclusions about silence and its meanings 
( 5 ) Altered practice whereby understandings were continually tested in various 
related contexts for verification 
( 6 ) Firmer and more refined conclusions . 
By identifying and problematising silence in this way , more about the subtleties 
and tacit complexities associated with learning has been exemplified . 
Understanding the Unsaid : Overview
Silence
It is a presence
It has a history , a form
Do not confuse it
With any kind of absence 
( Rich , 1979 , p . 17 ) 
Rich ( 1979 ) cautions us to not confuse silence “ with any kind of absence ”  ( p . 17 )  . 
A focus on silence and what remains unsaid in my mathematics classroom highlights complexities associated with learning as a pre-service teacher and as a 
teacher educator . By explicitly identifying one ’ s own and others ’ perceptions of 
silence , it becomes possible to isolate and identify incongruities ; the points where 
there may be misconceptions and multiple interpretations within the teaching and 
learning experiences . From this point reframing our understandings is possible . It 
is through identifying the interconnectedness , the interactions and the constant 
recursive cycle of reflecting on and ( re ) interpreting the events and interactions that 
a deeper understanding of the impact of silence , and the how and the why of 
silence , particularly during roundtable reflections , has emerged for me . 
The unremarkable and taken-for-granted assumption is that silence is a feature 
of , and permeates organisations . A remarkable outcome of researching and under124 7 Understanding the Unsaid : Deconstructing Silence and Reconstructing Self
standing silence in the day-to-day communication of teacher education classrooms 
might be an illumination of “ the complex nature of social relations ”  ( Clair , 1998 , 
p . 20 ) and through a reflexive approach , prompt transformation in teaching and 
learning about teaching . Perhaps it might be that as teacher educators , we may need 
to look beyond the ‘ polyphony ’  ( Brown & Coupland , 2005 ) and explore the silent 
spaces , for it is the research about and within these spaces that deeper insights into 
teaching and learning might emerge . 
Understanding the Unsaid : Overview 125
Chapter 8
Developing our Authority of Experience : 
Pre-service Teachers and Teacher Educator 
as Co-learners
Assumption Four : Individual Authority of Experience 
Will be Enhanced when Pre-Service Teachers and Teacher 
Educators are Reconceptualised as Co-Learners
What does it mean to reconceptualise ourselves as co-learners ? The preceding 
chapters have highlighted the ways in which my assumptions as a teacher educator 
have been both challenged and supported in my teaching and learning mathematics 
context . I now return to my initial impetus for interrupting our routine pedagogical 
practices ; that being my desire to devolve my authority as teacher educator and 
encourage what I considered to be a shared power base in learning about teaching . 
I wanted to teach so that pre-service teachers learnt about teaching through their 
own experiences , and not mine . I wanted pre-service teachers to experience a democratic approach to determining their learning , and hence encourage a deeper sense 
of pre-service teacher ownership of their learning . This approach to power sharing 
required us to operate differently ; to negotiate with one another ; to consider our 
needs and wants and to identify ways to achieve these negotiated goals . In this 
chapter , I examine our collective learning about negotiation , power and the development of “ authority of experience ”  ( Munby & Russell , 1994 ; Segall , 2002 ; Shor 
1997 )  . 
Introduction
In situ and retrospective reflection is crucial in coming to understand more about the 
ways in which the “ authority of experience ”  ( Munby & Russell , 1994 , p . 92 ) is 
acknowledged and developed in pre-service teacher education . In my self-study 
research , the process of understanding authority and the complexities associated with 
how I might facilitate the development of an authority of experience was non-linear 
and entailed constant retro-reflection on events , interactions and data provided from 
classroom learning and teaching mathematics sessions . My assumption that we could 
be co-learners however , was based on my desire to share ownership of the mathematics 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 127
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008
unit construction , and in this sense , I envisaged that co-authorship of the unit might 
lead to co-ownership and thereby create an environment where pre-service teachers 
felt empowered so that they might develop an authority of experience , through reflecting on experiences related to their learning about teaching . The term “ authority of 
experience ” is defined by Munby & Russell ( 1994 ) as the sense of authority which 
results from pre-service teachers being able to distil the essence of learning which 
emerges from reflecting on their own experiences . Developing one ’ s authority of experience requires more than simply having experience , it reflects an approach to learning 
from experience which is less reliant on propositional knowledge or the need for “ tips 
and tricks ”  ( Loughran , 2004b ) from experienced others . When pre-service teachers 
move beyond the need for propositional knowledge ( supplied by those in an authority 
of position ) they may then come to understand the “ unique nature of learning from 
experience ”  ( p . 93 , emphasis in original )  . 
This chapter explores issues of authority and power . I have presented my learning in four sections . The first section highlights and examines a pivotal interaction 
that occurred early in the study which raised issues associated with negotiation , 
power and authority of experience . The second section is my retrospective analysis 
of talk during RR sessions and attempts to clarify more about the connection 
between talk and the development of pre-service teacher authority of experience . 
The third section I discuss relates to teacher educator talk and examines my talk 
over time , and establishes the challenges for me in deciphering the intended from 
the actual in terms of my practice . The final section of my discussion summarises 
my learning and what it means for me to hold the assumption that pre-service teachers and their teacher educator can be reconceptualised as co-learners . 
In my introduction I refer to my initial attempts to negotiate the LTM unit with 
a cohort of pre-service teachers . I begin by describing a critical interaction which 
provided the stimulus for researching the ways in which power and authority were 
being interpreted , constructed and understood by both the pre-service teachers and 
me , through the vehicle of unit negotiation . 
The Learning and Teaching Mathematics Context
During Week One , of Semester Two , 2002 , I did not distribute a prescribed Learning 
and Teaching Mathematics II ( LTM ) course outline , as I had in previous years . 
Rather , I attempted to negotiate with the Third Year Bachelor of Education cohort 
the structure , assessment and learning tasks , and content of LTM . I had an already 
established teaching and learning framework and this framework included some possible options for the structure of the unit . Explanation of my genuine desire to negotiate the curriculum with the group and discussions related to the LTM unit continued 
during the initial information session and during the tutorial sessions throughout 
Week One . I sought to challenge the status-quo by encouraging pre-service teacher 
voice and promoting democratic practice with pre-service teachers in creating 
opportunities for them to share the development of a curriculum for learning about 
128 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
teaching mathematics . Collaboration therefore was an essential component of my 
approach so that pre-service teachers were encouraged to participate in negotiations 
about their learning . Just like Shor ( 1997 )  , I wanted to establish a “ power-sharing 
community ”  ( p . 62 ) amongst ourselves . We met weekly as a cohort in the Open 
Space ( a flexible teaching space which was conducive to group work as it offered 
structural flexibility )  . Positioning for me within this space was important – there was 
no front of room , and I wandered as I addressed the cohort . 
Chelsea ’ s Address to the Cohort
Chelsea was a member of the Third Year Bachelor of Education pre-service teacher 
cohort participating in the second forum session of the LTM in July , 2002 .  ( Chelsea , 
and the remainder of the cohort , had previously completed two units of Mathematics 
together throughout the Bachelor of Education course )  . She was a frequent and 
regular participant during discussions and appeared to enjoy contributing to reflective discussions related to her learning . At the conclusion of the Week Two forum 
negotiations ( which were related to the assessment tasks of the unit )  , pre-service 
teachers were asked if there were any further questions relating to the outcomes of 
the negotiations . I sat in a vacant seat , in the middle of a group of pre-service teachers , not too distant from Chelsea . With little hesitation following my question 
Chelsea rose to her feet and addressed the group of ninety-two pre-service teachers . 
Generally Chelsea ’ s contention during her address to the cohort was that we all had 
negotiated a task for assessment which she believed was unfair in terms of the effort 
required to complete the task . What follows is Chelsea ’ s written reflection ,  
completed the night following the session , of her participation in this forum . 
I was not very knowledgeable in the area of authentic negotiation . I expected that it would 
give me a sense of power and ownership over my learning , as I would have input into the 
assessment tasks , their weighting and possibly some unit content . One proposed assessment task was a portfolio , which should contain notes and reflections from our tutorials 
and lectures , plus reflections of ten journal articles . Although I am an assertive person , 
I was also apprehensive about challenging Robyn , the unit coordinator , on this . 
At the negotiation meeting , Robyn made it very clear that this was the time to discuss our 
thoughts and concerns . Peers seated near me and I quietly commented to each other that 
we had concerns with it . Robyn requested input , but no one commented . I reluctantly stood 
up and said ,  “ So everyone is happy with this task ?  ” No one answered . I went on and said ,  
 “ Doesn ’ t anyone think that there are too many articles to have to read and write about ? 
We know how long it takes and it is not weighted very high .  ” I looked around the room . 
There was silence . I was appreciative that Robyn was silent , allowing me to have my say 
and give other students some time to speak . Still no one commented . I felt rather embarrassed and uncomfortable . I pressed on and said “ so no one is going to walk out of this 
room and complain about this task because it will be too late then !  ”  
[ At this point Chelsea organised a vote , conducted the vote with the cohort by a show of 
hands to support her proposal and resolved the issue for her by effectively reducing the 
total number of articles from ten to five ] 
The Learning and Teaching Mathematics Context 129
The negotiated alterations were pleasing because I had participated in what I believed to be a 
team approach to making beneficial changes for all concerned . I felt proud of myself for having the courage to be actively involved . I felt positive about having the opportunity in a non 
threatening environment to express myself , knowing that ‘ the boss ’ would not in turn display 
negative behaviour or attitude toward me . My expectations of negotiating the unit were met . 
I questioned why these people did not speak up . I came to the conclusion that negotiating 
the curriculum was new to a lot of us and that it is at times difficult to alter the way we think . 
Challenging or negotiating with people in positions of power can be daunting in many 
institutions , not just in universities . I personally believe that primary and secondary schools , 
along with universities are not conducting enough authentic negotiation with students and 
hope that more students in the future are empowered through this process as I was .  
( Chelsea , Bachelor of Education pre-service teacher , Written reflection , Forum Session 2 , 
July 2002 ) 
I considered Chelsea ’ s interaction with the group as representative of two phases : 
Phase One describes what happened in terms of Chelsea ’ s involvement during the 
forum , my involvement as mathematics teacher educator and the cohort ’ s general 
lack of participation in the discussion ; and Phase Two represents our reflections on 
the event and the multiple layers of meaning related to the construction of authority 
which emerged some time afterward as a result of reflecting on our negotiations . 
Phase One : The Interaction
This pivotal interaction illuminated some key tensions which were evident 
( although not completely understood at the time ) during our negotiation . My intention was to negotiate the teaching and the learning outcomes for this mathematics 
unit ; pre-service teachers most likely held expectations which were based on their 
previous experiences as learners , and part of this expectation included a deference 
to my authority ( by way of my position )  . This may explain the silence and the lack 
of verbal challenges from the cohort in general regarding the number and type of 
tasks . In many ways we were limited by our lack of experience in identifying and 
using the skills required for effective negotiation . 
Phase Two : Multiple Interpretations
The second phase of the interaction relates to the multiple ways in which the interaction was interpreted . Underpinning our understandings were the notions of 
authority and how authority emerged as a key issue in understanding more about 
our changing roles . One interesting point about Chelsea ’ s reflection on her address 
to the cohort was the ways in which her perceptions of power ( and her perceived 
lack of authority as a learner to hold and use power ) influenced the nature of her 
negotiations . Simply put , the outcome of her negotiation meant that the number of 
journal articles to be selected , read and summarised was reduced from ten to five . 
130 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
In hindsight , however , this pivotal interaction also exemplifies the complexities 
associated with pre-service teacher / teacher educator negotiation . Chelsea questions 
her peers ’ lack of involvement in the initial and ongoing negotiations :  “ I questioned 
why these people did not speak up . I came to the conclusion that negotiating the 
curriculum was new to a lot of us and that it is at times difficult to alter the way we 
think ”  . She highlights the new role for her and her peers and how operating as a 
negotiator was indeed a process with which the cohort had had minimal , if any , 
prior experience in their pre-service teacher education . In this sense , Chelsea ’ s 
statement concurs with extensive research findings about the effects of pre-service 
teachers ’ extended apprenticeships of observation ( Lortie , 1975 )  , and that as a 
result of consistent exposure to teacher-directed approaches to learning , pre-service 
teachers exhibit a predominantly passive learning style . They do not expect , neither 
are they prepared for , opportunities to be genuinely involved in negotiations about 
the curriculum . Passivity in learning emerges as a result of ongoing experiences 
which traditionally exemplify a transmission of knowledge ( or banking ) approach 
to teaching and learning ( Freire , 1970 )  . Clearly , our Week Two , LTM negotiation 
experience challenged such notions and presented a vastly different scenario for the 
pre-service teachers and me , one that in hindsight , I had not prepared them for adequately . I simply assumed they were capable , willing and interested to accept a role 
as co-collaborators in the design of their teacher education curriculum . 
Teacher Educator as “ the Boss ” 
The question of teacher educator power arose in this interaction . Underpinning our 
interaction was what Chelsea had perceived as her reduced opportunities to effectively negotiate due to her position as a pre-service teacher and my position as a 
teacher educator . This is evident in her reference to me as an authority figure ,  “ the 
boss ”  . Chelsea provides further clues related to her thinking about power and its 
impact on her negotiation when she refers to her limited opportunities for practicing 
this type of negotiation ; the difficulties associated with altering embedded assumptions about learning and teaching and the “ courage ” it takes to challenge “ people in 
positions of power ”  . Our interaction reflects a power structure that pre-service teachers have been acculturated into and that they will probably unthinkingly recreate with 
their students unless there is some kind of challenge ( or interruption ) to their thinking 
about how or why change to this structure might be desirable . My aim in encouraging 
negotiation within the LTM units concurs with that of Shor ( 1997 ) who states that , 
The democratic disturbance of the teacher-centred classroom confirms a primary goal of 
shared authority : to restructure education into something done by and with students rather 
than by the teacher for and over them ( 1997 , p . 148 )  . 
At the conclusion of this session , Judy addressed the class in the following way :  “ You 
know , she is trying to do something different with us and we should support her ”  . 
Judy ’ s comment provided for me , a sense of support from at least some of the cohort . 
The Learning and Teaching Mathematics Context 131
My Struggle with the Outcome
At the same time my stated intention was to create opportunities for acculturated 
beliefs and practices to be challenged , yet clearly I was still struggling with the 
notion of how this might work in reality . This struggle was evident in my postsession journal reflection when I wrote : 
Almost had the unit negotiations completed when Chelsea said “ Hey , as a group are we 
really happy with the portfolio ?  ( silence ) You know , it ’ s going to be a lot of work , the ten 
journals and it ’ s only worth five percent ” Reply :  “ I think we should swap the self-directed 
activity which is 10% ”  ( mumblings , then motion put to class by Chelsea - Very difficult at 
this point to refrain from talking )  . I really felt like I needed to re - explain and justify the 
self-directed concept - the ownership , the opportunity to take learning further , to pursue an 
area of interest . And I did try , however , this was not generally accepted and the motion , put 
by the pre-service teacher [ Chelsea ] voted on and passed . I left this session feeling as 
though I had been attacked ; I was tired , I had tried and they still want for something different . A new learning for me : negotiation is so much easier when the negotiated outcome 
relates closely to personal [ teacher educator ] choices .  
( Wednesday July 31 , 2002 , Journal entry , Post-Forum Session ) 
My reflection uncovers a tension I felt in this situation between on the one hand my 
expressed goal of negotiation about tasks , and on the other the sense of being personally challenged when the negotiated outcomes were outside the boundaries of 
what I had anticipated . My focus during the early negotiation sessions was to coauthor and thereby co-own the learning tasks and assessments with the pre-service 
teachers . However , in conducting the negotiations , unanticipated issues for me , 
about authority related to my position , and power , surfaced . 
The extract from my reflection ( above ) reflects my ongoing assessment of my 
professional role as a teacher educator . The interaction with Chelsea shows that she 
had taken seriously the responsibility of negotiation and had attempted to push past 
the barriers of my “ authority of position ”  ( Munby & Russell , 1994 )  , openly questioning my authority in a public forum . I wrote that I felt as though I had been 
 “ attacked ” and yet wasn ’ t negotiation meant to underpin my new approach to practice ? Shouldn ’ t I have been prepared for , even welcomed such an outcome ? 
Examining this interaction has now exposed further questions for me about my 
authority of position : For instance , what structures were in place so that pre-service 
teachers felt that they could truly negotiate . After all , what were their options ? This 
was Week Two of their first semester with me as their teacher educator . Why 
should they trust me and my intentions when in reality they had known me in this 
learning and teaching mathematics context for only one week ? 
Different Perspectives
Clearly , both Chelsea and I approached the task of negotiation from different perspectives , and underpinning the negotiation was our attempts at negotiating from a 
132 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
base of power , as it were . Although Chelsea felt daunted by speaking out , she was 
concomitantly proud for having the “ courage to be actively involved ” in negotiating the unit as she refers to her sense of “ power and ownership of [ her ] learning ”  . 
She also articulated the difficulty generally , associated with challenging those in 
positions of power :  “ Challenging or negotiating with people in positions of power 
can be daunting in many institutions , not just in universities ”  . In hindsight , I realise 
that the cohort had received minimal preparation during class about why negotiation and ownership of the unit was seen ( by me ) as essential to the LTM unit . In this 
sense , few formal negotiation tools that they might use had been directly introduced . Key qualities underpin successful negotiation . These include :  ( 1 ) being 
articulate ;  ( 2 ) being able to identify a purpose and sequence in an argument ;  
( 3 ) being able to justify a modified proposition ;  ( 4 ) being confident ; and ( 5 )  , having 
a relationship with me ( as teacher educator ) and pre-service teacher peers . 
When I review the interaction with Chelsea with these negotiation tools in mind , I 
see multiple ways of interpreting the learning from the interaction . For example , 
Chelsea was confident ( 4 ) articulate ( 1 ) and had an already established working 
relationship with me and her peers ( 5 )  . Her argument although sound , sequential 
and with justification ( 2 ) however , bothered me to a degree . My belief about her 
intention in this negotiation was to reduce the workload from ten articles to five . 
Was I compromising my teaching standards by allowing this negotiation to be voted 
on and passed ? As my reflection indicates I was frustrated and I felt I hadn ’ t convinced the cohort of my idea that ‘ this is important for your learning ’  ( i . e .  , to selfselect ten articles and pursue an area of interest in mathematics learning and 
teaching )  . Where did my responsibility as a teacher educator begin and end in terms 
of directing the LTM curriculum ? The process of negotiation was complex and I 
felt as though the ground kept shifting . My experience resonates with research 
reported by Fecho , Commeyras , Bouchereau Bauer and Font ( 2000 ) who experienced a similar situation with graduate students in critical literacy classes when 
they as educators , attempted to disturb their regular practices , to share authority 
with their students . For these educators “ shifting of roles and purposes blurs and 
challenges lines of authority creating new relationships in the classroom dynamic ”  
( p . 474 )  . However , in contrast to the experiences reported by Fecho et al .  ( 2000 )  , I did 
not initially , deliberately and / or systematically consider in advance the influence of 
power , nor the authority of my position in terms of how this might impact pre-service 
teacher involvement in negotiating the principles and practices of the learning and 
teaching mathematics unit . And , I had assumed ( and expected ) that pre-service teachers would already possess and be prepared to use , skills of / for negotiation . 
Post-session Conversation
An informal phone conversation with Chelsea one year after our pivotal interaction 
during the mathematics forum , helped me to discern more about the impact of the 
experience on Chelsea and gain further insights into some underpinning foundations 
The Learning and Teaching Mathematics Context 133
which need to be available if pre-service teachers are to be encouraged and feel more 
empowered to negotiate aspects of their learning about teaching mathematics . 
A summary of our conversation ( I noted key points and gained her permission to use 
these ) is described below : 
The person , the main operator has to be passionate and committed and the students need 
to understand that , with negotiation , there would not be repercussions … The relationship 
was important and knowing you helped as I knew you would be impartial and that you 
would listen … The participants in this process need to feel comfortable or they won ’ t have 
the courage , and they need to be self-confident ( Chelsea , Personal Conversation , July 
2003 ) 
Chelsea provides some pertinent clues about the necessary conditions for her to feel 
that she could effectively ( albeit with hesitation ) negotiate learning outcomes , 
which involved a direct challenge to the person in authority . She indicates some 
dispositions required of the “ main operator ”  ( i . e .  , teacher educator ) that include 
personal skills such as enthusiasm , passion and a genuine willingness to negotiate . 
Perhaps , most importantly , Chelsea had an already established relationship with me 
which allowed her to feel as though she could take the risk to put forward her ideas 
(  “ knowing you helped as I knew you would be impartial and that you would listen ”  )  . Chelsea also raises the issue associated with repercussion . She needed to 
believe that by challenging the person in authority , she would not suffer consequences . This view concurs with Shor ’ s ( 1997 ) research in which he suggests that 
his students also needed to be able to “ speak their minds without the fear of 
reprisal ”  ( p . 148 )  . A further key factor related to successful negotiation is raised in 
Finkel ’ s ( 2000 ) research that is relevant to this interaction in that students need to 
be provided with opportunities to discover new ways of operating as a group and 
new ways of dealing with one another when developing a community of ( reflective ) 
practice which is underpinned by a shared power base . 
In summarising the learning from this pivotal interaction with Chelsea , three key 
points emerged for me . These related to ( 1 ) negotiation tools ,  ( 2 ) the ability to genuinely create a shared power base with pre-service teachers , and ( 3 ) the need for 
exercising professional judgement when negotiating . 
My first point here , relates to the particular tools required for negotiation within 
our context . These include self-confidence ; a relationship with the teacher educator 
and peers ; the ability to articulate an idea and / or challenge , the ability to sequence 
an argument , and being able to justify a new proposal . Not all pre-service teachers 
possess these skills neither do all pre-service teachers choose to openly participate 
in the negotiation process . 
A second key point relates to my struggle to genuinely share authority and the 
emerging contradictions between what I say and do as a teacher educator . I learnt 
that it is easy to talk and read about negotiating with pre-service teachers and establishing a shared power base . It is much more difficult to enact these ideas in practice . Understanding the difficulties in transferring ideas into practice illuminates the 
complexities associated with not only having co-learning as an ideal , but understanding some of the ways that authority of position , for example , can create barriers to establishing a co-learning community in practice . While I was silent during 
134 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
the interaction with Chelsea , I was experiencing feelings of doubt ( over my handling of the situation )  ; anxiety ( will this negotiation erupt and implode ?  ) and a 
sense of defeat ( they did not go with what I thought we had agreed upon )  . Crucially , 
I had not at the time , considered or questioned the pre-service teachers ’ motivation 
for the negotiation . In retrospect , this is perhaps why I also felt vulnerable . Was 
Chelsea negotiating purely to ease the workload and if so , surely for most of the 
group this would be a reasonable outcome ? Did pre-service teachers really need to 
read and evaluate ten articles and would five serve a similar purpose ? This is where 
teacher educator professional judgement becomes important : Which negotiations 
do I agree to ? Which negotiations do I overrule ? 
To summarise , analysing this interaction with Chelsea led me to understand 
more about pre-service teachers ’ authority of experience , my authority of position 
and the ways in which our individual authorities develop in multiple ways shaped 
by our past experiences and present contexts . In the following section I discuss the 
nature of the authority of position and the authority of experience and how my 
understanding of these concepts developed through examining the nature of the talk 
in RR sessions . 
Teacher Educator Authority of Position
The interaction with Chelsea allowed a sleeper issue ( i . e .  , an issue which has an 
impact on learning but has not yet been specifically identified ) to surface in my 
practice . The sleeper relates to the ways in which my power and the authority of 
position might influence not only the style and the impact of negotiation on our 
learning , but also , participation in RR sessions . The critical interaction with Chelsea 
became the impetus to examine other practices and beliefs in my teaching related 
to the sharing of authority and the use of power . I wanted to challenge the statusquo in terms of traditional teacher directed and transmissive approaches to teaching 
and to shift the power base so as to devolve teacher educator authority ( of position ) 
and thereby shift the “ centre of gravity ”  ( Shor , 1997 , p . 104 )  . In so doing , I anticipated that there would be some development of pre-service teachers ’ sense of 
authority , for example , through participating in discussions related directly to their 
own experiences during RR sessions I assumed they would be developing their 
authority of experience . Having identified the sleeper issue of the impact of 
my authority of position , I became more focused towards the development of preservice teacher authority of experience through their participation in RR sessions . 
I anticipated that pre-service teachers could then experience what it might be like 
to interrupt some of their taken-for-granted practices ; evaluate what doing so meant 
for them in their learning about teaching and then begin to incorporate the RR 
practice in their teaching . The RR sessions had the hallmarks of what I felt represented a democratic , two-way reflective discussion based on my assumption 
that pre-service teachers develop an authority of experience through sharing 
experience . 
Teacher Educator Authority of Position 135
Talk illuminates a deeper understanding about the ways in which power and authority 
were interpreted and enacted in pre-service teacher classrooms . I deliberately tried to 
build pre-service teacher authority through RR sessions . My assumption about developing pre-service teacher authority of experience through participation in RR sessions was 
based on the view that sharing ( partner teaching ) experiences would facilitate the development of pre-service teachers ’ individual authority of experience . Underpinning this 
assumption was that co-learning ( pre-service teacher / teacher educator ) would be a direct 
outcome of encouraging a focus on pre-service teacher experience to develop an authority of experience as the authority base would be shared . I refer to excerpts of transcripts 
from Roundtables Eleven / Twelve in my discussion of talk . I was curious about the 
nature of talk and the ways in which pre-service teachers / teacher educator constructed 
dialogue . In other words , who was talking during RR sessions and what were they saying ? Following an analysis of my data seven sub-categories were identified : Self ( S )  ; 
Peers ( P )  ; Pre-service teachers to teacher educator ( PTE )  ; Pre-service teachers about 
teacher educator ( PAT )  ; Teacher educator to pre-service teachers ( TTP )  ; School experience ( SE )  ; and , the University experience ( UE )  . I wanted to know more about the ‘ who ’ 
and ‘ what ’ of the talk during RR sessions . My analysis focused on questions such as : Did 
the discussion related to experience refer to self ; was the intention to address the peer 
group ; did pre-service teachers talk to or about the teacher educator ; and did the teacher 
educator speak to and question the pre-service teachers ? The school experience and the 
university experience categories refer to the what , or the context , of the discussion . 
Broadly , I wanted to analyse the nature of the talk at a closer level and by doing so , I 
hoped to gain a deeper understanding of the ways in which pre-service teachers were 
articulating their learning and in what ways I was involved in these conversations . 
Talk : Self , Peer and Teacher Educator to Pre-service Teachers
Self
An underlying expectation I had about RR sessions was that pre-service teachers would 
be provided with opportunities to raise issues related to their teaching experiences . In 
this RR context the teacher educator ’ s role is to participate in , rather than dominate , the 
discussion . Pre-service teacher voice is encouraged and the creation of a supportive and 
trusting environment is integral . Therefore , I anticipated there would be a focus on preservice teacher talk about ‘ self ’  ( in this data ‘ self ’ talk is coded from “ I ” statements ) 
during both R11 and R12 . The analysis of Category One ( Self ) data provides interesting 
insights into the ways in which pre-service teachers framed themselves within their 
learning . Self talk expressions accounted for 29% of the total instances of talk in R11 
and 12% of the talk in Roundtable Twelve . For example , when addressing the class , Lin 
referred to ways of perceiving aspects of her learning that relate to age , problem-solving 
and perspectives . She stated :  “ for me who ’ s older I think along a different line ” and “ it 
[ sharing experience ] gives me a very different perspective on how to cope with the 
problems that students .  .  . have in classes ”  ( R11 )  . She suggested that RR discussion 
136 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
provided alternative perspectives for her and that maybe her age had an impact on her 
propensity to interpret her own experience from a singular perspective . Another student , 
Jane , commented on the comfort and reassurance provided by her peers when problems 
were discussed during RR sessions . She commented that :  “ I ’ ll probably deal with it [ the 
problem ] better because .  .  . I know that it happens to everyone else [ and ] I can fix those 
mistakes ”  ( R12 )  . This sentiment is also reflected in Tim ’ s statement where he suggested 
that credibility was an important aspect for him when learning about teaching , and 
through listening to the experiences had by others he was “ learning from other people ’ s 
experience in that I can adjust those to my situation I think there is more credibility .  .  . 
if you hear it from somebody else who has actually done it ”  ( R11 )  . These comments 
indicate that pre-service teachers were building their understanding of experience 
through sharing experience and that the practice of sharing contributed to the creation 
of their authority of experience . As pre-service teachers unpack their learning , they 
examine its impact in a supportive learning environment ; a learning environment constructed deliberately for this purpose . 
Sal identified that the notion of comfort matters when sharing aspects of problems 
with her peers . She also mentioned her feelings about the ways she saw our ( pre-service teacher / teacher educator ) roles in the RR sessions as balancing out , or heading 
towards equality :  “ I feel like more of an equal to you [ Robyn ] than if you were up the 
front telling . It makes me feel more comfortable and that my opinion is valid ”  ( R11 )  . 
Sal alluded to the physical positioning of the RR sessions which being conducted in a 
circular structure , meant there was no physical ‘ head of table ’  , only participants . She 
also associated being up the front with “ telling ” so one might assume that telling might 
not be her experience of me during roundtable sessions . Having her opinions validated 
was also important for Sal . Many pre-service teachers mentioned that sharing problems during Roundtable sessions became a means of reassurance , as more often than 
not , their peers were experiencing similar difficulties as they were . 
Self expressions ( or “ I ” talk ) were evident during both R11 and R12 discussions . 
Using “ I ” suggests some degree of revelation about self in learning . Self was 
revealed in the value of articulating and sharing experiences , and also by the ways 
that reassurance provided by peers when their experiences connected in some way 
with their own experiences . Pre-service teachers show that they are willing to discuss self , and own their declarations which might indicate a level of development 
of an authority , based on the examination of experience . However , if Munby and 
Russell ’ s ( 1994 ) definition of authority of experience relating to extracting the 
essence of learning is applied to this analysis , then the evidence is not quite so clear 
as I do not have data to suggest that at this point , the pre-service teachers were 
doing anything more than sharing experiences . 
Peer
The second category I identified in the categorisation of roundtable talk from R11 and 
R12 ( Peers ) refers to the ways in which the incidences of talk represent pre-service 
teachers directly addressing a peer ( 17% of the total number of instances recorded in 
Teacher Educator Authority of Position 137
Roundtable Eleven and 17% recorded for Roundtable Twelve )  . During Roundtable 
Eleven , for example , nine of the total of seventeen instances when pre-service teachers directly addressed their peers specifically concerned pre-service teachers ’ experiences in schools . This may indicate something about where authority as a pre-service 
teacher may begin to emerge . Being in a school context provides opportunities for 
pre-service teachers to plan , implement and evaluate their learning . In this sense , the 
territory is theirs , as it were . Perhaps pre-service teachers first , feel more familiar in 
the school context ( as all have attended these institutions for many years ) and second , 
feel they can relate and share their experiences with their peers at university about 
these first hand experiences of teaching . In this sense , although the experience is 
unique to their context , they feel authorised by way of experience to unpack their 
learning during RR sessions . In addition to this , I was not part of their experiences of 
being in schools and therefore , as a group , I can participate on more equal terms . 
One of the most interesting contributions related to feelings of personal authority 
as a teacher was provided by Ellen . Following a discussion with a peer about the 
value of being in schools , she stated :  “ Mainly when I ’ m with kids at school I don ’ t 
have any authority either so now I know that everyone ’ s in that boat ”  ( R11 )  . Ellen 
specifically raises the notion of her perceived lack of authority as a pre-service 
teacher when partner teaching in schools . In this sense , although she felt that she did 
not have “ any authority ” in schools as a pre-service teacher , she was reassured by the 
fact that this also had been the experience of her peers . She then states : that “ you ’ ll 
feel it ’ s not just me , this is perhaps what we go through ”  ( R11 )  . Ellen identifies that 
she is seen by the students as not having any authority of position as a pre-service 
teacher . Understanding more about her comment leads me to consider the role of 
experience in developing not only an authority of experience , which might be developed as a result of having experience , but also the ways in which the authority of 
position develops in pre-service teacher education . In developing their professional 
identity , pre-service teachers might need to explicitly consider the ways in which 
personal perceptions about a lack of authority of position impacts their learning , and 
explore ways in which experience might contribute to challenging this perception . 
Examining the authority of position as a pre-service teacher leads me to consider factors which might contribute to pre-service teacher ’ s emerging professional identity and the ways in which partners can assist in developing deeper 
understanding about their experiences , through interacting with a partner . For 
instance Emma ’ s statement ( below ) suggests that having a partner with whom to 
debrief enables multiple perspectives on teaching to be unpacked in informal 
ways and provides opportunities for pre-service teachers to develop feelings of 
authority through engaging with peer teaching partners who are at the same level 
in their practice . 
And you don ’ t realise it at the time .  .  . and as we were coming back from Bendigo we were 
talking about it and we could see it , you know , like all the different things .  .  . we found all 
the things as we were going .  .  . through the process ‘ cause she was in the room at the same 
time and so she could point out different things that I hadn ’ t picked up on .  .  . and I could 
tell her my reasoning .  
( Emma , R12 ) 
138 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
Emma then continues by stating that , in relation to the value of having a peer partner working with and alongside her in the classroom ,  “ they [ peers ] can see things 
differently .  .  . they ’ re making an outside connection .  .  . some other experience they 
bring to it .  .  . another source ”  ( R12 )  . The practice of partner teaching may well be 
encouraging the development of individual authority related to experiences had in 
both informal ( discussions ) and formal ( RR sessions )  . 
Teacher Educator Talk
The third key category which emerged from the RR data refers to the ‘ what ’ or the substance of my talk during RR sessions . During the RR sessions , I used the Outer Circle 
of the ALACT framework ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ) as a guide for my participation . 
I was aware of not dominating the discussion but of still maintaining a presence ; of 
facilitating without selecting all actions / experiences for comment ; of not being in a fore 
grounded position but still operating from a position ; of challenging but not always 
confronting . Considering that this modified approach to my role was a deliberate effort 
to adhere to the practices mentioned above , I was surprised to find from the data that 
during Roundtable Twelve , particularly , the highest number of instances of talk identified within this excerpt of the session related to me , the teacher educator , addressing the 
pre-service teachers ( 34 instances or 24% )  ; almost one quarter of the instances . 
Analysis of R12 in terms of instances of talk indicates that the function of my 
talk was as an evaluative tool , to find out about the impact of Roundtables on preservice teacher thinking and how my role within the RR was being interpreted by 
these pre-service teachers . For example , I asked the following questions during 
R12 :  “ Should they [ roundtables ] continue as a learning approach ?  ”  ;  “ Do you learn 
from that [ RR ]  ?  ”  ;  “ So how does that make you feel ?  ”  ;  “ Do you like learning in a 
group like this ?  ”  ;  “ Do you like the actual process ?  ”  ;  “ How do you see my role as 
teacher educator ?  ”  ;  “ What else about my role ?  ”  ;  “ So is exposure to different types 
of reflective practice important ?  ”  . In fact , much of my talk is framed as questions 
in order to elicit more from pre-service teachers about how they were experiencing 
my role during RR sessions . My questions also modelled a process whereby preservice teachers were exposed to my vulnerabilities associated with practicing 
teacher education in innovative ways . However , returning to my initial statement in 
this section ( using the ALACT as a guide for my participation ) I notice that for 
these selected roundtables at least , my intended practice did not always mirror the 
actual , or indeed that which was experienced . Rather than prompting , challenging 
and guiding pre-service teacher learning ( ALACT )  , I was explicitly questioning my 
role and the process of RR . In this way , I was using the RR sessions as an evaluative 
tool to inform my understanding of the ways in which my role was interpreted , 
more than practising the ALACT skills to support pre-service teacher learning . This 
was not a practice I had considered to be a roundtable function yet it contributed 
more to my knowing , as a teacher educator . In many ways I felt vulnerable asking 
these questions aloud ( previously I would have asked pre-service teachers to write 
responses to explore the effectiveness of a teaching practice )  . By asking questions 
Teacher Educator Authority of Position 139
during RR sessions about my role , the verbal feedback was in the moment and faceto-face , which also meant any number and types of responses might be provided by 
pre-service teachers . Perhaps in hindsight , by asking these questions , I was directly 
exposing the ways in which my authority of position was being altered as I participated in a different manner during RR sessions . 
School Experience and Roundtable Reflection
With reference to talk relating to the category of school experience , analysis of the RR 
session data suggests that the pre-service teachers ’ views of the most relevant context for 
their learning through experience was within the school context .  ( The combined total of 
instances of talk for R11 and R12 referred to school experience was 20% )  . Interestingly 
there were minimal , spontaneous , explicit references to the relevance or value of university experience / s .  ( Generally the main references to the university experience were as a 
result of questions instigated by me )  . These results may suggest that pre-service teachers , 
in valuing school experience ( and showing this valuing through unpacking their learning ) 
will have the need to understand more about the ways in which they learn within this 
context as it will have immediate repercussions in their practice . 
A number of pre-service teacher responses refer to the roundtable sessions and 
their value . For example :  “ I like the small group ; you can ’ t be distracted really easily 
so you have to focus ”  ( Jen , R12 )  . Pre-service teachers generally acknowledged that 
RR sessions were a means whereby they could effectively unpack their learning in 
a trusting and supportive environment . Perhaps then , the RR context is where their 
authority of experience may be developed as it encourages pre-service teachers to 
critically select learning and / or teaching experiences and unpack the experience as 
a means of determining learning ? It might be also that RR sessions provide 
pre-service teachers with a means to identify the essence of their learning , as it is 
in identifying the essence that the authority of experience might develop . In this 
way , pre-service teachers are less reliant on propositional knowledge and more 
reliant on extracting meaning from their own experiences as pre-service teachers . 
Their experiences are validated and contribute to their growth as learners . 
Studying Teacher Educator Talk over Time : Intended and Actual
Earlier in this chapter I noted that the numbers of instances of my talk were considerably higher than I had anticipated . Understanding what and how I contributed was 
important for me in determining whether I was offering shared and equitable access 
to dialogue . One aspect of my attempt to share the power base with pre-service 
teachers in our RR sessions was through shared and equitable access to dialogue , so 
understanding more about my talk became important to me as I needed to distinguish the intended from the actual , in instances of my talk . Did I speak less over 
time ? If pre-service teacher talk was an important practice in establishing their authority 
140 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
of experience as new teachers , then was I allowing this growth to happen by not 
dominating the talk ? The results from a comparative RR analysis were surprising to 
me . My belief was that my contributions to the RR dialogue had decreased over the 
years of this self-study . I selected two roundtable sessions , at random , which were 
conducted one year apart . I chose the first session and one session mid-way through 
the study to compare . Following is a comparative analysis of two RR sessions ( R1 , 
2002 and R11 , 2003 )  . 
Analysing this data raised some pertinent issues for me about evidence of 
change in practice . The same number of pre-service teachers verbally participated 
in each excerpt from the RR discussion ( 9 ) and by analysing the percentage of total 
words , it was evident that there were the same number of dominant voices in each 
session .  ; These were : Sandi ( 23 . 8% )  , Shonia ( 15 . 9% ) and Robyn ( i . e .  , me )  ( 37 . 4% ) 
in R1 , and Mal ( 27 . 5% )  , Mary ( 18 . 9% ) and Robyn ( 35 . 6% ) in R11 . In both 
excerpts , I had not only been a dominant contributor to the discussion , but in fact , 
I had dominated the talk ; approximately one third of the total RR session time was 
talk directed by me . One key difference between the two roundtables which became 
evident as a result of my analysis was that the average number of words per instance 
of my talk decreased from 52 ( R1 ) to 25 ( R11 )  . I still was a dominant voice during 
RR sessions in terms of frequency of contributions , but using fewer words . 
This was a revelation for me as I had believed that through time , I had reshaped 
my role so that I did not dominate the talk . I then became curious about my talk and 
the ways in which I structured my talk . Had the structure changed over time ? 
During R1 I asked six questions ; provided three transitions to further discussions ; 
one explanation and three summaries of talk . During R11 , I asked five questions , 
provided three transitions to further discussions ; three explanations ; and one exploration of the role of the teacher educator . Surprisingly , not only had my total percentage of talk remained the same , but my style of talk had also remained the same . 
I had not changed the frequency or the pattern of my contributions , even though my 
perception was that I was behaving differently . 
The comparative analysis of my talk over time is interesting for many reasons . 
Even though I had acknowledged and identified that I wanted to establish a shared 
power base through more equal distribution of talk ; even though I had adopted a 
formal structure to assist this aspect in my practice ( i . e .  , ALACT )  ; even though 
I had introduced new structures to enable a fore grounding of pre-service teacher 
experience ( Roundtables ; Commuting partner teaching in schools )  , I still was a 
dominant voice in discussions , and my style had scarcely altered . This indicates for 
me that although changing practice is difficult , researching the attempts and the 
outcomes will remain integral to my practice . 
Summary : Challenging My Assumption
By examining both a snapshot of practice ( Chelsea ) and ongoing regular practices 
( such as RR sessions ) I have come to understand more about the ways in which 
developing one ’ s authority of experience is dependent not only on having experience 
Summary : Challenging My Assumption 141
but is also influenced by such factors as :  ( 1 ) one ’ s authority of position ;  ( 2 ) the why 
and what of negotiation ; and ( 3 ) the need to extract and make explicit the essence of 
learning . Individual authority of experience is enhanced if pre-service teachers and 
teacher educators are reconceptualised in the learning and teaching context as colearners . Reconceptualisation , although necessary , needs to be accompanied by 
researching practice if genuine change is to eventuate . My reflection on my learning 
exposes my initial assumption as somewhat idealistic and considerably more complex in its enactment than I had envisaged . In other words , researching my practice 
has highlighted for me that modifying routine , beliefs and behaviours ( with reference to pre-service teachers and me ) particularly in relation to the more equitable 
distribution of power is a more challenging task than it ostensibly appears . 
Authority of Position
My authority of position as teacher educator and indeed the impact of my authority 
of position needed to be acknowledged . As much as I intended to co-share the power 
base with my pre-service teachers , my intentions were at times thwarted by my position .  ( This was clearly articulated by Chelsea in her reflection on the Forum session 
where she was hesitant about challenging the negotiated outcomes of the LTM unit .  ) 
However , RR sessions provide some insight into the ways in which pre-service 
teachers had begun to work around their views of my authority of position , for 
instance , in fore grounding issues emanating from their experiences , rather than 
deferring to me and my experiences . Their approach might suggest that they were 
becoming less dependent on working from more formal propositional knowledge , or 
theories about teaching , in an attempt to develop their own authority , acknowledging 
the value of their experiences in informing their learning about teaching . Teacher 
educators need to acknowledge the authority of position that they have and understand that pre-service teachers need to be exposed to opportunities to find new ways 
of dealing with ( Finkel , 2000 ) the person in the authority of position ( Munby & 
Russell , 1994 , p . 92 )  . One new way might be the introduction of RR sessions . 
I had taken for granted my authority of position so much so , that I did not initially 
recognise its effects on the ways that pre-service teachers negotiate and / or participate in 
RR sessions . When the impact of my position of authority did become apparent I needed 
to encourage pre-service teachers to understand that genuine attempts were being made 
by me to focus on sharing this power with them and developing their authority of experience through valuing and exploring their experiences of learning about teaching . 
The Why and What of Negotiation
Negotiation not only requires learner consent ( as this consent cannot be forced ) but 
also the acquisition of particular personal and professional tools or skills . These 
142 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
tools include the provision of explicit ways of how to negotiate in conjunction with 
why negotiate ( or contribute to dialogue )  . An important issue raised by Chelsea and 
reflected in power and authority research ( for example , Shor , 1997 ) is that of repercussion or reprisal which might result from a pre-service teacher attempting to 
negotiate and / or challenge the power status-quo . Therefore , in responding to calls 
for negotiation , for example , pre-service teachers need to feel that by taking risks 
and challenging the taken-for-granted , that they have some degree of protection . 
This is identified by Chelsea when she suggests that she “  .  .  . felt positive about having the opportunity in a non threatening environment to express myself , knowing 
that ‘ the boss ’ would not in turn display negative behaviour or attitude toward me ”  
( Forum , Week Two , 2002 ) and “ the students need to understand that , with negotiation , there would not be repercussions ”  ( Personal communication , July 2003 )  . Shor 
( 1997 ) states that the desire to promote a shared-authority base in education 
requires that teacher [ educators ] often need to “ teach by the seat of their pants ” in 
transferring some “ momentum to the students ”  ( p . 104 )  . In order to transfer 
momentum , pre-service teachers need to know and practice skills of negotiation , 
and believe that there will not be reprisal . As previously stated in this chapter , 
although I did indeed intend to share the power base with the pre-service teachers 
in both negotiating and unpacking their teaching and learning , I did not intentionally consider the negotiation skills required of both pre-service teachers and me in 
order to share a power base effectively . Tools for negotiation need to be addressed 
and made explicit and it also needs to be acknowledged that some pre-service 
teachers may be more inclined to accept and use tools of negotiation for negotiation 
than others . 
Teacher educators also require negotiation tools . My negotiation tools were 
developed as a result of teaching primary school students for many years . As selfstudy scholars have reported in research of their teaching there simply is no script 
for teacher educators ’ work ( see , for example , Mueller , 2003 )  , and coming to 
understand more about what is required for negotiation became an integral part of 
my script . As Maturana and Varela ( 1998 ) suggest we “ lay down a path while walking ”  ( p . 11 ) and in this way , much of what we come to know as educators is not 
only the result of experience but of reflecting on experience and reframing experience so that it informs future practice . For me these negotiation tools included the 
ability to listen ; to understand more about intent and motivation ; to remain strategically silent ( by this I mean the ability to use professional judgement about knowing 
what to negotiate and when ) and to acknowledge my responsibility to develop relationships with the pre-service teachers . 
Understanding More About the Nature of Co-learning
A key question for me arising from my examination of the assumption which 
underpins this chapter is : Can we ( pre-service teachers and teacher educator ) ever 
be truly regarded as co-learners with so much underlying tension related to the 
Understanding More About the Nature of Co-learning 143
teacher educator authority of position ? My research leads me to make a cautioned 
response of , yes . Initially , I had not considered myself a co-learner ; rather a facilitator , a modeller and / or an animator of learning . Co-learning within this environment 
however , required an examination of experience and a constant questioning of 
accepted values and practices . One means of achieving the aim of teacher educator / pre-service teacher co-learner through this research has been through establishing and carefully monitoring the talk during RR sessions . 
I have come to recognise through the experience of this research that co-learning 
is an important role in learning more about teaching and learning in teacher education . However , the role of co-learner may not necessarily mean equal access to dialogue , for example , and / or an equally shared power base . It might mean that we 
( co-learners ) learn alongside one another and in this sense , and in extracting our 
own core learning we are contributing to our own authority of experience ; these 
learnings then become personal outcomes . Perhaps the authority of position as a 
teacher educator needs to be acknowledged as such and it is in making the impact 
of this position explicit , that all learners can then explore ways to deal differently 
with the ways on which this perceived authority might impact learning . 
However , just because pre-service teachers have an experience , it does not necessarily follow that they have gained / developed their authority of experience . Some 
key understandings emerge in terms of co-learning and they include a need to make 
new learning explicit ; establish a trusting environment ; make explicit the possible 
impact of my authority of position ; establish ways in which we can effectively 
negotiate using skills ; become aware of contradictions in practice and finally , offer 
legitimate choices so that pre-service teachers feel that they have some choice , and 
therefore increased control and ownership over the direction of their learning . 
In terms of my research , it is apparent that , as Munby and Russell ( 1994 ) suggest , 
experience must be had , in order that authority of experience might be developed . Preservice teachers ’ experiences in schools and their experience of reflecting at the roundtable provided opportunities for the having of the experience . For pre-service teachers , 
different kinds of experience contribute to different forms of authority for them . What 
they see as legitimate really matters . The analysis of my data also suggests that their 
experiences as pre-service teachers provided the stimulus for reflection and hence the 
ownership of the learning that emanated from that experience . Where experience and 
reflection intersect there were opportunities for their authority of experience to 
develop . As a teacher educator I continue to ask : What might this look like ? Sound 
like ? One way that has been revealed through this research is in pre-service teachers ’ 
regular references to interactions , and the way these interactions impacted on their 
learning and how this made them feel : thus highlighting a connection between the 
affective dimensions of learning and the development of an authority of experience . 
The authority of position as a teacher educator needs to be acknowledged before 
it can be manipulated . It is through having and analysing experience ( partner teaching and RR sessions ) that individual authority of experience can begin to develop . 
Co-learning may not necessarily mean equal access to dialogue but may be interpreted in multiple ways in a teaching and learning environment and one of the 
interpretations of co-learning might mean learning alongside one another . 
144 8 Developing our Authority of Experience
Developing an “ Authority of Experience ”  : Overview
In this chapter I have examined the notions of negotiation , authority of experience 
and authority of position and the possibilities of pre-service teachers and teacher 
educators being reconceptualised as co-learners . 
Negotiation ( both as a pre-service teacher and a teacher educator ) requires particular skills and tools . The tools required for effective negotiation need to be made 
explicit ; they cannot be assumed . Co-learning is an ideal I held for our practice in 
learning about teaching and for co-learning to be authentic and be mutually rewarding a shared power base is required . A shared power base for us , in this context , 
meant equitable access to dialogue , particularly during RR sessions , as it was 
anticipated that during the session pre-service teachers would unpack their learning 
associated with their experiences , not mine . To enable pre-service teacher growth 
in their individual authority of experience , I needed to devolve authority and allow 
this unpacking to occur . Although I assumed that this was the case , examination of 
the data suggested that in practice , little had altered in terms of me being a dominant contributor and often , dominating RR sessions . I continue to work with this 
aspect of my practice . 
Developing an “ Authority of Experience ”  : Overview 145
Part III
Powerful Pedagogy
Conducting self-study research has highlighted the ways in which examining 
everyday classroom interactions can lead to powerful new learning and enhance a 
pedagogy of teacher education . In the final section of this book , I ( re ) examine my 
assumption about the role of self-study in learning about teaching and establish the 
importance of using assumption interrogation as a lens through which to examine 
my practice . Self-study demands a reconceptualisation of teacher educators ’ and 
pre-service teachers ’ roles in learning . It emphasises not only the development of 
self but others , and aims for improvement in teaching and learning about teaching . 
It is an evolutionary and responsive process and is underpinned by inherent political 
dimensions . It alters personal and professional perceptions about teaching and also 
requires enactment of new learning in teaching . Self-study researchers theorise 
their learning and as such examine the underbelly or the drivers of their beliefs and 
practices . 
Chapter 9
Learning Through Self-Study
Assumption Five : Self-Study of Teacher Educator 
Practices Provides a Means for Enhancing 
a Pedagogy of Teacher Education
Learning through self-study is the focus for the discussion within this chapter as it 
captures for me the salient aspects of ‘ coming to know ’ as a teacher educator . 
Identifying and challenging taken-for-granted assumptions about teaching and 
learning provided a lens for me to examine my practice . This chapter reveals the 
ways in which exploring assumptions has contributed to the development of my 
pedagogy as a teacher educator . 
Introduction
Learning through self-study ( using assumptions as a lens to scrutinise my practice ) 
has revealed much about the embeddedness of assumptions and the ways in which 
they need to be surfaced . In this chapter I offer a synthesis of my learning and 
illustrate the ways in which I needed to , first identify and describe my assumptions 
about learning and teaching , then explore the ways in which these assumptions 
underpinned and shaped my practice . I also examine the sub-assumptions which 
became evident through this analysis of my practice . Finally , I illustrate the ways in 
which new understandings about my learning and teaching have been woven into 
my teacher education practice . 
Revisiting my initial ideas of this research has been an important means of coming to understand more about the ways that my pedagogy has developed over time . 
Initially , the focus of my research ( and the intention which underpinned assumption 
identification ) was to find ways in which I could assist pre-service teachers to learn 
more effectively about teaching and learning mathematics . However , more recently 
I have come to see the ways in which my understanding of myself has influenced 
not only my view of pedagogy , but also how it has tangibly influenced my practice . 
In defining more about my pedagogy , I note the work of Loughran ( 2006 ) who 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 149
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008
states that pedagogy “ is about the relationship between teaching and learning and 
how together they lead to growth in knowledge and understanding through meaningful practice ”  ( p . 2 )  . As a means of explaining my learning through this selfstudy , I draw on the work of Senese ( 2002 ) who identified axioms as a way of 
explaining how he learnt about himself and the impact of that on his teaching . His 
axioms included :  “ go slow to go fast ”  ; and ,  “ be tight to be lose ”  ( p . 47 )  . In retrospect , I see now the value of contemplation to discern the essence of my practice 
and the impact of practice on learners . For me , learning to stand back to see ways 
forward adequately describes the ways in which reflecting on my work over the 
past five years has created new understandings , challenged existing and deeply 
embedded assumptions about learning and teaching and provided a changed framework from which to operate as a teacher educator . 
The following section is introduced by way of a discussion related to the role of 
 ‘ ideals ’ in teacher education and I use ideals as a base to foreground the implementation and sustainability of change in teacher education . 
Ideals in Teacher Education
Much has been written about ideals in education ( for example , Brookfield , 1995 ; 
Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ) and the ways in which ideals can influence practice . In my 
context ideals relate to big picture aspirations and reflect an ultimate objective 
which I consider necessary for successful teaching and learning . With reference to 
Brookfield ’ s ( 1995 ) categories of assumptions , ideals correspond with the level of 
the paradigmatic ; that is , assumptions which are the most difficult to uncover , and 
often , the most difficult to alter . 
As a precursor to unpacking my ideals for teacher education , I believe it is 
important to understand the forces which work against transforming ideals into 
tangible and sustainable outcomes in teacher education . The following offers one 
way of thinking about this situation . Many ideals remain as ideals as they get lost 
in the process of workshopping ; a term employed as a means of explaining why 
there might be a lack of imagination and creativity in teacher education . For example , a creative idea is had . It is spoken about with another and in this sharing it 
becomes reshaped and some provisos and ‘ what ifs ’ become caveats to the ideal . It 
is then taken to another collective and this collective works through the foundations 
and possibilities and it is further reframed . The idea finally arrives at its end point , 
looking and feeling quite different from the original ( and perhaps radical ) ideal . It 
is now far more palatable for the majority , less controversial and more within a 
regular mould ; less ingenious . What began as an ideal which perhaps pushed comfort zones has been remodeled and reframed to resemble that which perhaps already 
existed . Therefore , there need to be opportunities in learning and teaching contexts 
where ideals can take root and challenge the status-quo in education . For example , 
a collective needs to begin with an ideal and imagine pathways ( rather than barriers ) to its achievement . Considered in this light , the framework for working towards 
150 9 Learning Through Self-Study
ideals was in place for me . This framework consisted of a course structure which 
was flexible ; a broader university culture that encouraged and supported innovative 
practice ; pre-service teachers and staff who were prepared to take professional risks 
and challenge the status-quo and teachers in schools who were prepared to provide 
a different style of mentorship for pre-service teachers . 
In retrospect , I can see that as a consequence of understanding the nature of ideals and the change process , generally , it seems that top-down or externally driven 
changes can be destined to fail due to the very nature of the external impetus . 
Imposing change is a less effective means of achieving sustainable and meaningful 
change in teacher education as often the change process is one that is reactive and 
responsive rather than proactive and authentic . Therefore , ownership ( and thereby 
carriage ) of the ideal is imperative . Alongside ownership is the requirement for , and 
recognition of , one ’ s professional autonomy . Professional autonomy is integral to 
self-study research as the research focus cannot be held fixed in one time and place . 
The learning is constantly in motion . Teacher educator responses to learning and 
teaching situations need to be in the moment . Decisions about alternative future 
plans for practice reflect professional judgment . Hence the value of self-study 
research . Self-study research gives voice to teacher educators , pre-service teachers 
and most importantly , in my context , connects with the learners in schools . The 
issues that are dealt with arise from authentic contexts . Assumption hunting , identification and challenging offers rich ways in to unpacking deeper understandings 
of learning and teaching – not only about the choices made in our teaching and 
learning contexts but in the ways that we might use new understandings to inform 
and alter practice / s . 
In summary , pursuing ideals matters . It was important for me , that I ( and others ) 
did not workshop the life and / or potential out of the ideas . Professional judgment 
is paramount but professional judgment is not an insurance policy against failure , 
mistakes and disillusion . These aspects of creating a living ideal need to be 
embraced , and self-study provides the support mechanism for embracing such a 
challenge . 
In the following section , I discuss the multiple lenses that self-study researchers 
have used to examine their practice . My lens is the assumption lens . I then consider 
my learning through referring to Brookfield ’ s ( 1995 ) three categories of assumptions ( commonsense , or causal ; prescriptive ; and , paradigmatic )  . For each category , 
I identify the assumption and the practices related to the assumption ; I reflect 
on the ways in which I have come to understand more about my learning and I state 
the ways in which my practice has altered . 
Assumptions as a Lens for Learning About Practice
As mentioned , self-study researchers have implemented various lenses for researching and understanding their practice . These lenses include “ tensions ”  ( Berry , 2004b )  ;  
 “ anecdotes ”  ( Loughran , 2006 )  ;  “ assertions ”  ( Loughran & Northfield , 1996 )  ; and 
Assumptions as a Lens for Learning About Practice 151 
 “ axioms ”  ( Senese , 2002 ; Austin & Senese , 2004 )  . Assumptions are another form of 
lens ( Brandenburg , 2004a )  . As a collection of beliefs about ourselves , they make us 
who we are ; influence the ways in which we operate and become filters for the 
ways in which we see and understand the world . It was through framing my learning about teaching through assumptions that I could identify and examine the ways 
in which my beliefs about teaching and learning both underpinned and influenced 
my practice as a mathematics teacher educator . By using Brookfield ’ s ( 1995 ) 
categorisation of assumptions – paradigmatic , prescriptive and causal – I have 
learnt more about my assumption base and the complexities surrounding the very 
notion of assumption hunting , identification and understanding . 
What becomes paramount in understanding more about the ways in which 
examining assumptions can lead to deeper understandings of pedagogy however , is 
not only the identification of the “ causal ”  ( and commonsense ) assumptions , but an 
examination and backtracking through to more deeply embedded “ prescriptive ” and 
 “ paradigmatic ” assumptions ( Brookfield , 1995 , p . 3 )  . Much can be extrapolated 
about the ways in which the most deeply embedded assumptions ( the paradigmatic ) 
can be interpreted as commonsense assumptions , and yet to alter any form of 
assumption and / or belief remains at the least a challenge , and at most , according to 
some researchers ( e . g .  , Pajares , 1992 ) almost impossible . 
Commonsense Teaching from a Commonsense Base
In retrospect , much of my modified approach to learning and teaching mathematics 
was based on what I believed to be commonsense practice based on commonsense 
assumptions ( for example , reflecting in and on practice ; teaching practice in schools ; 
engaging pre-service teachers in taking responsibility for their learning ; involving 
pre-service teachers in the negotiation of content )  . However , it was not until I began 
to unpack how each of these commonsense assumptions influenced my approach to 
implementing commonsense practices that I began to understand more about my 
own thinking and how that influenced my approach to teaching . I now illustrate this 
new understanding by referring to the example of partner teaching . 
Partner Teaching
I had supervised and mentored pre-service teachers when I was a teacher in primary 
schools , a practice that began in my second year of teaching . Then when the opportunity to reconceptualise the university mathematics units arose , I explored the 
value of partner teaching ( the “ commuting model ” as per Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ) 
because my previous experiences of working with student teachers in schools led 
me to see the inherent value of a shared approach to planning , teaching , evaluation 
and reflection . 
152 9 Learning Through Self-Study
Many sub-assumptions underpinned this practice . For example , I assumed that 
shared learning in an unknown teaching environment would provide a supportive 
structure ; that peer feedback was valuable ; that many teachers , pre-service teachers , 
assistants work together in a classroom at one time ( a practice which is now the 
norm , so experience with the norm is important )  ; that pre-service teachers like to 
be active as learners and that pre-service teachers need to learn about compromise . 
Many of these sub-assumptions were embedded in my initial thinking . Therefore , 
for me , these sub-assumptions did not require challenging – they simply were . 
However , it was through pre-service teachers using multiple modes of reflection 
( both oral and written ) that I came to see that even the simplest ( and for me , least 
complex ) of my assumptions had an impact on pre-service teacher learning and 
needed to be questioned and reshaped . 
Not all pre-service teachers were comfortable with partner teaching . As has been 
discussed in Chapter 5 , although many pre-service teachers indicated that a teaching 
partnership was a positive learning experience , some negative feedback raised further 
questions for me about the nature of the partner teaching arrangement . For example , 
who should establish the partnership ? Should the partnership be friendship based ? As 
some pre-service teachers stated , it can be difficult for friends to give feedback to each 
other since they may hold back from offering a response that might be perceived as 
critical of that person in order to preserve their friendship , or conversely , may offer 
feedback that is perceived as personally critical or hurtful and in the process , sever a 
friendship . I had not considered the impact of the ways in which teaching partnerships 
were constructed . What was commonsense for me was not commonsense for others . 
Changed Practices
Bringing this new knowledge about pre-service teacher partnerships to the LTM 
classes extends both my own and pre-service teacher learning about teaching as it 
identifies options related to the construction , implementation and value of teaching 
partnerships . With reference to my current role , I continue to encourage pre-service 
teachers to establish their own partnerships but prior to the pairing , I make explicit 
the multiple ways in which a partnership might be constructed . 
We discuss the benefits and drawbacks of partnerships based on established 
friendships ; the multiple ways in which the partnership might function in practice ; 
and the ways in which partnerships might extend to critical partnerships ( i . e .  , the 
feedback on teaching provided is a means of promoting further growth as a teacher 
and learner about teaching )  . Prior to studying the nature of my assumptions related 
to partner teaching , my emphasis was on the logistics of the partnership ; the 
schools ; the timing of visits and the connections with school personnel . I recognise 
that , in many ways , the nature of my concerns were similar to the kinds of concerns 
that , in their initial experiences of teaching , preoccupy pre-service teachers about 
management and organisation . Hence a parallel is drawn between our experiences , 
and I can better appreciate how and why they may become caught up with these . 
Commonsense Teaching from a Commonsense Base 153
In order to direct my pedagogy more purposefully towards the nature of the partnership , my focus now is on the ways in which teaching partnerships operate so that 
pre-service teachers can be encouraged to provide support and critical feedback on 
teaching and learning about teaching . 
Understanding more about the sub-assumptions related to partner teaching has 
also enabled me to prepare pre-service teachers more adequately for their partner 
teaching by making explicit the ways in which they can critique a person in a teaching situation and be less critical of the person . The structure I have incorporated 
into my LTM units is that of peer assessment of tutorial presentations , whereby 
teams of pre-service teachers research and present a shadow topic to the remainder 
of the class .  ( A shadow topic is a content area in mathematics whereby pre-service 
teachers have identified specific gaps in their understanding , for example , decimals ; 
where they struggle to identify the key learning stages ; and generally , where they 
feel they have minimal understanding )  . In this way pre-service teachers are encouraged to take some risks , move away from their own content comfort zones and 
explore possibilities with content areas they find challenging . 
A requisite for all pre-service teachers is to peer critique each of the presentations , and at the conclusion of the session , the discussion revolves around pre-set 
criteria . Each pre-service teacher is required to write a reflection ( which is returned 
to each of the team members presenting ) and discuss their opinions and suggestions 
with the presenting team . The assessment for the unit also becomes a shared 
responsibility . Ultimately , I see this as modeled critique where the impetus for the 
discussion emerges from an authentic experiential base , but can also be guided by 
me in terms of structure , synthesis and support . It was through identifying my own 
assumptions about teaching and learning that I have come to see how I might begin 
to more purposefully shape my teaching towards my ideals . 
Prescriptive Assumptions in Learning About Teaching
Assumption hunting and identification has been a difficult process . It has also been 
messy . As I have indicated in the above section , examining the assumptions which 
underpinned my teaching revealed the ways in which even the simplest or commonsense assumptions comprise multiple sub-assumptions and shaped my approach . 
When I map out my assumptions I note that there is a propensity for me to state my 
beliefs about learning and teaching as prescriptive assumptions ( i . e .  , those which 
reflect what a good educational process should look like ) as ways in which preservice teacher learning might be enhanced . I speak of multiple reflective practices 
being a conduit for pre-service teacher critical reflection ; Roundtable Reflection 
being an effective means to challenge pre-service teachers ’ taken-for-granted 
assumptions ; the value of verbal participation ; and , I reveal my beliefs about the 
importance of co-learning in teacher education . 
All of these combine to reflect a platter of assumptions , and all within a particular category . Many of these assumptions have been challenged as a result of studying 
154 9 Learning Through Self-Study
my practice . It has also been interesting for me in the process of this self-study to 
note that all of the four key assumptions which were identified as the focus for the 
analysis chapters refer to the ways in which I envisaged that pre-service teachers 
might be encouraged to connect in deeper ways with their learning by reflecting on 
their experience . I had not consciously considered the ways in which reflecting in 
and on my practice would affect the ways in which I now understand the how 
and why of my pedagogy as a mathematics teacher educator . This identification 
marks an important shift in recognising the importance of acknowledging my own 
learning . 
One prescriptive assumption I had was that multiple reflective tools would contribute to pre-service teacher critical reflection . In the next section I examine the 
nature of my ( prescriptive ) assumption about using a range of reflective tools . 
I look at the ways in which the multiple facets of this assumption revealed not only 
my intentions related to reflective practices but also my expectations about preservice teacher learning . It was not until I had reflected in greater depth on the 
feedback from pre-service teachers that I began to see the ways in which their 
reflections on their learning ultimately impacted me and my learning . 
Using Multiple Reflective Tools
Reflection is a generic skill , encouraged in teacher education to enable pre-service 
teachers to examine their experiences in deep and meaningful ways . Initially , when 
I began my study , I did not question the validity of this claim or the practice of 
using multiple tools to enhance reflection . To me , it was commonsense practice . As 
Gore ( 1993 , p . 149 ) suggested , it “ would be virtually inconceivable to find a 
teacher educator who would advocate unreflective teaching ”  . Commonsense , yes : 
Prescriptive for me , yes . In retrospect , some of my key assumptions combined the 
elements of being both commonsense and prescriptive ( reflecting what I believed a 
good educational practice might look like )  . By encouraging the use of multiple 
reflective tools , I foresaw that skills would be developed to help unpack learning . 
Once again , it became evident that my prescriptive assumption about the use of 
reflective tools was underpinned by many sub-assumptions . What does a commonsense practice ( perhaps masquerading in my self-study as a prescriptive assumption ) look like ? How does it feel for us ( pre-service teacher / teacher educator ) to be 
involved in multiple types of reflection in and on practice ? Through examining the 
impact on pre-service teachers of using reflective multiple tools , I have come to see 
that a structured approach can guide reflection so that it does not become a 
( re ) telling of experiences had ( Munby & Russell , 1994 )  . Through using , for example , ALACT , as a framework , pre-service teachers ( through critically selecting 
issues that mattered to them to reflect on ) revealed to me more about the kinds of 
choices that they made about what to reflect on . 
I have also come to see that a framework , such as ALACT , provided me with 
the means by which to monitor my own practice as a teacher educator within this 
Prescriptive Assumptions in Learning About Teaching 155
remodeled learning environment . Although ALACT was integral to the RR sessions , as a guide it has application in various contexts . Much of the ALACT 
cycle has transferable qualities and I now use the framework as a guide especially during critical conversations , incidents and events . For example , during 
one-on-one conversations , it is possible to identify the issue and through working through an ALACT cycle , an individual might identify their problem ( for 
example ) and explore alternative ways of both viewing the problem and exploring alternatives . 
My deeper understandings about the use of models by which to frame reflective 
practice has contributed to my pedagogy by way of helping me understand more 
about the prescriptive nature of the assumption .  ( In this case , that assumption being 
that pre-service teachers , and teacher educators , can benefit by using a framework 
for reflection ; therefore reflective frameworks are useful tools for teacher education .  ) Importantly , new understandings emerged from our experiences of these tools 
and from systematically examining data gathered from day-to-day interactions , and 
written reflections . 
Modified Practices
By identifying and evaluating the assumptions that underpinned my altered practices in the LTM units , I have come to see that prescriptive assumptions remained 
in motion . By motion I mean that in many ways they remained in a state of fluidity 
and the reason I see for this is that they were not as entrenched or embedded as 
were paradigmatic assumptions . They were created to meet a need to work towards 
an ideal and for my need to know more ; therefore had not experienced a long 
life preceding this study . Although the ownership of the assumptions ( and subassumptions ) was evident , I was aware of , and prepared to modify my practices 
based on these prescriptive assumptions . Perhaps my practices changed because 
I anticipated that they would . Some of these changed practices relate to the ways 
in which RR sessions are conducted ; the introduction of peer critique in LTM 
classes ; the modification of written reflections and the retraction of assigning 
marks for reflection . 
Paradigmatic Assumptions in Learning About Teaching
Through this self-study , I have come to recognise that assumption hunting can lead 
one to uncover those assumptions which are paradigmatic , and therefore direct our 
teaching from a deeper level . These assumptions can be challenged and the challenging requires a continuing focus on the ways that the assumption plays out in 
teaching and learning . First , the assumption needs to be identified and the ways in 
which the assumption influences practice needs to be established .  ( For me , the 
156 9 Learning Through Self-Study
practices or experiences which led me to change my assumption were structures 
such as Roundtable Reflection , partner teaching and introducing multiple ways of 
reflecting on practice )  . Then the practices need to be scrutinised by way of data 
collection and ongoing analysis . Finally for me , after three years , I can now look 
back to see not only that my paradigmatic assumptions have been challenged but 
also that particular processes have been instrumental for me in working through and 
meeting this challenge . 
The Role of Experience in Exploring Assumptions
Understanding more about the way in which my pedagogy has developed did not 
just happen ; it was the result of focused inquiry on experience as both a teacher and 
a learner . One key paradigmatic assumption ( Brookfield , 1995 ) which pervaded this 
self-study was that the role of experience is crucial in developing understanding of 
teaching and learning . Therefore , if this assumption is viewed as part of a learning 
continuum , then at the opposing end of the spectrum might be the transmission 
model of teaching . This model assumes that knowledge can be packaged and transferred unproblematically to another individual . Identifying this paradigmatic 
assumption has been most informative for me as a teacher / researcher . 
Exploring this point more deeply , I see that as Brookfield suggests , paradigmatic 
assumptions “ are examined critically only after a great deal of resistance in doing 
so , and it takes a considerable amount of contrary evidence .  .  . to change them ”  
( 1995 , p . 3 )  . My lead up to this self-study helped me to see that even though I 
thought I operated from a constructivist base , in reality , I modelled a type of teaching which reflected more of a transmissive approach to teaching and learning . Preservice teachers were satisfied with this as they wanted to be supplied with tips and 
tricks for classroom success and therefore became reliant on me as supplier of 
answers to their perceived learning needs . I needed their affirmation and , as at that 
time as a beginning teacher educator , I was unsure about my role . However , a challenge to my learning came by way of a sense of personal and professional dissatisfaction , when I began to recognise the contradictions in my practice ; Whitehead ’ s 
( 1993 )  “ living contradiction ”  . It was by working through these contradictions that 
I came to see the value of pre-service teacher and teacher educator learning being 
more thoroughly explored through a focus on pre-service teachers ’ experiences , 
and not mine . 
For me , this realisation represents a major shift in one of my key paradigmatic assumptions . This shift is towards a belief that learning experiences must 
not only be had by an individual , but that :  ( 1 ) pre-service teacher and teacher 
educator expectations about learning matter ; and ( 2 ) changed practice can be the 
result of extracting the ‘ essence of learning ’  ( acknowledging and valuing the 
authority of experience )  . Each of these new understandings , which have been 
developed through reflecting on my experience , could represent new prescriptive 
assumptions ( and hence contribute to new ways of understanding and enacting 
Paradigmatic Assumptions in Learning About Teaching 157
paradigmatic assumptions ) which I have developed , which in turn have influenced my pedagogy . 
Expectations About Learning Matter
Learning about teaching in teacher education is complex . More often than not , my 
research has provided evidence to suggest that engaging in activity ( such as teaching , presenting tutorial sessions , Roundtable Reflection sessions and actively constructing teaching aids , for example ) is preferred by pre-service teachers in their 
mathematics units . Therefore , my assumptions about activity based learning and 
the pre-service teacher assumptions ( generally ) about the value of such an active 
approach to learning about and through teaching , in many ways connected . In this 
way , our simple and perhaps commonsense assumptions linked . 
What did become obvious throughout the study of my practice was that I had 
quite different expectations about the outcomes of the experiences , and it was 
through the challenging of these expectations that I was led to see the ways in 
which some assumptions needed to alter . I refer , for example , to my prescriptive 
assumption about Roundtable Reflection and the inherent value for pre-service 
teachers in being provided with structured opportunities to unpack their experiences in a supportive environment . One sub-assumption related to Roundtable 
Reflection was that those who verbally participated in the discourse were maximising their opportunities for learning . My learning from an interrogation of this 
sub-assumption shows how I have been challenged to recognise the power of 
silence and the ways in which silence ( during RR sessions ) represented more than 
an absence of talk . My initial response to the less verbal contributors was to judge 
them as being disengaged or disinterested . In conjunction with this initial judgment , I was therefore unable to determine the ways in which they were connecting 
with , or unpacking , their learning as I had few verbal clues . Their silence was 
frustrating for me , and limiting , in that my understanding about their learning was 
minimal . 
Exploring silence has enhanced not only my pedagogy , but altered my beliefs 
and impacted my practice as a teacher educator . Silence might indicate a multiplicity of responses ( such as fear ; the inability to keep up with the pace and flow of the 
conversation ; nothing new to add ; and / or an active resistance )  . Some pre-service 
teachers have a propensity for a particular learning style . This became most evident 
during RR sessions . Not all learners felt the desire to unpack their learning in this 
environment . Studying my practice has shown that not all learners reflect on their 
experiences ‘ just like me ’  , and that I need to be aware of the less verbal contributors 
so that they have opportunities and others ( such as me ) do not limit those 
opportunities . 
Two key understandings have emerged through examining the assumptions and 
the sub-assumptions related to RR . The first is that by being less ( verbally ) dominant I could focus on other ways of learning about teaching and second , that learning 
158 9 Learning Through Self-Study
is happening in silence . I examine each of these understandings below and discuss 
how each has impacted my understanding of pedagogy . 
A Less Dominant Voice as Teacher Educator
In reviewing this assumption about maximising learning through verbal participation in RR sessions , it seems that in fact , I was maximising my learning by not participating verbally in roundtable sessions . By limiting or monitoring my participation , 
I was free to observe the interactions and evaluate learning with a more critical 
focus . For example , I considered carefully the ‘ what ’ of pre-service teacher reflection , and the types of concerns which became important for them in their learning . 
I was also able to notice more about their participation . This noticing instigated my 
search for understanding more about pre-service teachers who were either silent 
during the discussion , or who were less vocal . My intention was to take a less 
dominant verbal role in the discourse and encourage pre-service teachers to unpack 
learning based on their experiences and not mine . I learnt more about my learning 
and their learning via a combination of speaking less and reflecting on the RR sessions , over time . 
Changed Practices
Understanding more about my assumption ( related to learning through talk / learning 
in the silence ) does not always lead to altered practice . For example , I still organise 
RR sessions so that they centre on pre-service teachers ’ experiences , they are still 
conducted weekly and they still follow partner teaching in schools . They remain an 
integral practice in the LTM units . I now understand that not everything needs to 
change . If a practice has value , it should be maintained and my responsibility is to 
work towards maximising the possibilities for learning with each new group . 
An altered practice relates to the beginning point of RR sessions , whereby each 
pre-service teacher identifies one critical incident which emerged from their teaching , and they write and / or reflect on this for one to two minutes . They briefly share 
this incident with the group ( and in this way , each pre-service teacher has a voice 
and hears their voice early in the session )  . My role remains that of synthesiser , 
challenger and facilitator ( as opposed to the deliverer of the correct information or 
the right way to respond to different teaching and learning situations as deemed 
appropriate from my teaching experience )  . 
A new understanding for me is that it is easier to alter structure than the thinking 
behind the structure . Even knowing more about the thinking and understanding 
more deeply does not ensure a follow on to changes in practice . An example of this 
is my knowledge that I dominated discussions . Assumption hunting helped me to 
identify what underpinned my practice ( and sub-assumptions were revealed such as 
Paradigmatic Assumptions in Learning About Teaching 159
an expectation that I would be a major contributor and my need to evaluate learning 
through listening to discourse )  . Through formally examining my practice through 
data gathering and analysis and as much as I wanted to change ( and obviously had 
the desire ) the reality is that it still remains a challenge for me . This then leads to 
me to consider what it is that I can realistically expect of myself as a teacher educator and how that influences my expectations for my pre-service teachers . 
For me , the assumption lens was beneficial in multiple ways . It allowed me to 
focus on my learning . I was constantly reframing my learning through examining 
my practice , examining my assumptions and altering practices ; as I was able . But , 
when asking pre-service teachers ‘ to do as I do ’  , what is reasonable and fair ? In the 
following section , I examine the impact on pre-service teachers of assumption hunting , assumption identification and subsequent challenging of assumptions . 
Pre-service Teachers and Assumption Hunting
Assumptions are compounds of sub-assumptions ; they are not simple and they are 
incredibly interconnected . I know this now , but I did not know this when I embarked 
on my self-study . It has been through reframing critical incidents , interactions and 
events that I have been able to see how some critical collisions with pre-service 
teachers became the catalyst for my deeper understanding of pedagogy . In working 
with pre-service teachers , using assumption hunting as a lens to reflect on learning , 
a number of parallels between my learning and theirs became obvious . These parallels include :  ( 1 ) an understanding that assumptions become naturalised or embedded ( 65% of pre-service teachers stated they were not aware of their assumptions )  ;  
( 2 ) that assumptions are difficult to identify ; and ( 3 ) that there is an affective 
response when assumptions are challenged . While I felt I understood the difficulties 
pre-service teachers encountered in identifying ( and then challenging ) their own 
assumptions about learning and teaching mathematics , I am not sure that I anticipated the affective implications for them as learners in this context . 
Through using assumption hunting with pre-service teachers , I noted that they initially confronted very similar apprehensions and challenges as I did . The first question 
I was asked when introducing writing about assumptions was :  “ What are assumptions ?  ” In most instances , a healthy and clarifying discussion followed . As one preservice teacher stated during one class ,  “ they are the mother of all – ups ”  . When 
I asked him to explain , he suggested that assumptions are based on beliefs , rather than 
evidence and therefore can lead you in directions different than those intended . 
Raising Awareness of Embedded Assumptions
Retrospective reflection on how the impact of authority was identified exposed the 
understanding for me that perhaps power and authority had become naturalised 
160 9 Learning Through Self-Study
in my ways of teaching ; so much so that the effect of the authority of position had 
been under-considered to a point where it remained “ invisible ”  ( Kincheloe et al .  , 
1999 , p . 180 )  . By making the invisible visible , it then became possible for me to 
deal with how these notions of power were being interpreted by the learners . Selfstudy researchers have identified the pervasive role of teacher educator power and 
its concomitant professional privilege ( Bodone et al .  , 2004 ; LaBoskey , 2004 ; 
Loughran , 2004b )  . Some even suggest that the ongoing “ misuse of power , social 
justice and discrimination are culturally and systematically generated ”  ( Bodone 
et al .  , 2004 , p . 775 )  . Therefore , this research has explicated the need for me as a 
teacher educator to recognise and acknowledge the embeddedness of my authority 
of position and the ways in which my power shapes what is and is not acceptable 
as learning from the position of teacher educator . 
Prior to any examination of the ways in which individual authority of experience 
develops , I needed to understand more about the ways in which my position as a 
teacher educator was being interpreted by my pre-service teachers . Whilst my 
intention was to share and negotiate power with pre-service teachers ( and hence 
promote ownership of the process of learning ) the reality was that my position 
impacted the ways in which pre-service teachers felt that they could legitimately 
negotiate these outcomes . An initial research finding highlighted the ways in 
which , for me , my power , or authority by my position , had become a sleeper ( or 
naturalised )  , as part of my practice . Therefore , in any attempt to negotiate learning , 
I needed to consider the impact of this sleeper in my practice . In considering this 
issue now , perhaps the most effective way is to make the new learning about the 
impact of teacher educator power explicit for pre-service teachers . 
Assumptions About Self-Study
Assumption hunting ( Brookfield , 1995 ) is a powerful lens for unpacking pre-service teacher and teacher educator learning . For me , it was an important tool in my 
self-study as it allowed me to examine my practice in deeper ways . It allowed me 
to move through the different layers of assumptions from the causal ( or outer ) to 
the innermost layers . Within the innermost layers I was challenged to reveal the 
least conscious parts of my practice , and it was these deeper and less conscious 
parts of practice which had the most powerful influence in directing my practice . 
What assumptions underpin the processes associated with self-study and teacher 
education ? Interrogating my study I see that self-study represents for me , a paradigmatic assumption , as it reflects the “ basic structuring axioms [ I ] used to order [ my 
learning and teaching ] world into fundamental categories ”  ( Brookfield , 1995 , p . 3 )  . 
This study is the result of my interrogation of assumptions related to self-study . I now 
understand that :  ( 1 ) assumptions are comprised of multiple sub-assumptions ;  
( 2 ) understanding categories of assumptions is important as those most resistant to 
change ( paradigmatic ) need to be identified , examined and exposed and this process is 
time consuming and difficult ;  ( 3 ) my commonsense assumptions may not necessarily 
Paradigmatic Assumptions in Learning About Teaching 161
be shared by pre-service teachers ; and ( 4 ) prescriptive assumptions underpinned the 
ways in which the modified practices were designed and implemented . 
However , when seen as a paradigmatic assumption , self-study also reflects a 
deeper understanding for me of :  ( 1 ) the position of the researcher within the 
research process ;  ( 2 ) the role of self and others ; and ( 3 ) the pervasiveness of the 
political . In the following section I will address each of these new understandings 
which can also be understood as sub-assumptions . 
The Position of the Researcher Within the Research Process
My positioning as researcher within this self-study has been crucial in coming to 
understand more about the impact and conflict of multiple roles ( i . e .  , teacher , participant researcher )  . Key understandings were exposed as a result of studying 
practice related to the importance of distancing and balance ; ethical and moral 
responsibilities and , the impact of the context on the outcomes of the research . 
The Importance of Distancing
This self-study research has operated from an insider perspective and therefore , in 
working from the inside-out ( Loughran , 2004 )  , it was anticipated that the focus of the 
research would not only be relevant as it emerged from an authentic , naturalistic context , but additionally , would contribute to the body of teacher education literature and 
provide substantive knowledge relating to the pedagogical development of teacher educators and teacher education . The self-study approach facilitated the researching of 
practice from the inside – out and enabled me to understand more about my modus 
operandi . However , it was not until I could actively distance myself from the daily-ness 
of my practice ( Hamilton , 2002 ; Kuzmic , 2002 ; Stenhouse , 1978 ) that my learning 
about learning became evident . Distancing provided a space between the activity and 
the reflection and therefore provided a different lens from which to view the learning . 
In many cases , the learning from examining my practice emerged as a gradual process . 
As Cochran-Smith & Lytle ( 1993 ) suggested , teacher [ educators ] are : 
in the position as privileged natives who are immersed in the data yet who can at the same 
time , stand back and employ self-critical techniques . Using these strategies , teachers make 
explicit for themselves the assumptions and expectations underlying their classes .  ( p . 45 ) 
A salient example of the impact of this distancing , combined with retrospective 
reflection , was evident in the construction and completion of the multiple perspectives tasks . It was through standing back and critically reflecting on the interaction 
( for example , Sam , Chapter 6 ; Roundtable Reflection ) which provided the stimulus 
for developing the multiple perspectives task . The analysis of the results of these 
tasks exemplified individual interpretations and experience of critical events and 
162 9 Learning Through Self-Study
interactions and provided a detailed insight into perspectives . Dealing with critical interactions from a distance has been crucial in understanding more about my 
developing pedagogy as a mathematics teacher educator . 
The Importance of Balance
Throughout my study I was constantly challenged by the need for balance . There 
was a continual juggling of needs : my needs as teacher educator / participant 
researcher conducting a self-study to enhance my understanding of my practice , 
and pre-service teachers ’ needs as learners of , and about , teaching . 
Initially , the needs of the pre-service teachers were representative of the extensive research which has suggested that expectations about learning to teach are 
underpinned by : activity and action , i . e .  , the learning of how and what about teaching ; and , participation in professional experience within school contexts . The 
reframing and subsequent refocusing within these units required a systematic focus 
on inquiry : on asking questions ; about using experiences as springboards for discussion ; about reflecting on learning and making the learning explicit ; and , about 
challenging taken-for-granted assumptions about learning and teaching . There was 
an increased emphasis on asking why . This represented my way of trying to shift 
and challenge their needs as a result of identifying my needs for their learning . 
This approach contrasted directly to that which had been experienced by pre-service 
teachers in previous units and indeed for many , as learners within their own school contexts . Maintaining a balanced approach to the needs of pre-service teachers was challenging . Although the changed practices that I introduced were based on sound 
intentions , I could not conclude that that balance ( in apprehending and responding to 
their needs ) was maintained at all times . The over zealousness with which I approached 
reflection on practice became frustrating and irritating for some pre-service teachers . 
Balance requires considered and ongoing attempts to meet the needs of pre-service 
teachers and me as a teacher educator researcher . This entails making my research about 
my practice explicit and modeling the ways in which studying practice as a teacher can 
enhance learning and teaching in schools . It means I need to know their needs and my 
needs and understand the fact that these can be ( and oftentimes are ) different . Sensitivity is 
important when identifying how these needs are revealed in practice . Therefore , a key 
learning for me through self-study of my practice has been the acknowledgement of the 
need to be sensitive and this sensitivity informs my subsequent practices . 
Ethical and Moral Considerations
A third key understanding which arose as a result of examining my assumption that 
self-study provides a means for me to enhance my pedagogy as a teacher educator , 
is the multiple ways in which ethical and moral considerations underpin self-study 
Paradigmatic Assumptions in Learning About Teaching 163
research . One key example relates to pre-service teacher participation in the research . 
Participation in the learning and teaching mathematics components of the Bachelor 
of Education was compulsory and a pass in the units was a prerequisite for the 
successful completion of the Bachelor of Education Degree . Although the pre-service teachers volunteered to be involved in the research ( and were at liberty to withdraw from the study at any time )  , questions arose for me about the way in which a 
withdrawal from this study may have indeed been executed and experienced . 
Although all pre-service teachers remained a part of this study , a key ethical and 
moral consideration would have been realised if a pre-service teacher did request to 
be exempt from the study as this would pose a serious question for the researcher :  
 “ How could the pre-service teacher then complete the academic requirements for 
the satisfactory completion of the unit ? Would this person therefore , be disadvantaged in the completion of the degree ?  ” 
Reflecting more about the consequences of such a scenario prompts me to ask 
first , who does the self-study serve ? If the response is that it serves to improve 
teacher educator practice and therefore teacher educator knowing within this context , then pre-service teachers would only need to be aware of the practice ( of selfstudy ) and be informed of the new learning . If the self-study involves pre-service 
teachers ( by way of altered practice , data collection and analysis and additional 
work requirements ) then consent must be provided . In providing consent , pre-service 
teachers need to be made aware of specific and non-discriminatory options 
available to them if they withdraw from the study and these are not always known 
in advance as much that occurs in self-study is a response to unfolding insights 
from data . 
The Role of Self and Others in Self-Study
This self-study highlights for me that teacher educators do learn alongside pre-service teachers and by understanding learning in this way , meaning-making and knowledge construction are interdependent learning relationships . Acknowledging and 
challenging taken-for-granted assumptions enabled me to gain a deeper understanding of the ways in which I was learning as a teacher educator , and a great deal of this 
learning was as a result of focusing on daily interactions with others . Much has been 
reported in the education and self-study literature relating to participants who share 
the learning setting ( Loughran , 2004 ; Pereira , 2000 ; Tidwell & Fitzgerald , 2004 )  ; 
but as Bullough and Pinnegar ( 2001 ) caution “ there is always a tension between 
those two elements , self and the arena of practice , between self in relation to practice 
and the others who share the setting ”  ( p . 15 )  . This tension became obvious in this 
self-study through the questions which continued to permeate the research :  “ What 
selves were developing ?  ”  ;  “ What selves were being projected ?  ” 
My self was constantly and actively being reshaped and remodeled as a result of 
a focus on the learners , and learner interactions . For example , while I was genuinely 
attempting to refrain from dominating RR sessions , I realised I was also initially and 
164 9 Learning Through Self-Study
predominantly a vocal learner and engaged primarily with the vocal learners . 
Identifying and understanding wait-time influenced my practice within the 
roundtable sessions . Establishing and modifying learning structures and approaches 
enabled me to gain a deeper understanding not only of the ways in which the preservice teachers were operating and constructing their knowledge , but the ways in 
which I was learning , and the ways in which I needed to modify my practice to 
enhance pre-service teacher learning . 
The Pervasiveness of the Political
Teaching , and understanding the complexities of learning in teaching through a lens 
of assumption hunting reveals the political nature of practice . Establishing the 
impact of the ways in which the authority , linked to my position as a teacher educator , 
raised the focus for me to ( retrospectively ) examine the pervasiveness of the political in my classroom . It was particularly during the participation and subsequent 
analysis of the roundtable sessions that the political nature of teacher education 
classrooms emerged for me in ways that may not have been apparent had I been in 
a ‘ teacher only ’ role . What had previously remained invisible was cast into stark 
relief by systematically reflecting on the classroom discourse . This insight is illustrated in terms of my beliefs about learning which underpin my approach to learning from researching my practice : 
1 . That the construction and maintenance of democratic teacher education classrooms requires the devolution of teacher educator authority . 
2 . That a democratic teacher education classroom should provide opportunities for 
the expression of each individual learner ’ s voice . 
3 . That learning in a democratic way can create vulnerabilities , challenges and tensions for learners . 
Each of the above beliefs is now discussed in the final section of this chapter with 
reference to critical incidents , interactions and events which precipitated deeper 
understanding about the explicit and implicit role of the political in teaching and 
learning about teaching through self-study . 
The Construction and Maintenance of Democratic 
Teacher Education Classrooms Requires the Devolution 
of Teacher Educator Authority
My learning about the political as it was represented in my attempts to decenter 
myself suggested that as a teacher educator , I am required to be explicit about the 
classroom operations and provide open discussion about aspects of learning , 
Paradigmatic Assumptions in Learning About Teaching 165
learner characteristics and expectations of the discourse . In retrospect , much of my 
explicit teaching was about the structure and the framework for reflecting on experience . Future teaching will be informed by increased attempts to be explicit so as 
to create an awareness of , and attention to , the liberating effect of inclusive classroom discourse . It must be acknowledged that the outcomes of this learning had 
different meanings for all participants . For some , it could be concluded , as 
Brookfield ( 1995 ) suggested , that : 
students will wonder how the teacher thinks they ’ re doing and will be observing … closely 
for any clues to approval or censure . Students ’ awareness of the power relationship that 
exists between themselves and their teachers is such that it pervades nearly all interactions 
between them .  ( p . 11 ) 
In my study , this understanding was evidenced by the ways in which individuals 
explored the various ways to deal with me as the authority figure ( Finkel , 2000 )  . 
This challenge was initially underestimated and under-considered by me . As 
reported in the self-study literature , being a teacher educator brings with it an 
authority of position ( Munby & Russell , 1994 ) which is represented in teaching as 
 “ knowledge in action ”  ( p . 92 )  . However , the expression of that knowledge in action 
might also inadvertently place pre-service teachers “ under authority ”  ( p . 93 )  . In my 
learning about my practice , by consciously emphasising pre-service teachers ’ experiences , pre-service teacher opportunities for developing an authority of experience , 
based on their experience , is more likely to develop . 
That a Democratic Teacher Education Classroom 
Should Provide Opportunities for the Expression of Each 
Individual Learner ’ s Voice
Opportunities for articulation and examination of experience became integral to the 
approach to teaching and learning about teaching . As I came to further understand 
the classroom dynamics , a number of new understandings emerged . First , pre-service 
teachers were creating and recreating the self within this process . The presented self 
varied according to the context , the individual , the level of personal comfort , or the 
connection and / or engagement with the topic . Second , regardless of attempts to 
devolve authority , in order to enhance democratic processes and foreground the 
learning and experiences of pre-service teachers , there was a reality that I had carriage for the assessment within these mathematics units . Although the assessment 
process included a combination of self , peer and teacher educator input , ultimately 
the learning would be assessed by me . This raised questions for me regarding the 
self and how the self was being either projected or protected . Although processes 
were negotiated and pre-service teachers provided input with relation to content 
selection , tutorial presentations , and roundtable discussions , for example , a greater 
emphasis needs to be focused on the why of assessment and which approaches 
maximise both the learning and the outcomes for the learners . In my teaching 
166 9 Learning Through Self-Study
I need to explore alternative assessments whereby peer assessment , self-assessment 
and lecturer assessment combine to create a shared assessment base . 
That Learning in a Democratic Way Can Create Vulnerabilities , 
Challenges and Tensions for Learners
Self-study is based on inquiry which leads to challenging of assumptions and to 
further questions . Alteration and adaptation of practices and beliefs is an outcome 
of this process . Self-study therefore has as its aim an emphasis on transformational 
rather than transactional learning . 
Schulte ( 2002 ) defined the transformation process as : 
the continuous evolution of one ’ s own understanding and perspectives in order to better 
meet the needs of all students . It is marked by the disruption of values or cultural beliefs 
through critical reflection … Transformation requires teachers to think critically and challenge ideas of how power and control are constructed .  ( p . 101 ) 
Explicitly challenging pre-service teachers ’ and a teacher educator ’ s assumptions 
can be ( and was ) experienced as confronting , and for some such challenging created a state of disequilibrium and / or discomfort . Although as the teacher educator 
I was aware , and to a degree prepared for this possibility , pre-service teachers were 
not so well prepared . For example , I decided to restructure the unit completely and 
the students were expected to participate in the reconstruction but had little ( if any ) 
experience in doing this . They had few requisite skills and no particular reason to 
trust ( at this point ) that this new approach offered real benefits for their learning . 
Reflecting on this introductory time , represented by the ongoing myriad of their 
questions , enabled me to distil the tangible nature of the changes in my beliefs , 
practices and understandings about learning . In this sense , my learning responded 
to Loughran ’ s ( 2006 ) argument that behaviour and practice must demonstrate how 
it is altered as a result of the self-study . Structural questions have largely been 
resolved by the combination of experience , reflection and time . It was the focusing 
on , and questioning about the structural and transactional elements ( roundtable 
reflection , partner teaching written and oral reflection on practice , guiding frameworks , multiple data gathering ) which became the foundation for transformation in 
respect to my learning as a teacher educator . In terms of my own understandings of 
my vulnerabilities as a teacher educator , I have learnt now to have “ faith in indirection ”  ( Finkel , 2000 )  . I am more comfortable with the indeterminable , the uncertainties and the complexities associated with learning about teaching . I understand that 
challenges can be inspirational and can lead to an exploration of alternatives to 
achieve learning and teaching aims . I understand that what might be conceived as 
failure can become fertile ground for reflection ; and I understand that it is okay to 
feel comfortable with a lack of closure . Reviewing the multiple interpretations of 
this interaction raises the complexities of the learning environment and how this 
learning has different meanings for all participants . 
Paradigmatic Assumptions in Learning About Teaching 167
Learning Through Self-Study : Overview
This self-study reveals that using assumptions as a lens to further understand practice incorporates multiple challenges . These include :  ( 1 ) the challenge of looking 
for / hunting assumptions ;  ( 2 ) the challenge of making understandings about teaching and learning embedded in assumptions explicit ; and ( 3 ) the process of challenging the assumptions once they have been located and made explicit . Assumption 
hunting is a powerful tool to interrogate practice , and using a framework ( such as 
Brookfield ’ s categories ) has allowed me to see more deeply into the ways in which 
assumptions impact pedagogy . 
168 9 Learning Through Self-Study
Chapter 10
From Personal Pedagogy to the Broader 
Teacher Education Context
The discussion in this final chapter focuses on a key imperative associated with 
self-study of teacher education practices : that of moving from personal , contextual 
and localised learning about the development of teacher educator pedagogy , to one 
which considers possible implications and recommendations for a broader educational / professional context . As such , this chapter represents possibilities for ways 
forward in teacher education . These possibilities have arisen from the close scrutiny 
and critical reflection of , and in my practice as , a mathematics teacher educator . 
I begin this chapter with a discussion of the key areas of connection to learning 
about teaching and conclude with six recommendations which emerged as a result 
of my self-study . 
Introduction
As a way of positioning my discussion , which in essence relates my learning to a 
broader professional context by way of implications and recommendations , I return 
to the research of prominent self-study scholars ( Feldman et al .  , 2004 ; Hamilton , 
2004 ; Hamilton & Pinnegar , 1998 ; LaBoskey , 2004 ; Loughran , 2004 ) who advocate ongoing connection with the educational community as an essential requirement of self-study research . Learning about pedagogy which remains individualised , 
and is contextualised holds bounded benefits – largely , for those who participate in 
the study in a localised context . Such research conducted by teachers and teacher 
educators remains unavailable to the broader educational community . One of the 
key characteristics of self-study research is the “ construction , testing , sharing and 
re-testing of exemplars of teaching practice ”  ( LaBoskey , 2004 , p . 175 ) and making 
 “ the experience of teacher educators a resource for research ”  ( Feldman et al .  , 2004 , 
p . 959 )  . As Brown ( 2004 ) proposes ,  “ strides may be made by sharing the questions 
and knowledge from the point of practice that , ultimately , serve to support other 
educators , to contribute to developing theory and to enhance the knowledge base of 
teacher education ”  ( p . 548 )  . This implies the importance of examining and sharing 
ways of coming to know as a teacher educator rather than ways of doing teacher 
education . 
R . Brandenburg , Powerful Pedagogy : Self-Study of a Teacher Educator ’ s Practice . 169
© Springer Science + Business Media , B . V . 2008
By examining the day-to-day interactions within my mathematics pre-service 
teacher education classrooms I have identified some of the complexities associated 
with coming to know about teaching , learning and learning about teaching . An initial acknowledgement which can be elicited from this self-study is that not only do 
pre-service teachers enter teacher education with embedded preconceptions about 
what it is to teach and learn about teaching , so too do teacher educators . Although 
my initial intention in conducting this research was to understand more about preservice teachers and their learning , through self-study I have come to understand 
more about myself both as a teacher and a learner . 
In many ways , my self-study responds to criticisms leveled at teacher education 
research which suggest that there is a “ lack of close study of what teachers [ bring ] to 
the programs ”  ( Zeichner & Conklin , 2005 , p . 698 )  . In this chapter , I identify aspects 
of my learning which may have implications for other teacher educators also seeking 
to develop their pedagogy ; who are coming to know through examining their practice . 
I begin by identifying the implications for me of having conducted self-study and 
identify the new insights and knowledge I have gained from this process . 
Implications
Conducting this self-study has contributed to my knowledge about teaching , learning and learning about teaching in pre-service teacher education . A number of 
implications for teacher education practice have emerged through studying my 
practice as a mathematics teacher educator . These implications are based around 
the following areas :  ( 1 ) Growing into and through Self-Study ;  ( 2 ) Prompting 
change as a Teacher Educator ;  ( 3 ) Problem-Setting ; and ( 4 ) Multiple Perspectives . 
Growing Into and Through Self-Study
My initial intention for this research was to monitor the ways in which pre-service 
teachers developed their understanding of skills and concepts required to teach 
mathematics in Prep-Year Ten teaching contexts . The reality however , as presented 
in this self-study , represents something quite different . Through systematically 
reflecting in and on my practice and through identifying and exploring critical incidents , events and interactions , I became more deeply aware of the importance of 
scrutinising my own practice in order to learn more about prospective teachers ’ 
learning about their practice . I have also come to learn more about the process of 
engaging in self-study which for me has been framed by the following seven assertions . These assertions include an understanding for me that self-study : 
1 . Is underpinned by an obligation to utilise one ’ s professional autonomy
2 . Is an evolutionary process ; alters perceptions about practice
170 10 From Personal Pedagogy to the Broader Teacher Education Context
3 . Challenges taken-for-granted assumptions about learning and teaching
4 . Requires a commitment to be a teacher / researcher
5 . Demands an interruption to habitual and routine practice
6 . Requires specific personal qualities . 
The first of these assertions relates to the requirement for teacher educators to be 
afforded professional autonomy in making judgments about the findings from 
research based on their experience and their practice . These judgements emerge 
from the inside-out , and from a complex interplay of context , affective responses 
within learning and teaching situations , experience , and crucially , the systematic 
collection and analysis of data . The integration of reflective practices provides the 
tools by which teacher educators can examine learning ( of all participants )  , respond 
to learners ’ needs and plan for appropriate turnaround in relation to beliefs and 
practices . 
Self-study is an Evolutionary Process
Although I began the research with a broad research aim , conducting the research 
as a self-study required that I continually monitored my learning by way of reflection and responded to incidents and events as they arose in my practice . Through 
conducting ongoing analysis of data I was therefore able to refine the research 
questions related to the learning and teaching . In this way , self-study represents an 
approach to research which reflects an inbuilt mechanism for identifying and dealing with issues related to practice as they arise in situ . Being flexible and aware of 
the increased sensitivities I needed to develop while learning more about my teaching and pre-service teacher learning was also crucial . 
Self-study Alters Perceptions About Practice
In May 2002 , I was told to “ practice what you preach ” by a pre-service teacher in 
the evaluation of the teaching in the LTM unit . This comment prompted me to 
investigate my practice more deeply and prompted me to ask the question :  “ Could 
it be that others ’ perceptions of me were different from my own ?  ” Through studying my practice , I have come to see how the intended and the actual in teaching 
mathematics did not align as closely as I had envisaged . An initial step for me in 
my research was to identify whether I was a “ living contradiction ”  ( Whitehead , 
1993 ) and if so , how could the contradiction ( s ) be addressed in practice . 
Self-study requires teacher educators to identify and challenge their taken-forgranted assumptions about learning and teaching . It is helpful for learners to see 
themselves as being shaped by their assumptions and a way of understanding this 
shaping is by reference to Brookfield ’ s ( 1995 ) research on the role of assumption 
Implications 171
hunting . By identifying and examining our taken-for-granted assumptions there 
was ( not surprisingly ) recognition that the ways in which these assumptions had 
been constructed were dependent on individual culture , history and previous experience . Identifying and articulating our assumptions requires a focus on that which 
provides the platform for our beliefs as teachers and learners . It is within this articulation that we come to see the ways in which others construct meaning and in doing 
so , highlights multiple perspectives on events , interactions and experience . 
Although at times , this process is confronting and uncomfortable , it does become a 
means by which deeper learning about teaching and learning is facilitated . 
Self-study Researchers See Themselves as Teacher-Researchers
Reconceptualising my role required me to acknowledge that being a teacher educator is multifaceted . Reframing my role required a blending of roles when teaching 
and a commitment to researching my learning , in conjunction with understanding 
pre-service teachers and the ways in which they were learning . Parallel learning ( a 
new learning which emerged as a result of researching my practice ) meant that 
I needed to move away from what was known ( for me ) into situations where 
I became a learner alongside pre-service teachers . Maintaining balance in terms of 
teaching and researching teaching was difficult , but essential . 
Self-study Requires an Interruption to the Habitual
Self-study requires an interruption to the habitual and a degree of living with the 
discomfort and uncertainty of not predetermining learning outcomes . Engaging in new 
practices can be challenging especially for teacher / educator ( s ) who have devised and 
controlled learning environments for years and who have developed patterns of behaviour and expectations based on these long standing experiences . Self-study researchers 
and pre-service teachers participating in such research need to develop the capacity to 
embrace complexity and uncertainty and have faith in indirection ( Finkel , 2000 )  . 
Self-study Demands Specific Personal Qualities
As a teacher educator I needed to have the confidence to challenge the status-quo 
as it existed in my mathematics teacher education classroom and be willing to 
attempt something very different to that which we ( pre-service teachers and me ) 
had traditionally experienced . I wanted to move away from a transmission approach 
to teaching to one where pre-service teachers were encouraged to value their own 
experiences and learn by reflecting on their experiences , not mine . This meant that 
172 10 From Personal Pedagogy to the Broader Teacher Education Context
pre-service teachers were being provided with opportunities to discover the essence 
of their learning and develop their own authority of experience . In this way they 
may become less dependent on the supply of propositional knowledge about teaching and the tips and tricks commonly associated with learning about teaching . 
However , learning about teaching within this context demanded a predisposition to 
be flexible and respond to unexpected situations with sensitivity and careful judgment . In exposing oneself as a learner alongside pre-service teachers , I needed to 
be prepared for pre-service teachers to understand that at times , I experienced feelings of vulnerability and indecisiveness . Pre-service teachers needed to understand 
that I experienced these feelings and I needed to acknowledge that it was reasonable 
to feel these feelings . In fact reconceptualising and reframing the role of the teacher 
educator as one that embraces uncertainty and experiences vulnerability is perhaps 
a hallmark of a new pedagogy of teacher education . 
Prompting Change as a Teacher Educator
A second implication that arose from this research is my deeper understanding of the 
ways in which researching practice might become a self-fulfilling prophecy . By that 
I mean that some changes might eventuate because you think or know that they 
should . By establishing changed approaches and modified practices in learning and 
teaching about mathematics , it would seem appropriate to assume that new knowledge would eventuate and inform practice . However , not all new knowledge generated from research transfers to alterations in practice . In asking the question ,  “ In what 
ways have I altered my practice as a teacher educator ?  ” I am confronted with evaluating the ways in which new understandings about teaching and learning have impacted 
the way that I do , and understand , teacher education . Early in the research , my initial 
need was to have my modified approach accepted by my pre-service teachers . My 
research emphasis was primarily focused on monitoring the ways in which changes 
to my teaching impacted pre-service teachers ’ learning . In this way I hoped to both 
rationalise and justify the changes I had made to my Learning and Teaching 
Mathematics units . What became obvious for me as time progressed was that change 
did not just happen ; it needed to be nudged , or consciously driven and interrogated . 
Problem-Setting
A third implication growing from my research relates to the notion of problem-setting . 
While problem-solving underpinned much of our reflective approach , in retrospect , the 
practice of problem-setting became an essential aspect of my practice . As well as reacting to problems encountered as a result of examining practice , I need to frame ( or set ) 
problems too , as a means of developing my knowledge of practice . When teacher education is understood within the frame of problem-setting no complete blueprint can ever 
Implications 173
be constructed for teacher education in terms of an ultimate method for lectures , tutorials 
and roundtable sessions , forums and pre-service teacher partner teaching in schools . This 
is because the needs of pre-service teachers and teacher educators vary . Each program 
requires a base whereby professional judgments and responses to needs must underpin 
practice . Whilst I believe the emphasis for pre-service teachers within the context of this 
study represented more a problem-solving approach to learning , a future goal for my 
teaching could include establishing an explicit connection between problem-solving with 
pre-service teachers and problem-setting . In my teacher education practice , pre-service 
teachers might then learn to become problem-setters and seek to explore solutions to 
their own problems . In this sense , their solutions will take on a greater significance as 
they emerge from questions pivotal to their own experiences . Learning about teaching 
then becomes a proactive ( rather than reactive ) exercise as learning can be prompted 
from the perspective of a ‘ need-to-learn about and from ’ experience . 
Multiple Perspectives
Understanding more about the ways in which others construct and view their world 
has been imperative in this study . Identifying assumptions not only became an 
effective means of clarifying our perspectives as teachers and learners ( and therefore of framing the ways in which we thought teachers should teach and learners 
should learn ) but also , in challenging taken-for-granted assumptions tangible ways 
of exploring alternatives for practice became available . 
In the final section of this chapter I identify and discuss six recommendations 
which represent possibilities for teacher educators who similarly aspire to challenging not only their own status-quo / world view of teacher education , but also the statusquo / conceptions of teacher education more generally . 
Recommendations
Within educational research there has long been criticism of educators ’ inability to 
implement and sustain meaningful educational change . The recommendations that 
follow exemplify how a conjunction of planned change connected to an interruption to the habitual can lead to valuable and sustainable change in teacher 
education . 
Teacher education continually comes under criticism in the media , as is demonstrated by the following article written by David Rodd and reflecting the Minister 
of Education ’ s opinion ( Rodd , The Saturday Age , December 3 , 2005 , News , p . 3 )  : 
● Teacher training out of touch
● Graduate teachers are entering classrooms under-prepared largely because their university 
lecturers have lost touch with everyday teaching ; lecturers need to be familiar with new 
approaches
174 10 From Personal Pedagogy to the Broader Teacher Education Context
● You can ’ t get it [ learning about teaching ] out of a textbook
● Lecturers need to be up to date with the current knowledge and thinking and the best way to 
get that is actually spending some time in schools . It ’ s not reading theoretical books
● There is significant disquiet over the quality and relevance of teacher education
● There is a mismatch or disjunction between universities and school classrooms . 
Assertions such as these reflect the way that teacher education is perceived by some 
as out of touch , theoretical , inadequate and , in its current form , an irrelevant enterprise . While such perceptions are not new to the teacher education debate , the 
ongoing challenge for the profession is how to address them – and what action to 
take that will have meaning and impact . Teacher educators are professionals who 
know about teaching and learning ; they understand the complexities associated 
with teaching , learning , and teaching about teaching and learning . Underpinning 
this challenge is the right ( and the responsibility ) of teacher educators to exercise 
professional judgment by using their professional autonomy . One means by which 
teacher educators ’ professional autonomy can be exercised is by way of modifying 
their pre-service teacher courses . In many contexts , reflective practice is increasingly being incorporated in these programs as a means of assisting pre-service 
teachers ( and teacher educators ) to examine their practice and contribute to pedagogical understanding . Systematic and integrated reflection in and on learning provides a means for further understanding the complexities of teaching and learning . 
Self-study offers one way of pursuing the development of knowledge of teacher 
education and creates possibilities for teacher educators to respond in informed 
ways and as vocal advocates for the profession . 
The following are six recommendations to further the knowledge and practices 
of teacher education . I propose that teacher educators : 
1 . Conduct self-study research
2 . Reframe themselves as teacher-researchers
3 . Provide for pre-service teachers , systematic , reflective approaches to learning 
about teaching , using multiple reflective tools
4 . Challenge their own and pre-service teachers ’ taken-for-granted assumptions 
about teaching and learning
5 . Trial Roundtable Reflection
6 . Theorise their Learning . 
Teacher Educators Conduct Self-study Research
Self-study requires systematic inquiry into practice . Loughran ( 2002 ) suggests that 
teacher-researchers combine their knowledge , skills and understandings of “ practice in their research of their practice ”  ( p . 3 , italics in original )  . Therefore , selfstudy requires an interruption to the habitual and the ability to live with the 
discomfort and uncertainty of not predetermining their learning outcomes .  ( Some 
predetermination is necessary and much of this relates to structures and process .  ) 
Although living with uncertainty about the outcomes of learning and teaching ( and 
the ambiguities which present themselves within these contexts ) may be challenging , 
Recommendations 175
new approaches to teaching and learning can unearth fertile new ground for learning . Teacher educators and pre-service teachers participating in self-study research 
need to develop the capacity to embrace the complexities and ambiguities of learning about teaching , and preparation needs to be thorough and ongoing to allow the 
embracing to occur . Self-study requires that participants will have the confidence 
to display the vulnerabilities that underpin teaching and learning and to be prepared 
to expose these in their own practice , and sometimes at the most unexpected and 
unanticipated times . By making research outcomes available to the broader educational community , the scholarship of teaching and learning about teaching is 
enhanced as new knowledge and understandings provide an ever extending knowledge base for teacher education . 
Teacher Educators Reframe Themselves as Teacher-Researchers
Researching teaching and learning in authentic contexts and based on genuine pedagogical concerns provides research outcomes which can contribute to the broader 
debate about meaningful and sustainable reform in teacher education . A insider 
research approach , although contextualised , can contribute to a deeper understanding about the ways in which a pedagogy of teacher education develops . 
Teacher Educators Provide for Pre-service Teachers Systematic , 
Reflective Approaches to Learning About Teaching , Using 
Multiple Reflective Tools
Integrating reflective practice using multiple reflective tools and processes provides 
a means to learn more about learning and teaching in teacher education . In providing an eclectic range of tools ( for example , ALACT framework ; Critical Incident 
Questionnaires ; Freewrites ) and practices ( Roundtable Reflection ; partner teaching 
in schools ) opportunities exist to assist pre-service teachers to connect with the 
reflective process in a way that is meaningful for each individual . Pre-service teachers can select a mode and / or tools of reflection which create some type of reflective 
traction , or a grip on the process of reflection . The ultimate aim of selecting the 
most appropriate form of reflecting in and on practice is that pre-service teachers 
will be encouraged to understand the benefits of reflecting in and on practice in 
their own school teaching environments , in an ongoing way , hence directing their 
own professional learning processes . 
Much of that which is learnt through reflecting on practice may at least initially , 
remain invisible and tacit . There are inherent difficulties in measuring change 
in understanding and learning ; or with a new insight , or in relation to a revised 
assumption . However , just because a new learning , understanding or insight hasn ’ t 
been named , then it doesn ’ t necessarily imply that it does not exist . So a new learn176 10 From Personal Pedagogy to the Broader Teacher Education Context
ing as a result of researching reflective practice is that new learning needs to be 
made clearer , i . e .  , that new learning doesn ’ t always ( and / or often ) emerge immediately . Pre-service teachers need to learn a language of learning to be able to name 
and describe it . Therefore ongoing research is important to bring to light different 
facets of existing learning . One of the tools is the tool of language to talk about 
learning in new ways . 
Teacher Educators Challenge their Own and Pre-service 
Teachers ’ Taken-for-Granted Assumptions 
About Teaching and Learning
It is helpful for learners to see themselves as being shaped by their assumptions . 
One way of understanding this shaping is by reference to Brookfield ’ s ( 1995 ) 
assumption hunting and the development of critical reflective practice . Identifying 
and articulating our assumptions requires a focus on that which provides the platform for our beliefs as teachers and learners . It is within this articulation that we 
come to see the ways in which others construct meaning and in so doing , highlight 
multiple perceptions on events , interactions and experience that we may not have 
considered . Although at times , this process is confronting and uncomfortable , it 
does become a means by which deeper learning about teaching and learning is 
facilitated . 
There is little doubt that developing a professional identity that challenges traditional notions of teacher and learner creates tensions for both teacher educators and 
pre-service teachers . These tensions need to be understood and managed . Systematic 
attention to eliciting and understanding multiple perceptions ( as demonstrated 
through this study ) provides insights into the ways in which learning is experienced 
and perceived by all participants in the educative process . 
Teacher Educators Trial Roundtable Reflection
Although this self-study refers to a specific and localised context , some of the 
learning from this study may take a form of generalisability in terms of ‘ ringing 
true ’ for other ’ s practice . Roundtable Reflection sessions provide opportunities for 
pre-service teachers to unpack their experiences in a structured and supportive 
learning environment . Such sessions are underpinned by a particular physical and 
discourse structure so that tendencies for ‘ talk-fests ’ and random conversations are 
minimised . Roundtable reflection sessions demand the reconceptualisation of a 
teacher educator ’ s role and , as such , require consistent efforts not only for the 
teacher educator to refrain from dominating the discourse . Teacher educators need 
to consider more deeply when to interject ; when to synthesise , when to redirect and 
when to challenge . This role relates to the ways in which teacher educators utilise 
Recommendations 177
their professional judgments . Roundtable Reflection , therefore , contributes knowledge about learning in multiple contexts ( including the school context ) as was evident in this self-study . With regard to teaching and learning , these practices ring 
true in ways that other educators might well relate to and therefore adjust , adapt and 
apply to their contexts because of the inherent value of the practices . 
Trialing Roundtable Reflection might become a structure for teacher educators 
to examine pre-service teachers ’ learning ; the issues they define as being problematic and promote discussions about alternative possibilities for future practice . 
Teacher Educators Theorise Their Learning
This self-study has exemplified for me new understandings of the ways in which 
individual and socially constructed knowledge is developed through reflection on 
experience . Exponents of the impact of reflection in and post-action ( for example , 
Schön , 1983 , 1987 ) suggest that this process leads to the transformation of experience into knowledge . Throughout this study it was evident that pre-service teachers 
were endeavouring to construct their own personal understandings of their actions 
in an individual and collective manner , hence producing individual and shared 
knowledge about teaching . This shared knowledge is developed through negotiation in the learning environment . For example , new knowledge about teaching 
about teaching and learning about teaching became evident to me during roundtable 
discourse through the deliberate and systematic challenging of assumptions , and in 
the individual written reflections about experience . In this way , my role as a teacher 
educator was one of facilitator or “ animator ”  ( Boud & Miller , 1996 ) of learning , 
and the ALACT framework provided guidelines for me to act in this role . Through 
this recursive approach we were continuously adapting as we incorporated new 
experiences into out learning through practice . My experience relates to the notion 
of phronesis ( Korthagen et al .  , 2001 ) whereby one gains knowledge through experience and a foundational concept of phronesis is that enough of the right experiences 
must be had ( Munby & Russell , 1994 )  . 
An obvious implication of using theory to ( re ) inform practice was the recognition that teaching is not telling or simply transmitting information . If knowledge 
about teaching is to be lasting and meaningful then being derived by the individual 
is advantageous . The process of knowledge production is enhanced when one ’ s 
own experience is being reflected on rather than the treatment of theory unrelated 
to practice . However , at the same time this knowledge as phronesis needs to be 
made accessible to others , which is where developing generalisations ( theorising 
experience ) to share with others is helpful . 
Understanding more about learner motivation and preferences for teaching and 
learning styles however , has also exemplified for me a tension associated with a 
reflective constructivist approach :  “ Is the concept of reflecting on experience as a 
basis for understanding the construction of knowledge ( as Britzman , 1998 , for 
example , maintains )  , simplistic and reductionist ?  ” My research would suggest that 
178 10 From Personal Pedagogy to the Broader Teacher Education Context
an awareness of the possible limiting structures of reflective practice is 
paramount . 
Reflection can be interpreted and experienced by pre-service teachers as just 
another imposition of their teacher education program and in this sense the reflective processes can become what Kelchtermans ( 2005 , p . 21 ) described as , yet 
another form of “ technical reductionism ”  . As a teacher educator I am now more 
aware of the impact of motivation and desire in learning to teach and have been 
exposed to reflective resistance . However , rather than acknowledging that critical 
reflection is a limited means of coming to self-knowledge , it can be understood as 
one means of assisting in the construction of knowledge from experience . Experience 
alone is not the best teacher and often without guided analysis experience can 
reinforce traditional stereotypes , or preconceived notions . 
Conclusion
Understanding my developing pedagogy as a teacher educator as well as pre-service 
teachers ’ learning about teaching has been based on a research process which has 
evolved from the inside-out . By systematically researching a reconceptualised 
approach to learning and teaching mathematics , more has been exposed about how 
examining the ordinary can lead to extra-ordinary insights about teaching ; and learning about teaching . The outcomes of my research suggest that if teaching is problematised and learners ’ assumptions identified and examined , then possibilities for 
meaningful , systematic and sustainable educational change might well be enhanced . 
A natural and ongoing focus for future research flowing from the results of this 
research would be to encourage pre-service teachers to be researchers of their own 
practice and to build an impetus for a corpus of pre-service teachers ’ learning about 
teaching through self-study . By conducting self-studies underpinned by reflection 
on , and in , practice ( either individually or collectively ) pre-service teachers ’ agency 
might be further enhanced and , importantly , inform processes , practices , organisation and structure of teacher education programs . In this way these emerging teaching professionals could enhance their learning about teaching and positively impact 
educational reform . 
Self-study as a Circuit-Breaker in Teacher Education
Finally , I refer to Fenstermacher ’ s ( 1994a ) suggestion that teacher research ( and in 
my case , self-study ) provides a legitimate contribution to research and theory production as it permits “ explanations ,  [ and ] perhaps even predictions , that are at a 
level of abstraction and generalisation sufficient to provide for the construction of 
robust theory and an expanding , increasingly sound body of knowledge ”  ( p . 44 )  . 
Throughout my self-study I have attempted to explain , predict and ( re ) construct my 
Self-study as a Circuit-Breaker in Teacher Education 179
theoretical underpinnings as they related to my understanding of why I taught and 
understood things in the ways I did . By examining simple everyday interactions , 
extra-ordinary understandings about the complexity of the teaching and learning 
process have been exposed . This new knowledge about teaching and learning contributes to the ever-broadening knowledge base for teacher education . However , 
reflecting in , on and about teaching can be experienced as a paradox – how does 
one develop an ability to extract the essence of learning , while learning , and then 
combine this “ of the moment ” reflection with retrospective reflection as a means to 
more deeply understand learning ? For me , working through this paradox , using 
self-study of my practice , has revealed more about what can be understood as 
Powerful Pedagogy . 