Pros and Cons of US education system- Know all Pros and Cons
Admissions | Updated 05 Mar, 2022

Pros and Cons of US education system- Know all Pros and Cons
In today's article, we'll have a detailed discussion on the pros and cons of US education system. Despite the fact that the U.S. is one of the most criticized nations in the world, it is also one of the most appealing for people who want to live and work abroad. It is also one of the best places to get a higher education. However, it is important to choose the university that gives you a proper level of knowledge – with the right institution by your side, you won’t have to ask anyone for a research paper help during your study years, instead, you’ll ace it all on your own.

If you are wondering about what to consider when applying for universities in the US, here is an overview of the things that you may or may not like about the US education system.

A point to consider is that the information below might not reflect your position on studying in the US. To you, some of the positives may be negatives and vice versa. Here we are trying to review the information from an international standpoint. Before we look into the pros and cons of US education system, let's have an overview of International students and US education system. 



Pros and Cons of us education system
What are the Pros of the US Education System?
1. Diversity

With a country, comprising 50 states spreading on an entire continent, you can imagine the overwhelming range of courses and majors that are at your disposal, and, with English being the universal language, you can practically choose any area of study in any university. Another positive side of the US education system is that, with such a big potential, there is a considerable chance for you to find a program which best suits your interests. In addition, as an international student in the US, you may find a program, which is looking for candidates from your region.

The US education system has a lot of diversity programs which encourage students from all over the world to apply. This is a golden opportunity for the student communities which belong to the underdeveloped countries to gain international experience, thus helping them improve their quality of life in return.

Further to this, the universities also offer different funding options in order to encourage international applications, thus filling their quota and raising their international and domestic recognition. There is also a high regard for sports education in the US education system and there are a lot of scholarships aimed at developing the athletes’ potential.

See More: List of 100 scholarships you should apply to study in USA

2. Flexibility of Education

The US education system is one of the most diverse in the world. Students have unlimited choices on what they could study. Usually the U.S. universities offer you the possibility to experiment with different courses in the first two years of your education, as opposed to European universities, where you pick a specific subject with predefined curriculum and you follow it throughout your studies.

This diversification in the US education system allows you to gain a different perspective and to avoid spending money on something that you don’t want to study. It also encourages you to broaden your knowledge on other fields so you could better develop your skills and personality. For instance, if you are studying to be a lawyer, you might want to cover courses for public speaking, reasoning and argumentation, literature, PR; instead of only covering courses that are directly connected to your subject.

Another interesting feature of the US Education system is the focus on the development of an all-round state of mind. This means that your talents are recognized and nurtured by encouraging you to participate in extracurricular and outdoor activities, round tables, research etc. In addition, U.S universities provide up to date facilities and advanced technologies, which are being developed onsite and can be used for work on government and private projects.

3. Academia and student life

Because of the high academic standard, many US universities attract the best and brightest scholars from around the world every year. You will have the opportunity to meet and interact with top-notch researchers who acquires in-depth field knowledge and experience. This will give you access to extensive knowledge and contacts. 

In addition, visiting professors will not only read lectures but will also expect from you to get in touch with them, so you could share your thoughts.

In this regard, academic life in the U.S may be more hands-on and interactive than the one in other countries. In class, students may be expected to express their opinion and the lecture itself is in open form. This creates an environment that tolerates discussions and dialogue.

Usually, the student life is situated mostly on the campus. The dormitories are also located there. Commonly the campus is outside of the city or in a designated area. There, one can also find the necessary utilities, restaurants, bars, cafes and clubs.
Since you will be spending most of your time on the campus, the student life is regarded more like a community, where you can interact with other students; engage in different activities, clubs and organizations.

We strongly recommend you to get involved in such activities, as they will help you with the cultural integration and will create opportunities for friendships, collaboration and academic ties.

See More: 5 Unusual experiences you will face after moving abroad to study

4. Global recognition 

With some exceptions, US universities are highly regarded around the globe and candidates with US Diplomas have a better chance to be picked by Employers.

In a survey for top universities in the world from 2014, 40 out of 100 universities are located in the U.S, 7 of which are in the top 10. 

What are some of the Cons of the US Education System?
1. Diversity as a negative 

As the number of international students in the US has escalated dramatically over the years, students can find high diversity in the courses offered by the US education system. Each state follows a different curriculum of courses creating students of varying standards of education. This creates a gap in the education and breaches the knowledge of the student in general. This leads to certain universities becoming more favored by employers and thus raising the inequality in the workforce.

2. Tuition Fees

One of the major setbacks of US education is the cost as the high standards of quality education comes with a freight. The US education fees are among the highest in the world, reaching up to $50 000 per year. 
One paper shows the undergraduate tuition and living expenses in MIT:
Nine months' tuition for 2014–2015 is $43,720. In addition, undergraduate room and board is approximately $13,224 depending on the student's housing and dining arrangements. Books and personal expenses are about $2,790.
In addition, due to the immigration status of the international students, the possibilities for student loans are limited. So, if you are looking for an abroad education loan, connect with our team at WeMakeScholars. The financial team of WeMakeScholars alone has sanctioned close to 10,000+ abroad education loan applications as these statistics tell you that our team’s knowledge about the entire abroad education loan process from the beginning to the end. The team of WeMakeScholars continuously strives to get their students the best education loan lender to fund their study abroad. 
See More: Academic Requirements for Engineering Candidates in USA

3. Holistic admission process

Applying for a university in the US is a rather complicated process as compared to any other country. Students who are willing to apply in the US, strong academic results are a must in order to be eligible for the top universities. Students have to excel academically as well as socially i.e. participating in community activities, volunteering in social work, science projects, arts projects etc. Universities usually consider all-rounder students as they require students who indulge and participate in different competitions and contests. 
Another side is the need to cover standardized tests.  Most U.S. colleges require that you take one or more admission tests in order to be eligible for their programs. Such tests as SAT, ACT, GRE, MCAT, LSAT, TOEFL or IELTS, which are not always available in other countries or online.

4. Social benefits and work

The major drawback of studying in the US is the finite accessibility to benefit from programs like social security, healthcare or other types of benefits offered by the Government for US citizens. 
Students who are willing to avail social security will require a social security number (SSN) issued by the Social Security Administration (SSA). In order to be eligible, students will need a letter from the International Social Service (ISS). Students must have a  job offer to ISS which displays the proof of job regulated by the F-1 international student visa in order to receive an ISS letter. 
Students who are willing to avail healthcare, each university has its own system which varies in standard or in the services provided to them. Smaller colleges may offer only basic coverage for general illness, where other top universities may offer full packages or coverage of healthcare. In any of these cases, students are required to sign a healthcare plan from their respective university. However, students must know that the US does not provide socialized healthcare and the treatment is very expensive as compared to other countries. 
Work options are also limited and are regulated by the F-1 international student work visa. For more information visit here 

So what is the conclusion?

In the end, despite the high tuition fees and the bureaucratic process, the US education system offers diverse possibilities for personal, professional and academic growth, which are globally recognized. The system praises individuality and encourages self-sustainability. It attracts highly qualified personnel, who rely on communication with the students. The US education system, although not very diversified, offers the possibility of cultural integration where differences are welcomed and students live as a community.

Read More: 13 Popular Scholarships you could never miss to be in US

Feel free to share all your experiences in the US, if you had a chance to study there!


FAQs:
How does the US education system work?

US is considered as one of the most appealing place for people who want to live or work abroad, but apart from that US is also appraised as the best place to pursue higher education because of their education system. Education system in US works in different levels where the first level of education is Elementary school, the second level of education is Middle school/Junior high school, then the third level is High School, and the fourth and the foremost is Higher education. Apart from all these, their classroom environment is dynamic where they allow students to share their thoughts and opinions, their grading system is based on student’s class participation, research or term papers, and through quizzes or short exams.

Is US education system good?

Yes, the US education system is good. The education system in US is considered the superior system in the world. This is because they offer a rich and wide range of choices for international students. The most enticing attribute of the US education system is its versatility. They accord students in multiple academic disciplines and also train them to gain future employment. Apart from that their formation of schools, programs and locations also overwhelm students to study in US. They provide community colleges for students to continue studies for an undergraduate degree or help them gain occupational skills for immediate employment.

What are the Pros of the US Education System?

Few pros of the US education system are: (a) The US education system has a lot of diversity programs which encourage students from all over the world. (b) This diversification in the US education system allows you to gain a different perspective and encourages you to broaden your knowledge in other fields so you could better develop your skills and personality. (c) Students get the opportunity to meet and speak with researchers, who are on top in their respective field, which will give you access to knowledge and contacts (d) It will allow you to gain Global recognition as US universities are highly regarded around the globe and candidates with US Diplomas have a better chance to be picked by employers.

What are the Cons of the US Education System?

(a) Diversity can be negative as each state follows a different curriculum of courses creating a gap in the education and in the knowledge in general (b) Tuition fees and other expenses are high (c) Admission process in the US is rather complicated as students need to have good academic record in order to qualify for the top universities (d) Students get limited accessibility to benefit from programs like social security, healthcare or other types of benefits offered by the government for US citizens