All linguistic theories describe language as a learned
system of sounds having an arbitrary value that meets
a social need to communicate . This system is comprised of units , or subsystems , that are embedded into
each other . Sounds are combined to produce words , 
words are combined to produce utterances , and utterances are combined to produce discourse . 
More precisely , these subsystems can be classified
as follows : phonology—the sounds of a language ; 
orthography—the ways in which language is organized in a
written text , including systems of punctuation , capitalization , and paragraphing ; graphophonics—the relationship
between the sound systems of language and the written
systems of language ; syntax or grammar—the study of
the systematic ways in which words are organized and
related to one another for meaning to occur ; semantics—
the study of vocabulary and how words and phrases relate
to objects and ideas ; pragmatics—the study of the ways
in which language use changes depending on context , 
time , place , and the social relationships between speakers
and listeners , readers and writers . 
Knowledge of a language is knowledge of a set of
subsystems that allows us to comprehend and produce
an infinite number of utterances . People use language
as a way of establishing contact , maintaining relationships , and sharing and categorizing experiences and
ideas . But what causes acquisition of this knowledge ? 
LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
Most children complete the basic language acquisition
process by the age of 5 without any direct instruction . 
Current theories of language acquisition posit that
humans have a unique ability to test various hypotheses about the structure of language , to develop rules of
a particular language and remember them , and to use
these rules to generate appropriate language in various
circumstances . As a child develops , these hypotheses
about how language is structured are modified by particular language input . In other words , the set of rules
available to the child changes as the child develops
and recognizes what are and are not permissible structures in his or her particular language . Furthermore , 
the evidence of developmental change is clear in the
types of utterances and discourse understood and produced at various ages . 
This capacity for language acquisition follows a
predictable pattern through different stages of acquisition . While the rate of acquisition may be different , 
the order is the same for all children and for languages
other than English . Constance Weaver outlined the
following stages in 1998 : 
1 . Babbling is more a result of developing fine
motor skills than an attempt to communicate . These
sounds seem to be required in order for infants to
develop the musculature needed to produce coherent
speech later on . 
2 . Single-word utterances are usually nouns for
common objects and people in the child ’ s life . These
utterances are the beginnings of the child ’ s purposeful
attempt to communicate . At this stage , overgeneralization , when a child formulates a rule and applies it too
broadly , is common . For example , when a child learns
that the four-legged friend in the house is a dog , or that
the dog ’ s name is Baxter , the child then generalizes
549
L
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 549
and refers to all four-legged animals ( cats , cows , 
horses , etc .  ) as dogs or as Baxters . Near the end of this
stage , children begin to apply words to the behavior of
others and not just their own . 
3 . Word combining and syntax emerge when the
child begins to combine first two or three , then many
words together . The ability to combine words signifies
the ability to convey deeper meaning and use more
complex grammar . 
Noam Chomsky , the originator of transformationalgenerative linguistics , suggested that what a grammar
should do is account for native speakers ’ unconscious
but functional knowledge of grammar ( i . e .  ,  “ deep structure ”  )  , which enables comprehension and production of
language . This internalized knowledge is one meaning
of the word grammar . In this sense , grammar refers to a
capacity for language , a native ability to create and
comprehend utterances . His work represented a marked
shift from the structuralist theorists who based their
grammars on an analysis of the structures of a language . 
They focused on the surface structure of sentences and
analyzed them into increasingly smaller components . 
Grammar may also refer to these formal systems that
theorists have developed and studied to explain and analyze language . It is important to point out that this type
of study has not produced a single body of knowledge
on which all linguists agree . Rather , it has produced different grammars that are each dependent on different
underlying assumptions and different methods of analysis and , accordingly , have different results . We now turn
to the primary distinctions between prescriptive grammar and descriptive grammar . 
PRESCRIPTIVISM
VERSUS DESCRIPTIVISM
As the term suggests , someone who subscribes to a
prescriptive approach to grammar believes that there
is a prescribed list of rules to which all speakers of a
language must conform . Those who do not comply are
said to be speaking “ incorrectly .  ” This is the approach
taken in most language instruction and is still widely
used in many language arts classrooms . A prescriptive
approach reflects a transmission model of education
that considers learning to be best fostered through continued practice of the rules . 
However , in their 1989 article “ Explaining
Grammatical Concepts ,  ” Muriel Harris and Katherine
E . Rowan found that continued practice , in most
instances , does not promote adequate understanding . 
Being able to identify sentence fragments in an exercise written specifically for that purpose does not
guarantee that the student knows the critical features
of fragments in contrast to grammatically complete
sentences , much less that the student can reliably distinguish between the two . Nor , as another example , 
does memorizing the rule that it is ungrammatical to
end a sentence with a preposition ensure that the
speaker who has memorized this rule will no longer
construct such sentences . Furthermore , the problem
for prescriptivists is that most sentences that are not
grammatically correct sound perfectly acceptable to
nearly all speakers , and nearly all speakers regularly use
ungrammatical sentences . 
Rather than prescribing how people should speak , 
contemporary linguistics and language theories and
theorists are interested in observing and describing how
people actually do speak . Descriptive grammar does
not judge language production as correct or incorrect . A
descriptivist works from the assumption that whenever
native language speakers of a language speak , they are
following a set of grammar rules . However , not all native
speakers are following the exact same set of rules . 
Consider the following two sentences : 
1 . If I were you , I would choose a different teacher . 
2 . If I was you , I would choose a different teacher . 
To some extent , there is certain to be disagreement
among native speakers regarding which of these statements is grammatically correct and which is ungrammatical . For some , sentence ( 1 ) is grammatical and
sentence ( 2 ) is ungrammatical ; for others , the opposite
is true . However , because sentences like ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are
spoken regularly by native speakers of English , they
are both grammatical for the people who speak them . 
However , it is difficult to imagine any native speaker of
English disagreeing that a sentence such as “ Wish they
for a teacher new ” is ungrammatical . Descriptivists use
examples such as these to highlight that while all native
English speakers share certain rules , we do not share
all rules . In fact , there is a tremendous amount of linguistic diversity among the speakers of English , as well as
among the speakers of any language . 
This is not to suggest that descriptivists do not acknowledge grammar rules ; they do . For prescriptivists , however , rules are constructed ( rather than prescribed ) from
observations of real language data—from language in
550———Language Theories and Processes
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 550
use . Furthermore , the correct versus incorrect distinction gives way to the appropriate versus inappropriate distinction . That is , when speaking with people
who prefer sentence ( 1 ) to ( 2 )  , it would be appropriate
to use ( 1 )  , and when speaking with people who prefer 
( 2 )  , it would be appropriate to use ( 2 )  . 
In the language arts classroom , this concept becomes
extremely important when considering instruction . 
For people to be successful in American society , 
knowing how to speak standard English ( i . e .  , the variety of English accepted in formal contexts ) is critical . 
Descriptive linguists , while being careful not to judge
nonstandard English as incorrect , work to teach
students the differences between the two and how to
produce standard English in the appropriate contexts . 
The focus of descriptive linguists on actual utterances
led quite naturally to the study of dialect . 
LANGUAGE VARIATIONS AND DIALECTS
Working within the traditions of structural or prescriptive linguists , dialecticians have shown that most differences in usage among speakers cannot be considered
aberrations from standard preferred speech . Rather , most
variations in usage derive from different language communities that develop their own varying norms . 
For example , William Labov showed in 1972 that
Black Vernacular English ( BVE ) is a distinct subsystem
within the larger grammar of English with its own regular conventions and rules . One such rule allows for what
Labov calls a remote present perfect in the use of been , 
such as “ I been know your name ,  ” in which been know
means “ have known for a long time and still know .  ” 
Shirley Heath described in 1983 instances when
teachers who do not know BVE usage often interpret
it as incorrect standard English . Ethnographic studies
such as Heath ’ s abundantly demonstrate how the different language conventions of people living and working in the same community can cause conflict and
misunderstandings on the parts of teachers and
students . As a result , these often lead to inappropriate
judgments of students and failure to learn . 
In an effort to address this and related issues , 
in 1972 the National Council of Teachers of English 
( NCTE ) adopted a resolution on language and
students ’ dialects titled “ Resolution on the Students ’ 
Rights to Their Own Language .  ” For 30 years , this
position statement has served as a guidepost for
NCTE ’ s continued focus on the issue of dialects and
language usage in the classroom and has been the
basis for other professional and governmental organizations . Viewing language from this perspective positions language acquisition and usage as more than
acquiring autonomous , cognitive skills . Rather , it situates language within social contexts and immerses it
within human relationships . Theories of language , as
we move through the twenty-first century , construe
language as social practices . 
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL
APPROACHES TO LANGUAGE
Sociolinguistics , a part of the new literacies , perceives
the function of language as more than to communicate
information . Language is , in addition , also a device to
think and feel with , as well as a device with which to
signal and negotiate social identity . In other words , 
the new literacies of this century focus on language as
social practices . Through the work of Lev Vygotsky , 
theorists , researchers , and teachers came to realize
that what students can accomplish on their own was
only a small part of what they could do with the help
of others . Vygotsky ’ s “ zone of proximal development ” referred to the spectrum of language activities
that individuals could accomplish with the assistance
of more able individuals in their social realm . 
Understanding that language is shaped by social
and cultural contexts contributed toward our enhanced
understanding of the role of language in a democracy
and its political implications . From such a perspective , issues of race , class , and gender are explicit
aspects of understanding language processes . Much
current language theory centers on the social and
political implications of language . 
Language theories , in large measure , constitute
and are constituted by shifts in culture . Movements within
the field are blended and complex , suggesting the fluidity
of language as a living cultural , social , and political entity . 
In a democratic society such as that in the United States , 
understanding language theories and processes as
dynamic and open systems provides a stronger sense of
the purpose and consequences of the role of language for
students , for communities , and for the nation . 
—Gina DeBlase
See also affective education ; at-risk students ; Black education ; 
cognition , theories of ; computers , use and impact of ; constructivism , social ; critical race theory ; critical theory ; crosscultural studies ; curriculum , theories of ; differentiation of
stimuli ; early childhood education ; elementary education ; 
Language Theories and Processes———551
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 551
high schools ; individual differences , in children ; instructional
technology ; Latinos ; learning environments ; literacy , theories
of ; measurement , theories of ; metacognition ; minorities , in
schools ; multiculturalism ; National Assessment of Educational Progress ; reading , history of , use in schools ; underachievers , in schools ; writing , teaching of
Further Readings and References
Chomsky , N .  ( 1957 )  . Syntactic structures . The Hague , 
Netherlands : Mouton . 
Chomsky , N .  ( 1968 )  . Language and mind . New York : 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . 
Harris , M .  ,  & Rowan , K . E .  ( 1989 )  . Explaining grammatical
concepts . Journal of Basic writing , 8 ( 2 )  , 21–41 . 
Heath , S . B .  ( 1983 )  . Ways with words : Language , life , and
work in communities and classrooms . New York : Cambridge
University Press . 
Joshi , R .  ,  & Aaron , P .  ( 2005 )  . Handbook of orthography and
literacy . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Kist , W .  ( 2005 )  . New literacies in action . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Kucer , S .  ,  & Silva , C .  ( 2005 )  . Teaching the dimensions of
literacy . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Labov , W .  ( 1972 )  . Language in the inner city : Studies in
the black English vernacular . Philadelphia : University of
Pennsylvania Press . 
Marsh , J .  ,  & Millard , E .  ( 2005 )  . Popular literacies , childhood
and schooling . New York : Routledge . 
National Council of Teachers of English .  ( 1974 )  . Resolution on
the students ’ right to their own language . Urbana , IL : Author . 
Soler , J .  ,  & Openshaw , R .  ( 2005 )  . Literacy crises and reading
policies : Why our children still can ’ t read . New York : 
Routledge . 
Vygotsky , L .  ( 1962 )  . Thought and language . Cambridge , MA : 
Harvard University Press . 
Weaver , C .  ( 1996 )  . Teaching grammar in context . Portsmouth , 
NH : Boynton / Cook . 
 LATINOS
The term Latinos is often used interchangeably with
the term Hispanic or with the various national origin
terms ( e . g . Mexican , Puerto Rican , Cuban ) found in
formal educational sources . Indeed , the choice of
terms to describe this population has been the subject
of considerable scholarly and political debate . The
impact of these debates on education is ongoing , 
given that available data on the educational status and
representation of Latinos in the United States can be
misleading if one is not careful to identify such factors
as national origin , economic class , native language , 
ethnic identity , and so forth to more accurately depict
the tremendous within-group diversity . Moreover , 
each of the groups that together comprise U . S . Latinos
has its own particular history , often rooted in the
regional or generational issues that likewise influence
their particular educational experiences . Such withingroup diversity notwithstanding , the available data on
Latinos in U . S . schools do indicate that several significant issues exist and persist for this population . 
LATINO DEMOGRAPHICS
Distribution of Latinos
Across the United States
Latinos can be found all throughout the United
States . In total , Latinos comprised 12 . 5% ( 35 . 3 million ) of the country ’ s total population in 2000 , and
this figure represents an increase of 58% since the
1990 census . The 2000 census indicates that this population is concentrated in the largest numbers in seven
states : California , Texas , New York , Florida , Illinois , 
Arizona , and New Jersey , with half of all U . S . Latinos
concentrated in California and Texas alone . Latinos
were the highest proportion of the population in East
Los Angeles ( California ) and Puerto Rico , with 96 . 8%
and 98 . 9% of the total population in these areas , 
respectively . Throughout the United States , 58 . 5% of
all Latinos identified themselves as Mexican ( origin ) 
and 9 . 6% as Puerto Rican , thereby representing the
two largest Latino groups . Approximately 28% of all
Latinos identified themselves as “ Other Hispanic ” in
the 2000 census , including those who identified themselves as Central American ( 4 . 8% of all Latinos )  , South
American ( 3 . 8% )  , and Cuban ( 3 . 5% )  . 
Based on data derived from the Pew Hispanic
Center in Washington , D . C .  , Latino workers made
up 40% of the 2 . 5 million jobs created in 2004 , even
though they made up only 15% of the U . S . workforce . 
Of these , 88% of the 1 million new jobs were filled by
Latinos from Mexico . According to Joel Millman in
2005 , the Pew study bolsters the belief that immigrants do not take jobs from American workers but
instead supplement the U . S . workforce . 
Latinos in U . S . Public Schools
The significance of the Latino population figures
is particularly apparent in the U . S . public schools . 
Among K–12 public schools , Latinos made up 17% of
the total student population in 2000 , according to the
U . S . Department of Education . The concentration of
Latino students in public schools varied by region , 
552———Latinos
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 552
with most Latinos concentrated in the South and West . 
Latinos at least doubled their
presence as a percentage of
total regional K–12 enrollments in all four regions of
the United States between
1975 and 2000 . For example , 
Latinos comprised 31 . 6%
of total public school enrollments in the West in 2000 , 
showing an increase of 16 . 8
percentage points since 1975 , 
or nearly a 114% increase . 
The distribution of Latino
students among school levels
reflects the relative youth of
this population . As noted by
Richard Valencia in the book
Chicano School Failure and
Success ( 2nd ed .  )  , although
in 2000 Latinos represented
17% of total K–12 enrollments , they comprised 20%
of the kindergarten enrollments
versus 15% of the total
enrollments in high school . 
Indeed , in California , Latinos , 
who made up about 45% of
the state ’ s total enrollments
in 2003–2004 , comprised 51% of the total kindergarten population versus 37% of all 12th graders . In
Texas , Latinos , who made up 44% of the state ’ s total
enrollment in 2003–2004 , comprised 48% of the total
kindergarten population versus 43% of all 9th graders
and 35% of all 12th graders . Part of this distribution
pattern is attributable to significant dropout rates
among Latinos ( discussed below )  . Nevertheless , an
optimistic view of these data indicates that the enrollments of Latinos will continue to grow and maintain a
significant presence overall , particularly in states such
as California and Texas , but also in states such as
Illinois , Iowa , Georgia , and New York .  ( See Figure 1 .  ) 
Growing Presence of
English Language Learners
It is important to note that among the K–12 Latino
student population is quite a large and growing proportion of English language learners ( ELL )  . The U . S . 
Department of Education reports that in 2001–2002 , 
ELL students numbered one in four students in
California and one in seven students in Texas , where
the vast majority of ELL students are Latinos and
Spanish speakers . In California , for example , the
state ’ s department of education indicates that 85% of
all ELL students were Spanish speakers and numbered over 1 . 3 million in 2003–2004 . Unfortunately
for many of the ELL students , only 30% of public
school teachers instructing these students have received
pertinent training , and a mere 3% have degrees in
English as a Second Language ( ESL ) or bilingual education , as noted by the U . S . Department of Education
in 1993–1994 . Indeed , 2003–2004 data from the
California Department of Education indicates that
only 38% of ELL students had met the state board of
education criterion for English proficiency . 
Two scholars who have documented the complexities of serving Latino ELL students are Guadalupe
Valdés and Eugene E . García . Valdés ’ s work attends
to the role of school-parental / family interactions and
relationships in supporting Latino immigrant students ’ 
Latinos———553
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Grades 9–12 1 , 854 , 509
Grades 7–8 1 , 000 , 558
Grades K–6
756 , 860
444 , 761
1 , 662 , 132
675 , 426
340 , 642
1 , 019 , 897 3 , 386 , 700
Total Latino Total White State Total
Figure 1 Total Latino , White , and Statewide Public School Enrollments by Grade
Level , California 2003–2004
SOURCE : Adapted from California Department of Education , Educational Demographics Unit .  
( 2004 )  . California public schools , statewide report : Enrollment by gender , grade , and ethnic
designation , 2003–04 [ Datafile ]  . 
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 553
participation in schools . It also illuminates the interconnectedness of race , class , national origin , cultural
heritage , and educational status in understanding how
immigrant students and their families navigate the
educational system in their own behalf . In a similar
vein , García argues for the incorporation of an understanding of individual and shared cultural identity formation and maintenance into discussions of bilingual
education policy . In doing so , he contends that bilingual education policy can be better aimed at producing learning environments for Latino ELL students
that are more responsive to both their needs and their
talents . 
Despite such remarkable changes in the student
demographics at the K–12 levels , Latinos in postsecondary institutions have not increased very rapidly
over the past several decades . Affirmative action policies had enabled some states to make inroads in the
recruitment of Latinos and other students of color into
higher education institutions . However , recent changes
in policy , including the elimination of affirmative
action in some states , have likewise had an impact on
the degree to which Latinos participate in college and
graduate school . Over the past two and one half
decades , Latinos have only increased their presence
among students enrolled in graduate / first-professional
programs by 3 percentage points , moving from 2%
in 1976 to just 5% in 2000 , according to the U . S . 
Department of Education . Translated into numbers , 
this means that of the 2 . 2 million students enrolled
in graduate / first-professional programs across the
country , only 110 , 000 were Latinos in 2000 . Among 2
million individuals holding doctorates in the United
States in 2001 , only 71 , 000 were Latinos . 
PERSISTENT CHALLENGES : HISTORICAL
PATTERNS AND RECENT TRENDS IN
LATINO EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT
Latinos have and continue to face tremendous challenges to their success in schools . The lack of educational success among Latinos has been attributed to
what many researchers have deemed to be deficiencies in their genetics , home cultures and experiences , 
parental education , and socioeconomic class origins . 
Rather than rely on such “ cultural deficit ” explanatory
models , other contemporary researchers instead
explain the relative lack of educational success among
Latinos as being tied to institutional and systemic
barriers that perpetuate the unequal status of this
group relative to their White , middle-class counterparts . While more recent research on Latino educational experiences has focused on best practices for
ensuring Latino success ( as discussed in more detail
below )  , the data indicate that challenges in educational access and attainment still persist . 
Dropouts
Perhaps one of the most persistent challenges for
Latino students in the United States is the high rate of
dropping out of school . Although it is clear that there
have been improvements in dropouts when one follows
more recent cohorts of students through their high
school years , scholars have pointed to the persistence of
the gap that results in dropout rates among Latinos that
are up to four times the rate of White students in similar age groups ( using U . S . census data )  . Even if one
only examines the dropout data in comparisons of U . S . -
born Latinos and White students , the gap is still 2 : 1 in
terms of dropout rates , and the gap has persisted for the
nearly three decades of data available through the census . Nevertheless , the presence of immigrant students
among the total Latino population , some of whom have
had very little or no formal schooling prior to their
arrival in the United States , at times contributes to overstated dropout rates relative to White students . In a
recent report sponsored by the Pew Hispanic Center in
Washington , D . C .  , among U . S . -born and immigrant
Latinos , ages 16 to 19 , the dropout rates varied widely
across Latino subgroups in 2000 . For 16- to 19-year-old
Mexican-origin immigrants , the dropout rate was 39%
versus 15% for their U . S . -born Mexican-origin counterparts . Among Puerto Rican students , the immigrant to U . S . -born difference was 22% versus 12% . 
Regionally speaking , among 16- to 19-year-olds , 
California ’ s immigrant Latinos experienced a 34%
dropout rate compared to U . S . -born Latinos with a
10% dropout rate . Likewise , in Florida , the dropout
rate among immigrant Latinos was 26% for 16- to 19-
year-olds , double the rate for U . S . -born Latinos in
that state . 
High School Completion
Simply examining dropout rates will not provide a
sufficient picture of Latino graduation or completion
rates , particularly given that Latinos may take significantly longer to graduate with a high school diploma
than other students . According to the National Center
554———Latinos
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 554
for Education Statistics , Latino high school completion rates have fluctuated over the past two and one
half decades . Nevertheless , in 2001 , 58% of Latino
18- to 24-year-olds had completed high school . This
percentage is markedly lower than their White counterparts , of whom 83% had completed high school . 
While high school completion , in and of itself , does
not always translate into substantial returns to the
students , for Latinos it can lead to higher education and
thereby better employment opportunities . 
College Eligibility Rates
Even for those Latino students who are able to
persist in school in order to graduate , there remains an
important hurdle to further educational and employment opportunities . College eligibility among Latino
high school graduates has been the focus of the work
of many scholars . In California , for example , only
21 . 5% of all Latino 12th-grade graduates completed
all of the courses required for admission to the
University of California and / or the California State
University systems in 2002–2003 . While 2002–2003
Texas data indicate that Latinos completed the 
 “ Recommended High School Program ” at rates comparable to White students in that state ( about 57% versus 56% , respectively )  , it appears that Latinos are
disproportionately underrepresented among students
completing their high school programs with the
Distinguished Achievement Program designation . 
While Latinos comprised 34% of the total graduate
population , they comprised 29% of those graduates
completing the college-level coursework associated
with the Distinguished Achievement Program . 
Comparable figures for White Texas graduates , however , show a disproportionate overrepresentation
with their being 49% of the total graduate population
and 60% of those accomplishing the Distinguished
Achievement Program designation . 
Representation Among
Teachers and Administrators
Researchers have argued for the importance of
representation of Latinos at all levels of K–12 and
postsecondary education , particularly in light of scholarship on the role of Latino culture in their educational
success . Table 1 presents data that reflect the disproportionate representation of Latino teachers and
administrators relative to students in U . S . public
schools . For example , nationwide figures indicate that
of all school principals and teachers , only 5% and 6% , 
respectively , are Latinos . Similarly , in the states of
California and Texas , where Latinos are found in such
high concentrations among students , Latino representation among teaching and administrative ranks is
quite low . In both states , Latinos comprise well over
40% of the total student enrollments , yet they comprise much less than 20% of the teachers and administrators . Given the data on Latino participation in higher
education , these figures are not necessarily surprising , 
but they do illuminate the challenge that schools face
in becoming responsive learning environments , as recommended in the research of Patricia Gándara , García , 
Valdés , Valencia , and others .  ( See Table 1 .  ) 
Newly Emerging Educational
Issues : Resegregation , High-Stakes
Testing , and Zero-Tolerance Policies
There are several policy issues affecting the growing
numbers of Latino students in the United States , particularly in urban settings : resegregation , high-stakes
testing , and zero-tolerance policies . These issues
potentially thwart educational efforts aimed at increasing Latino attainment and success in public schools . 
Data from 2003 on the distribution of Latino fourth
graders , for example , show that 40% attend schools
with concentrations of children of color of 90% or
more . Latinos are more likely now than before desegregation efforts in the 1960s to attend segregated
schools . Latinos face a variety of forms of segregation , 
such as that based on language and academic ability . 
Indeed , the movement toward high-stakes testing to
determine the placement and progress of Latinos in
schools has become a serious concern for many
researchers . They argue that Latino students ’ learning , 
academic growth , and academic giftedness are not
only inadequately captured by many of the standardized tests designed to “ hold schools accountable ” for
their educational success , but the tests discriminate
against students by testing them on material that they
may not have been taught in the first place . This situation is particularly acute , according to these scholars , 
in the case of English-language-learning Latinos
whose schools may not provide assessments that are
appropriate measures of their progress . Moreover , 
given the relatively high concentration of Latinos
in urban communities , with the added attention on
Latinos———555
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 555
identifying violent behavior among urban youth 
( males , especially )  , Latino students face additional isolation as targets for zero-tolerance policies . Increasing
numbers of Latinos in Texas , for example , are removed
from school for a variety of disciplinary issues , resulting in the overrepresentation of Latino ( and African
American ) males in suspensions , expulsions , and assignments to alternative educational settings . 
Documenting Latino High Achievement
Latino high achievers are largely invisible in urban
high schools and in educational research . Over the last
three decades , numerous scholars have written about the
connections between the academic underachievement of
Latino students schooled in the United States and socioeconomic / academic barriers . Sonia Nieto , John Ogbu , 
Signithia Fordham , and William Vélez have variously
discussed the impact of internal and direct colonialism , 
single-parent households , poverty , culturally irrelevant
curricula , and nonacademic tracking on Latino students
within traditional public urban schools . Other scholars
contend that Latino academic underachievement has
been exacerbated by the disproportionate representation
of Puerto Rican- and Mexican-origin students in special
education programs that academically miscategorize
them and employ watered-down curricula . 
While this scholarly work is important and theoretically rich , recent scholarship is turning the page from
an exclusive overemphasis on academic underachievement to stories that describe the conditions that
make it possible for working-class Latino students to
become high academic achievers . Thus , to counteract
the overabundance of scholarly literature that discusses
why Puerto Rican- and Mexican-origin students drop
out of school and / or academically underachieve , scholars on Latino issues have recently produced research
that focuses on the institutional , familial , and community-based factors that have the potential to enable
these students to become high academic achievers . In
turn , this research has resulted in major implications
for students , families / communities , policymakers , and
school reformers . 
Research With Puerto Rican Students
Scholars have focused on the high achieving
schooling experiences of Puerto Rican students . With
this line of inquiry , they have countered traditional
perceptions of the overall lack of support and caring
that working-class families and communities of color
provide their children . What is especially interesting
to note is that all of these researchers situate the multiple ways in which families , and especially mothers , 
serve as support systems to these students ’ academic
success . Thus , the research directly challenges cultural deficit theories regarding the lack of academic
success among Latinos by employing new theoretical
556———Latinos
Table 1 Distribution of Latino , White , and Total U . S . Public School Teachers , Administrators / Principals , and
Students ( in thousands ) 
Teachers Administratorsa Students
Latino White Total Latino White Total Latino White Total
US 169 . 0 2 , 531 . 6 3 , 002 . 3 4 . 3 68 . 9 83 . 8 8 , 103 . 3 28 , 612 . 4 47 , 440 . 5 
( 6% )  ( 84% )  ( 5% )  ( 82% )  ( 17% )  ( 60% ) 
CA 41 . 5 227 . 7 306 . 9 3 . 5 19 . 3 26 . 4 2 , 717 . 6 2 , 138 . 1 6 , 108 . 1 
( 14% )  ( 74% )  ( 13% )  ( 73% )  ( 45% )  ( 35% ) 
TX 50 . 4 204 . 3 279 . 8 2 . 9 12 . 2 17 . 1 1 , 735 . 0 1 , 701 . 2 4 , 163 . 4 
( 18% )  ( 73% )  ( 17% )  ( 72% )  ( 42% )  ( 41% ) 
SOURCE : Adapted from U . S . Department of Education , National Center for Education Statistics ( NCES )  , The Digest of Education
Statistics , 2002 ; NCES ,  “ Public School Student , Staff , and Graduate Counts by State : School Year 2001-02 ,  ” April 2004 ; California
Department of Education , Educational Demographics Unit , 2001-2002 ,  ; Texas Education Agency , Snapshot 2002 ,  
. 
a . NCES data source only reported ethnic demographics for school principals in the United States . California and Texas data include
principals and all other administrators . 
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 556
frameworks that situate the experiences of Puerto
Rican students within the context of their families and
communities as a base ( versus lack ) of support . 
For example , Pedro Antrop-González found that
the families of Puerto Rican high achievers held their
children to high academic expectations and expected
their children ’ s teachers to do the same . In addition , 
mothers took it upon themselves to help their children
with homework . In the event that the mother , or any
other family member , could not help with homework , 
outside help was found so that their child would not
fall behind in their schoolwork . Other forms of familial support included children being encouraged to
develop their bilingual language skills and bicultural
frames of reference in order to navigate life inside and
outside their homes and communities . Moreover , the
families of these high achievers taught their children
that many people , especially many of their teachers
and peers , would hold them to low standards and
expectations by virtue of being Puerto Rican ; hence it
was crucial that their high academic performance
serve as a tool with which to dismantle these erroneous assumptions . 
Other scholars have also located the high academic
achievement of Puerto Rican students in relation to
their access ( or lack thereof ) to community-based and
school-based resources . These students ’ acquisition of
social capital and their participation in social networks , 
including churches and extracurricular activities with
institutional agents , greatly contributes to high academic achievement . These social networks serve multiple purposes , such as allowing for the establishment of
trust-laden relationships between youth and adults and
the consequent exchange of valuable information like
the college entry process , the scholarship application
process , and providing general mentoring / advice . This
mentoring especially contributes to the development
of a “ school kid identity ,  ” which places emphasis on
proschool behaviors like going to school every day , 
remaining on top of schoolwork / homework , seeking
placement in safe social niches with other high achievers , participation in extracurricular activities , and conforming to institutionally sanctioned rules and norms . 
On the contrary ,  “ street kids ” found it very difficult
to situate themselves in school-oriented peer networks , 
and often adopted negative means of resistance to
schooling through membership in gangs and / or not
going to school altogether . Finally , all these scholars
ultimately contend that large , comprehensive high
schools often do a poor job at equitably encouraging
all students to access social networks that foment a
school kid reality . 
Research with Mexican-Origin Students
Scholars have contributed to the literature on the
schooling experiences of high achieving Mexican-origin
students . Like much of the aforementioned work
regarding Puerto Rican high achievers , Mexican-origin
students and their families have informed these scholars of similar institutional and familial / community conditions that have supported their high academic
achievement . One thorough analysis of familial support among Mexican origin students , for example , can
be found in Latino High School Graduation : Defying
the Odds by Harriett D . Romo and Toni Falbo . 
Families play a very active role in the academic
success of their children because they go the extra mile
to mentor them at home and seek positive support
structures outside the home by way of larger outside
communities . Institutions work to either help or hinder
Mexican-origin students ’ academic success . While
student membership in “ cosmopolitan networks ” and
their access to positive support structures and resources
are very helpful for students , Romo and Falbo also discuss the myriad ways in which institutions diligently
work to inequitably offer them to all students . 
While it is known that some teachers try very hard
to construct additive curricula by weaving their
students ’ linguistic and sociopolitical realities within
their classrooms , it is also known that most teachers
do not . Rather , as documented in a Texas high school , 
many school-related forces strive hard to maintain the
status quo through subtractive schooling that demonizes the bilingualism and biculturalism that students
and their families already bring to their classrooms . 
Furthermore , this subtractive schooling is reinforced
through structures of large , comprehensive schools
and overcrowded classrooms where students , their
teachers , and other school staff members often find it
impossible to authentically know each other and maintain
mutually caring relationships . 
Academic resiliency among Latino students is
most evident in those high-achieving students who
complete school and successfully complete college . 
These students are the ones who are high achieving
throughout their school life . The research on highachieving Latino students identifies their coping
strategies . Gándara identifies protective factors that
may assist a child in avoiding undesirable developmental
Latinos———557
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 557
and academic outcomes . Protective factors can
generally be categorized under the role of parents , 
the students ’ behavioral and cognitive attributes , and
school / institutional factors . Richard Duran identifies
factors of resourcefulness in Latino students ’ ability to
overcome incompatibilities between the student and
the educational institution . Henry Trueba ’ s work on
the academic success of immigrant children shows
that if children are able to manage to retain a strong
and affirming self-identity and remain as part of the
sociocultural community , they can achieve . 
Future Directions for Documenting
Latino Educational Success
Students have taught educational scholars that their
academic success is often not attributable to schoolrelated factors like teachers and other institutional
agents . Rather , their success is more clearly linked
to home and community-related factors like the influence and advocacy of their mothers , the importance
of their ethnic identity , and their acquisition of social
capital through community-based social networks like
churches and extracurricular activities . The difficulties experienced by high-achieving Puerto Rican- and
Mexican-origin students lead researchers , such as
Festus Obiakor , to believe that even “ good ” large
comprehensive urban high schools still inequitably
structure opportunities for high achievement . That is , 
even for high-achieving Latino students , many schools
do not tap into the funds of knowledge that these
students bring to school . 
Thus it is important that schools be encouraged to
continually examine the ways in which their students ’ 
lives are reflected both inside and outside schools . 
Broader partnerships with community-based agencies , families , and area universities are also some of
the recommendations emanating from the research on
high-achieving Latinos . Through these types of
school-community partnerships , high schools can further reinforce the social and cultural capital these
students are already receiving in their homes and
communities , which Latinos can employ to graduate
from high school , enter college , and access opportunities that will improve their life chances . 
—Gloria M . Rodriguez , 
Rene Antrop-Gonzalez , and Augustina Reyes
See also accountability ; achievement gap , of students ; 
achievement tests ; affirmative action ; Chavez , Cesar
Estrada ; cross-cultural studies ; desegregation , of schools ; 
discipline in schools ; diversity ; dropouts ; equality , in
schools ; ethnicity ; ethnocentrism ; expectations , teacher and
student cultures ; high schools ; immigration , history and
impact in education ; League of United Latin American
Citizens ; Mendez , Felicitas ; minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; underachievers
Further Readings and References
Antrop-González , R .  ( 2003 )  .  “ This school is my sanctuary ”  : 
The Dr . Pedro Albizu Campos alternative high school . Journal of the Center for Puerto Rican Studies , 15 ( 2 )  , 232–255 . 
California Department of Education , Educational
Demographics Unit .  ( 2004 )  . California public schools , 
statewide report : Enrollment by gender , grade , and ethnic
designation , 2003–04 [ Data file ]  . Retrieved from 
/ dataquest . 
Gándara , P .  ( 1995 )  . Over the ivy walls : The educational mobility of low-income Chicanos . New York : State University of
New York Press . 
García , E .  ( 2001 )  . Hispanic education in the United States : 
Raíces y alas . Lanham , MD : Rowman & Littlefield . 
McCarthy , C .  , Crichlow , W .  , Dimitriadis , G .  ,  & Dolby , N .  
( Eds .  )  .  ( 2005 )  . Race , identity , and representation in education . New York : Routledge . 
Millman , J .  ( 2005 , May 2 )  . Low-wage U . S . jobs get 
 “ Mexicanized ,  ” but there ’ s a price . Wall Street Journal , p . A2 . 
Nieto , S .  ( 2000 )  . Puerto Rican students in U . S . schools : A brief
history . In S . Nieto ( Ed .  )  , Puerto Rican students in U . S . 
schools ( pp . 5–38 )  . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Obiakor , F . E .  ( 2001 )  . It even happens in “ good ” schools : 
Responding to cultural diversity in today ’ s classrooms . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Pedraza , P .  ,  & Rivera , M .  ( 2005 )  . Latino education . Mahwah , 
NJ : Erlbaum . 
Reyes , A .  ( 2001 )  . Alternative education : The criminalization
of student behavior . Fordham Urban Law Journal , 29 ( 2 )  , 
539–559 . 
Valdés , G .  ( 2001 )  . Learning and not learning English : Latino
students in American schools . New York : Teachers College
Press . 
Valencia , R . R .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2002 )  . Chicano school failure and
success : Past , present , and future ( 2nd ed .  )  . London : 
RoutledgeFalmer . 
 LAW
The U . S . Supreme Court ’ s 1954 decision in Brown v . 
Board of Education was the most important educationrelated case in U . S . history , perhaps its most significant judgment ever . With Brown providing a major
impetus in the ensuing years , the United States has
558———Law
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 558
undergone a myriad of educational , legal , and social
transformations . Brown not only ushered in an era of
equal educational opportunities in striking down racial
segregation in public schools but also signaled the birth
of the field known as education law or school law . 
Prior to Brown , the Court addressed only a handful
of education-related cases . Yet , now almost every year
the Court resolves at least one school-related case . In
fact , since the Court first addressed a dispute under
the Establishment Clause in 1947 , upholding a state ’ s
providing transportation for children who attend nonpublic schools in Everson v . Board of Education 
( 1947 )  , it addressed more than 30 cases in both school
desegregation and religion . 
In light of the significance that education law has
assumed in the daily activities of educational leaders , 
this entry reflects on the centrality of education law in
educational leadership preparation programs . The centrality of education law is reflected in a study conducted
on behalf of the University Council for Educational
Administration ( UCEA )  . The survey revealed that with
87 . 5% of UCEA ’ s members offering courses in education law , it is the second most commonly taught subject
in leadership programs . Furthermore , since many universities offer a variety of graduate and undergraduate
classes in education law , it is likely to remain a crucial
element in curricula , demonstrating that as an applied
rather than a purely theoretical discipline , it is essential
for educators at all levels . 
The UCEA study and other indicators support the
proposition that specialists in education law must help
clarify the law so that it remains a valuable tool . Faculty
members who specialize in education law can help to
preserve the importance of education law by teaching
students to focus on such basic concepts as due process
and equal protection , essential elements in the development of sound policies and practices . In other words , 
as important as abstract legal principles or theories are , 
faculty members who teach education law must concentrate on ways to help practitioners apply these concepts rather than having them memorize case holdings
apart from their applications in real-life situations . 
Education law presents a unique intellectual challenge to prepare educational practitioners , whether board
members , superintendents , principals , or teachers , to
be proactive . Working in a discipline that tends to be
reactive , faculty members teaching education law need
to present their subject matter as a tool that should be
applied in advance to help ensure that the school officials meet the needs of all of their constituents , ranging
from students and parents to faculty , staff , and the
local community . Yet , the goal of making the law
proactive becomes complicated , because most
changes generated by education law are reactive , and
modifications come only after a decision has been
reached via litigation . To this end , Brown is a typical
example of how the law can be seen as reactive insofar as there would not have been a need for Brown if
the schools in Topeka and elsewhere had met the
needs of African American students . 
Along with balancing the tension present between
the proactive and reactive dimensions of education law , 
law classes in educational leadership programs should
not become Law School 101 . Rather than trying to turn
educators into lawyers equipped to deal with such technical and procedural matters as jurisdiction , statutes of
limitation , and the service of process , courses in education law should provide a broad understanding of the
law that will allow them to accomplish two important
goals . 
First , classes in education law should provide educators with enough awareness of the legal dimensions
of a situation so they can better frame questions for their
attorneys to answer , performing a kind of triage to limit
problems , when a legal controversy arises . To this end , 
educators must be taught to recognize the value in making their attorneys equal partners not only in problem
solving after the fact but also in developing responsive , 
proactive policies . Such a proactive approach is consistent with the notion of preventative law wherein knowledgeable educators can identify potential problems in
advance and in concert with their attorneys can work to
ensure they do not develop into crises . Moreover , when
educational leaders select attorneys for their boards , for
example , they would be well advised to hire individuals
with specialized practices in education law , thereby
avoiding potential lapses in critical knowledge and
ensuring their advice has the most up-to-date perspectives on legal matters . Second , classes in education law
must teach educators how to rely upon their substantive
knowledge of the law and where to look to update their
sources of information through professional organizations such as the Education Law Association so they can
develop sound policies to enhance the day-to-day operations of schools . 
Education law is a dynamic , intellectually stimulating discipline that is constantly evolving to meet the
needs of educational leaders as they direct the daily
activities in schools . The merits of its decisions aside , 
and the impact that they are likely to have on educational
Law———559
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 559
leaders aside , one has only to read recent Supreme
Court opinions in such areas as sexual harassment , 
religion , and special education , among others , to recognize the importance of keeping abreast of legal
changes . In light of these cases , educators are charged
with the task of developing and implementing policies
to enhance school environments for all constituents . 
Perhaps the only constant in education law is that as
it evolves to meet the demands of a constantly changing educational world , it is likely to remain of utmost
importance for all who are interested in schooling . In
fact , the seemingly endless supply of new statutes , regulations , and cases speak of the need to be ever vigilant
of how legal developments impact on education . 
—Charles J . Russo
See also accountability ; affirmative action ; Black education ; 
boards of education ; civil rights movement ; collective bargaining ; critical race theory ; critical theory ; desegregation , 
of schools ; Latinos ; League of Latin American Citizens ; 
Marshall , Thurgood ; Mendez , Felicitas ; A Nation at Risk ; 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People ; No Child Left Behind ; special education ; state
departments of education ; unions , of teachers
Further Readings and References
Brown v . Board of Education , I , 347 U . S . 483 ( 1954 )  . 
Everson v . Board of Education , 330 U . S . 1 ( 1947 )  . 
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act , 20 U . S . C . §§
1400 et seq . 
Pohland , P . A .  ,  & Carlson , L . T .  ( 1993 )  . Program reform in
educational administration , UCEA Review , 34 ( 3 )  , 4–9 . 
Russo , C .  ( 2005 )  . The role of law in leadership preparation programs . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 168–186 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Russo , C .  ,  & Osborne , A .  ( 2003 )  . Special education and the
law . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
 LAW , TRENDS IN
The typical publication in school law , whether an
article or a book , examines one or more topics for a
relatively contemporaneous period or without a comprehensive and systematic trends analysis . The purpose of this entry is to help fill the gap by providing
a compact longitudinal overview of the trends in
school law . Inasmuch as the expansive school law
literature provides the microlevel textual details , the
focus of this overview will be on two key dimensions , 
or variables—volume and outcomes—of the education
litigation . 
The overall trend for these two dimensions , which
is different from a prevailing perception among many
educators and other segments of the public , is that
court decisions in the context of K–12 education are
on a gradual downswing rather than an explosive
upswing and that the school defendants have won the
majority of the published , final decisions , even in the
turbulent 1970s and continuing to the present time . 
Volume refers here to the frequency of published
case law , which is the only available database for such
overall purposes . Contrary to a common perception of
a continuing “ explosion ” in education litigation , various empirical analyses have reached the opposite conclusion—the overall volume of published case law
reached a high point in the 1970s and has gradually
but rather steadily decreased since then . The major
exception within this total downward trend is the
special education segment , which has risen relatively
dramatically since the end of the 1970s in terms of
both published hearing / review officer and published
court decisions . Yet , contrary to Richard Arum ’ s 2003
characterization of the courts ’ hostility toward school
authority , his own data show a steady and steep decline
in the frequency of student discipline cases in regular
education since the 1970s . 
Outcomes refers here to who won these published
decisions—the plaintiff or suing party or the defendant school authority . Again contrary to the common
conception , the school authorities won the majority of
the decisions overall in both the 1970s and the more
modern era . Although the proverbial pendulum from
the earlier to the later period did not swing for the
overall published case law , it did do so for student
cases . More specifically , there was a statistically significant shift in the outcomes of student-initiated court
decisions from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s . 
Within the student-initiated category , however , the
outcomes of the special education decisions , both at
the hearing / review officer as well as the court level , 
remained relatively stable , modestly favoring school
districts , at least for the time period 1989 to 2000 . 
—Perry Zirkel
See also accountability ; affirmative action ; Black education ; 
boards of education ; civil rights movement ; collective bargaining ; critical race theory ; critical theory ; desegregation , 
of schools ; Latinos ; League of Latin American Citizens ; 
Marshall , Thurgood ; Mendez , Felicitas ; A Nation at Risk ; 
560———Law , Trends In
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 560
National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People ; No Child Left Behind ; school safety ; special education ; state departments of education ; unions , of teachers ; 
violence in schools
Further Readings and References
Arum , R .  ( 2003 )  . Judging school discipline : The crisis of
moral authority . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University
Press . 
D ’ Angelo , A .  , Lutz , J . G .  ,  & Zirkel , P . A .  ( 2004 )  . Are published IDEA hearing officer decisions representative ? 
Journal of Disability Policy Studies , 14 , 241–252 . 
Joint Center & Common Good .  ( 2003 )  . The effects of law on
public schools . Retrieved June 8 , 2004 , from http :  /  / 
cgood . org . 
Lupini , W . H .  ,  & Zirkel , P . A .  ( 2003 )  . An outcomes analysis of
education litigation . Educational Policy , 17 , 257–279 . 
Zirkel , P . A .  ,  & D ’ Angelo , A .  ( 2002 )  . Special education case
law : An empirical trends analysis . West ’ s Education Law
Reporter , 161 , 731–753 . 
 LAWRENCE-LIGHTFOOT , SARA
Sociologist Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot ( 1944– ) built
her research agenda describing interactions between
families and schools . Throughout eight books and
innumerable articles , Professor Lawrence-Lightfoot
provided insightful analyses of the social conditions
of school and family relations . She also expanded on
qualitative research approaches adopting the reporting
style called portraiture . Much of her work drew on
personal perspectives formed during her life as a female
African American professor at Harvard . 
The daughter of a professor of sociology and a psychoanalyst , young Lawrence-Lightfoot shared her
parents ’ educated view of the dynamics of race , gender , 
and culture in the intersection of home and school . Her
Mississippi-born parents attended White institutions of
higher education . Lawrence-Lightfoot attended rural
New York schools . She noted her parents ’ remarkable
vigilance negotiating her siblings ’ and her experiences
in predominantly White schools . She earned her bachelor ’ s degree from Swarthmore College , where she holds
an endowed professorship , and a doctorate from Harvard
University , where she holds the Emily Hargroves Fisher
Professorship , a chair that will become the LawrenceLightfoot Endowed Chair upon her retirement . The
Lawrence-Lightfoot Endowed Chair is Harvard ’ s
first to be named for an African American female . 
Lawrence-Lightfoot also serves as the chair of the
MacArthur Foundation , an organization that recognizes
the betterment of the human condition . Among her many
honors , Lawrence-Lightfoot received a MacArthur
Fellowship in 1984 . 
Lawrence-Lightfoot ’ s analysis of the tensions
between families and schools , especially the divisions
between mothers and teachers , began with Worlds
Apart in 1978 . Her subsequent descriptions of the interlocking networks among schools , communities , and
families in The Good High School provided intimate
depictions of high schools with healthy relationships . 
During this period of the mid-1980s , LawrenceLightfoot joined with another noted sociologist , James
Coleman , to provide direction for high school reform
and explain how schools and communities could
exploit social capital in schooling . Their work exposed
differences between public and nonpublic schools as
less about students ’ socioeconomic status and more
about the social networks ignored or severed by public
high schools but nurtured and woven more tightly in
nonpublic schools . 
In addition to contributions illuminating the
social complexity of school , parent , and community
relationships , Lawrence-Lightfoot ’ s approach to publishing her findings offered a more fluent presentation
of the results of qualitative research . In the late 1990s , 
she published an explanation and a defense of her
method , portraiture . With coauthor Jessica Hoffman
Davis , Lawrence-Lightfoot extended ethnographers ’ 
debates over the role and place of voice as a means
of relating research results . Lawrence-Lightfoot positioned portraiture as a phenomenological procedure . 
Portraiture provides a means of data reduction that has
been criticized for its unspoken reification of a singular perspective on phenomena of interest . 
Despite such critiques , Lawrence-Lightfoot ’ s
nuanced rendering of the emotional dimensions of
racial and gendered relations in schools and their
communities strikes a sustained resonance . Her parables and portraits of mothers and teachers engaged in
contests over students ’ education and futures continue
to provide an authentic description of highly charged
social situations surrounding schooling . 
—Jane Clark Lindle
See also Black education ; Catholic education ; children and
families in America ; communities , types , building of ; cultural capital ; cultural politics , wars ; expectations , teacher and
student cultures ; feminism and theories of leadership ; gender
Lawrence-Lightfoot , Sara———561
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 561
studies , in education ; high schools ; human capital ; parental
involvement ; qualitative research , history , theories , issues ; 
resiliency ; social capital ; stratification , in organizations
Further Readings and References
English , F .  ( 2000 )  . A critical appraisal of Sara LawrenceLightfoot ’ s portraiture as a method of educational research . 
Educational Researcher , 29 ( 7 )  , 21–26 . 
Lawrence-Lightfoot , S .  ( 1983 )  . The good high school : 
Portraits of character and culture . New York : Basic Books . 
Lawrence-Lightfoot , S .  ( 2000 )  . Respect : An exploration . 
Cambridge , MA : Perseus Books . 
Lawrence-Lightfoot , S .  ,  & Hoffman Davis , J .  ( 1997 )  . The art
and science of portraiture . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
 LEADERSHIP , COMPLEX
THEORY OF
Complex leadership theory is the study of the role
of leadership in the emergence of ideas among
neural-like networks of interactive , interdependent
agents . It is premised on complexity theory , a
science of emergent dynamics in interactive , adaptive networks . 
Complexity theory itself derives from chaos theory , 
a science of nonlinear behavior in interactive , dynamically active systems ( nonlinearity is defined as producing outcomes that are disproportional to inputs )  . 
Chaotic systems exhibit complicated , dynamic , deterministically derived order ( thus they are distinguished
from simple random systems that exhibit no order )  . 
Mathematically generated plots of the motion of such
systems reveal convoluted—and hauntingly beautiful—patterns , the most famous of which looks like
butterfly wings drawn with nonoverlapping , neverending lines ( the well-known Lorenz attractor )  . 
Chaotic systems are nonlinear and consequently
unpredictable ; they are so highly changeable that they
carry little information about their past or future
behaviors . A number of turbulent or potentially turbulent activities , such as weather patterns or fluid flows , 
are described by the science of chaos . 
Before chaos theory , it was assumed that dynamic
behavior was either random ( hence of little interest ) 
or stable . Stable systems , such as a clock pendulum , 
repeat themselves eventually ; thus their past and their
future are predictable . Neither chaos nor stability
describes what happens in human systems , however . 
One can see a bit of chaos and a bit of stability in
social dynamics , but one can also identify characteristics ( such as adaptability ) that are not observed in
either chaos or stability . Instead , social systems lie
between chaos and stability but exhibit unique characteristics as well . This boundary is the realm of complexity theory . 
Like chaotic systems , complex systems are nonlinear , but this nonlinearity manifests predominately as
small change events rather than as the dramatic events
characteristic of chaos . Like stable systems , complex
systems are sufficiently unchanging to carry information about their past and their future ; that is , they are
predictable . However , information in complex systems
is also dynamic ( from its chaotic side )  , so memories and
predictability are prone to dissipation . Unlike stable or
chaotic systems , complex systems are adaptive , capable
of solving problems ( computer simulations of complex
systems can solve difficult puzzles , for example )  , and
are able to respond quickly and flexibly to satisfy their
needs . Perhaps most important for leadership and organization , complex systems are also capable of reinventing themselves in surprising and creative ways . 
Complex systems are networks of agents ( individuals or groups ) who are interactive , interdependent 
( the actions of one agent affects the fitness of other
agents )  , and moderately coupled ( directly affecting a
limited number of other agents )  . The dynamics of
complex systems are enhanced by the presence of
catalysts , and indeed the system can generate its own
catalysts . One important catalytic agent is the leader . 
Complex systems produce new structures or creativity
with bottom-up rather than top-down activities ; that
is , their strength lies in the dynamics of their followers rather than the control of their leaders . Complex
systems are typically coordinated by simple , local , 
minimally restrictive rules that govern the actions
of agents . Because complex systems are adaptive and
capable of rapidly producing creative surprises , they
are ideally suited for knowledge-producing organizations in hypercompetitive environments such as the
computer software industry , research and development systems , and , more topically , higher education
institutions that value and promote research or public
schools struggling to adapt rapidly and creatively to
environmental demands . 
Leadership plays an important role in enabling
the emergence of complex systems . The study of such
leadership is called complex leadership ( to suggest
leadership of complex systems rather than a description
562———Leadership , Complex Theory Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 562
of the leader )  . Complex leadership differs dramatically
from traditional models of leadership . Traditional
models can be categorized either as management of
influence or management of meaning models . 
Management of influence refers to leadership that
directly influences follower behavior to accomplish
organizational goals ; these perspectives include command and control models , contingency theories , and
bureaucracy theory . Management of meaning refers to
leadership that seeks to align workers ’ sense of propriety , their worldviews , or their definitions of life
goals with organizational goals ; this category includes
transformational leadership and culture leadership . 
Both influence and meaning models of leadership deal
primarily with human relations and tend to depend
heavily on social-psychological strategies . 
Complex leadership moves away from ( although it
does not abandon ) relational approaches and focuses
instead on enabling conditions ( i . e .  , network dynamics ) that foster the creativity and flexibility available
through complex systems . Because of its significant
departure from traditional approaches , it is appropriately labeled with its own model categorization , 
which can be termed management of emergence . This
terminology emphasizes the bottom-up , spontaneous
nature of productivity in complex systems and underscores leadership ’ s unique role in that process . 
Complex leadership enables complex behavior
within an organization . Its role can be defined in terms
of several overlapping functions . First , complex leadership enables interaction . Agents in complex organizations need unfettered access to each other and to
ideas , for it is the interaction of ideas that generates
surprise and creativity . Interaction can be accomplished both passively and actively . Passive enabling
involves the way space is structured . Educational
facilities can be organized to either encourage or discourage interaction . Traditional school structures with
classes staggered on both sides of long hallways 
( called the egg crate layout ) are poorly suited for
interaction . Leaders can ameliorate passive structures
with effective organization , but there are more appropriate structures such as pod structures ( a small number
of classrooms open onto a common area ) or even
structures in which two or more classrooms share a
glassed teacher workroom . 
Active enabling of interaction refers to direct
actions by leaders to build patterns of interaction , and
usually is accomplished by the way school activities
are scheduled and organized . Leaders can schedule
teachers with common interests to common preparation time , they can foster interaction with judicious use
of committees , they can encourage interdisciplinary
units , and they can find creative ways to use inservice
to foster interaction ( sponsor a “ teacher ’ s ” fair along
the lines of student science fairs , for example )  . 
A second function of complex leadership is fostering interdependencies . In interdependent networks , 
the actions of one agent directly or indirectly affect
the actions of other agents . A decision by the English
department to focus on grammar in the ninth grade , 
for example , might inhibit students ’ capacity to deal
with word problems in algebra ( such conflicts are
called conflicting constraints )  . The manner in which a
math department leads students to envision calculation of unknowns may make it difficult for them to
solve quantity equations in chemistry . The complex
leader finds ways to enhance such interdependencies
in order to achieve three outcomes :  ( 1 ) conflicting
constraints ( or task-related conflicts ) that naturally
occur in interdependent networks stimulate agents to
find ever fitter solutions to their problems ,  ( 2 ) interdependence imposes a measure of accountability that
fosters coordination , and ( 3 ) interdependent relationships provide pathways for the dissemination and
coordination of innovations—without such linkages , a
change agent must , in the extreme , introduce change
to one person or department at a time . 
Complex leadership seeks to foster moderate levels , 
as opposed to tight or loose levels , of coupling among
agents . Coupling refers to the number of interdependencies any given agent experiences or the degree of
effect that interdependent agents have on one another . 
In tightly coupled systems , conflicting constraints are
difficult or impossible to resolve because many different agents must coordinate and participate in seeking
mutually fit solutions . Consequently , such systems
either freeze into inaction , or if they do change , that
change is likely to perturb the entire system—which
may be catastrophic . Leaders create tight coupling
with , among other things , excess coordination or
authoritarian behavior . Loosely coupled systems do not
experience the tension of conflicting constraints and do
not have channels for coordination or dissemination ; 
thus there is little incentive to work together or to
change . Loose coupling emerges when organizational
patterns and leadership activities fail to foster interdependency ; different disciplines in higher education tend
to be loosely coupled because of organizational patterns and regulations , for example . Moderately coupled
Leadership , Complex Theory Of———563
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 563
complex systems , in contrast , are sufficiently tight to
experience motivating tension and channel innovation
but sufficiently loose to change stably . 
Complex leaders motivate action with adaptive
tension . Adaptive tension is any pressure that pushes a
system to perform . When Jack Welch , former CEO of
General Electric , told employees that their product must
be number 1 or number 2 in their field or be canceled , 
he was creating adaptive tension . Adaptive tension moves
a system away from a steady state toward an unstable , 
unspecified , but urgent future ; such conditions are conducive to nonlinear change and creative surprise . 
Complex systems are focused on indeterminate
vision . Determinate vision—the usual form of visioning—
utilizes current states of understanding to define a specific desired future and focuses the organization on
achieving that future . In such conditions , creativity is
limited by the capacity of vision makers and by the state
of current understanding . That is , determinate vision
enables the unfolding of current knowledge but does not
enable creative surprise . Indeterminate vision envisions
generalized future states and behaviors and does not
otherwise limit those futures . Welch envisioned number
1 or number 2 ; he did not envision what number 1 or 2
would look like . A principal whose vision is for the
school to be the most creative school in the district does
not specify what creativity is to look like ; rather he or
she envisions a behavior that can be realized in a variety
of ways . 
In addition to building indeterminate organizationwide vision , complex leadership fosters heterogeneous agents and heterogeneous visions . As implied in
the preceding paragraph , traditional models of leadership have the effect , either by direction or indirection , 
of coordinating activity around a central determinate
vision or set of visions to homogenize follower behaviors to a common perspective . Chester I . Barnard , for
example , argued that the leader ’ s role is to align worker
preference with organizational goals . Transformational
leadership seeks to define worker meaning relative to
organizational vision . Complex leadership , on the other
hand , seeks to foster multiple , decentralized visions . An
important strength of the complex leadership approach
is its ability to bring together a rich diversity of skills
and visions in an interactive , interdependent network . 
Interaction of heterogeneous ideas enables potent
surprise and creativity . Ideas combine , recombine , and
aggregate in complex and surprising ways to produce
a diversity of unanticipated meta-ideas , products , and
environmental adaptations . 
Complex systems are coordinated in part by simple , 
local rules . Rules for complex systems enable rather
than limit behavior . Complex rules serve six primary
roles : they stimulate action , enable interaction , foster
interdependency , interject tension , enable bottom-up
decision making , and focus conflict on task ( rather than
personal ) behaviors . A good example is provided by
Microsoft ’ s “ synch and stabilize ” rule . Microsoft
divides its programming staff into small teams—
agents , in complexity terminology . These teams are
responsible for particular elements of a given program . 
Programs such as XP or MS Word are extremely complex and require millions of lines of code . Top-down
control of the programming function would be inefficient , produce programs with limited capability , and
it would be difficult to respond rapidly to changing technological landscapes . Semiautonomous work groups
and bottom-up decision making—complex structuring—overcomes these limitations . To coordinate programming workgroups , Microsoft has implemented
local rules structures such as synch and stabilize . At the
end of each week , groups are required to compile their
code and combine it with the codes of other groups . If
the different code sets fail to run together , the programmers are required to fix the problems before they leave
for the day . One can readily see that this rule accomplishes all six of the primary roles described above . 
Transformation is an important characteristic of
complex leadership , but the traditional definition of
transformation must be modified to be consistent with
assumptions underlying complex leadership theory . In
the traditional approach , transformation strategies tend to
be constructed around two premises ( although there are
exceptions )  : the transformation of individuals into selfmotivated , engaged follower / leaders , and the alignment
of follower meaning with organizational goals . This definitional set works for complex leadership theory if we
define organizational goals in terms of indeterminate
rather than determinate vision , and if we further recognize the value of heterogeneous vision embedded within
the more general , indeterminate vision focus . Efforts to
align worker motivation to determinate goals stifle bottom-up behaviors and its advantage for creative behavior . 
Organizational vision is important , but complex leadership achieves transforming benefits with indeterminate
vision that enable creativity . 
Complexity leaders allocate resources in ways that
support and foster network dynamics . For example , 
public schools traditionally allocate money on a
per-pupil basis , or they make distributions based on
564———Leadership , Complex Theory Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 564
the resource intensiveness of a given discipline ( thus
sciences get more money than do English classes )  . 
The complexity leader might make allocations to meet
foundational needs , but remaining funds would be distributed in support of creative ideas—money follows
creativity . Another important resource is information , 
and complex leadership finds strategies to maximize
distribution of that commodity . 
Finally , complexity leaders work to build external
networks with clients , other educational organizations , 
resource providers , community agencies , and others . 
Primary attention is devoted to building network relationships with agencies that have a vested interest in
education , but fit networks extend to a wide spectrum
of outside agencies as well . At least two complexityrelated functions are served by this . First , the construction of external networks serves the same
purpose as internal , system-based networks : it fosters
creativity and innovation in the educational ( and
broader ) system . Second , fitness is derived from broad
bases of support , and support can come from unexpected sources . For example , a recreation department
may seem a somewhat unlikely ally for an elementary
school , but it may be willing to share costs of a
school-site recreation facility for mutual benefit . A
farm bureau may seem an even more unlikely ally , but
it may have influence with local school boards . 
—Russ Marion and Phil McGee
See also adaptiveness of organizations ; administration , 
theories of ; boundaries of systems ; bureaucracy ; capacity
building , of organizations ; creativity , in management ; 
frame theory ; hierarchy , in organizations ; infrastructure , of
organizations ; line and staff concept ; management information systems ; management theories ; matrix organization 
( the “ adhocracy ”  )  ; motivation , theories of ; networking and
network theory ; organizational theories ; organizations , 
types of , typologies ; planning models ; rational organizational theory ; role conflict ; role theory ; satisfaction , in
organizations and roles ; scalar principle ; school improvement models ; stratification , in organizations ; table of organization ; Theory X , Theory Y ; total quality management ; 
transformational leadership
Further Readings and References
Argyris , C .  ( 1972 )  . The applicability of organizational sociology . London : Cambridge University Press . 
Barnard , C .  ( 1938 )  . The functions of the executive . Cambridge , 
MA : Harvard University Press . 
Bass , B .  ,  & Avolio , B .  ( 1994 )  . Improving organizational effectiveness through transformational leadership . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Cusumano , M .  ( 2001 )  . Focusing creativity : Microsoft ’ s 
 “ Synch and Stabilize ” approach to software product development . In I . Nonaka & T . Nishiguchi ( Eds .  )  , Knowledge
emergence : Social , technical , and evolutionary dimensions
of knowledge creation . Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
Lorenz , E .  ( 1993 )  . Chaos theory . Seattle : University of
Washington Press . 
Ogawa , R .  ( 2005 )  . Leadership as social construct : The expression of human agency within organizational constraint . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 89–108 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Marion , R .  ,  & Uhi-Bien , M .  ( 2001 )  . Leadership in complex
organizations . Leadership Quarterly , 12 , 389–418 . 
McKelvey , B .  ( 2003 )  . Toward a 0th law of thermodynamics : 
Order creation complexity dynamics from physics & biology to bioeconomics . Journal of Bioeconomics , 6 , 1–31 . 
 LEADERSHIP , DISCRETIONARY 
( AND POWER ) 
A discretionary leader uses power—generally authority
to achieve desired outcomes effectively and efficiently . 
Within classical hierarchical or linear organizational
paradigms , discretionary leadership evokes great
man / great woman theories . Because participatory leadership styles often are viewed as more enlightened , beneficial , and productive , leadership without attention to
situations , needs of followers , and the like are less
favored . Nevertheless , situational realities often require
that leaders use power discreetly , according to the nature
of decisions required , leadership demanded , and needs of
the occasion . Discretionary leadership , then , emphasizes
the nature of values , situational factors , organizational
characteristics , participant behaviors or needs , ends
sought , and demands for types of leadership . Cognizance
of such factors enables leaders to act on existing contingencies toward positive organizational outcomes . 
The need for discretionary leadership is driven by
recent reliance on data-based decision making and
accelerated by growing concerns for accountability . 
As organizational performance bows to environmental
factors and aligns with contemporary forms of early
emphases on scientific management , specialized professional roles become critical to organizational survival and success . Thus , administrative leaders often
find themselves constrained by the system with little
flexibility in decision making . Information-driven
decisions or centralized systems too often leave little
room for managers to use their own judgment . To
overcome the constraints of such mechanistic systems , 
Leadership , Discretionary ( and Power ) ———565
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 565
leaders necessarily use discretion when countermanding hard data or information so that decisions account
for soft , hard-to-measure factors , factors that easily
can nullify the best laid bureaucratic plans . 
Discretionary leadership and the judicious exercise
of power are synonymous . In the context of neo-great
man / great woman theories and Frederick Taylor ’ s timeand-motion job specifications , discretionary leaders
must employ values , ethics , and sound judgment when
considering issues of right and wrong , fairness , or the
greater “ good ” of the organization . Furthermore , discretionary leaders must recognize changing organizational
needs : increasing diversity , multiple constituencies at
all levels , and the utility of distributed leadership . As a
result , leadership roles are multifaceted with broad
responsibilities and must deal with evolving cultural
norms and values , pervasive technology , and external
demands for effectiveness—and efficiency . These multiple complexities necessitate leaders who are flexible
decision makers , who are contextual in orientation , and
who balance organizational ends with those of both
internal and external constituencies . 
Various organizational and environmental variables
also can determine the latitude a leader can assume . 
For example , an environment with a highly mechanistic organizational structure , a centralized managerial
system , and rigid operational policies has little flexibility , and discretionary leadership is less possible . 
However , the way that a leader construes and reacts to
a given situation determines leadership actions . 
Obviously , the position that leaders hold in a hierarchy
affects their credibility and ability to act , and interpersonal dynamics have much to do with the amount of
power that discretionary leaders have as well as their
successful use of it . 
Discretionary leaders usually have a wide repertoire
of leadership attributes and styles that they can use . 
They vary their leadership depending upon the situation
in which they operate . Hierarchical , environmental , and
technological complexity and organizational structure
all constrain leadership behavior . Macrovariables , 
including factors such as the general and specific environments , context ( size and technology )  , structure , and
cultural diversity , also add to the complexity with which
leaders must grapple . Given these problems , leaders
must still strive for successful organizational outcomes . 
Flexibility—and sufficient discretionary leadership—
can be key to organizational success . 
—Zav Dadabhoy and Rodney Muth
See also leadership , complex theory of ; leadership , distributed ; 
leadership , situational ; leadership , task-oriented ; leadership , theories of ; path-goal leadership theory ; scientific
management ; Taylor , Frederick
Further Readings and References
Clement , D .  ( 2004 )  . The veil of discretion : A new look at how
much freedom the Fed should have in setting monetary
policy . Region , June , 10–13 , 42–47 . 
Dimmock , C .  ,  & Walker , A .  ( 2005 )  . Educational leadership : 
Culture and diversity . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Kochan , F .  ,  & Reed , C .  ( 2005 )  . Collaborative leadership , community building , and democracy in public education . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 68–84 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Northouse , P . G .  ( 2004 )  . Leadership : Theory and practice 
( 3rd ed .  )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Taylor , F . W .  ( 1911 )  . The principles of scientific management . 
New York : Harper . 
Tomlinson , H .  ( 2004 )  . Educational management . New York : 
Routledge . 
 LEADERSHIP , DISTRIBUTED
Educational researchers have long examined the link
between the importance of principal leadership and
student achievement , concluding that successful educational leaders have a powerful influence on the effectiveness of the school and student learning . In fact , 
school leadership has been found to have a significant
impact on student learning , second only to the effects of
the quality of curriculum and teachers ’ instruction . 
Until recently , most research assumed that leadership must come from the school principal . For
decades , studies on leadership have documented specific leader traits and behaviors , focusing on the top of
the hierarchical organization—the principal . There is
now much greater emphasis placed on the idea of distributed leadership , shared by multiple individuals at
different levels of the school organization . 
The idea that a single “ hero ” leader can lead and
transform a school alone has become obsolete . The
task of leading today ’ s schools has become so multifaceted and complex that a single person cannot be
expected to accomplish this alone . More than two
decades of school reform has continually added to the
workload and responsibility of the principal . 
The multitude of demands placed on principals ’ 
time draws resources away from a focus on curriculum
566———Leadership , Distributed
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 566
and instruction , as numerous tasks from the school , 
district , state , and federal government require the
attention and consideration of school leaders . Because
of this , many educational researchers and policymakers believe that school leadership today should be
distributed throughout the organization , rather than
focused on a single individual . 
Distributed leadership is currently a buzzword in
educational circles , and in the past few years has been
used increasingly in discussions about school leadership . As attention to this perspective grows , so does its
research base and empirical support . However , there
seems to be little agreement as to the meaning of the
term , and it lacks a widely accepted definition . 
Some may define distributed leadership as simply
the redistribution of the principal ’ s responsibilities to
other staff members . Other views move beyond this
simplistic analysis and call for a fundamental change
in organizational thinking , redefining school leadership as the responsibility of all in a school . 
A fruitful way of considering distributed leadership
is that it is a way of thinking about leadership , rather
than a new technique of practice . Distributed leadership seeks expertise throughout an organization , rather
than focusing it upon a single individual or individuals in a formal position or role . So the idea is that
school leadership should be viewed as the cumulative
activities of a broad set of leaders , both formal and
informal , within a school , rather than as the work of
one individual—such as the principal . 
Distributed leadership is characterized as a form of
shared or collective leadership in which expertise is
developed by working collaboratively . The rationale
is that in a knowledge-intensive situation found in
schools , there is no way to perform tasks of great
complexity without widely dispersing the responsibility for performance among various roles . Distributed
leadership becomes the focal point that provides a
common frame of values for performance . 
This does not , however , suggest that there is no one
responsible for the overall performance of the school . 
The job of the principal in a distributed environment
is to hold the pieces together and maintain a productive relationship between the actors . 
The National Association of Secondary School
Principals ( NASSP ) insists that the principal should
provide leadership by building and maintaining a vision , 
direction , and focus for student learning , but also argues
that the principal of a school should never act alone . 
NASSP recommends that all schools establish a
governing council for key decisions to promote
student learning and an atmosphere of participation , 
responsibility , and ownership . 
The central tenet behind distributed leadership is
that the complex nature of instructional practice
requires individuals to function in networks of shared
and complementary expertise rather than in a structure
with a hierarchical division of labor . With distributed
leadership , knowledge and practice are extended across
positions and individuals rather than being focused on
a single role . 
James Spillane , principal investigator for the
Distributed Leadership Study , noted in 2005 that
distributed leadership is primarily about leadership
practice rather than leaders or their roles , functions , 
routines , and structures . A distributed perspective on
leadership argues that school leadership practice is
distributed in the interactions of school leaders , followers , and their situations . The critical issue is not
that leadership is distributed but how it is distributed . 
The practice of leadership is not the same as the
actions of the principal or other school leaders , nor is
it a function of what a leader knows or does . 
Effective principals do not just string together a
series of individual actions , but systematically distribute leadership by building it into the fabric of school
life . Leadership is distributed not by delegating it or
giving it away but by weaving together people , materials , and organizational structures in a common cause . 
Because this concept is relatively new , there is little
empirical knowledge about how , or to what extent , 
distributed leadership is utilized by school leaders . 
Additional empirical studies examining the relationship between distributed leadership , school improvement , and student achievement are warranted and
needed . Although these links have yet to be made , 
educational researchers , policymakers , and practitioners
are all in agreement that school leadership , the principalship in particular , needs fundamental change—and
that the distributed perspective on educational leadership is a potential prospect for the future of educational leadership . 
—J . Patrick Grenda
See also administration , theories of ; authority ; bureaucracy ; 
capacity building , of organizations ; chain of command ; chief
academic officer ; creativity , in management ; differentiated
staffing ; governance ; group dynamics ; human resource
development ; infrastructure , of organizations ; involvement , 
in organizations ; leadership , task-oriented ; leadership , 
Leadership , Distributed———567
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 567
theories of ; networking and network theory ; power ; principal-agent theory ; principalship ; theories , use of ; transformational leadership ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Harris , A .  ( 2004 )  . Distributed leadership and school improvement : Leading or misleading ? Educational Management
Administration & Leadership , 32 ( 1 )  , 11–24 . 
Huber , S .  ( 2004 )  . Preparing school leaders for the 21st century . 
New York : Routledge . 
Kochan , F .  ,  & Reed , C .  ( 2005 )  . Collaborative leadership , community building , and democracy in public education . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 68–84 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
National Association of Secondary School Principals .  ( 2004 )  . 
Breaking ranks II : Strategies for leading high school
reform . Reston , VA : Author . 
Spillane , J .  ( 2004 )  . Distributed leadership : What ’ s all the
hoopla ? Evanston , IL : Institute for Policy Research , 
Northwestern University . 
Spillane , J .  ( 2005 )  . Distributed leadership . Educational
Forum , 69 ( 2 )  , 143–150 . 
 LEADERSHIP , 
NATIONAL STANDARDS
Professional standards in educational leadership are
established to seek consensus among scholars and practicing administrators about a common body of knowledge , set of competencies , skills , dispositions , and
language to ensure quality in the professional preparation and development of school leaders . University
scholars in educational administration and leaders in
professional school administrator associations apply
standards to direct their members to master a common
knowledge base to ensure competent professionals . In
addition , professional standards serve as benchmarks
to add value to the accreditation of graduate programs
and licensure of principals and system administrators . 
Licensure and entry into the profession are granted
based on candidates ’ successful completion of the
program and on their passing an examination closely
aligned to standards of content and best practice . 
Stronger links among standards , accreditation , and
licensure help ensure greater academic rigor and the
quality of program graduates . 
National standards in educational leadership are a
relatively new development . Minimal curriculum
guidelines for the preparation of school administrators
emerged in the early 1950s from the National Council
for the Accreditation of Teacher Education ( NCATE )  , 
but a quarter century passed before the American
Association of School Administrators ( AASA ) and its
Committee on the Advancement of School Administration ( CASA ) in 1982 produced a generic document
on guidelines / standards for the preparation of school
administrators . Drafts of the guidelines / standards were
distributed for reactions to selected scholars , practicing
school administrators , principal associations , and open
forums at the National Conference for Professors
of Educational Administration ( NCPEA ) and the
American Educational Research Association ( AERA )  . 
In 1983 the document Guidelines for the Preparation
of School Administrators became the first widely recognized national effort to bring some consensus to the
knowledge base and a common set of competencies , 
skills , and dispositions needed to become a competent
school administrator at the building or system level . 
Thus , beginning in 1982 , the following seven AASA
competency and skill areas became benchmarks for
standards later developed by several state departments
of education , university preparation programs , and
professional administrator associations and societies . 
1 . Designing , implementing , and evaluating a school
climate / culture improvement program that utilizes
mutual staff and student efforts to formulate and
attain school goals ( eight related mastery indicators ) 
2 . Understanding political theory and applying political
skills in building local , state , and national support for
education ( seven related mastery indicators ) 
3 . Designing a systematic school curriculum that
ensures both extensive cultural enrichment activities
and mastery of fundamental as well as progressively
more complex skills required in advanced problem
solving , creative and technological activities ( six
related mastery indicators ) 
4 . Planning and implementing an instructional management system that includes learning objectives , 
curriculum design , and instructional strategies and
techniques that facilitate high levels of achievement 
( seven related mastery indicators ) 
5 . Designing staff development and evaluation systems
to enhance effectiveness of education personnel ( five
related mastery indicators ) 
6 . Allocating human , material , and financial resources
to efficiently and accountably ensure successful
student learning ( six related mastery indicators ) 
568———Leadership , National Standards
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 568
7 . Conducting research and utilizing research findings
in decisions to improve long-range planning , school
operations , and student learning ( four related mastery indicators ) 
After each of the seven AASA competencies / 
standards , lists of specific skills to validate mastery of
each standard are included . Additional standards , 
skills , and dispositions in the area of leadership ethics
were added in the 1993 AASA standards and in the
1996 ISLLC Standards . In addition , emphases were
placed on the technical core of teaching and learning
and social justice for all students
Numerous studies of the competencies and skills
in the guidelines were conducted to determine the
validity and relevance of the seven competencies and
related skills in the preparation and professional
development of principals and central office administrators . The 1985 AASA book Skills for Successful
School Leaders , by John Hoyle , Fenwick English , and
Betty Steffy , compiled a knowledge / theory base for
each of the seven guidelines / standards . The book—
and subsequent editions in 1990 , 1994 , and 1998—
explored the historical and theoretical foundations
of educational administration , the standards , related
competencies and skills for goal accomplishment , 
research and theoretical rationale for each standard
and competency , the management system strategies , 
content domains , and a mastery check for each standard and related skill after each chapter to assist the
student and professor engage in professional development and renewal activities . 
Subsequent efforts to create professional standards
by other administrator and professor associations and
chief state school officers ( CSSO ) rest on the research
base of the AASA Guidelines for the Preparation of
School Administrators : Performance-Based Preparation
of Principals was created by the National Association
of Secondary School Principals ( NASSP ) after the
AASA guidelines in 1985 ; Principals for the TwentyFirst Century by the National Association of
Elementary School Principals ( NAESP ) in 1990 ; 
School Leadership : A Preface for Action by the
American Association of Colleges for Teacher
Education ( AACTE ) in 1988 ; Principals for Our
Changing Schools by the National Policy Board for
Educational Administration ( NPBEA ) in 1993 ; Professional Standards for the Superintendency by AASA in
1993 ; the Interstate School Leaders Licensure
Consortium Standards for School Leaders ( ISLLC ) by
the Council for Chief State School Officers ( CCSSO ) 
in 1996 ; and Standards for Advanced Programs in
Educational Leadership by the National Council for
the Accreditation of Colleges of Education ( NCATE ) 
in 2002 . These NCATE standards are based on a combination of earlier Curriculum Guidelines for School
Administrators , ISLLC Standards for building principals , and the AASA Professional Standards for the
Superintendency . The ISLLC Standards are widely
recognized and controversial . Martha McCarthy found
that 40 states have adopted the ISLLC Standards and
require individuals to pay a substantial fee to take the
Educational Testing System ( ETS ) school leaders exam
as a prerequisite to reward or deny initial administrative
licensure . In addition , a National Policy Board advisory
group advising the Educational Leadership Constituent
Council ( ELCC ) responsible for preparing the 2002
Standards for Advanced Programs in Educational
Leadership for NCATE concluded that the ISLLC
Standards were limited in their scope , their skill , and
the knowledge base for system administrators . Thus , 
components of the AASA and the earlier NCATE standards were included . Areas strengthened were school
and district governance , policy development , political
strategies , strategic visioning and long-range planning , 
school finance and financial management , district personnel processes and legalities , education law at state
and national levels , and school facilities . 
Researchers John Hoyle , Lars Bjork , Virginia
Collier , and Tom Glass analyzed the limited research
and theory base absent in the ISLLC / NCATE
Standards for school administration . These and other
writers claim that since the early AASA guidelines / 
standards , minimal research has appeared to verify
later iterations . Fenwick English has asserted that
standards need to be more than popular ; they need
to be independently validated as true . Thus far , few
validation studies have occurred other than those of
the AASA guidelines listed above except more recent
research to validate the AASA Professional Standards
for the Superintendency by Linda Horler and Robert
Wells and the ISLLC Standards by Cheryl McFadden , 
Darlene Mobley , James Burnham , Randy Joyner , and
Henry Peel . Efforts are under way , moreover , to seek
predictive evidence that NCATE preparation programs
using national standards are superior to alternative and / 
or unaccredited programs in preparing superior practicing school leaders . 
Disagreements continue among scholars about the
value of standards and their link to NCATE accreditation . 
Leadership , National Standards———569
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 569
While professional administrator associations and
state departments of education find standards useful in
guarding licensure for principals and superintendents , 
members of the University Council for Educational
Administration and the National Council of Professors
of Educational Administration find the accreditation
and program approval by the Educational Leadership
Constituency Council ( ELCC / NCATE ) problematic . 
The strong emphases toward on-the-job performance
and assessment and less emphasis on evidence of rigorous scholarship , theory development , and course
content is viewed as quasivocational training by many
university researchers . Scholars find this bias of
ELCC / NCATE toward outcomes / success on the job at
the expense of input measures and intellectual reflection valued in the scholarly community as troubling . 
According to Art Wise , executive director of NCATE , 
the institution under review must provide data related to
the following leadership / outcome questions . 
• Have candidates mastered the necessary knowledge
for the job they will perform ? 
• Do candidates meet the state licensure requirement ? 
• Do candidates understand teaching and learning , and
can they fulfill their responsibilities ? 
• Can candidates apply their knowledge in schools / 
districts ? 
• Can candidates promote student learning in their schools / 
districts ? 
While these questions are central to successful
practice at the building and central office levels , they
also assume that if graduates fail in any of these performance areas after 1 or 10 years in the field , then the
graduate ’ s advanced programs could be labeled inadequate and the institution given low marks for preparation . The ELCC has assumed the role of watchdog
by serving as the program review body for NCATE
institutions and for listing names of programs denied
accreditation on their Web site as a warning to others . 
Because NCATE regulates only the certification arm
of graduate programs , the 188 doctoral programs in
NCATE institutions are not the focus of the program
review process . Herein lies the dilemma : since some
doctoral degree programs in colleges of education are
in counseling , human development , higher education , 
and educational psychology and not subject to the
NCATE process , a college can lose its accreditation
due to program reviews linked to K–12 educator
preparation and thus mar the image of the other programs in colleges of education . This issue and the time
commitment required by faculty and staff to prepare an
NCATE report are listed as reasons that many colleges
of education located in both prestigious and lesser
known universities avoid the NCATE accreditation
ordeal . This avoidance , according to James Cibulka , is
harmful to the education profession . He speculates
that the same avoidance strategy characterizes a high
percentage of educational administration programs
operating outside accreditation . While these include
some online programs and deregulated alternative certification programs offered by state departments of
education or other quasieducation agencies , there are
also some top-rated educational leadership programs
that are not NCATE accredited . At the same time , in
spite of their generic limitations to apply to both campus and central office administrators , ISLLC and the
new NCATE Standards have generated greater efforts
to align curriculum with the standards central to the
licensure examination—School Leaders Licensure
Exam . This is similar to the reforms that occurred
after the AASA guidelines in the 1980s . The current
state of finding consensus about which standards to
use and how to teach and measure them remains an
unsolved puzzle that will not soon become a clear
unified picture . 
As difficult as assessing administrative performance
is , it must be done if standards-based performance is to
have any relevance in preparing and assessing daily
performance of principals and central office administrators . Limited research points to the benefits of
preparing and assessing school leaders by using the
standards set forth by AASA , ISSLC , NCATE , and
ELCC . These standards are grounded in 20 years of
research and best practice about the roles of building
and system administrators and the critical academic
preparation for their roles . Professional associations
and NCATE are calling for more measures of program
outcome effectiveness to help ensure the success of
school administrators once they are on the job . Greater
links between national standards for the preparation
and licensure of school and their actual job performance is an unending quest . Research is under way by
scholars in UCEA and NCPEA to investigate relationships between the NCATE standards for campus and
central office administrators and their on-the-job performance . In addition , research is needed to investigate relationships between the ISSLC Standards and
successful practice in school leadership positions . Will
researchers find positive relationships between scores
on required ISSLC exams and NCATE accreditation
570———Leadership , National Standards
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 570
ratings and successful practice ? Standards are only as
useful as those who apply and improve their relevance
to quality performance . Also , there is a tendency in
any profession to hold on to standards when they
become overinstitutionalized . That is , when research
and best practice reveal that standards are no longer
guiding school administrator preparation to higher
performance , standards need to be changed . 
At this time , there is little clear evidence that the
NCATE / ELCC or the AASA Professional Standards
for the Superintendency will result in outstanding success by school administrators . It is striking , however , 
that iterations of the seven guidelines / standards created
by AASA in 1983 are found in all graduate programs in
educational administration . If a student masters all of
the NCATE / ELCC / ISLLC / AASA Standards , will the
student be guaranteed success ? This belief is not realistic for the following reasons : 
• It is possible to acquire an adequate level of performance in almost every standard and related skills , 
though few administrative roles require the same
level of expertise in all of them . 
• Educational administration / leadership is not static , 
but interactive and dynamic . Simply mastering each
standard and skill ignores the reality of the entire job . 
• The knowledge base is constantly being expanded , 
challenged , and refined . 
Thus , national standards in educational leadership
serve as a compass to lead university preparation programs to greater scholarship to produce the best and
brightest for administrative positions in America ’ s
schools . Professionalism depends on the creativity
and capacity of individuals and institutions to capitalize on new insights in the scholarship and practice to
insure that all children succeed in school . Since uniform standards rigidly applied may impair the flexibility that administrator preparation programs need to
meet local or regional needs , standards should be flexible , subject to change and not be used as a threat
by national agencies to limit program development or
the expertise of faculty or practicing school leaders . 
Professional standards in educational leadership have
become avenues toward consensus among university
scholars , professional school administrator associations and practicing building and system administrators to assure quality in the professional preparation
and development of school leaders . 
—John R . Hoyle
See also American Association of School Administrators ; 
Council of Chief State School Officers ; Education
Commission of the States ; expert power ; Interstate School
Leaders Licensure Consortium ; National Association of
Elementary School Principals ; National Association of
Secondary School Principals ; National Council for the
Accreditation of Teacher Education ; politics , of education ; 
principalship ; school improvement models ; schools of education ; standard setting ; universities , preparation of educational leaders in
Further Readings and References
Cibulka , J .  ( 2004 )  . The case for academic standards in educational administration : Toward a mature profession . UCEA
Review , 46 ( 2 )  , 1–5 . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . Tsar khorosh , boyary polkhi : The ISLLC
Standards and the enshrinement of mystical authoritarianism as anti-change doctrine in educational leadership preparation programs . In F . Lunenburg & C . Carr ( Eds .  )  , Shaping
the future : Policy , partnerships , and emerging practices 
( pp . 112–133 )  . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Education . 
English , F .  ( 2004 )  . Undoing the “ done deal ”  : Reductionism , ahistoricity , and pseudo-science in the knowledge base and standards for educational administration . UCEA Review , 46 , 5–7 . 
Hoyle , J .  ( 2001 )  . I ’ ve got standards , you got standards , all God ’ s
children got standards . AASA Professor , 24 ( 2 )  , 27–32 . 
Hoyle , J .  ( 2002 )  . Superintendents for Texas school districts : 
Solving the crisis in executive leadership . Fort Worth , TX : 
Sid W . Richardson Foundation . 
Hoyle , J .  , Bjork , L .  , Collier , V .  ,  & Glass , T .  ( 2005 )  . The superintendent as CEO : Standards-based performance . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
McFadden , C .  , Mobley , D .  , Burnham , J .  , Joyner , R .  ,  & Peel , H .  
( 2003 )  . Are national ISLLC Standards important to job
performance ? An eastern North Carolina perspective . In
R . Lunenburg & C . Carr ( Eds .  )  , Shaping the future : Policy , 
partnerships and emerging perspectives ( pp . 389–400 )  . 
Lanham , MA : Scarecrow Press . 
Murphy , J .  ( 2005 )  . Unpacking the foundations of ISLLC Standards
and addressing the concerns in the academic community . 
Educational Administration Quarterly , 41 ( 1 )  , 154–191 . 
National Council for the Accreditation of Colleges of Teacher
Education .  ( 1996 )  . Curriculum guidelines . Washington , 
DC : Author . 
National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education .  
( 2002 )  . Standards for advanced programs in educational
leadership . Washington , DC : Author . 
Wells , R .  ( 2004 )  . Perceptions of first-year superintendents in
Texas of the importance of the professional standards for
superintendents . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Texas
A & M University , College Station . 
Young , M .  ,  & Lopez , G .  ( 2005 )  . The nature of inquiry in educational leadership . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 337–361 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Leadership , National Standards———571
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 571
 LEADERSHIP , PARTICIPATORY
Participatory leadership is defined in terms of the
degree of subordinate participation in the decisionmaking process . Rather than make arbitrary decisions , the
participative leader seeks to involve other people in the
process . The amount of subordinate participation varies
depending on the manager ’ s preferences and beliefs . 
Participatory leaders provide direction , information , resources , and group facilitation . Proponents
of this leadership style place emphasis on concern for
people ( relationship ) over structuring the organizations . Collaborative leaders seek input from those
affected by the decision while working actively with
individuals and groups in making the decisions . They
keep an open mind and are willing to adjust predetermined positions . 
Participative leadership is about empowerment and
power sharing . Gary Yukl pointed out that it is most
often linked with the decision-making process that
takes four main forms :  ( 1 ) autocratic decisions in
which managers make the decision on their own ,  ( 2 ) 
consultation of others for opinions and ideas with the
manager making the final decision ,  ( 3 ) joint decisions
where the manager and subordinates make the decision together , and ( 4 ) delegation in which the manager
gives authority and responsibility for the decision to
an individual or group . 
For followers , participation is both mental and
emotional involvement that leads to commitment and
shared responsibility for group goals . R . G . Owens
emphasizes that democratic consent , decision making
by voting that creates winners and losers , is different
than collaboration . Decision making by voting does
not provide either incentives or opportunities to fully
engage in addressing complex problems . However , participatory decision making does not mean everyone is
involved in all decisions . Edwin Bridges suggested
two rules to determine when teachers participate in
decision-making . The first rule is the test of relevance . 
Relevance is when teachers have a personal stake in the
decision . It involves issues such as discipline , curriculum , and teaching methods . The second rule is the
test of expertise . Teachers need to be able to contribute
effectively to the decision-making process . An example
of not having the expertise would be involving science
teachers in developing the English curriculum . 
School leaders work in a dynamic environment
that invites quick decision making . However , leadership is working with and through others to achieve
organizational goals . Participatory leadership is a collaborative effort to achieve shared goals . Participatory
leaders understand the importance of involving those
affected by the decisions and when to involve others
in the decision-making process . Effective involvement
includes having those who are expected to implement
the changes fully participate in the decision-making
process . 
Models of collaborative group decision making
can be helpful . They are a starting point for potential
improvement . An important decision for all groups
to make is how it will make decisions . It is necessary
for organizations to develop and make known the
decision-making process to be used and to decide if it
is acceptable to the participants . Equal and collaborative partnerships working toward a shared vision
attain performance goals . 
V . H . Vroom and P . W . Yetton ’ s normative decision
model demonstrates the importance of using the right
model for the right situation . Leaders look at decision quality , decision acceptance by the followers , 
and time needed to make decisions . This model helps
determine the amount of input followers should have
based on a given situation through a set of sequential
rules . The leader then behaves in the most proficient manner . Yukl states that the effectiveness of this
model depends on several factors : the relevant information that the leader and subordinates have , how
likely the followers will accept an autocratic decision , 
if the subordinates will participate if given an opportunity , the extent of conflict among followers regarding
alternative solutions , and if the problem is unstructured
and requires creative problem solving . 
Peter Drucker provides an example of a rational
decision-making model that assists in systematically
solving problems :  ( a ) classify the problem ,  ( b ) define
the problem ,  ( c ) specify the conditions for the problem solution ,  ( d ) decide on the best action ,  ( e ) compromise ,  ( f ) implement the decision , and ( g ) review
the effectiveness of the decision . Implicit in rational
decision-making models are the assumptions of full
disclosure of information and that there is one best
possible solution . 
Shared decision making ( SDM ) is a process of
making educational decisions in a collaborative
manner at the school level and provides the opportunity for school professionals , parents , community
members , and students to collaborate in setting goals
and promoting increased student achievement and
teacher effectiveness . However , there is little evidence
572———Leadership , Participatory
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 572
that SDM improves either teacher performance or
student achievement . 
T . J . Kowalski cited several presumed advantages
of shared decision making :  ( a ) participation increases
subordinates ’ motivation , productivity and commitment ,  ( b ) subordinates are less competitive when working on shared goals ,  ( c ) the range of knowledge and
skills increases with more people involved and better
decisions are the result , and ( d ) increased communication and knowledge within and among the organization ’ s members . 
Some disadvantages of participative decision making are ( a ) it requires more time of leader and subordinates ,  ( b ) the group might make a mediocre decision
in favor of group unity ,  ( c ) the group may be dominated by one or two members , and ( d ) the groups are
not exempt from making the same errors in decision
making as an individual might make . Another disadvantage is the lack of training for both teachers and
administrators in group process skills . 
The literature is clear : principals are critical to the
development of school priorities , culture , and resources . 
Principals are currently trained to function as resultsoriented leaders in hierarchical school systems . In
1999 , Janet Chrispeels and colleagues called attention
to the paradox between principal training and the
school restructuring initiatives requiring collaborative
or participatory leadership . The decision-making
practices of organizations are reflections of the beliefs
of those in authority . The increasing complexity and
demands on school principals makes participatory
leadership a good strategy for both individuals and the
organizations . 
—Darlene Y . Bruner
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; boundaries of
systems ; capacity building , of organizations ; collaboration
theory ; conceptual systems theory and leadership ; conflict
management ; governance ; involvement , in organizations ; 
management theories ; morale ; motivation , theories of ; personnel management ; power ; professional learning communities ; 
role ambiguity ; role conflict ; Theory X , Theory Y ; values of
organizations and leadership ; working conditions , in schools
Further Readings and References
Bridges , E .  ( 1967 )  . A model for shared decision making in the
school principalship . Educational Administration
Quarterly , 3 ( 1 )  . 
Chrispeels , J .  , Strait , C .  ,  & Brown , J .  ( 1999 )  . The paradox of collaboration . Thrust for Educational Leadership , 29 ( 2 )  , 16–19 . 
Drucker , P .  ( 2002 )  . The effective executive . New York : 
HarperCollins . 
Kowalski , T . J .  ( 2003 )  . Contemporary school administration : 
An introduction . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Owens , R . G .  ( 2004 )  . Organizational behavior in education : 
Adaptive leadership and school reform . Boston : Allyn & 
Bacon . 
Vroom , V . H .  ,  & Yetton , P . W .  ( 1973 )  . Leadership in decisionmaking . Pittsburgh , PA : University of Pittsburgh Press . 
Yukl , G .  ( 2002 )  . Leadership in organizations ( 5th ed .  , 
pp . 122–148 )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
 LEADERSHIP , SITUATIONAL
Situational leadership has its roots in the Ohio State
Leadership Studies that were based on surveys of leaders
and subordinates that focused on two elements of
leadership :  ( 1 ) consideration or relationship behavior
of leaders toward their subordinates , and ( 2 ) initiating
structure or task behavior of leaders and how their
roles are defined and structured . 
Situational leadership suggests that leaders demonstrate flexibility in determining and using an appropriate leadership style to fit their followers ’ needs
and their work situations . This is done by making
conscious choices between directive and supportive
behaviors to achieve desired outcomes . The style a
leader uses with individuals or groups depends on the
readiness or maturity level of the people they are
attempting to influence . The maturity level is determined by the person ’ s motivation to set and reach high
attainable goals and their willingness to be responsible for the success of group goals and performance . 
Maturity is decided on in relation to specific tasks and
may vary from task to task . 
Paul Hersey and Kenneth Blanchard ’ s situational
leadership model is based on a relationship between 
( a ) the extent of guidance and direction ( task behavior ) a leader gives in one-way communication when
explaining what each follower is to do and when , where , 
and how tasks are to be accomplished ,  ( b ) the amount
of guidance and emotional support ( relationship
behavior ) a leader provides in two-way communication in providing emotional support and facilitating
behaviors , and ( c ) the readiness or maturity level that
followers exhibit in performing a specific task , function , 
or objective . 
When people need to be told specifically what and
how to do a task and need constant feedback about
Leadership , Situational———573
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 573
their assigned tasks , the situational leader functions
in the first stage as directing with high-task , lowrelationship leadership behaviors . At the second level , 
people need to be sold on an idea , and then they are
able to complete the tasks required without close
direction . This stage needs coaching with high-task , 
high-support leadership behaviors with two-way communications and emotional support . The third stage , 
in Hersey and Blanchard ’ s model , is supporting and
has low-task , high-relationship leadership behaviors . 
People at this stage have the motivation , ability , and
knowledge to complete the task and share in the decision-making process with the leader . The fourth stage
involves low-task , low-relationship leadership behaviors . At the delegating level , people need only to be
given a sense of the leader expectations , since they are
willing , able , and motivated to take responsibility for
completing the task successfully . 
Yukl ’ s criticisms of situational leadership theory
stem from the lack of consistently defined leadership
behaviors and an unclear description of the relationship between leader behavior and follower performance . Another shortcoming is the narrow focus on
the subordinate ’ s maturity level as the situational variable . Notwithstanding the criticisms , situational leadership has made positive contributions . The emphasis
on flexible leader behaviors and the different treatment of individuals in varying situations helps in our
understanding of effective leadership and provides
opportunities for leaders to assist followers to grow in
maturity . 
—Darlene Y . Bruner
See also accountability ; bureaucracy ; contingency theories ; 
creativity , in management ; goals , goal setting ; management
theories ; organizations , types of , typologies ; path-goal
leadership theory ; transactional analysis
Further Readings and References
Hersey , P .  ( 1985 )  . The situational leader . New York : Warner
Books . 
Hersey , P .  , Blanchard , K .  ,  & Johnson , D . E .  ( 2001 )  . 
Management of organizational behavior : Leading human
resources ( 8th ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Sheilds , C .  ,  & Sayani , A .  ( 2005 )  . Leading in the midst of
diversity : The challenge of our times . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , 
The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 380–
402 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Yukl , G .  ( 2002 )  . Leadership in organizations ( 5th ed .  , pp . 270–
272 )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
 LEADERSHIP , SOCIAL
DIMENSIONS OF
This entry constitutes a fairly macroscopic inquiry
into the supporting phenomena that continue to make
leadership one of the most compelling topics of more
than two millennia of Western history , from our Greek
origins to today . At least since then , we in the West
have continued a passionate love / hate affair with leadership that dominates , constructs , and fashions our
thinking and actions . 
Undeniably , the behavior of leaders takes place
in a social context . This focuses upon the dimensions
of this social context . We first deal with the structure
of organizations , including positions , roles and role
expectations , the conflict generated by conflicting
role expectations , and hierarchy and authority as components of structure . Next , we deal with social systems , the norms and subcultures generated by the
organization and its social systems , and the concept of
climate . The impact of such factors as race , gender , 
ethnicity , age , and social class stratification is analyzed , as will compelling images or metaphors of
organizations upon our thinking . 
Next , we look at cyclical organizational behavior
and the style of leadership generated by each phase of
the cycle , followed by various perceptions of leadership
as social process , as social function , and as a behavior
system . Next is a brief pass at divergent leadership
theories , including new movements , such as transformative and constructivist leadership , followed by the
role of authority , power , influence , and empowerment . Last
are a summary and some conclusions . 
ORGANIZATIONS ARE SOCIALLY
CONSTRUCTED REALITIES , WHICH
CREATE STRUCTURE : POSITIONS
AND ROLES—THE BUILDING BLOCKS
The process of forming an organization—any organization—generates positions , which sociologists also call
statuses . Positions comprise the structure of organizations . When a Wal-Mart store opens , it has managers , 
clerks , custodians , and customers . When a school
opens , it starts with a principal , perhaps an assistant
principal or two ( depending upon size )  , an office manager , clerks , teachers , often department heads if a secondary school , students , cafeteria personnel , and a head
custodian . We develop different expectations for the
574———Leadership , Social Dimensions Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 574
people occupying each position , constituting their
roles , which consist of clusters of expectations for any
position . Obviously , expectations may differ , so that
one can be a passive , laissez faire principal , an aggressive change agent , or a bureaucrat , among various interpretations of one ’ s role . 
How a person acts out a position becomes his or
her role , depending upon the actor ’ s interpretation of
the bundles of expectations surrounding the role . 
Thus , a role is a dynamic enactment , one ’ s interpretation of the expectations surrounding one ’ s position . 
Often , clusters of expectations can be divergent for a
role , which can cause conflict both for the person
occupying the role and for those who may have different expectations for the role occupant . Indeed , each
group ( groups may also be considered social systems ) 
may have a range of expectations for a role , some of
which may be in conflict , thus causing role conflict
within the group . And different social systems may
develop conflicting expectations for a role . 
Benne and Sheats approached roles by breaking
them into role functions based on three levels of
behavior : the first focused on achieving tasks , the
second on maintaining the group or organization , the
third termed idiosyncratic , need-meeting behavior . 
Illustrations of the first include initiating activity , 
summarizing , evaluating . The second includes encouraging , gate keeping , and consensus testing , and the
last covers blocking behavior , aggressive actions , 
recognition seeking , and the like . 
PEOPLE IN ORGANIZATIONS DEVELOP
GROUPS ( SOCIAL SYSTEMS ) —THE BASIC
STRUCTURE OF ALL ORGANIZATIONS
As people interact in organizations , inevitably they
develop social systems or subgroups . A social system can
be defined as two or more people interacting meaningfully . To diagnose social systems is to watch who relates
to whom and who works with whom ; in families , who
allies with whom . The number of social systems in our
organizations is immense . A group of 5 people totals 22 . 
A faculty of 20 or 25 literally generates hundreds . 
The model developed by E . G . Guba and J . W . 
Getzels , and later modified , clarifies expectations , 
sometimes divergent , both within and among social systems . Getzels and Guba pointed to two dimensions , the
nomothetic and the idiographic , in understanding organizations and social systems . The nomothetic consists of
the institution ’ s developing certain roles , which in turn
have clusters of expectations attached to them that are
intended to achieve the goals of the organization . The
idiographic consists of the individual ’ s personality need
dispositions . The authors noted that knowing role
expectations and need dispositions is essential in understanding the behavior of role incumbents in an institution and that social behavior is a result of an individual
attempting to cope with behavioral expectations consistent with his or her needs ( see Figure 1 )  . 
Next , the model predicts several sources for
conflict . The first is conflict within roles ; the second
Leadership , Social Dimensions Of———575
Ethos ValuesMores Rationality Belongingness
INSTITUTION
GROUP
EXPECTATIONS
INTENTIONS
INDIVIDUAL PERSONALITY NEEDS
Identification
ROLE
CLIMATE
Organism Constitution Potentialities
THE CLASS
AS A SOCIAL
SYSTEM
GOAL
BEHAVIOR
Figure 1 The Class as a Social System
SOURCE : Getzels , J . W .  ,  & Thelen , H . A .  ( 1960 )  . The classroom group as a social system . In N . B . Henry ( Ed .  )  . The dynamics of
instructional groups : Sociopsychological aspects of teaching and learning . N . S . S . E . Yearbook ( vol . 59 , pt . 2 , p . 80 )  . Chicago : National
Society for the Study of Education . Reprinted with permission . 
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 575
focuses on conflict among roles a person may face . 
The model helps explain and predict the potential for
conflict caused by facing differing expectations both
within a social system and among several relevant
social systems . 
HIERARCHY , AUTHORITY
As people in organizations develop different positions , they place them in hierarchical order , one being
more highly valued than another , as can readily be
seen in virtually all organizations . In schools , principals
are granted more prestige and authority than clerks , 
teachers more than students . Recently , organizational
designers have flattened out the hierarchy with such
devices as schools-within-schools . 
PEOPLE IN ORGANIZATIONS SLOWLY
DEVELOP NORMS ( CUSTOMS , BELIEFS ) 
THAT BECOME A CULTURE
Norms comprise customs , practices that all people
and social systems develop as they interact . And as
they interact , they develop shared expectations , feelings , attitudes , beliefs , and customs . In short , they
develop a culture of shared patterns of expectations for
behaving that everyone in a culture learns . Americans
drive on the right , the English drive on the left , which
confuses Americans in London . Culture can be defined
as commonly accepted and expected shared ideas , attitudes , values , customs , and habits concerning social
living that everyone in the culture learns . 
Traveling to a different country informs us of our
adherence to norms taken for granted , such as the
English serving tomatoes with half-cooked bacon at
breakfast contrasting with American models . Rural
Mexicans do not have different breakfast food , morning meals being the same as other meals . 
In organizations , we develop our own subcultures
and our own norms . Those of the U . S . Marine Corps
differ from those of a kindergarten ( no cookies and
milk at 10 AM and no afternoon naps for Marines )  . 
School-based people often consider their central
office out of touch with their realities . Therefore , 
supervisors who make sure to be based in a school and
attend faculty meetings regularly tend to be accepted , 
while those based centrally often are treated as visitors , as the Other . Those in leadership positions who
fail to spend time grasping norms and subcultures
of organizations into which they enter often create
considerable hardship for themselves , as well as for
the other denizens . Sometimes ignoring such a basic
norm has resulted in spectacular career flameouts . 
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE AND CLIMATE
Culture and climate are different . Culture , which
develops over time , is revealed , much like the iceberg , 
by customs and norms and by artifacts such as buildings , art , technology , and by values , attitudes , assumptions , and beliefs expressed in patterns of behavior , 
speech , and language . Climate focuses on determining
perceptions of teachers in schools . Studies of climate
provide tools to diagnose and to analyze perceptions
regarding how the organization is functioning , developing a considerably more detailed insight into a host
of phenomena . These include perceptions of such factors as leadership and group behavior , many of which
impact people ’ s satisfaction . Subsequently , other
instruments have been developed to assess climate , 
such as the Organizational Climate Index ( OCI )  . 
In considering the social dimensions of leadership , 
such factors as race , gender , ethnicity , age , and social
class stratification comprise major factors for those in
leadership positions to be aware of in most areas in the
West . In debating over whom to ask to serve on a committee , perceptions of the above factors must be taken
into account , unless one wants the project to fail . 
IMAGES / METAPHORS OF ORGANIZATIONS
Metaphors and images are so common in everyday
use that we become unaware of their impact on our
thinking and behavior . Treating the organization as a
machine is readily displayed in Wal-Mart ’ s and the
fast-food industry ’ s use of Frederick Taylor ’ s principles that workers should be cheap , easy to train and
supervise , easy to replace and to standardize . This makes
workers ( read , teachers ) readily replaceable . 
Other metaphors include the organization as
• An organism
• A culture
• A political system
• A self-learning system—a learning organization
• A family
• Involved in change
• An instrument of domination or a psychic prison
• A social sorting mechanism
• A refuge
576———Leadership , Social Dimensions Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 576
Manifestly , utilizing each of these metaphors
produces distinctly different behaviors as one operates
within and outside the organization . 
Henry Mintzberg ’ s logo provides intriguing insights
into the functioning of organizations ( see Figure 2 )  . 
The strategic apex comprises those running the
organization , with middle management considered the
middle line . The operating core are the workers ( read , 
teachers )  , while the technostructure consists of computer
experts and other analysts . The support staff includes
office workers and custodians . Calling these “ pulls ,  ” 
Mintzberg ’ s analysis explains a great deal of the dynamics
of the pulling and hauling in many organizations , as each
component tries to maximize its control and influence . 
Clearly , the strategic apex wants to control decision
making , pulling to centralize . The middle line wants
to control their destinies to maximize their autonomy
in decision making , driving to Balkanize . The operating core wants to control its destiny , pulling to professionalize . For decades , nurses and teachers have
emphasized their professional roles . 
The technostructure ’ s goal is to standardize work
processes , thus exercising some control . To gain influence , support staff push to collaborate . With this model
of organization pulls , we can predict these social systems ’ behavior . 
IMPACT OF THE SOCIAL FUNCTIONS
OF SCHOOLS ON LEADERSHIP
Hidden by their diffuseness , the social functions of
schooling impact leadership behavior usually without
our being aware of their influence . For example , 
schools function as social sorting mechanisms , classifying kids according to their socioeconomic status . 
Thus , assistant principals dealing with discipline generally handle more minorities and tend to expel them
in higher percentages than higher socioeconomic
levels . Schools tend to display a warehousing function , keeping youth off the streets , by filling time . 
Study halls illustrate this function . 
Schools also socialize kids and adults by inculcating
people into the myriad symbols of the culture , its norms , 
expectations , myths , and practices . School is where kids
learn to be kindergartners and later , adolescents . 
Recently , politicians have climbed aboard the train of
the value of failure to enhance the worth of the diploma
by eschewing social promotion , thereby increasing
dropout proportions . Principals often buy into these
functions without becoming fully aware of their impact . 
CYCLICAL ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR
Do organizations display cycles in their careers ? The
tri-partite theory of organizational succession and
change asserts that cycles occur and , in the process , 
impact leadership selection fundamentally , but generally over relatively long periods of time , thus escaping
attention .  ( See Figure 3 .  ) 
The Charismatic Leader : 
The Person-Oriented Phase
of the Organization ’ s Career
The cycle becomes manifest when an organization , 
which seems to be living in the past , may become so
out of sync with its purpose and environment that
the strategic apex , or the board of the strategic apex 
( if it is that body that becomes so dysfunctional ) decides
something must be done to prevent disaster . Almost
invariably , they select a dynamic person , a charismatic
leader , to break the organization out of its doldrums . 
Such a charismatic leader energizes people , attracts
followers , becoming the most creative , dynamic
phase . In this person-oriented phase , many initiatives
become developed and implemented , often uncoordinated , that excite people . The future is wide open . 
Leadership , Social Dimensions Of———577
Pull to Collaborate
Pull to Standardize
Pull to Centralize
Pull to
Balkanize
Pull to Professionalize
Figure 2 Five Pulls on the Organization
SOURCE : Mintzberg , H .  ( 1979 )  . The structuring of
organizations , 1st edition ( p . 20 )  . Reprinted with the permission
of Pearson Education , Inc .  , Saddle River , NJ . 
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 577
Examples include John F . Kennedy , Mahatma Gandhi , 
Indira Gandhi , John Dewey , Bill Clinton , Martin
Luther King Jr .  , and Al Shanker . 
The Planner and Plan-Orientation : 
The Planning Phase
After some time , usually short , the leader may become
attracted to another position , or may be blown out . The
leader ’ s supporters , anxious to retain some initiatives , try
to incorporate these into a plan , and look to recruit a planner to lead into the next phase , Planning . Planners can
focus on a simple plan ( block scheduling , uniforms , 
two teachers teaming ) to complex , synergistic , multiyear
plans ( a middle school , continuous progress , a constructivist school with learning communities )  . Some planners
often operate below the radar and so are more difficult to
identify . Gen . Omar Bradley , Donald Trump , Sen . Hillary
Rodham Clinton , Lee Iacocca , and Dale Parnell ( the
founder of the Tech-Prep movement ) come to mind . 
The plan guides thinking and resources , leading
many to become loyal to it . However , the planning
phase follows an inevitable , fixed , and fateful template . As time goes on , the bit-by-bit , day-to-day
incremental nature of decision making by administrators focused on the immediate and crises tends to drift
slowly away from holding the plan aloft as the decision-making prism . The cogency and force of the plan
fades , and as new people enter , their loyalty is less
than that of the pioneers . After 2 or 3 years , the plan
becomes more honored in the breach . To achieve the
plan , people develop red tape , rules , and regulations , 
which begin to rule the organization ’ s life . After 5
years , the plan has slid out of consciousness , except
by old-timers reminiscing about the good old days . 
Slowly priorities change , the planner often leaves to
more hospitable shores , and the organization begins to
drift . It has moved into the next phase . 
The Bureaucrat : 
The Position-Oriented Phase
By this time the planner has been succeeded by
the bureaucrat , whose main purpose is to stabilize and
usually to increase his or her power and control in an
organization dominated by red tape , routine , rules , 
and regulations . Hope , long stifled , has disappeared ; 
the organization is backward looking , pointing to past
glories , rather than looking proactively toward the
future . The bureaucrat often is a tinkerer , at worst a
stabilizer , often a high Theory X controller . Creative
lines of action , even if suggested , are squelched , since
with little or no charisma , the loyalty of personnel
focuses on the position of the leader , not to the leader
himself or herself . Examples of bureaucrats include
Gerald Ford , George H . W . Bush , and other managers
serving as functionaries . 
Unfortunately , this phase usually lasts the longest , 
since the organization can drift for a long time until
the people at the top realize again that disaster looms
and a charismatic leader is needed . 
The Synergist
Once in a blue moon , an organization finds a
person who combines charisma and planning , a synergist . Gen . Douglas MacArthur , Robert E . Lee , John
Dewey , Al Shanker , Robert Maynard Hutchins ( the
chancellor of the University of Chicago )  , Franklin
Delano Roosevelt , Martin Luther King Jr .  , and Dale
Parnell come to mind . The combination of charisma
and planning skill gives an organization considerable
power and direction , breaking it out of position orientation more readily . Since synergists are rare , combining a charismatic leader and a planner could be
considered as a synergist staffing plan . 
Recruiters armed with the tri-partite theory possess
an invaluable tool in their armamentarium of theories , 
578———Leadership , Social Dimensions Of
Charismatic
Leader 
( PersonOriented ) 
Synergist Planner 
( Plan-Oriented ) 
Bureaucrat 
( PositionOriented ) 
Figure 3 Phases of Organizational Change : TriPartite Theory
SOURCE : Shapiro , A .  ( 2000 )  . Leadership for constructivist
schools ( p . 79 )  . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Press . Reprinted with
permission . 
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 578
models , frames of reference , and concepts by which to
improve their and their organization ’ s career . 
SOCIAL ASPECTS OF LEADERSHIP : 
AS SOCIAL PROCESS , SOCIAL FUNCTION , 
AND AS A BEHAVIOR SYSTEM
Leadership is obviously a social process , inasmuch
as leaders function in social systems and in social settings . Leadership must take place in social systems
and in social settings . Interactions among people comprise social processes , such as influence , acceptance
and rejection , trust , conflict , competition , and cooperation , among others . Thus , as leaders interact with
individuals and with social systems , they are engaging
in social processes . 
The very act of leadership is a social function in a
social setting . It comprises a key role in any social system , particularly in formal systems , and often in informal systems , such as families and friendship groups . In
virtually all formal social systems , the function of leadership is expected and usually respected . For schools , 
all states have legislated responsibilities to guide the
roles of principals and superintendents . For example , a
superintendent must recommend a candidate for a principalship , which the board of education can or cannot
approve . In most states , the board cannot act without the
superintendent ’ s recommendation . Thus , leadership
comprises a social function in the organization . 
As for leadership as a system of behavior , we
have huge numbers of books peering at the behavior of
leaders , recommending various approaches to implement the efficacy of those in leadership roles . Many
formulations have entered into pop culture , such as
Stephen Covey ’ s The 7 Habits of Highly Effective
People , a non-research-based text . Clearly , attempts to
modify or to improve the behavior of those in leadership positions comprises treating leadership as a
behavior system . 
DIVERGENT LEADERSHIP THEORIES
Numerous leadership theories have been proposed , 
often some being fads . The context of this entry prevents dealing with all , other than suggesting that the
developing social contexts of our changing society
and culture have led to theories reflecting the norms
and beliefs of those cultures . It is no accident that
Frederick Taylor ’ s scientific management emerged
in the early part and the human relations movement
developed in the middle part of the last century . Two
theories developing in the last part of the twentieth
century and in this century are transformative and
constructivist leadership , reflecting contemporary
thinking about the purposes of leadership as facilitative and empowering . 
AUTHORITY , INFLUENCE , 
POWER , EMPOWERMENT
Chester I . Barnard contributed to understanding power
by noting that it exists only when subordinates accept
the leader ’ s authority . The subordinate has to perceive
the communication as authoritative subjectively , and
accepts it . Next , objectively , authority is the characteristic of a communication that causes it to be accepted . 
Four conditions have to occur for a communication to
be authoritative . First , it must be understood by the subordinate . Next , it cannot be inconsistent with the subordinate ’ s perception of the organization ’ s purposes . 
Third , the communication cannot be inconsistent with
the subordinate ’ s purposes . Last , the subordinate has to
be able to carry out the communication both mentally
and physically . 
To this , we can add Max Weber ’ s formulation 
( see Figure 4 )  , which focused on influence over others ’ 
behavior , involuntary and voluntary compliance of
others . Involuntary compliance he perceived as being
based on power , forced compliance of others . Weber
perceived authority and influence as based on voluntary
compliance . Authority is willingly obeyed because
people recognize that it comes from a legitimate source , 
and so suspend critical thinking to choose other alternatives . Persuasion was based on influence , thus useful to be charismatic or a referential person . 
The last person to cite is Robert W . Bierstedt , a
sociologist who dealt with social power . For Bierstedt , 
organizations are social entities , creating positions
and roles , some of which have more and less power . 
For Bierstedt , 
• Power is institutionalized authority . 
• Authority rests on the capacity to apply sanctions . 
• Sanctions are stored force . 
Thus , social power rests on one ’ s capacity to employ
force . Power , thus , is a predisposition or a prior capacity to employ force . Power , therefore , is potential ; it is
stored force . If it fails in its use , you do not have it , the
reason why the military is so hesitant to use force . 
Leadership , Social Dimensions Of———579
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 579
Empowerment presently is considered a social
good , since it enables people to control their own
destinies . Many modern leadership theories point to
empowerment as essential for the health of organizations and people . 
—Arthur Shapiro
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; axiomatic
theory ; behaviorism ; bureaucracy ; compliance theory ; conceptual systems theory and leadership ; contingency
theories ; critical theory ; decision making ; Dewey , John ; 
empowerment ; group dynamics ; human resource development ; King , Martin Luther Jr .  ; leadership , theories of ; leadership effectiveness ; management theories ; nomothetic / 
idiographic dimensions ; organizational theories ; organizations , types of , typologies ; rational organizational theory ; 
role theory ; social relations , dimensions of ; Taylor , 
Frederick ; Theory X , Theory Y ; Weber , Max
Further Readings and References
Barnard , C . I .  ( 1938 )  . The functions of the executive . 
Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . 
Bierstedt , R . W .  ( 1950 )  . An analysis of social power . American
Sociological Review , 15 , 730–738 . 
Dantley , M .  ( 2005 )  . Moral leadership : Shifting the management paradigm . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of
educational leadership ( pp . 34–46 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Sage . 
English , F . W .  ( 2002 )  . Caveat emptor : A de-constructive
reading of the stealth metaphysics of Stephen R . Covey . 
Educational Leadership Review , 3 ( 3 )  , 13–22 . 
English , F . W .  ( 2003 )  . The postmodern challenge to the theory
and practice of educational administration . Springfield , 
IL : Charles C Thomas . 
Getzels , J . W .  ,  & Guba , E . G .  ( 1957 )  . Social behavior and the
administrative process . School Review , 65 , 423–441 . 
Getzels , J . W .  ,  & Thelen , H . A .  ( 1960 )  . The classroom group
as a social system . In N . B . Henry ( Ed .  )  , The dynamics of
instructional groups : Sociopsychological aspects of teaching and learning . NSSE Yearbook ( vol . 59 , pt . 2 , p . 80 )  . 
Chicago : National Society for the Study of Education . 
Gronn , P .  ( 2003 )  . The new work of educational leaders . 
London : Paul Chapman . 
Mintzberg , H .  ( 1979 )  . The structuring of organizations . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Ogawa , R .  ( 2005 )  . Leadership as social construct : The expression of human agency within organizational constraint . 
580———Leadership , Social Dimensions Of
Others Suspend
Choice of Action
Pending Command
to Signal
Basis for Choice
of Action
Force
of
Personality
Cogency
of
Arguments
Prestige
of
Person
Recognition
as Legitimate
Source of
Commands
Such as
Manipulation
of Economic
or Social
Conditions
Actual Use of
Physical
Force or
Reprisals
Threat of
Physical
Force or
Reprisals
An
Impersonal
System of
Law
Persons in
Legitimate
Position in a
Hierarchy
Willingness to
Follow Directives 
of Superiors in 
Position to Exercise 
Social Constraints 
on Dissidents
Control By Power
Exercised Through
Power : Forced
Compliance Despite
Resistance
Involuntary
Compliance of
Others
Persuasion : 
Willingly Influenced
Authority : 
Willingly Obeyed
Influence by Authority
Characterized by Both
of Following Conditions
Influence by Individual
Not in Authority Position
but Through
Voluntary
Compliance of
Others
Influence Under Behavior of Others
Figure 4 Relations and Difference
SOURCE : Blau , P . M .  ,  & Scott , W . R .  ( 1962 )  . Formal organizations ( pp . 27–32 )  . San Francisco : Chandler Publishing Co . Reprinted
with permission . 
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 580
In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational
leadership ( pp . 89–106 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Owens , R . G .  ( 2004 )  . Organizational behavior in education . 
Boston : Pearson . 
Shapiro , A .  ( 2000 )  . Leadership for constructivist schools . 
Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Press . 
 LEADERSHIP , SPIRITUAL
Spiritual leadership actually includes three elements . 
The first is connectivity and relationship building . 
The spiritual self motivates human beings to connect
with one another and explains the synchronous
ways in which people ’ s lives intermingle and have a
significant impact on each other . School leadership
grounded in spirituality is one that clearly celebrates
participatory practices in decision making and welcomes the articulation of the multiple voices that make
up any learning community in completing the work of
schools . This is the case because spirit-directed leadership clearly understands the interconnectivity of all
the persons in any learning community and relishes
the thought that the polyphonic nature of schools adds
to their vibrancy and effectiveness . 
The second element is both ontological and teleological , as the human spirit craves meaning-making and
purpose to be consistent parts of the human experience . 
Spiritual leadership sees the work of educational leaders
in a broad social and cultural context and perceives
school leaders as those whose purpose , mission , or calling is to serve learning communities in a leadership
capacity . Critical spirituality extends the notions of
mission and calling by locating educational leadership
responsibilities in the arena of helping to transform
society from racism , classism , sexism , homophobia , and
other marginalizing societal practices . Through critical
self-reflection , recognizing the work of school leaders
as being in a broader social , cultural , and political space , 
creatively strategizing to involve school practices in
ameliorating the undemocratic and inequitable routines
and traditions in mainstream society and finally taking
action to bring about societal change , schools , through
spiritual leadership , become arenas where social transformation is generated and nurtured . 
Finally , spiritual leadership involves the ethical and
moral dimensions of school administration . Educational
leadership that is grounded in spirituality consistently
asks the critical questions of whose interests are being
served through administrative practices and who is
being included as well as excluded through administrative decisions . Spiritual leadership compels school communities to embrace the ethics and morality of a social
justice agenda along with the academic responsibilities
of schools . 
Some of the scholars and concepts that have nurtured the growth of spiritual leadership include Cornel
West ’ s notions of prophetic pragmatism , the idea of
conscientization as developed by Paulo Freire ’ s liberation theology and concepts of the psychology of
ultimate concerns . Others include work on linking
spirituality with democratic education , Carlyle
Fielding Stewart ’ s treatise on Black spirituality and
consciousness , and David Purpel ’ s pronouncements on
the moral and spiritual crisis in education . Spiritual
leadership has also become a part of the organizational
theory discourse . Finally , the research by Michael
Dantley , Khaula Murtadha , and others has moved the
spiritual vernacular more deeply into the educational
leadership and higher education discourse . 
—Michael Dantley
See also cross-cultural studies ; democracy , democratic education and administration ; diversity ; empowerment ; esteem
needs ; expert power ; involvement , in organizations ; leadership , theories of ; leadership effectiveness ; morality , moral
leadership ; transformational leadership
Further Readings and References
Dantley , M .  ( 2005 )  . Moral leadership : Shifting the management
paradigm . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 34–46 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Freire , P .  ( 1998 )  . Pedagogy of freedom : Ethics , democracy , 
and civic courage . Lanham , MD : Rowman & Littlefield . 
Murtadha , K .  ( 1999 )  . Spirited sisters : Spirituality and the
activism of African American women in educational leadership . In L . Fenwick ( Ed .  )  , School leadership : Expanding
horizons of the mind and spirit : Proceedings of the
National Council of Professors of Educational Administration . Lancaster , PA : Technomic . 
Purpel , D .  ( 1989 )  . The moral and spiritual crisis in education : 
A curriculum for justice and compassion in education . 
New York : Bergin & Garvey . 
West , C .  ( 1982 )  . Prophesy deliverance : An Afro-American
revolutionary Christianity . Philadelphia : Westminster Press . 
 LEADERSHIP , SYSTEM-ORIENTED
System-oriented leadership ( SOL ) is a goal-oriented
approach to organizational leadership where the
Leadership , System-Oriented———581
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 581
functioning of an organization is seen as a whole ( i . e .  , 
cultural symbols and values , formal structures , environment ) and allows organizational members to focus on
factors that align key processes and resources to improve
performance . SOL is not the purview of administrators , 
and may include students to school board members . In
sports or medicine , SOL is analogous to including a
person ’ s state of mind and conditions of use or recovery
in the treatment , in addition to the body . 
As state governments have established learning standards to address accountability issues in public schools , 
student and stakeholder needs have become increasingly
important . Meeting the challenge of accountability means
a systemwide change in educational organizations from a
product-focused , industrial model to a learner-focused , 
continuous quality-improvement model . SOL is a key
component of a learner-focused , continuous qualityimprovement model . 
SOL was well described as a systems perspective in
1966 by Daniel Katz and Robert Kahn in The Social
Psychology of Organizations , as well as in 1969 in
Systems Thinking , a collection of essays on the topic
edited by F . E . Emery . There are five basic characteristics
of SOL that continue to reverberate through school
reform literature . School leaders that are system oriented
1 . Look for demands , opportunities , trends and patterns , 
and change in the external environment ( e . g .  , stakeholder needs and requirements , funding sources , 
legislation )  . 
2 . Identify important internal organizational factors based
on the needs , requirements , cultural symbols and values , and relationships between organizational subsystems ( e . g .  , students , teachers , grade levels , classrooms , 
departments ) and the organization as a whole . 
3 . Recognize that an organization is intertwined , influenced , and interactive ( open ) with its environment . 
4 . Filter environmental information for external factors
that are related to important internal organizational
factors to focus planning and action . 
5 . Provide freedom to diverge from the existing organizational structure and commingle organizational
elements ( e . g .  . time , space , grade levels , content areas , 
departments , personnel , stakeholders ) to achieve organizational goals . 
The first two characteristics set the expectation that
educational leaders seek information externally from
stakeholders and internally from staff and students , as
well as have knowledge of educational research and
societal trends . Educational leaders must know how to
identify local , state , and national resources that might
be leveraged to improve educational performance . 
There is interplay between characteristics 2 , 3 , and
4 ; needs , requirements , and cultural symbols and values identified externally from students and stakeholders , as well as internally from faculty and staff , should
be reflected in the school ’ s or district ’ s goals and
improvement planning . The interplay between internal and external factors through goal setting and planning should result in shared norms and alignment of
learning standards , curriculum , instruction , performance standards , and feedback / reporting . 
Finally , SOL sets the expectation that educational
leaders will be able to look beyond the formal organizational structures of schools to accept , support , and
capitalize on innovation to improve organizational
performance . Important developments often surface
on the boundaries of seemingly unconnected elements
of a system . 
—George R . Stanhope
See also administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; communications , theories in organizations ; conceptual systems theory
and leadership ; creativity , in management ; ethos , of organizations ; group dynamics ; human resource development ; 
leadership , discretionary ( and power )  ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , participatory ; leadership , theories of ; 
management theories ; organizational theories ; organizations , types of , typologies ; planning models ; rational organizational theory ; restructuring , of schools ; role theory ; 
strategic planning ; systemic reform ; systems theory / thinking ; 
total quality management ; values of organizations and
leadership
Further Readings and References
Emery , F . E .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1969 )  . Systems thinking . Middlesex , UK : 
Penguin . 
Fullan , M .  ( 2004 )  . Leadership & sustainability : System
thinkers in action . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Hoyle , J .  , Bjork , L .  , Collier , V .  ,  & Glass , T .  ( 2004 )  . The superintendent as CEO . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Katz , D .  ,  & Kahn , R . T .  ( 1966 )  . The social psychology of
organizations . New York : John Wiley & Sons . 
 LEADERSHIP , TASK-ORIENTED
Task-oriented leadership is focused on achieving
goals . Leaders who are task oriented are attentive to
582———Leadership , Task-Oriented
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 582
production and achievement . They are also more likely
to keep their distance and be aloof . The assumptions
they make about their roles , purposes , and behaviors
reflect their commitment to completing the work
requested of them . Successful task-oriented leaders are
key in contributing to their organization ’ s effectiveness
by setting goals , allocating labor , and enforcing sanctions . They often accomplish this by working hard , 
being persistent with solving problems , and overcoming barriers . Descriptors for task-oriented leaders include 
 “ production emphasizing ,  ”  “ goal achieving ,  ” and 
 “ work facilitative and goal emphasizing .  ” 
TASK-ORIENTED VERSUS
RELATIONS-ORIENTED LEADERSHIP
Task-oriented leadership is often discussed in connection
with relations-oriented leadership . The distinction lies in
the titles : task-oriented implies concentration on the task
to be accomplished , while relations-oriented implies a
concentration on the quality of relationships with others . 
Most effective are leaders who use both . Research on the
effectiveness of task-oriented versus relations-oriented
has not supported the superiority of either orientation . 
TYPES OF LEADERS
Task-oriented leadership can be identified in selected
types of leaders . For instance , with Hersey and
Blanchard ’ s situational leadership model , a task-oriented leader would define the role of others , explain
what to do and why , establish well-defined patterns of
organization and channels of communication , and
determine the ways to accomplish assignments . 
Task-oriented leadership behavior has also been
associated with performance leadership in connection
with behavior that prompts and motivates the group ’ s
achievement of goals . The focus on task to strategic
thinking means projecting patterns of collective behavior to the whole situation . It is also evident in the
leader ’ s interest in issues and methods and the system
that can connect people and things to achieve objectives . 
Immediate supervision , combined with management
as a whole , can foster a “ culture of productivity ” —a
shared image of a highly productive work setting—in
which supervisors , managers , and workers alike focus
on the work being done and how to maintain successful operations . 
—Jean M . Haar
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; leadership
effectiveness ; leadership styles ; management theories
Further Readings and References
Bass , B .  ( 1990 )  . Bass and Stogdill ’ s handbook of leadership : 
Theory , research , and managerial applications ( 3rd ed .  )  . 
New York : Free Press . 
Crow , G .  ,  & Grogan , M .  ( 2005 )  . The development of leadership thought and practice in the United States . In F . English 
( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership 
( pp . 362–379 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Gronn , P .  ( 2003 )  . The new work of educational leaders . 
London : Paul Chapman . 
Kowalski , T .  ( 2003 )  . Contemporary school administration : An
introduction ( 2nd ed .  )  . Boston : Pearson Education . 
Tomlinson , H .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Educational management . New
York : Routledge . 
 LEADERSHIP , TEACHER
Definitions of teacher leadership abound , but most
hold in common an expanded view of teachers ’ contribution to schooling through leadership activities
and efforts beyond the boundaries of the classroom . 
Teacher leadership is generally considered to be the
ability and energy to make a contribution to the school
beyond one ’ s classroom duties . Teacher leaders are
those who work with colleagues to influence schoolwide educational and instructional practices . Underlying this practice is a philosophical perspective that
by working in an extended capacity , it is possible to
shape a better world . 
Teacher leaders , then , are those who strongly
value their contribution as teachers and take particular
responsibility for decision making and activities outside their classrooms . They might help implement
particular reforms within school sites or work in tandem with building principals to tackle obstacles , build
rapport with the community , and support the improvement of the overall educational culture of schools . 
They might experiment with and examine particular
innovative forms of instruction with students , analyze
these , and invite or encourage colleagues to engage in
similar activities . In general , teacher leaders are those
who use inquiry , work collaboratively , understand the
nature of adult learning , and regard the complexities
of the school as an organization . In one study , teacher
leaders were those identified by their peers as risk
takers and people who seek challenge and growth for
Leadership , Teacher———583
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 583
personal and professional development as teachers . 
These teachers were skilled collaborators and viewed
as very supportive of their peers . Other researchers
have identified an incidence of strong caring relationships as significant among teacher leaders . This , along
with a high incidence of collaboration , teacher-led initiatives , and high levels of trust among faculty were
factors that distinguished teachers as leaders . This also
holds true for other researchers ’ work with groups of
teacher leaders . Teacher leaders know how to build
trust and rapport . They examine problems within the
context of the organization . They deal with change
processes well and work consistently to build skill and
confidence in others through collaborative efforts . 
It remains difficult to exactly define teacher leadership . In part , this is due to the fact that teachers are far
from homogeneous in the variety of roles they take up
as teacher leaders and in the multiple ways they define
themselves as teacher leaders . In fact , teachers who are
leaders take on a variety of roles that can be categorized
as both formal and informal in their work as teacher
leaders . Formal teacher leadership roles include positions such as lead teachers , master teachers , department
heads , team leaders , grade-level leaders , union representatives , and members of the school governing
boards , mentors , teacher coaches , and school facilitators . Such teachers might represent their colleagues in
district-level or site-based decision making , act as
sources of professional growth for peers , or advocate
for their colleagues or students in a wider arena . 
Informal roles taken by teacher leaders are those that
also extend beyond classrooms but are concerned less
with the overall organizational dimensions or management of schools . Teacher leaders in such roles might
take the lead in shaping the curriculum of a school , setting standards for student behavior , deciding on student
placement , designing staff development , setting specific
school policies , evaluating teacher performance , selecting new teachers or administrators , deciding on school
budgets , establishing community partnerships for resource
allocation or other support , creating new program initiatives , promoting and advocating for their school , developing accountability processes for monitoring and
evaluating student learning , and mentoring new or
more inexperienced teachers . 
The roles of teacher leaders in the conception of
teacher leadership through the past decades of accelerated reform may be viewed as occurring in three
distinct waves . In the first wave , teacher leaders were
more formally assigned in roles that stressed management , 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the school system . 
Such work is most typified in the work of teacher
work in formal roles of leadership . The second wave
emerged in recognition of teachers ’ instructional abilities and the capacity of this expertise to inform instructional improvement and curriculum development . In
this wave , curriculum developer and staff development , teacher mentorship , and other roles were created to capitalize on teachers ’ pedagogical knowledge . 
Such work is most exemplified in the informal leadership roles taken up by teachers in particular school
sites . 
Finally , the third wave stemmed from the need for
schools to be recultured for collegiality and systemic
change as fundamental cultural changes in schools as
organizations . In this current wave , teacher leaders are
those who assisted in designing schools , mentoring
colleagues , engaging in problem solving , and initiating professional development activities for other
teachers . In this wave of teacher leadership work , 
teachers in both formal and informal roles of leadership in their schools are concerned overall with their
abilities to effect significant change in school culture
and improve the quality of school life . 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF LEADERSHIP
IN TEACHER LEADERSHIP
Increasingly , teacher leadership has become significant
in the process of school reform and school change . 
Leadership has always been a critical factor in the
reform and improvement of schools today . Yet , ambiguity and uncertainty surround our understanding and
conceptualization of leadership in schools . Is leadership a specialized role held by a designated figure , or
is it a set of processes shared among a range of individuals entrusted with the educational fates of our
youth ? Many in educational administration and teacher
education are challenging the pervasive notion that
leadership resides in the figure of the school principal
or another appointed administrator . Scholars have
questioned the exalted responsibility given to one individual . Leadership , they argue , would be better understood as sets of processes that individuals engage in for
the pursuit of various goals and objectives . 
Moreover , given the increasing demands on schools
today , it seems foolhardy to put such high expectations
and demands on so few leadership figures . Traditional
models of school leadership that rely too heavily on
the leadership abilities of the school administrator
584———Leadership , Teacher
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 584
have not explored the capacity of teachers to make a
difference in their schools . School-based reform movements and the teacher professionalism movement or 
 “ re-professionaliation ” that began in the United States , 
Canada , and Great Britain in the late 1980s have
alerted us of the crisis in teaching as manifested in the
recruitment and retention issues of the profession today . 
These movements have urged us to reconsider top-down
initiatives of reform , reconsider notions of school leadership , develop wider models of distribution of leadership roles and practices across schools , and develop
the capacity of teachers to make a significant impact
on professional practice , quality , and the improvement
of the school itself . Just as the teachers ’ movement
advocated for changes in the roles , image , and general
work of teachers , mainly through the enhancement and
expansion of their roles within the school site , organizational school reforms have called for new site-based
school management frameworks and a wider reliance
on the leadership capacity of teachers within the site . 
These two reforms have garnered support for and
attention to research and development in teacher leadership . Moreover , these reforms have fostered a timely
reconsideration of teachers ’ work to include more
enhanced roles , complex new responsibilities , and
enhanced skills . 
Recent notions of teacher leadership have called
for theoretical orientations that acknowledge a “ reconception ” of what leadership means . Teacher leadership has been related to other concepts such as distributive leadership and professional learning communities . 
The distributive leadership view acknowledges the idea
that leadership is fluid , emergent , and can be exhibited
by anyone in the organization . Furthermore , this perspective elucidates leadership as an interactive and personal process of sense making and the creation of
meaning that is continuously a part of organizational
membership . It implies that leadership is socially constructed and culturally sensitive . Teacher leadership is
also aligned with the goals of professional learning
communities . These communities integrate three
themes into the school : professionalism , organizational
learning , and personal connection . 
RESEARCH NEEDS IN TEACHER LEADERSHIP
The knowledge base of research on teacher leadership
reflects a dearth of research in this area . Some research
has indicated that teacher leadership results in
increased perceptions of professional growth , more
professional development opportunities for teachers , 
more instructional innovation , greater communication
among faculty , and increased cooperation among
teachers and administrators . Yet , little research reflects
the ways that teachers engage alongside other leaders
and how this might impact organizational culture . 
Likewise , there is little empirical research that examines the ways that principals and teachers understand
this sharing of leadership and its contribution to school
reform efforts . Researchers have only begun to examine the ways that teachers contribute in the leadership
of schools and the ways that these efforts impact
school improvement and reform . Given the high levels
of accountability and the increased focus on student
achievement of late , it seems pertinent to more seriously examine the perspectives and actual work of
teachers and school administrators who share leadership roles and tasks and the relationship of this work
to the overall improvement of school programs . 
In summary , teacher leadership shows much
promise in the reform of educational administration
and may quite possibly facilitate the reform efforts
aimed toward increased student achievement and
quality school programming . As a concept , however , 
it remains vaguely defined to scholars and practitioners . Thus , teacher leadership is a concept of practical
promise that would stand to benefit from theoretical
expansion and research-based inquiry . 
—Audrey M . Dentith , Floyd D . Beachum , 
and Elise M . Frattura
See also American Federation of Teachers ; Bethune , Mary
McLeod ; capacity building , of organizations ; career development ; career stages ; critical theory ; Dewey , John ; empowerment ; Haley , Margaret ; innovation , in education ; involvement , 
in organizations ; leadership , task-oriented ; leadership , theories
of ; Picott , J . Rupert ; professional development ; professional
development schools ; professional learning communities ; role
ambiguity ; role conflict ; role theory ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; supervision ; systemic reform ; tutoring ; universities , preparation of educational leaders in ; women in
educational leadership ; Young , Ella Flagg
Further Readings and References
Beachum , F . D .  ,  & Dentith , A .  ( 2004 )  . Teacher leaders : 
Creating cultures of school renewal and transformation . 
Educational Forum , 68 ( 3 )  , 276–286 . 
Chrispeels , J .  ( 2004 )  . Learning to lead together . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Crowther , F .  ( 1996 )  . Teacher leadership : Exploration in theory
and practice . Leading and Managing , 2 ( 4 )  , 304–321 . 
Leadership , Teacher———585
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 585
Crowther , F .  , Kaagan , S . S .  , Ferguson , M .  ,  & Hann , L .  ( 2002 )  . 
Developing teacher leaders : How teacher leadership
enhances school success . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Crowther , F .  ,  & Olsen , P .  ( 1996 )  . Teachers as leaders : An
exploration of success stories in socioeconomic disadvantaged communities . Kingroy , Queensland , Australia : 
Queensland Department of Education . 
Harris , A .  ( 2003 )  . Teacher leadership as distributed leadership : 
Heresy , fantasy , or possibility ? School Leadership & 
Management , 23 ( 3 )  , 313–324 . 
Henning , J . E .  , Trent , V .  , Engelbrecht , D .  , Robinson , V .  ,  & 
Reed , G . A .  ( 2004 )  . Cultivating teacher leadership through
a school and university partnership . Unpublished paper . 
Murphy , J .  ( 2005 )  . Connecting teacher leadership and school
improvement . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage
 LEADERSHIP , THEORIES OF
Leadership theories represent systematic organized
knowledge to explain the nature and effectiveness of
leadership . Theories provide a foundation for analyzing and predicting the complex nature of leadership
behavior . Practitioners use theories as illustrations or
as guiding principles to interpret leadership actions . 
The amount of research on leadership theories is significant to the field , since understanding theories helps
researchers and practitioners assess personal and organizational behaviors . Theories give insights about leader
effectiveness and influence expectations and assessments
of leaders as they relate to organizational goals . 
The earliest theoretical studies were based on the
assumption that effective leaders possess certain intellectual abilities , physical characteristics , and personality
traits . Later studies centered on leadership behaviors , 
styles , and situations . Current theories involve characteristics of leaders who serve as change agents and
visionaries able to deal with the complexity and uncertainty of today ’ s organizations . 
HISTORY OF LEADERSHIP THEORIES
Theory emerged during the late nineteenth century
and early twentieth century as a means to define and
explain the nature of leadership . Early focus was to
examine and explain the emergence of great leaders
based on their innate ability . Studying small group
leadership emerged by 1920 . Many researchers have
attempted to identify universal traits common to
leaders ; others embraced psychoanalytic or political
perspectives and attribution theories . Later , scholars
conceptualized effective leadership based on specific
behaviors , identifying behavior theories and leadership styles . As a result of the difficulty in isolating key
behavioral patterns , researchers focused on contingency and situational theories , attempting to identify
leadership behaviors that would succeed in specific
situations . 
More recent theories attempt to describe leadership
effectiveness in terms of exchanges between leaders
and followers . Researchers continue to offer models , 
approaches , and perspectives that build on previous
studies and advocate for additional inquiry . Recent
theories examine leadership and organizational
change and the importance of vision shared by leaders
and followers . 
Theories , models , approaches , styles , and perspectives are all terms used in the literature . While most
theories focus on one variable as being significant , 
the research includes varying assumptions and understandings about leadership effectiveness . Studies of
theories have been prolific and encompass a variety of
views , with early theories still resurfacing in both current literature and practice . 
DISTINGUISHING THEORY FROM STYLE
While some leadership theories provide explanations
based on traits , behaviors , situations , and processes , 
leadership styles refer to the patterns of behavior
demonstrated by leaders as they influence others , with
leadership styles representing one of four broad strands
of leadership research . Other strands include leadership
traits , behaviors , and situational contingencies . The
styles approach provides a framework for assessing
leadership behavior , and many studies on style attempt
to measure preferred leadership behaviors so leaders
can assess their behaviors and determine how to change
or improve their styles . Leadership styles address a
continuum from leaders being directive to facilitating
delegation . Directive behaviors assist followers in
accomplishing goals as leaders direct , clarify , and define
direction . Delegation behaviors involve leaders helping
followers feel comfortable about themselves and the
situation related to the task . 
CLASSIFYING THEORIES
Researchers often use concepts of leadership definitions to classify theories . Both definitions and classification methods vary widely . Common methods to
586———Leadership , Theories Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 586
classify theories include trait theories , behavior
theories , attribution theories , contingency theories , 
situational theories , and transformational theories . 
Another approach relates to variables that influence
leadership effectiveness , including categories about
leader , follower , and situational characteristics . Other
approaches focus on leader-centered or followercentered behaviors , use universal or contingent descriptors , and conceptualize behaviors as descriptive or
prescriptive . 
Great Man and Trait Theories
Earliest theories focused exclusively on leader
characteristics and neglected behaviors , interactions
of leaders with followers , and situational variables . 
Although a century old , concepts from these theories
still appear in current educational and corporate settings , as seen in job selection processes and professional development settings . These theories are generally
described as great man and trait theories . 
The notion of being a born leader captures the
essence of great man theories . Leaders were seen as
elitists , rising to power because of superior characteristics that appealed to those waiting to be led . Leader
traits are not viewed as learned or developed but are
viewed as being present primarily at birth . Because of
innate abilities , individuals are destined to exert themselves as leaders when the need arises . Great leaders , 
like great politicians or military leaders , rise to the occasion whenever opportunity exists . 
Heredity , natural endowment , and survival of the
fittest were key concepts . Subsequent theories largely
have dispelled the notion of leadership being innate
and inherited , although great man theories still impact
current views of leadership . The impact is most apparent during heroic acts of leadership when organizations honor those who step forward in extreme crises 
( i . e .  , faltering corporations or underachieving schools ) 
and succeed in moving organizations from highly dysfunctional to highly functional in short periods of time . 
Great man theories provided a basis for the emergence
of trait theory . 
Trait Theories
Trait theories explain leadership in terms of leader
characteristics and personality , identifying certain
physical , social , and personal attributes in leaders . 
Hundreds of studies between 1930 and 1950 helped
identify characteristics to differentiate leaders from followers . Relevance was on leader selection , and emphasis was on characteristics like gender , height , energy , 
appearance , integrity , self-confidence , intelligence , 
desire to lead , and charisma . Subsequent researchers
maintained that personal characteristics could not
accurately predict leadership , and that situational variables are important to explain effectiveness , causing
researchers to reject trait theory and focus emerging
theories on behaviors and situations . 
Behavior Theories and Approaches
The next generation of theories focused on leader
behaviors and differed dramatically from the trait
approach—moving leadership conceptualization from
what a leader is to what a leader does . Studies began
to address how leaders behave with subordinates in
varied contexts . Humanistic or personal behavioral
theories are based on the development of the individual in an effective organization . Leaders by nature are
motivated , while organizations by nature are structured and controlled . Leadership is seen as observable
actions of the leader . 
Psychodynamic and
Psychoanalytic Theories
These theories explain leader behaviors related to
associations , interpretations , and analyses from early
childhood and family developments , and are grounded
primarily in work from Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung . 
Popular interpretations perceive leaders as father
figures , noting that the father of the family defined the
leader ’ s psychological world . Mother figures were also
seen as playing a key role , with either strong mothers
or absent fathers impacting the leadership role . 
Psychohistorians were influenced by psychoanalysts in attempts to explain the behavior of historical
political leaders , who were studied in terms of childhood deprivations , cultural environments , parental
relationships , and psychodynamic needs of followers . 
Psychoanalytical theory was also used to explain the
interaction of leader personalities and how situations
are dramatized in times of crises . 
Two-Factor Leadership Theorists
These theorists maintain that leadership is a combination of two kinds of behaviors and that a leader ’ s
Leadership , Theories Of———587
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 587
effectiveness depends on using the best blend of behaviors appropriate for the situation . The two dimensions
of behaviors addressed leaders being ( 1 ) task focused , 
by initiating structure towards goal attainment , or 
( 2 ) relationship focused , by showing consideration for
people . Leaders were believed to favor one particular
dimension , although they did not function in one
dimension exclusively . 
Early work from Ohio State in the 1940s stressed
leader behaviors over traits and identified two-driver
dimensions of leadership behavior : initiating structure
and consideration . Concurrently , researchers at the
University of Michigan studied leader behavior on group
performance , grounding the dimensions to production
orientation and employee orientation . The second generation of Michigan studies identified the two dimensions
as being independent , in that leaders could behave along
both dimensions at the same time . The most widespread
application of the two-factor theory became identified
with the managerial or leadership grid , used widely in
training and development settings . The two dimensions
address how leaders align behaviors with concern for
production and concern for people to achieve organizational goals . There are limitations to this approach , notably
a failure to connect leadership behaviors to subordinate
performance outcomes . Other critics say that this
approach is not a refined theory , since it doesn ’ t provide
a well-organized prescription for leader behaviors . 
Douglas McGregor suggested Theory X and
Theory Y as types of leader behaviors , with Theory X
based on the assumption that people are passive and
resistant to organizational needs , thereby calling for
the leader to direct and motivate people . Theory Y is
based on the assumption that people are highly motivated and desire responsibility , with the leader offering organizational conditions so followers can fulfill
needs while achieving organizational goals . 
Chris Argyris proposed a maturity-immaturity theory
identifying a fundamental conflict between organizations and individuals , because the nature of the organization is to achieve goals by structuring members ’ roles
and controlling their performances . On the other hand , 
individuals tend to be self-directive and seek fulfillment by exercising initiative and responsibility . Argyris
proposed that organizations are effective when leaders
create situations for followers to make creative contributions as a result of their own internal needs . 
Paul Hersey and Kenneth Blanchard presented
a life cycle of leadership theory , where leader behaviors are related to the experiential and motivational
maturity of subordinates . In this theory , leaders gradually decrease emphasis on task structures as subordinates mature . 
SITUATIONAL LEADERSHIP THEORY
Situational theorists studied environmental contexts
that promote leader emergence—noting that circumstances , time , and location largely determine when , 
how , and who will emerge as a leader . The theory
directly contrasts trait theories that exclude leaders
from the situational contexts . 
Personal situational theorists proposed that it is an
interaction of personal traits and situational factors
that explain leader emergence , maintaining that neither
traits nor situations alone account for leadership . 
Various theorists stressed the construct of fitting leader
talents to the demands brought by particular situations
and the importance of followers to the leader emergence , noting that theories must address the interplay
of situations and the individuals . The theories have
widespread application in predicting leadership potential and in matching individuals ’ background experiences , traits , and skills to job requirements . 
Led by Fred E . Fiedler , contingency theory was a
primary theory for over 40 years , stressing that the situation imposes demands on leaders who operate from
two primary constructs—that of being task oriented or
being relations oriented . These constructs were determined by how leaders judge their least preferred
coworker . The concept of situational favorableness
related to a leader ’ s ability to be held in esteem by followers have legitimacy and power and lead a task that
was structured , clear , and easily solved . Theorists
maintained that task-oriented leaders succeed in situations with either high or low favorableness , and
relations-oriented leaders succeed most in situations
between the favorableness extremes . 
Interaction theories grounded in social learning
explain leadership through the lens of the leader-subordinate relationships . Theories are characterized by
leader emergence resulting from interactions between
demands of the individual and the situation . Leaders
demonstrate behaviors based on how they perceive
that others see them as leaders . 
Attainment theories focus on explaining who
emerges as a leader and why . One theory describes
how leaders emerge in situations where tasks of the
group are interdependent and are related to the solution of shared problems . The concept of structured
588———Leadership , Theories Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 588
interaction or predictable interaction is essential . 
The role structure of the group and the leader ’ s role
are defined by organizational expectations . Leadership
effectiveness becomes a function of group members ’ 
perceptions of their freedom to accept or reject the
interaction structure . 
Ralph Stogdill developed an expectancy-reinforcement theory to explain the emergence and persistence of
leadership in unstructured groups . He defined leadership emergence as the extent to which a leader initiates
and maintains structure in interactions and expectations
with the group . In another valence model , an emergent
leader is one who emerges and is able to perform roles
and functions that encourage participation of members
and enable the group to achieve its goals . 
The managerial leadership approach is based on an
authority relationship between the leader and subordinate , with the model including role definitions , hierarchical structures , and patterns of interaction . Leadership
and management are used interchangeably , with the
leader seen as impersonal , formal , and task centered . 
The model suggests a structural approach to change , 
with unilateral decision making , and subordinate
compliance leading to effective results . Several different
leadership styles can be identified within management
techniques , with each technique using leadership in a
different way . Distinctions between management and
leadership have been the focus of researchers over the
years , despite the caution that stereotypical labeling
of people as managers or leaders is too simplistic . 
Researchers usually attempt to make the distinction in
terms of the person instead of the process . 
Political theorists attempt to explain leadership in
terms of influence and power . Political leadership
is the ability to impress the will of the leader on those
being led and to induce obedience , respect , loyalty , 
and cooperation . Leadership is expressed in terms of
the power to command or the ability to dominate . 
Reward and implicit coercion are the bases of
power . Power is exercised in an institutional environment based on either authority , prestige , or both , 
including referent and expert power as two elements
that comprise prestige power in organizations . The
power to influence , which can be exerted downward , 
laterally , or upward , stems from three sources : position , 
personal , and political means . 
Reinforced change theory rests on the notion that
through their efforts , leaders change the motivation , 
understanding , and behavior of other group members
to bring about successful organizational change . In
this theory , congruence is a key dimension for leader
success , and incongruence is viewed as bringing conflict and failure . Leaders are successful based on the
degree to which followers ’ expectations for rewards
and punishment are met . The theory lays groundwork
for the path-goal theory . 
Path-goal theory explains how leaders motivate followers to achieve work-related goals . Theorists applied
the central theme of expectancy theory to understand
how leaders clarify goals and incentives for followers
and identify work behaviors needed to reach desired
goals . Leaders motivate followers psychologically
by enhancing their desire to work for rewards , with
rewards resting under the control of the leader . 
Subordinates become satisfied by gaining rewards for
performance along the desired “ path ” of behaviors
identified by the leader . Leader behaviors are determined by variables including role clarity , environmental factors , and individual differences . Although
path-goal theory has not been widely applied in practice to leadership development activities , the theory
provides recommendations about how leaders should
act in various situations . The theory gives leaders the
opportunity to assess situational work needs and to
adjust leadership approaches based on needs—relying
on the assumption that a primary goal is for leaders to
move subordinates towards work goal attainment . 
Leader-member exchange ( LMX ) theory , also
known as vertical dyad linkage theory , examines the
role-making processes between leaders and each subordinate . Emphasis is on how leaders develop different
exchange relationships over time with subordinates . 
The premise is that most leaders establish a special
relationship with a small number of trusted subordinates . These relationships are usually formed on the
basis of personal compatibility and subordinate competence and dependability . 
Studies have varied as a result of the theory ’ s definition . LMX is sometimes defined to include mutual
trust , respect , affection , support , and loyalty . The
theory is considered as a universal theory with little
focus on situational variables that impact the leadermember exchange process . Gary Yukl advocates that
more longitudinal research is needed to discover how
exchange relationship evolves over time . 
As one of two theoretical models in LMX , the leader ’ s
attribution about subordinates model describes the
cognitive processes used by leaders to determine
the reasons for subordinate performance . The leader
assesses performance based on interpretation of the
Leadership , Theories Of———589
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 589
subordinate ’ s behavior and performance . Whereas
the subordinate ’ s attributions about the leader model
focuses on subordinates ’ interpretations of the leader ’ s
actions and behaviors . 
Democratic and participative leadership theory
involves leaders using various decision procedures
that include follower input . Leaders usually consult
with subordinates and integrate their suggestions into
decisions , accommodating multidirectional communication with subordinates . With these theories , the
organization is viewed as a democratic network , sharing power among followers and leaders . 
Victor H . Vroom and P . W . Yetton ’ s model is closely
aligned to participative leadership and supports the
notion that a major objective of the leader is to empower
others . Supportive leadership is viewed as essential for
participative leadership . The research on participative
leadership accentuates the leader ’ s role and perspective
in sharing power . Group members may be involved in
decision making or consultation . The notion of participative leadership has become increasingly popular in
recent literature , and is sometimes described as cooperative or distributed leadership . 
Team leadership theory relates to working with
organizational teams and has become an important
research focus in the past decade , fueled mostly by the
shifting structure of the American workplace and the
emphasis on teams in achieving goals . Earliest
research in the 1940s dealt with understanding groups
from a social science perspective , but research was
not conducted on long-term groups , did not take into
account leadership interplay , and did not inform reallife application for work groups . Working with teams
is viewed as a way to distribute leadership functions
beyond the shoulders of the formal leader . As a result , 
the function of group leadership becomes complex . 
Recent research focuses on the role of the leader in
helping the team accomplish its task , maintain itself , 
and function effectively . Team leadership has not been
researched fully or tested in practical settings . 
Critical theorists maintain that oppressed groups
in society , who often believe that systems are in their
own best interests , sometimes support institutionalized oppression by those in power . In this theory , 
leaders sometimes manipulate beliefs and values of
followers to maintain influence . Although this behavior may seem contrary to what would be expected
regarding leadership theory , theorists maintain it is
important to understand the manipulation of meaning by
leaders and leaders ’ abilities to convince subordinates
that actions are in their best interests as a way to keep
subordinate perceptions aligned with leader desires
towards goal accomplishment . 
Transactional leadership theorists , led by James
MacGregor Burns , maintain that leaders engage in relationships with subordinates for the purpose of exchanging valued things . The theory describes two types of
leader behavior to include contingent reward and passive
management by exception . Contingent reward behavior
uses rewards to influence motivation and clarification
of the work required to obtain the rewards . Passive management by exception uses contingent punishments and
other corrective action in response to deviations from
acceptable performance by followers . Active management by exception was added later as a type of transactional leadership behavior , and is described as looking
for mistakes and enforcing rules to avoid mistakes . 
Transactional leadership relies on an exchange process
concerning leader influence and creates follower compliance . The compliance may or may not include high
enthusiasm and motivation from the followers . 
EMERGENCE OF RECENT THEORIES
Differing from earlier theories , current theories
emphasize the leader ’ s behaviors related to leading
vision , the emotional appeal of vision to followers , 
and the influence of high-level leaders on organizational change and performance . 
Charismatic leadership theory identifies charisma
as a personality characteristic that gives leaders exceptional influence over others . Leader behaviors include
achievement orientation , high energy levels , confidence , consideration for followers , and a high need for
social influence . Theorists stressed the importance of
leaders being moral , balancing their use of power , and
influencing values , behaviors , and overall performance
of followers by gaining loyalty and admiration . From
an emotional perspective , followers see that leader
behaviors inspire completion of organizational mission . The intense loyalty to leaders can be misguided
by charismatic leaders who could use their influence
for immoral or evil purposes . Charismatic leaders may
generate integrations of institutions and loyalties or
may engender opposition movements . Some scholars
believe that support and loyalty from followers is at the
base of intense love for charismatic leaders—since followers view charismatic leaders as superhumans . 
Recent theorists contend that charismatic leadership needs alignment with situational variables . The
590———Leadership , Theories Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 590
theory suggests a return to principles of trait theory , 
noting that leadership behaviors result from innate
characteristics . It has been noted that charismatic
leaders emerge most often in weak rather than in
strong situations and that charismatic leadership can
alter self-concepts of followers and attempts to link
followers to the organizational identity . 
While further research on charismatic leadership is
needed , the theory does provide an explanation of the
marked emotional impact that some leaders have on
followers . The concept of charisma has been embedded in a component of transformational leadership
identified as idealized influence . 
Symbolic leadership theory involves the signals to
others of what is important in the organization . These
leaders create and communicate a vision for followers , 
making clear to subordinates the connections between
what they do and how it fits toward the achievement
of excellence in the organization . 
Transformation leadership theory is based on ideas of
James MacGregor Burns and later supported by empirical research by Bernard M . Bass . In this approach , 
leaders attempt to change and transform individuals—
moving both themselves and others to a higher level of
motivation and performance . As a change-oriented
theory , transformational leadership is broad in perspective and is one of the current approaches to leadership
that has been researched and applied extensively across
numerous organizational structures . Transformational
leadership involves followers becoming motivated as a
result of feeling trust , admiration , loyalty , and respect
toward the leader . The leader transforms and motivates
followers by inducing them to transcend their own selfinterests to achieve organizational visions and goals . 
Followers become more aware of the importance of task
outcomes and become more productive . 
Many researchers have developed numerous surveys
to assess aspects of transformational leadership , 
focusing primarily on leader behavior and linking
motivation of followers to performance . While the
theory provides new insights , some contend that it is
necessary to examine group and organizational-level
processes in order to determine a leader ’ s long-term
effectiveness . Strengths include the extensive nature
of the research , the theory ’ s alignment with common
beliefs held about the role of visionary leadership , and
the notion that leadership can emerge from others outside the formal leader . 
Feminist leadership theories focus on leader behavior based on the demographic characteristic of gender
dynamics . Some researchers have found that women
use a more participative and a less autocratic or directive leadership style . Females may emphasize relational
communication goals in their interactions with subordinates . Researchers tend to examine ways women
respond as leaders , the differences in leadership
behaviors and effectiveness of men and women , and
questions regarding why women leaders exist in small
numbers . 
Carol Shakeshaft has contended that research
findings that show no distinctions between males and
females in leadership roles are flawed because a White
male model has served as a conceptual framework . 
Shakeshaft offers that the work of female leaders has
five major elements :  ( 1 ) relationships with others ,  ( 2 ) 
teaching and learning ,  ( 3 ) building community ,  ( 4 ) 
awareness of their status , and ( 5 ) the line that separates
their public and private lives . 
The cultural leadership approach is viewed by Edgar
Schein as a way to identify basic assumptions and patterns invented , discovered , or developed by groups and
taught to new members as the correct way to behave in
the organization . Organizations are viewed as cultural
entities , where meaning from behavior is more important than the behaviors . Thomas J . Sergiovanni and John
E . Corbally argue that no one theory can define or predict the best leadership situations , arguing that a total
reconceptualization of leadership should occur . The
next conception of leadership should focus on building
identity , increasing understanding , and making the work
of others more meaningful . 
A decade of research about theories along with
popular publications provide avenues for ongoing discussion and study of leadership . Theories have been
explained and critiqued in numerous ways , and various frameworks have been created to classify and
draw linkages and contrasts among the theories—
ranging from such theories as great man to transformational leadership theories . Research literature
includes explanations of leadership traits , behaviors , 
situations , and modern concepts about the role of the
leader involved in complex organizational change . 
Serving as tributaries to the body of knowledge about
leadership , historical and modern-day theoretical concepts about leadership are being applied in current
organizations . The primary intent is to apply theory to
connect leadership effectiveness to results and goal
attainment . 
—Frankie K . Williams , Diane Ricciardi , 
and Richard Blackbourn
Leadership , Theories Of———591
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 591
See also Barnard , Chester I .  ; Burns , James MacGregor ; 
charisma , of leaders ; Clark , Septima ; contingency theories ; 
creativity , in management ; critical theory ; Cubberley , 
Ellwood ; DeBono , Edward ; DuBois , W . E . B .  ; feminism and
theories of leadership ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; governance ; great man theory ; Halpin , Andrew
William ; leadership , complex theory of ; leadership , distributed ; leadership effectiveness ; leadership styles ; Machiavelli , 
Niccolò ; management theories ; Mann , Horace ; McGregor , 
Douglas ; Montessori , Maria ; organizational theories ; pathgoal leadership theory ; Plato ; Plutarch ; power ; resources
management ; theory movement , in educational administration ; Theory X , Theory Y ; trait theory ; transformational leadership ; Washington , Booker T .  ; women in educational
leadership ; Woodson , Carter G .  ; Young , Ella Flagg
Further Readings and References
Argyris , C .  ( 1973 )  . Personality and organization theory revisited . Administrative Science Quarterly , 18 , 141–167 . 
Bass , B .  ( 1997 )  . Does the transactional-transformational paradigm transcend organizational and national boundaries ? 
American Psychologist , 52 , 130–139 . 
Bogotch , I .  ( 2005 )  . A history of public school leadership : The
first century , 1837–1942 . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 7–33 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Brower , R .  ,  & Balch , B .  ( 2005 )  . Transformational leadership 
& decision-making schools . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Crow , G .  ,  & Grogan , M .  ( 2005 )  . The development of leadership thought and practice in the United States . In F . English 
( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership 
( pp . 362–379 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Fiedler , F .  , Chemers , M .  ,  & Mahar , L .  ( 1976 )  . Improving leadership effectiveness : The LEADER MATCH concept . 
New York : Wiley . 
Hersey , P .  ,  & Blanchard , K .  ( 1972 )  . The management of
change : Change and the use of power . Training & 
Development Journal , 26 ( 1 )  , 6–10 . 
Shakeshaft , C .  ( 1987 )  . Women in educational administration . 
Newbury Park , CA : Sage . 
Wheatly , M .  ( 1992 )  . Leadership and the new science : 
Learning about organization from an orderly universe . San
Francisco : Berrett-Koehler . 
Yukl , G .  ( 2002 )  . Leadership in organizations ( 5th ed .  )  . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
 LEADERSHIP EFFECTIVENESS
Effective leaders carry the dreams of others to the
finish line . The history of effective leadership is laden
with inspiring tales of prophets , explorers , military
heroes , athletes , scientists , and educators . Effective
leaders have shaped nations , corporations , education
systems , and the lives of millions of people . From
ancient times to the present , observers remain perplexed
about the actual essence of effective leadership and how
to teach it . While researchers report multiple studies
about leadership effectiveness , they find that myth
and historical accounts of historical figures influence the
definitions and characteristics of effective leaders . 
Warren Bennis and Burt Nanus found 350 definitions of
leadership in the literature , and others challenge the lingering belief that personal physical , gender , and personality traits determine successful leadership . Physical
size is a factor in athletics and other endeavors that require
strength and agility , but weight , height , race , gender , and
personality traits are not dominant factors in determining effective leadership . 
Mother Teresa and Mohandas Gandhi were not tall , 
imposing persons , but their spiritual and intellectual
gifts made them effective , caring leaders in the eyes of
the world . These and others have modeled and helped
transform the archaic view of top-down rule by stoic
leaders toward bottom-up team builders in empowered
organizations stressing relationships . The traditional
top-down controlling bureaucratic model is being
replaced by organizations with effective leaders with
vision and selflessness . Most Fortune 500 companies , 
top 10 universities , and exceptional school districts
have moved away from well-oiled , predictable , clockwork systems with rigid line-and-organizational charts
with isolated executives making decisions in secret . 
Larry Hirschorn ’ s 1997 postmodern premise is
that there is no single best way to organize schools for
success . He and other transformers realize that centralization of authority is no longer the best structure
in contemporary school organizations . To model shared
leadership , the superintendent of schools , central office
staff , and principals empower teacher leaders to guide
colleagues to make site-based decisions about new
personnel , curriculum , and selected budget items . 
Effective school leaders stress professional development for all staff members in the areas of servant leadership , delegation , communication , and the sharing of
data for district , campus , and student performance . 
The origins of transforming school organizations
toward relationships and team building are found
in the early works by Hemphill and Coons , who , in
1950 , distinguished the difference between leading
and administering . Later , Gordon Donaldson believed
that contemporary school administrators must take
people beyond outdated administrative practices to
592———Leadership Effectiveness
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 592
mobilize staff practices and beliefs so that the school
fulfills its vision and mission for all children . James
MacGregor Burns calls these changes toward more
human organizations transformational leadership that
helps employees find fulfillment in the workplace . 
Leadership studies have been divided into five
themes :  ( 1 ) leadership as personal quality ,  ( 2 ) leadership as a type of behavior ,  ( 3 ) leadership depending on
the situation ,  ( 4 ) leadership as relational , and ( 5 ) leadership as a moral quality for systemic improvement . 
John Hoyle recently added a sixth theme—leadership
as a force of love and spirituality . 
Leadership as a personal quality is a remnant of
the great man theories of the 1950s , when personality
traits and other human capabilities that gave individuals advantage over others dominated the literature
on leadership . In 1981 , Ralph Stogdill classified these
personal qualities or traits as capacities in intelligence , scholarship , or athletic abilities for achievement , initiative to meet responsibilities , sociability for
participation , and socioeconomic position and popularity for status . Superintendents and principals using
this personal quality theme tend to hire only those
people who look like and act like the boss , which can
be discriminatory against women and minorities . 
Leadership as a type of behavior or activity is an
attempt to move beyond the great man habit . This
theme dominated research in educational administration in the 1960s and 1970s . John Hemphill and Alvin
Coons were pioneers in discovering the two factor
dimensions of initiating structure and consideration in
1950 . Initiating structure identified the leader ’ s skills
in developing goals , assignment of tasks , explaining
details , and communicating responsibilities of team
members . Consideration identified the leader ’ s human
side , that is , interpersonal relationships , trust , respect , 
support , and sense of caring about team members . 
These and related studies helped establish the use of
employee perceptions about leader behavior and verified two major factors of task and people orientation
that remain central to current leadership models . Wayne
Hoy and his students conducted numerous studies
linking leadership behavior to school reform , health , 
decision making , and other factors . 
Leadership depending on the situation has
been influenced by Fred Fiedler , Paul Hersey and
Ken Blanchard , Victor Vroom and R . J . House , among
others . This research focused on emerging leadership
in the context of group norms , tasks , position power , 
and leader-member relations . Since situations are
fluid , leadership strategies must be adaptive to successfully complete a team project on time and with high
quality . Hersey and Blanchard added maturity level of
the worker to the two dimensions of concern for task
completion and the worker . They reasoned that if people
lacked the skills or knowledge to complete a task , they
must be taught to do the task , inspired with a reason to
build quality into task activities , participate as a team
member , and finally delegate the task when an
employee has fully matured on the job . 
Leadership as relational stresses that leadership
and followership are inextricably linked . Rosabeth
Kanter and Amitai Etzioni and others provide keys
into the understanding of the use of power and influence in organizations , and how power relationships
are displayed in corporate and school life . School
superintendents are often viewed as the king on the
hill who have lost touch with the peasants doing the
real work of teaching , and the personality of schools
varies widely according to interpersonal relationships
and the people skills of the principal . 
Leadership as a moral quality for systemic improvement has taken center stage in leadership research
and professional development . The ideas of Thomas
Sergiovanni , Lee Bolman , Terry Deal , and others have
nurtured ideas on servant and transformational leadership and the importance of a moral compass for more
caring and community-centered workplaces . Effective
moral leaders help create shared visions and respect for
the values of others in the organization . A growing area
of inquiry on social justice as a moral quality focuses
on supporting the theories of leadership that will guide
leaders to shape schools and communities toward greater
equity and justice through educational programs . 
Leadership and the force of love and spirituality
goes a step beyond moral quality and servant leadership . In today ’ s schools , effective leaders are finding
that unconditional love for staff , parents , and students
is the quality needed to find solutions for human frailties and system failures . Unselfish , loyal , and benevolent concern for the good of others—even the
unlovable—is key to effective leadership in today ’ s
schools . John Hoyle and Michael Fullan suggest that
school administrators apply love as the key to high performance and problem solutions . The concept of spiritual leadership in educational administration is new . 
Effective leaders have a sense of spiritual awareness
beyond mere religious doctrine to help gain a sense
of profound connection to human issues and problems
beyond themselves . Spiritual leaders sense a power
Leadership Effectiveness———593
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 593
greater than mere human knowledge and experience . 
Margaret Wheatley observed that those who speak
about a vocation or calling are spiritual thinkers . 
Effective leadership has been transformed in many
ways since the behavioral / theory movement in the mid1950s . Effective leaders understand that cooperation
cannot be forced on others , but leading others to destinations beyond their imaginations and gaining their
commitment to shared goals can capture cooperation to
seek higher goals for themselves and for children . 
—John R . Hoyle
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; authority ; 
bureaucracy ; capacity building , of organizations ; charisma , 
of leaders ; Chavez , Cesar Estrada ; civil rights movement ; 
communication , theories in organizations ; contingency
theories ; empowerment ; ethos , of organizations ; feminism
and theories of leadership ; great man theory ; human
resource development ; leadership , task-oriented ; leadership , theories of ; leadership styles ; line and staff concept ; 
locus of control ; management by objectives ; management
theories ; morality , moral leadership ; personality ; role
model ; stewardship ; superintendency ; transformational
leadership ; values of organizations and leadership ; vulnerability thesis , of superintendents
Further Readings and References
Bennis , W .  ,  & Nanus , B .  ( 1985 )  . Leaders : The strategy for taking charge . New York : Harper & Row . 
Bolman , L .  ,  & Deal , T .  ( 1997 )  . Reframing organizations : 
Artistry , choice , and leadership ( 2nd ed .  )  . San Francisco : 
Jossey-Bass . 
Hersey , P .  ,  & Blanchard , K .  ( 1988 )  . Management of organizational behavior : Utilizing human resources ( 5th ed .  )  . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Hirschorn , L .  ( 1997 )  . Reworking authority : Leading and
following in a post-modern organization . Cambridge , MA : 
MIT Press . 
House , R .  ( 1996 )  . Path-goal theory of leadership : Lessons , 
legacy , and a reformulated theory . Leadership Quarterly , 
3 ( 2 )  , 323–352 . 
Hoy , W .  ,  & Miskel , C .  ( 2004 )  . Educational administration : 
Theory , research , and practice ( 7th ed .  )  . Boston : McGrawHill . 
Hoyle , J .  ( 2002 )  . Leadership and the force of love : Six keys to
motivating with love . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Sergiovanni , T .  ( 1992 )  . Moral leadership : Getting to the heart
of school improvement . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Stogdill , R .  ( 1981 )  . Traits of leadership : A follow-up to
1970 . In B . Bass ( Ed .  )  , Stogdill ’ s handbook of leadership 
( pp . 73–97 )  . New York : Free Press . 
Wheatley , M .  ( 2002 )  . Spirituality in turbulent times . School
Administrator , 8 ( 59 )  , 42–48 . 
 LEADERSHIP STYLES
The mystery of why one leader ’ s style is more effective than another ’ s is unsolved . Leadership style consists of a leader ’ s general personality , demeanor , and
communication patterns in guiding others toward
reaching organizational or personal goals . Leadership
style research has been dominated by self-report perceptions of subordinates about their leader ’ s behavior
patterns in decision making , interpersonal relations , 
planning , instructional leadership , and management
efficiency . Among widely used instruments to assess
leadership style are the organizational climate description questionnaire ( OCDQ )  , leadership behavior
description questionnaire ( LBDQ )  , and the organizational health inventory ( OHI )  . These instruments
gather faculty and staff perceptions of the leadership
style of the principal and other organizational dynamics in a school organization . The results of these perceptions have been helpful to principals who may see
themselves as democratic , inclusive leaders , while the
data reveal an authoritarian , aloof bureaucrat . A principal may organize for and believe in site-based decision
making , but subordinates ’ perceptions may reveal that
the principal “ owns ” the site and makes all decisions . 
The literature reveals little empirical research about
why some leadership styles in certain situations are
triumphant successes and others are dismal failures . 
Observers have pondered why some successful leaders
use a consistent style in all situations and others use a
more situational style . Research is silent in analyzing
leadership styles across schools , school leaders , and
situations , but there is general consensus that some
leaders are better than others in reading the environment and adjusting their style to address issues . 
Categories of leadership styles have increased in
the postmodern literature . Among the more recent
categories are charismatic leadership , social justice
leadership , gender and race leadership , moral leadership , and spiritual leadership . The four rather global
categories of leadership styles chosen for this entry , 
however , are authoritarian , participative , transactional , 
or transformational . 
Authoritarian leaders employ coercive tactics to
enforce rules , use Machiavellian cunning to manipulate people and decision making , and reward loyalty
over merit . Control is the primary management strategy employed by authoritarian leaders . This form
of leadership emphasizes objectivity in the workplace , 
tends to be impervious to human problems , is insensitive
594———Leadership Styles
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 594
to race and gender , and displays little emotion or affection toward employees . Douglas McGregor ’ s Theory
X becomes the authoritarian ’ s motif , believing that
people must be forced to work , closely supervised , and
rewarded or punished based on individual productivity . 
They believe in a top-down , line-and-staff organizational chart with clear levels of authority and reporting
processes . Fred Fiedler found that authoritarian leaders
can be viewed as successful in certain task situations—
allowing for the extremes of consideration and ruthlessness , depending on the situation . 
School boards looking for a “ take charge ” superintendent encourage authoritarian leadership types . When
the focus is primarily on high stakes test scores and a
board of education ’ s mandate to “ right the ship ,  ” 
authoritarian leadership will rule and will be rewarded
throughout the entire school district . Research is silent
in analyzing leadership styles across school leaders and
situations , but there is a general consensus that some
leaders are better than others in reading the environment and adjusting their style to address issues . 
Regardless of more recent democratic leadership styles , 
scientific management and the ghost of Frederick Taylor
continue to prevail in many schools across America . 
Excessive accountability demands by legislators , 
school boards , and communities can lead to top-down
authoritarian environments . 
Participative leaders strive to move away from the
authoritarian boss-led mode of leadership to the human
side of the enterprise espoused in the 1930s by Mary
Parker Follett , Elton Mayo , Frederick Roethlisberger , 
and others . They found that productivity and human
relationships were closely linked , and opened inquiry
into informal structures and social systems . Follett ’ s
vision guided her to challenge the grip of scientific
management on early twentieth-century industry . She
believed managers should treat workers with dignity
and change the workplace from strict authoritarian
control over workers to a more collegial team concept . 
Chester I . Barnard in 1938 viewed successful organizations as humans working together to reach goals rather
than impersonal structures to force productivity . These
and other pioneers espousing participative leadership
viewed organizations as social systems in which
people ’ s social needs were the most important factors
in motivating workers to higher productivity . Later , 
Douglas McGregor , Rosabeth Kanter , Tom Sergiovanni , 
Terry Deal , and many others stressed shared decision
making and group participation in building productive
organizations centered on people and their needs . These
writers greatly influenced the creation of site-based
decision making in public education . Without a sitebased approach to problem solving , organizations
become tightly controlled by rules and policies that are
not conducive to effective teamwork . When the communication pattern is top to bottom and ruled by the
chain of command , teams become guided missiles for
management . These missiles are told when to fire , how
to fly , and where to strike . If the team missiles hit the
wrong target , management blames the teams for the
failures . Participative leadership , however , leads to delegation and communication about goals , processes of
goal accomplishment , respect for diversity in team
members , and a collective effort to seek quality in each
task and final product . This collaborative process brings
a family atmosphere to the workplace and creates
respect for the contributions by each member . The X
generation believes in the participative leadership style , 
provided they have the support and opportunities from
upper management to contribute to and influence team
outcomes . 
Transactional leaders attempt to balance initiating
structure in order to get things done with meeting the
needs of the people while things are getting done . This
type of leadership requires the integration of organizational goals and expectations with the needs of the
people doing the work . This style of leadership is
based in the dual organization where the bureaucratic
side conflicts with the professional one . The GezelsGuba social systems model is widely known but abandoned in some recent textbooks . The model presents
the two dimensions : idiographic ( the needs of individuals ) and nomothetic ( the goals of the organization ) 
and transactions between the two . This model depicts
the dynamics of balancing the needs and productivity
of the organization with the needs , personality , and
dispositions of people doing the work . The workers
may feel that the production goals of management
are beyond the ability and energy of the workers . This
dynamic is found in organizations of all kinds and is
important for management to understand for morale
and production reasons . Transactional leaders play the
tit-for-tat game of rewarding employees as long as
they are producing what management needs . James
MacGregor Burns explains that transactional leaders
motivate workers by offering rewards for what the
leaders need done . According to Robert Owens , this
popular form of leadership is an example of quid pro
quo ; leaders offer the lure of employment and security
in return for collaboration and assistance , for example . 
Leadership Styles———595
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 595
Transactional leadership reflects the reality of the
workplace and continues to be the predominant model
in most organizations , including public schools . 
Transformational leaders demonstrate the elixir of
human understanding . If applied with integrity , transformational leadership can reform organizations in
magic ways . Leaders using this style create an environment where every person is empowered to fulfill his or
her highest needs and becomes a member of a productive learning community . Transformational leaders
are servants to others and guide them in creating and
embracing a vision for the organization that inspires
and brings forth top performance and creates a belief
system of integrity , a cause beyond oneself , diversity of
thought , and inclusiveness for all races and gender . 
Subsumed in this style is moral leadership , leading with
love , and spiritual leadership . Moral leadership is based
on dignity and respect for the rights of others to selfdetermination within moral bounds of the organization . 
Rather than an arbitrary set of rules to follow , moral
leadership is a covenant to do the right things for others
and live that covenant in all human interactions . Schools
living moral leadership focus on the generic child and
ensure that all staff members share in the belief that the
school family must constantly work to inspire new and
higher levels of trust and commitment to every child
and each other in the school community . 
Also linked to transformational leadership is leading with love . This leadership style reaches beyond
leading with heart , soul , and morality and moves on to
the concept of love in an attempt to reteach the lesson
of history ’ s great leaders . The most powerful leaders in
history are remembered not for their positions , wealth , 
and number of publications or position but for their
unconditional love for others . Leading with love revisits ideas that guide human kindness , social justice , and
servant leadership and rediscovers ways to replace
anger , mistrust , and hatred with love . This type of love
is unselfish , loyal , and benevolent concern for the good
of another . The Greeks used the work agape as the
highest form of love . Agape is unselfish love , love of
unlovable people , and love that overwhelms animosity
in schools and other organizations . 
Another important and emerging movement linked
to transformational leadership is leadership for social
justice . This postmodern position has heightened the
urgency for research in educational administration
to continue to reexamine its theories to ensure that
no voices have been excluded and to direct efforts to
guide superintendents , principals , and teachers in their
efforts to guide schools toward greater inclusiveness , 
equity , and justice . 
Perhaps the capstone of transformational leadership is spirituality . Deepak Chopra believes that
leaders are the symbolic soul of the organizations they
lead , that great leaders respond from the higher levels
of spirit , and that leaders grow from the inside out . 
Others writers support the proposition that spiritual
leadership calls for a power greater than mere human
knowledge and experience . The spiritual and administrative sides are of equal importance when guiding a
school or a school system dedicated to helping each
student become a successful , ethical individual . 
Spiritual leaders assert that without a spiritual side , a
leader lacks depth in understanding human motives and
can destroy organizations and innocent lives . In addition , school administrators can be spiritual leaders and
take charge of a given problem . Sometimes assertive
and forceful leadership is the only strategy for school
leaders . When students are not learning , teachers are
not teaching , administrators are not administering , 
and support staff are not supporting , the superintendent and other administrators must take charge and
create change in attitude , performance , and , if needed , 
personnel . Scholars write that spiritual leaders cannot
allow children and youth to fail , nor can they stand
idly by and ignore incompetence . To ignore children ’ s
failure and injustice and blame it on the child ’ s background or family is spiritless leadership . Spiritual
leadership is encouraging others to seek the highest
vision , reaching for the highest human endeavors , and
serving before being served . Writers concur that this
is the most sought after form of the transformational
leadership style . 
A gradual shift from top-down authoritarian to
transformational leadership is occurring in America ’ s
schools , but the need remains to conduct research that
centers on research about leadership styles , staff morale , 
and student performance . Until definitive research can
provide evidence that transformational leadership promoting equity , empowerment , morality , and love is the
superior style for all schools and school districts , 
schools will continue to be a patchwork of authoritarian , participative , transactional , and transformational
leadership styles . 
—John R . Hoyle
See also authority ; Barnard , Chester I .  ; bureaucracy ; Burns , 
James MacGregor ; capacity building , of organizations ; 
charisma , of leaders ; cognitive styles ; consideration , caring ; 
596———Leadership Styles
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 596
creativity , in management ; Follett , Mary Parker ; human
resource development ; involvement , in organizations ; leadership , system oriented ; leadership , theories of ; management theories ; McGregor , Douglas ; role model ; Taylor , 
Frederick ; Theory X , Theory Y ; transformational leadership ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Creighton , T .  ( 2004 )  . Leading from below the surface . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Dimmock , C .  ,  & Walker , A .  ( 2005 )  . Educational leadership : 
Culture and diversity . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Fiedler , F .  ( 1973 )  . Recent developments in research on the
contingency model . In E . Fleishman & J . Hunt ( Eds .  )  , 
Current developments in the study of leadership . Carbondale : 
Southern Illinois University Press . 
Hoyle , J .  ( 2002 )  . Leadership and the force of love . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Marshall , C .  , Tillman , L .  , Lopez , G .  , Larson , C .  , Capper , C .  ,  & 
Scheurich , J .  ( 2003 )  . Leadership for social justice : 
Identifying the terrain . Crafting a mission , and purpose . In
F . Lunnenburg & C . Carr ( Eds .  )  , Shaping the future : Policy , 
partnerships , and emerging perspectives . The 11th Yearbook
of the National Council of Professors of Educational
Administration ( pp . 85–98 )  . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Press . 
McGregor , D .  ( 1964 )  . The human side of enterprise . New York : 
McGraw-Hill . 
Ogawa , R .  ( 2005 )  . Leadership as social construct : The expression of human agency within organizational constraint . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 89–108 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Sergiovanni , T .  ( 1999 )  . Rethinking leadership . Arlington
Heights , IL : Skylight Professional Development . 
Snowden , P .  ,  & Gorton , R .  ( 2002 )  . School leadership and
administration ( 6th ed .  )  . Boston : McGraw-Hill . 
 LEAGUE OF UNITED
LATIN AMERICAN CITIZENS
The League of United Latin American Citizens 
( LULAC ) was founded in 1929 in Corpus Christi , 
Texas . LULAC was actually the consolidation of three
previous Mexican American organizations in existence at the time . LULAC is concerned with the
economic condition , educational attainment , political
influence , health , and civil rights of Hispanic Americans
through advocacy and community-centered programs
that exist in a nationwide network of 600 local councils . LULAC develops and works toward implementing a national platform of activities and programs via
its national assembly and conventions . 
The most recent LULAC national legislative
platform endorsed ( a ) supporting affirmative action ,  ( b ) 
the use of adjusted census figures for redistricting purposes as well as for the distribution of federal funds for
the states ,  ( c ) voter registration , encouraging all eligible
immigrants to become U . S . citizens ,  ( d ) reform of the
criminal justice system to reduce the numbers of Latinos
who are incarcerated and eliminate the death penalty ,  ( e ) 
ending child labor ,  ( f ) legislation that enables Latinos to
obtain driver ’ s licenses ,  ( g ) diversity in the workplace ,  
( h ) expanding federal support to stimulate Latino
businesses , job growth , and training ,  ( i ) expanding
the number of enterprise zones along the border ,  ( j ) the
renegotiation of trade agreements that will raise the
standard of living for labor and protect the environment ,  
( k ) legislation that will decrease Latino dropout rates in
schools ,  ( l ) the improvement of public schools and the
admission of undocumented immigrant children with
good records and moral character to be admitted to colleges and universities and obtain citizenship ,  ( m ) a
national holiday in honor of Cesar Chavez ,  ( n ) stronger
measures and prosecution of those committing hate
crimes ,  ( o ) universal health care ,  ( p ) expansion of insurance coverage for children in poverty ,  ( q ) an increase in
the number of representative Latinos in federal employment ,  ( r ) expansion of affordable housing ,  ( s ) an
increase in Latino-oriented programming in all facets of
the media ,  ( t ) legislation that provides for a congressionally recognized framework for the 4 million U . S . 
citizens living in Puerto Rico ,  ( u ) a guarantee to protect
the quality of life for Latino seniors , and ( v ) pay equity
for women and worker ’ s rights . 
Concurrently , LULAC opposes efforts ( a ) to prevent
the collection of data based on race and ethnicity ,  ( b ) the
exploitation of children working anywhere for low
wages and under dangerous conditions ,  ( c ) the incarceration of youth in adult prisons ,  ( d ) the growing federal
deficit ,  ( e ) national origin discrimination ,  ( f ) vouchers
for schools ,  ( g ) college entrance exams as the sole or primary determinant in the admissions process ,  ( h ) all legislation that designates English as the official language of
the United States ,  ( i ) the location of dump sites in or near
Latino communities ,  ( j ) the expansion of the agricultural
guest worker program that does not provide adequate
labor rights protections , health benefits and housing ,  ( k ) 
any effort to require hospital emergency room personnel
to check on the immigration status of patients ,  ( l ) the militarization of the border , including the use of vigilante
patrolling groups ,  ( m ) drilling for oil on federal lands , 
and ( n ) the privatization of Social Security . 
League of United Latin American Citizens———597
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 597
LULAC ’ s emphasis on education is embodied
in LULAC ’ s National Education Service Centers 
( LNESCs ) established in 1973 , an effort to educate and
prepare America ’ s future workforce by providing over
1 , 000 scholarships through the National Scholarship
Fund and helping nearly 400 , 000 students enroll in college . The core of the programs within LNESC includes
Educational Talent Search , Gear Up , Upward Bound , 
the LULAC National Scholarship Fund , the Hispanic
Leadership Opportunity Program , Science Corps , the
Washington Youth Leadership Seminar , and Young
Readers . Additional information on LULAC may be
secured online at www . lulac . org . Over the years , 
LULAC has provided funds for the legal defense of
Latinos and Latino interests and agendas in the nation . 
It was a LULAC-supported attorney who helped overthrow school segregation in Southern California in
1945 in Mendez v . Westminster , an action that predated
Brown v . Board of Education by 8 years . Newer Latino
political organizations include the Mexican American
Legal Defense Fund ( MALDEF ) and the Mexican
American Youth Organization ( MAYO )  . The newer
political awareness , militancy , and pride of the Mexican
American heritage is referred to as chicanismo . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also accountability ; adult education ; affirmative action ; 
Chavez , Cesar Estrada ; civil rights movement ; compensatory education ; critical race theory ; cross-cultural studies ; 
cultural capital ; cultural politics , wars ; desegregation , of
schools ; discipline in schools ; discrimination ; diversity ; 
elementary education ; ethnicity ; ethnocentrism ; immigration , history and impact in education ; individual differences , in children ; Latinos ; Mendez , Felicitas ; National
Assessment of Educational Progress ; Office of Economic
Opportunity ; performance assessment ; politics , of education ; power ; school districts , history and development ; 
social context ; standardized testing ; tracking , of students ; 
underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Chapa , J .  ,  & de la Rosa , B .  ( 2004 )  . Latino population growth , 
socioeconomic and demographic characteristics , and
implications for educational attainment . Education and
Urban Society , 36 ( 2 )  , 130–249 . 
Contreras , A .  ( 2004 )  . Latinos at the portal of the 21st century . 
Education and Urban Society , 36 ( 2 )  , 223–234 . 
Cortina , R .  ,  & Gendreau , M .  ( 2003 )  . Immigrants and schooling : Mexicans in New York . New York : Center for
Migration Studies . 
Garcia , E .  ( 2005 )  . Teaching and learning in two languages . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
 LEARN , OPPORTUNITY TO
Opportunity to learn refers to the degree to which
education is freely available and accessible to students
in the United States . Although it may seem self-evident that our public institutions should provide a free
and adequate education for all children and should
adjust their curriculum and teaching / learning methods
to ensure that every child has the opportunity to learn , 
this concept has always been and will probably continue to be a controversial one . The term has evolved
over the years based on changing political and economic circumstances in the country and on the extent
to which the society in general views education as a
fundamental right of all its citizens . 
HISTORICAL ROOTS
When state constitutions in the United States were created , most included the principle of free schools and
citizen education funded through taxation . Public education in the United States was founded on the belief
that in a democracy , the citizenry must have the opportunity to learn . However , this concept was not universally accepted without controversy , and there were
many arguments about whether tax dollars should support education for all and about the extent to which the
opportunity to learn should or should not be connected
to promoting Christian religious beliefs . This issue
persists today in the battle for separation of church and
state in the school curriculum and continues to impact
the degree to which citizens do or do not provide financial support for public institutions . In recent years , it
has manifested itself with calls for using tax dollars to
support private religious schools , expanding student
opportunities to learn in contexts that explicitly foster
religion in educational environments . 
In most states , public education had an uneven
beginning , with communities making individual decisions about whether schools would be formed and
who would attend them . Horace Mann , the first secretary of the State Board of Education in Massachusetts , 
is generally considered the first educator to initiate the
creation of a state system of public education . His
goal was to provide common schools in which most
children , including immigrant children , would
have the opportunity to learn . Controversy about this
inclusion and about making public schooling mandatory was loud and constant , with even those in
the immigrant community sometimes voicing their
598———Learn , Opportunity to
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 598
opposition . Arguments regarding the inclusion of
children whose parents are illegal immigrants in public
education today are extensions of this disagreement
about who should be educated using public dollars . 
Eventually , public schooling was established in all
states . It was mandatory for most , but not all students . 
Most students with disabilities were not required to
attend these schools . In the South , political and social
realities created the policies of separate but equal
schools for Black and White children . Even though
the schools were not in fact equal , the concept of providing children an equal opportunity to learn was a
theoretical notion underlying this practice . 
EXPANDING THE PARAMETERS
OF OPPORTUNITY TO LEARN
In 1954 , the Brown v . Board of Education Supreme
Court ruling that separate schools are inherently
unequal opened up a whole new framework of thinking
in which equity became more comprehensively incorporated within the concept of opportunity to learn . 
Issues of adequate funding , quality of facilities , considering cultural differences , and meeting student needs
became part of the conversation about how our society
should provide opportunities for all children to learn . 
Though serving needy children was not a new conversation ( ensuring opportunities for needy children was
discussed by Mann , Maxwell , and others in the early
1900s )  , the responsibility of the states and the nation to
provide equal opportunities for all students brought the
issue out into a much more public arena . 
In 1975 , another issue entered the national dialogue
when considering opportunities to learn when the
Education for All Handicapped Children Act , commonly called 94–142 , was passed . Among other things , 
this law held states and the nation accountable for
ensuring that children with disabilities had the opportunity to learn , stressing that appropriate accommodations must be made to ensure this goal . These children
had often been excluded from the notion and realities of
educating “ all ” students . Many were kept at home or
shunned in schools . This law forced a reexamination of
these exclusive practices . Today , the move toward
inclusion of children with disabilities in classes with
children not so classified is another part of the movement toward ensuring all children have the opportunity
to learn . This topic is filled with controversy as parents , 
teachers , students , and administrators strive to find an
appropriate balance to ensure that learning opportunities are maximized for all . 
Moving to a National Agenda
With the advent of the accountability movement in
the United States , states have begun to demand that
all children demonstrate competence at some level . 
The passage of the No Child Left Behind legislation
expanded accountability to include national regulations . This law holds schools responsible for ensuring
that all children achieve a minimum level of competency as measured by standardized tests . Under this
legislation , gaps between minority and majority race
children , between children of high and low socioeconomic levels , and between children with disabilities
and those who are not so classified are to be narrowed . 
Thus , theoretically , all children are not only to be
given the opportunity to learn , but they must achieve
at a minimum level , or serious consequences will fall
upon schools they attend . Students will be permitted
to leave those schools to attend others that appear to
be more successful in fostering student achievement . 
Arguments are being made that since all students
are being held to the same standards , they all must
have equal access to high-quality instruction in order
to ensure that they all have an equal opportunity to
learn . Some writers have suggested that mandating
that students pass tests , without ensuring that they
have had the opportunity to learn what is being tested , 
is immoral and creates an accountability system that
victimizes students . 
Closely related to the imposition of national standards , based on standardized testing , is the notion that
examining the opportunity to learn must include dealing with how students should demonstrate learning . 
The narrow system of standardized testing is being
questioned as not adequately measuring student ability or performance . Those opposing this approach to
measuring student performance suggest that discussing the opportunity to learn in the present
accountability environment , without dealing with giving students varied opportunities to demonstrate
learning , is doing a disservice to students , teachers , 
and learning and ignores the realities of student differences that must be a part of the conceptualization
of learning opportunities . 
EXAMINING FACTORS
THAT IMPACT OPPORTUNITY TO
LEARN ON AN INDIVIDUAL BASIS
Researchers are also expanding the concept of opportunity to learn by examining factors that inhibit or
Learn , Opportunity to———599
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 599
facilitate learning for students of differing backgrounds
and abilities . They have begun to uncover structural
processes within schools that appear to enhance or
limit students ’ opportunity to learn based on the types
of courses students take , particularly in high schools . 
Their research examines how learning opportunities
are distributed among students based upon whether
they are considered slow , low , or high learners . Such
issues center on whether there are differences in how
these students are taught , in the quality of the teachers
they have , and in the kinds of knowledge they have
access to . This research is tied to equity issues as
researchers suggest that denying similar learning
opportunities to students in lower-level classes hinders
their employment capacities and stifles the development of their higher order thinking skills . They suggest
that all students should be given similar learning
opportunities in order to facilitate their potential for
learning and eventually their status in life . 
Other factors being studied in terms of opportunity
to learn deal with the teaching and environmental
strategies that maximize student learning . Examining
learning styles , creating alternative teaching methods , 
constructing facilities and classroom spaces around
teaching and learning , and establishing varied classroom environments are the types of topics that are
dealt with when investigating what to consider when
dealing with providing the opportunity to learn to all . 
Another research area related to opportunity to learn
examines the extent to which students ’ past experiences and the experiences they have in their classrooms relate to their ability to learn a specific subject
such as science or mathematics or to succeed in specific learning environments such as preschool or college . Researchers have examined this issue in terms of
such things as gender differences and motivational
levels and have related them to specific subject areas
such as science , geography , and computer science to
aid educators in devising teaching / learning models
that will compensate for lack of experience and build
upon strong experiential foundations . 
When schools were established in this country , 
providing an opportunity to learn seemed like a simple
concept of providing free public education for all . 
However , differences in beliefs about the purposes of
schools and the extent to which schools must adapt in
order to meet student needs make this a complex and
difficult issue to address . While there appears to be
agreement that all children should succeed in school , 
the degree to which the society and educational leaders
are willing to ( a ) invest resources ,  ( b ) conduct research
to determine how best to teach and measure student
performance to meet individual needs , and ( c ) change
teaching / learning strategies and environments to meet
diverse needs is unknown . There is a growing body of
knowledge that suggests we must make major changes
in the teaching / learning environment and in the way in
which learning is judged if all students are to receive
an opportunity to learn . Whether this will occur is yet
to be determined . 
—Frances K . Kochan
See also accountability ; achievement gap , of students ; achievement tests ; affective domain ; at-risk students ; Black education ; class size ; classroom management ; climate , school ; 
cognition , theories of ; compensatory education ; critical race
theory ; critical thinking ; cross-cultural studies ; cultural capital ; cultural politics , wars ; curriculum , theories of ; diversity ; dropouts ; early childhood education ; equality , in
schools ; equity and adequacy of funding schools ; human
capital ; individual differences , in children ; intelligence ; 
learning environments ; Mann , Horace ; mastery learning ; 
Maxwell , William H .  ; minorities , in schools ; motivation , 
theories of ; No Child Left Behind ; performance assessment ; 
psychology , types of ; reading , history of , use in schools ; 
rural education ; special education ; standardized testing ; systemic reform ; time-on-task ; tracking , of students ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Alexander , B .  , Anderson , G .  ,  & Gallegos , B .  ( 2005 )  . 
Performance theories in education . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Ansalone , G .  ,  & Biafora , F .  ( 2004 )  . Elementary school
teachers ’ perceptions and attitudes to the educational structure of tracking . Education , 125 ( 2 )  , 249–259 . 
Bogotch , I .  ( 2005 )  . A history of public school leadership : The
first century , 1837–1942 . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 7–33 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Clements , D .  , Sarama , J .  ,  & DiBiase , A .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . 
Engaging young children in mathematics . Mahwah , NJ : 
Erlbaum . 
DeStefano , A .  , Rudestam , K .  ,  & Silverman , R .  ( 2004 )  . 
Encyclopedia of distributed learning . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Sage . 
Levstik , L .  ,  & Barton , K .  ( 2005 )  . Doing history . Mahwah , NJ : 
Erlbaum . 
Smutny , J .  ,  & von Fremd , S .  ( 2004 )  . Differentiating for the
young child . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Stone , R .  ( 2004 )  . Best teaching practices for reaching all
learners . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
600———Learn , Opportunity to
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 600
 LEARNING , ONLINE
Online learning is delivered via the Internet . Courses
or learning experiences are designed to take advantage
of being online and having a range of tools and options
not available in the same ways within a traditional
classroom . It offers a rich potential to students , and this
potential is beginning to be tapped by school leaders . 
Before online learning became widely available
and affordable , students in small high schools frequently were unable to take advanced placement
courses . They were restricted to a single foreign
language option . Often physics or other higher-level
science classes were not taught , and even years 3 and
4 of foreign languages were taught together , denying
students opportunities to engage in programs that
would enable them to be prepared for college and
career . Online learning has increased the options and
opportunities for students . 
In the academic year 2002–2003 , approximately
8 , 200 public K–12 schools had students engaged in
distance learning . These figures are from a National
Center for Education Statistics report , based on survey
data , released in March 2005 . Over three quarters of
the schools offering distance courses were high
schools . At the high school level , a large percentage of
the distance courses were advanced placement , foreign
language , or college-credit opportunities for students . 
Smaller schools and rural schools reported higher
numbers of distance courses . Recent samplings suggest that the numbers of online courses are increasing , 
with more schools providing them to students . 
Online courses may be taught through synchronous ( at
the same time ) or asynchronous ( time period set in general terms , not specific hours ) methods . Often the online
courses are a combination , providing lectures and discussion at a particular time , and further discussions and activities are provided asynchronously . Some online courses
include an opportunity to be synchronous and have visual
and sound connectivity . Many utilize a chat-type setting . 
There are increasing numbers of conference opportunities
employed within courses , depending on resources , equipment , and other considerations . As more K–12 schools
are connected to Internet2 or other powerful connections , 
these options will become common . Hybrid courses
involve multiple ways of disseminating material and
engaging students . These may include DVD-based lectures , live chat sessions , asynchronous discussions and
activities , learning objects ( including simulations )  , video
conference sessions , print materials , and even occasional
face-to-face conferences or meetings . 
Some schools establish a time within the school
day when students are engaged in online learning at
the school site , eliminating the issue of attendance
accounting . The context is a regular time and a regular
place with a teacher or paraprofessional as a support . 
Students may be taking one or more courses , and the
adult present often is not expert in any of the fields , yet
he or she is there for technology support , examinations , and general supervision . Students may or may
not have access to the course outside the context of this
daily session . Often the school , which may have the
best Internet connectivity in the area , provides priority
access for students taking online courses before and
after school in addition to within the school day . 
Many online courses are offered as if they were an
additional period before or after school but without
the place and time being designated . Students select
their own time and place to be engaged in the course . 
Frequent reports may be provided by the course
instructor to satisfy attendance requirements in the
local districts , since seat time remains the major
means of determining attendance for districts . 
There are many reasons for schools and regional
coalitions to utilize online courses . Scheduling conflicts , small and scattered populations of learners or
potential learners for a particular subject , the need to
target specific groups with specialized instruction , 
requirements to offer advanced placement courses
without adequate numbers of students and / or qualified
faculty , a desire to offer college-credit-attaining courses
without numbers or faculty , or infusing richness into
the curriculum that is not possible due to isolation
cause school leaders to consider this opportunity . There
are some schools that are using the online courses to
mitigate the limited space on the campuses due to
growth and lack of immediate funding . Others use
online courses to allow students to retake a course for a
higher grade . A few districts see online courses as a
way to offer a rich program while saving money . 
Homeschooling utilizing online courses , both
through programs connected to the public schools and
through private enterprises , increasingly is a medium
of choice for families . Sometimes this choice is based
on convenience , as in the case of families distant from
the closest schools , traveling families , or children
employed in the entertainment business , and other
times the choice is based on concern about the local
Learning ,  , Online———601
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 601
schools . Instead of being used as an addition or
enhancement to the school curriculum , these students
are educated primarily through online sources , never
visiting a school building . There is precedent for
the virtual school , such as the distance programs , 
largely radio based , utilized in remote areas of Canada
and Australia for dozens of years . 
Students whose school experience is largely an
online one are a different population from those whose
classroom experience is supplemented by online
courses . Socialization , attending to social cues , development of empathy , and similar social skills learned in
the classroom environment are not as much a part of the
online setting . Teaching cooperation and sharing , a part
of the face-to-face elementary school experience , is not
part of the online course . Collaboration and cooperative
teaching and learning is expected in well-crafted online
courses , but it is based on participants having had experience with such collaborations in a face-to-face environment . These are activities that should supplement
any online or virtual schooling program that is the primary means of providing students their education . 
Other difficulties with online teaching and learning include authenticating who is being tested and who
actually is doing the assignments , providing active
learning , meeting the needs of individual students and
their learning styles , and maintaining a highly engaged
learning situation . Teaching online is different from
teaching in a face-to-face setting . Teachers frequently
know what is happening with students in their classes
from the expressions and physical cues . Online , there
are few cues and clues to changes in attitudes unless
the work is not being done . Reaching out and encouraging is different and , often , difficult . Even when there
are sessions using video conferencing systems , the
nuances of behaviors are much more subtle than in
face-to-face settings . The key to success in the virtual
school is having engaged adults at both ends of the
teaching and learning so students know they are cared
about and that their learning is monitored . 
High-quality online teaching is not modeled after
face-to-face teaching . because the modalities for
delivering the instruction are significantly different . 
The increasing multimedia capabilities of computers
help make the online classroom more engaging and
responsive , but teaching within the online setting
requires different pedagogical acumen . Educational
organizations , whether at the school , regional , or state
level , must invest in preparing teachers to be effective
online instructors . They also must prepare students to
be effective online learners . In addition , the educational
organizations must provide support for the online
course venture . They must consider what effective
teaching online is and how to prepare teachers for the
task . In addition , they must establish ways to assess
online teaching and online courses . 
Teaching effectively online requires
• Responding frequently to posts and emails
• Extensive searching for Web-based resources
• Flexibility
• Hardware , software , and Internet competency
• Experience with course management systems as
learner in addition to instructor
• Background in information literacy , law , and ethics
• Understanding of special needs and disability issues
vis-à-vis the Web
• Ability to develop and implement student-centered
activities
• Willingness and skill to be a facilitator and guide , not
a lecturer
• Orientation toward collaboration , problem-based
learning
• Encouraging and supportive
• Understanding of Bloom ’ s taxonomy and how to
encourage students to move from knowledge into
higher-level thinking skills
• Recognition that online necessitates more feedback
and engagement with students than face-to-face
To this end , a well-crafted , effectively conducted
online professional development and , even better , 
certification course for those who will be teaching
online courses should include modules on
• Effective facilitation of learning online
• Creating discussions that afford an entire class an
opportunity to present and consider the topic
• How to encourage discussion , deal with “ discussion
busters ,  ” and support individual student learning
through discussions
• Ways to ensure high-level involvement and quality
participation
• Developing WebQuests and other learning objects
that encourage targeted searching of the Web for
high-quality materials
• Information literacy
• Matching learning activities to course objectives
• Comparing traditional methods with online pedagogies
• Assessment tools , including rubrics , quizzes , and more
• Copyright law as it applies to online teaching and
learning
• Special needs , access , and online courses
602———Learning ,  , Online
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 602
• Feedback and how to use it to engage students
• Designing collaborative and / or problem-based projects
for online learning
• Means for assessing one ’ s own success
• Tools within the course management system and how
to employ them effectively
An online venture includes students . They need to
be prepared for the changes in how they will access
the course and other aspects of learning online . Online
students should be
• Able to work without constant supervision
• Good readers and writers
• Technology competent
• Good typists
• Self-motivated and self-starting
• Understanding and accepting of other ideas and
opinions
• Curious
• Honest , honorable
Research on online learning and teaching has
produced examples of best practice . Hallmarks of
successful online courses and programs include
• Use of highly engaging activities
• Clear expectations with scaffolding to assist students
in meeting the standards
• High touch environment and a sense of place despite
the virtual nature of online courses
• Engaged adults at each end—teacher and parents or
others near the students
• Media rich classes
• Timely , supportive , and encouraging feedback
• Flexible , yet well planned , classes
• Challenging activities that produce quality work and
minimize violations of honesty
• Frequent assessment of students , instructor , course , 
and the experience
• Reliable technology with support provided
• Routine review of courses , matching activities and
expectations with the standards for face-to-face
instruction
• Accreditation
• Support for the online teaching and learning process
from administration , governing board , parents , and
other stakeholders
Online courses may be cost effective , since they
enable a school or region to serve small and scattered
populations with highly qualified teachers . The fact
that they may not require school site space also may
offer a savings . Online courses must , however , have a
limited enrollment to enable the teacher to maintain
quality contact with each student . These contacts are
more time intense than those in face-to-face courses . 
Research-based estimates of time suggest 1 . 5 times
as many hours go into teaching an effective online
course as a similar face-to-face course . 
The potential for online courses is great . Over 70%
of the schools and districts currently involved in online
courses plan to increase their offerings . Those not
making such plans cited infrastructure weaknesses , 
attendance funding , and course quality . Legislatures
in several states are grappling with ways to deal with
attendance formulas to include online courses to
remove this barrier . Accrediting bodies have developed
guidelines for assessing quality in online courses . 
Teacher education institutions and other agencies are
developing courses to prepare teachers for online
instructing . As more university students receive a portion of their education online , teaching online will
become a more understood option . Course and class
Web pages are commonplace ; increased instructional
options are moving to online . More fully online courses
for K–12 students are coming . 
Online learning offers professional development
opportunities to teachers , administrators , counselors , 
and other school staff members . Districts , counties , 
regions , and states are taking advantage of this option
to conduct trainings that both save travel and reach targeted groups . Frequently , districts contract with nonprofit or private groups to offer a wide variety of courses
online to support teachers . The growth in online learning at K–12 schools is reaching students and adults
working in those schools . 
—Penelope Walters Swenson
See also adult education ; brain research and practice ; communications , theories in organizations ; computers , use and
impact of ; curriculum , theories of ; digital divide ; discourse
theory ; instructional interventions ; instructional technology ; 
language theories and processes ; learning , theories of ; life
span development ; literacy , theories of ; management information systems ; market theory of schooling ; mentoring ; 
motivation , theories of ; schooling effects ; time management
Further Readings and References
Berge , Z .  ,  & Clark , T .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2005 )  . Virtual schools : 
Planning for success . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Carr-Chellman , A .  ( 2005 )  . Global perspectives on e-learning . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Learning ,  , Online———603
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 603
Hiltz , S .  ,  & Goldman , R .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2005 )  . Learning together
online . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
North Central Regional Educational Laboratory .  ( 2002 )  . 
Virtual schools and e-learning in K–12 environments . 
Retrieved March 18 , 2005 , from 
policy / pubs / html / piv0111 / apr2002a . htm . 
Seiter , E .  ( 2005 )  . The internet playground : Children ’ s access , 
entertainment , and mis-education . New York : Peter Lang . 
Setzer , J .  ,  & Lewis , L .  ( 2005 )  . Distance education courses for
public elementary and secondary school students : 
2002–03 . Washington , DC : National Center for Education
Statistics . Retrieved March 17 , 2005 , from 
. gov / pubs2005 / 2005010 . pdf . 
Wenglinsky , H .  ( 2005 )  . Using technology wisely . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
 LEARNING , THEORIES OF
Learning theory is characterized by two different
conceptions of learning :  ( 1 ) learning as a permanent
change in behavior—the behaviorist perspective , and 
( 2 ) learning as a permanent change in mental associations—the cognitivist perspective . 
BEHAVIORISM
Behaviorists believe that learning is the result of environmental stimuli that “ condition ” behavior responses . 
Behaviorists assume that human beings and animals
learn in the same way , so principles derived from
research with animals are applied to human learning . 
Learning is studied by observing and measuring an
organism ’ s responses to environmental stimuli . 
From his studies of cats trying to get out of a
puzzle box , Edward Thorndike posited that learning
generally involves trial-and-error behavior . When
responses are followed by satisfying consequences , 
those responses are strengthened , but when responses
are followed by discomfort , those responses are weakened . Practice facilitates the learning of responses . 
Ivan Pavlov , a Russian physiologist , developed the
theory of classical conditioning as he was studying
salivation in dogs . Pavlov concluded that organisms
could be conditioned to demonstrate an involuntary
response ( e . g .  , salivation ) through the pairing of two
stimuli ( e . g .  , meat powder and a bell ringing )  . 
B . F . Skinner proposed the principles of operant conditioning . Skinner believed we learn behaviors that are
followed by certain consequences . He developed the
Skinner box to study responses ( e . g .  , a rat pressing a
metal bar ) and effects of reinforcers ( e . g .  , getting a food
pellet as a reinforcer for pressing a metal bar ) in a controlled environment . Skinner observed that responses are
strengthened by reinforcers or consequences that
increase the frequency of a behavior . He also observed
that a reinforcer must follow a response immediately and
must be presented only if the desired response occurs . 
Clark Hull suggested that the presence of intervening variables unique to each organism influenced a
response to a stimulus . Hull posited that intervening
variables ( e . g .  , habit strength , drive , stimulus intensity , incentive ) work together to increase the likelihood and relative strength of a particular response . 
Inhibitory factors ( e . g .  , fatigue ) decreased the likelihood and strength of a response . 
Behaviorist learning theory has affected classroom
practices in several ways . Teachers have been taught
the importance of reinforcement and the fact that learning is more likely to occur in environments that provide
positive consequences for learning . Reinforcers may be
material objects , signs of positive regard , opportunity to
engage in favorite activities , good feelings , or positive
feedback on learning performance . It is important for
students to be active respondents . Repetition and reinforcement strengthen desired stimulus-response habits . 
SOCIAL AND HIERARCHICAL
LEARNING THEORY
Social learning theory focuses on how people learn
from one another in a social context . Albert Bandura
at Stanford University was integral to the development
of social learning theory . Bandura believed that
people learn through observing and modeling what
others do . He identified three types of models :  ( 1 ) live 
( a person is demonstrating a behavior )  ,  ( 2 ) symbolic 
( a person or character in a film , television show , book , 
etc .  , is demonstrating a behavior )  , and ( 3 ) verbal
instruction ( a description is given about how one is
supposed to behave )  . Bandura proposed that four conditions are necessary for someone to learn through
modeling :  ( 1 ) the individual must pay attention to the
model and to essential components of the modeled
behavior ,  ( 2 ) the individual must remember the behavior by developing verbal and visual memory codes as
guides for performing the observed behavior ,  ( 3 ) the
individual must want to demonstrate the behavior , and 
( 4 ) the individual must replicate the behavior . 
Bandura proposed that self-efficacy plays an
important role in learning . When individuals believe
604———Learning , Theories Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 604
they are capable of performing learned behaviors successfully , they are more likely to engage in those
behaviors . Feelings of self-efficacy affect choice of
activities , effort , and persistence . Individuals tend to
choose activities where they believe they will be successful and avoid activities where they believe they
may fail . Individuals with high self-efficacy tend to
exert more effort and persist longer when encountering barriers or obstacles in working at a task . 
Bandura also emphasized the role of self-regulation of behavior . Self-regulation involves setting standards for one ’ s own behavior , observing oneself in
action and identifying what aspects of one ’ s performance are working well and which are not , judging
and evaluating one ’ s own behaviors based on the standards one has set , and self-praising when goals are
accomplished or self-criticizing when standards are
not met . 
Robert Gagné proposed a hierarchy of eight types
of learning behaviors . The behaviors transition from
behaviorist to cognitivist learning principles and represent a cumulative learning process . Gagné ’ s eight
learning behaviors are as follows : 
1 . Signed learning , where a response is made to a given
signal
2 . Stimulus response , where a response is made to a
given stimulus
3 . Motor chains , where two or more stimulus-response
connections are linked together to form a complex
skill
4 . Verbal association , where two or more words or
ideas are linked together
5 . Multiple discriminations , where different
responses are made to different components of a
particular set
6 . Concepts , where abstract reactions are made to
stimuli
7 . Rules , where two or more stimulus situations or concepts are chained
8 . Problem solving , where known rules or principles are
combined in new ways to solve a problem
Gagné also identified five learning outcomes
that he believed are observable and measurable and
constitute for him the domains of learning :  ( 1 ) intellectual skills—categorizing and using verbal and
mathematical symbols , forming concepts through
rules , problem solving ,  ( 2 ) information—knowing
facts , names , dates , places ,  ( 3 ) cognitive strategies for
processing and organizing information ,  ( 4 ) motor
skills , and ( 5 ) attitudes . 
Social and hierarchical learning theories have had
several implications for classroom practice . Students
learn what behaviors are and are not acceptable by
seeing the consequences of behaviors in which others
engage . Adults must be conscious of their behaviors
and model appropriate behaviors . Appropriate behaviors can be increased by clearly describing consequences of behaviors . Students ’ self-efficacy affects
their learning . Self-efficacy can be enhanced through
confidence-building messages from others , watching
others be successful , and experiencing success oneself . Teachers can help students set realistic standards
for performance based on their current skills and ability levels , and they can help students develop selfinstruction , self-monitoring , and self-reinforcement
skills . Curriculum should be organized so that concepts , 
skills , and learning tasks are hierarchically sequenced
to develop complex cognition . 
COGNITIVISM
Cognitivism has dominated learning research and
theory development since the 1960s but appeared in
earlier decades in the work of Edward Tolman , the
Gestalt psychologists , Jean Piaget , and Lev Vygotsky . 
Like his behaviorist contemporaries , Edward Tolman
conducted research on animals . He emphasized global
or molar behaviors rather than isolated stimulusresponse connections . He believed learning can occur
without reinforcement and without change in behavior . 
Tolman also believed that individual intervening variables play important roles in learning . He stressed that
behavior is goal directed and that organisms develop
expectations about the outcomes of their behaviors . 
Tolman proposed that knowledge is organized and that
organisms make inferences about situations and environments based on this organized knowledge . 
German Gestalt psychologists Max Wertheimer , 
Wolfgang Köhler , and Kurt Koffka further stressed the
importance of organizational processes in perception , 
learning , and problem solving . Max Wertheimer
observed that perception is often different from reality . Köhler illustrated that experiences cannot be well
Learning , Theories Of———605
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 605
understood by looking only at isolated parts ; one may
learn more from the whole in combination rather than
from the individual parts . Organisms structure and
organize experiences and are predisposed to organize
experiences in particular ways . 
Jean Piaget studied how children think and learn . 
Piaget proposed that people are not passive respondents
to environments but are active processors of information . 
Knowledge is structured in schemes or mental units
that are modified as individuals interact with others and
their environments . People interact with their environments through assimilation ( consistency with existing
cognitive schemes ) or accommodation ( modification of
existing schemes or formation of new schemes )  . He
believed that people were intrinsically motivated to
make sense of the world around them . 
Piaget identified four distinct stages of cognitive
development . In the sensorimotor stage ( birth to 2
years )  , cognition is characterized by behavior- and
perception-based schemes . In the preoperational stage 
( 2 to 6 or 7 years )  , language skills develop and new
mental schemes develop around words . In concrete
operations ( 7 to 11 or 12 years )  , logical thinking
emerges and is applied to concrete , observable objects
and events . Formal operations develop after 11 to 12
years of age . Children develop the ability to reason
with abstract , hypothetical , and contrary-to-fact information . Piaget also posited that children ’ s progression
through the four stages of cognitive development is
limited by maturation ( genetically controlled physiological changes )  . 
Russian psychologist Lev Vygotsky also studied
children ’ s thinking in the 1920s and early 1930s , but
his major writings were not translated into English
until much later . Vygotsky believed that mental
processes develop through social interactions and that
thought and language processes develop independently , merging when children are about 2 years old . 
Vygotsky suggested that children have two kinds of
abilities , an actual developmental level where the
child can perform tasks independently without
assistance and a level of potential development
where the child can perform tasks with assistance
from a more competent individual . Vygotsky proposed that children learn best in the zone of proximal development , that cognitive level where a
child ’ s problem-solving abilities are beginning to
develop and where the child can be challenged to
attempt tasks with the assistance of a more competent individual . 
Cognitive theories share several important ideas : 
• People and animals may not learn in the same ways . 
People possess abilities unique to the species . 
• Mental events are central to studying learning . 
• The study of learning should be objective , and learning theories should be based on evidence . However , 
inferences can be drawn about the nature of internal
mental events that produce observed responses . 
• Individuals are actively involved in the learning
process and control their own learning . 
• Learning involves the formation of mental associations
not necessarily reflected in overt behavior changes . 
• Knowledge , beliefs , attitudes , and emotions are all
associated and connected , that is , organized . 
• Learning involves relating new information to previously learned information . 
INFORMATION PROCESSING THEORY
Information processing theory has been central to
contemporary cognitivism . In information processing
theory , learners are viewed as active seekers and processors of information . Computer processing is a common metaphor for information processing theory . The
underlying assumption is that information must be
moved through several different sequential stages in
order for it to be remembered . Information comes in
from the environment and is attended to . It must be
encoded so that it can be stored in memory . Encoding
involves the creation of memory traces that are then
stored in internal memory , which is like a computer ’ s
disk drive storage system . Retrieval is the process of
finding previously stored information so that it can be
used again . Retrieval is somewhat like accessing a computer ’ s database . Increasing students ’ ability to recall
and use information is important for increased learning . 
Retention of information is longer and retrieval is easier if information is overlearned , if understanding concepts is stressed over repetition of facts , when new
information is linked to and builds on existing information , and when students are helped to develop cue associations to enhance active searching for information . 
CONSTRUCTIVISM
Constructivism is a perspective that has emerged over
the last 20 years . In constructivism the learner is the
active agent , internalizing , reshaping , or transforming
information and constructing meaning or understanding . In constructing meaning , the learner connects new
606———Learning , Theories Of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 606
learning with existing knowledge and prior experiences . 
The learners conjecture , question , project , and form
interpretations of the world reflective of their perceptions , experiences , and interactions with the world . 
Constructivism views knowledge as interpretive
rather than objective . 
An important component of constructivism is the
learner ’ s awareness of the mental processes being used
to construct meaning and the regulation of those
processes to enhance learning and memory . This
metacognitive knowledge and skills include ( a ) being
aware of one ’ s own learning and memory capabilities
and limitations ,  ( b ) knowing what one can realistically
accomplish in a learning task ,  ( c ) knowing which learning strategies are effective for particular outcomes and
which are not ,  ( d ) planning an approach to a learning
task ,  ( e ) using effective learning strategies ,  ( f ) monitoring whether one has successfully learned information
or not , and ( g ) knowing effective strategies for retrieving information from memory . 
Cognitive learning theories have several implications for classroom practices . Cognitivism focuses
on the active agency of learners . Learning is enhanced
when students ask questions , are not fearful of being
wrong , take thinking risks , and play with knowledge
and ideas . What students learn is not the only important focus for classroom learning ; how students are trying to process information and create meaning is also
important . Instructional topics , strategies , and activities must take students ’ current level of cognitive processing into account . Helping students learn to take
notes , identify important information , organize information , relate new information to existing information , 
make connections among different areas of information , and use prior knowledge to interpret or expand on
new information can facilitate understanding . Students
need to be aware of their own comprehension and engage
in summarizing and self-questioning to monitor what
they have and have not learned successfully . Cognizance of mental processes builds the learner ’ s abilities to regulate and use those processes to construct
knowledge and understanding . 
—Judith A . Ponticell
See also adult education ; affective domain ; Baer , Donald ; 
behaviorism ; Binet , Alfred ; Cattell , Raymond ; cognition , 
theories of ; conditioning theory ; constructivism ; Dewey , 
John ; early childhood education ; emotional disturbance ; 
feedback ; giftedness , gifted education ; Havighurst , Robert ; 
individual differences , in children ; intelligence ; Jung , Carl ; 
language theories and processes ; measurement , theories of ; 
metacognition ; Piaget , Jean ; problem solving ; professional
learning communities ; psychology , types of ; psychometrics ; Skinner , B . F .  ; Spearman , Charles ; special education ; 
standardized testing ; Thorndike , Edward ; Wolf , Montrose
Further Readings and References
Bandura , A .  ( 1986 )  . Social foundations of thought and action : A
social cognitive theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Gagné , R . M .  , Briggs , L . J .  ,  & Wager , W . W .  ( 1988 )  . Principles
of instructional design ( 3rd ed .  )  . New York : Holt , Rinehart 
& Winston . 
Koffka , K .  ( 1935 )  . Principles of Gestalt psychology . 
New York : Harcourt Brace . 
Köhler , W .  ( 1929 )  . Gestalt psychology . New York : Liveright . 
Pavlov , I . P .  ( 1927 )  . Conditioned reflexes ( G . V . Anrep , Trans .  )  . 
London : Oxford University Press . 
Piaget , J .  ( 1952 )  . The origins of intelligence in children 
( M . Cook , Trans .  )  . New York : W . W . Norton . 
Skinner , B . F .  ( 1938 )  . The behavior of organisms : An experimental analysis . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Thorndike , E . L .  ( 1898 )  . Animal intelligence : An experimental
study of the associative processes in animals . Psychological Review Monograph Supplement , 2 ( 8 )  . 
Tolman , E . C .  ( 1932 )  . Purposive behavior in animals and men . 
New York : Century . 
Vygotsky , L . S .  ( 1978 )  . Mind in society : The development of
higher psychological processes . Cambridge , MA : Harvard
University Press . 
Wertheimer , M .  ( 1945 )  . Productive thinking . New York : 
Harper . 
 LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS
Every organization , whether educational , political , 
cultural , industrial , or business related , has a learning
environment with its unique culture and climate . 
Together these create the personality or ethos of the
organization . Research on 20 schools found a significant difference in student achievement between
schools with a positive or negative climate . Thus , a positive learning environment promotes learning whereas
a negative environment is known to deter optimal
knowledge obtainment . 
Climate can be defined as the social atmosphere of
a setting ; thus the learning environment in which
participants have different experiences , depending
upon the protocols wherein they are operating . These
learning environments can be divided into three
categories : 
Learning Environments———607
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 607
1 . Relationships , including involvement , support , and
affiliation with others
2 . Personal growth or goal orientation , including personal development and self-enhancement of all
members of the organization
3 . System maintenance and system change , including
the orderliness of the environment , clarity of the
rules , and the strictness of the person enforcing them
A learning environment includes , but is not limited
to , physical facilities and settings , types of students , 
school and community characteristics , resource availability , climate , and degrees of support . Research on
which issues correlate to learning and student achievement has determined that schools must have a safe and
orderly environment , a climate of high expectations for
success , strong instructional leadership , a clear and focused
mission , an opportunity to learn and have appropriate
time on task , frequent monitoring of student progress , 
and strong home-school relations . 
Organizational climate is often used interchangeably
with organizational culture . They are closely intertwined and dependent , yet distinct . Culture is the psychological attributes that give an organization its
personality , whereas climate is the institutional features
that can be seen . An example would be a metaphor of an
iceberg itself , whereas climate is the tip of the iceberg
itself . Yet it is supported by the underlying value and
belief systems and traditions that form the organizational culture . There appear to be six climate variables
that are similar to Larry Lezotte ’ s effective schools ’ correlates . These are instructional leadership , classroom
instruction , high expectations , parent and community
involvement , a sense of mission , and time on task . In the
earlier Lezotte research , a safe and orderly environment
is clearly one of the contributing factors to a positive
school or organizational climate . The first generation
correlate of a safe and orderly environment was defined
in terms of the absence of undesirable or negative circumstances . However , in the second generation , the
emphasis is on the presence of desirable circumstances . 
Thus , the emphasis has changed from the presence of
positive versus negative factors . 
The physical , emotional , and social components
of an organization play a large role in the total wellbeing of the learners . This is particularly important
within the educational society where more is expected
from today ’ s schools than within the last hundred
years . Careful consideration must be given to an environment that fosters careful attention to the knowledge , 
skills , attitudes , and beliefs that learners bring to the
educational setting . This includes the instructor possessing sensitivity to the cultural orientation of students
and the effect of those perspectives and beliefs on classroom learning . Effective teachers help learners see the
reason or purpose for learning by respecting and
understanding their former experiences , understandings and assuming that these can serve as a foundation
on which to build bridges to new learning . 
—Elaine L . Wilmore
See also achievement gap , of students ; arts education ; behaviorism ; capacity building , of organizations ; class size ; 
classroom management ; climate , school ; cross-cultural
studies ; coeducation ; constructivism ; differentiated instruction ; discipline in schools ; diversity ; ethos , of organizations ; expectations , teacher and student cultures ; 
governance ; Head Start ; individual differences , in children ; 
language theories and processes ; middle schools ; 
Montessori , Maria ; morale ; motivation , theories of ; neuroscience ; resiliency ; schooling effects ; social capital ; social
context ; social psychology ; social relations , dimensions of ; 
special education ; standardized testing ; underachievers , in
schools
Further Readings and References
Lezotte , L .  ( n . d .  )  . Correlates of effective schools : The first and
second generation . Retrieved February 22 , 2004 , from . 
Wilmore , E . L .  ( 2003 )  . Principal leadership . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
 LEMON TEST
In Lemon v . Kurtzman , 403 U . S . 602 ( 1971 )  , the U . S . 
Supreme Court created a three-part test to determine
when public aid to private religious schools violates
the constitutional separation of church and state . To be
permissible , public aid to a private religious school
must meet the following criteria :  ( a ) it must have a
secular purpose ,  ( b ) its primary effect must neither
advance nor prohibit religion , and ( c ) it must not
foster excessive governmental entanglement with
religion . As a general rule , private religious schools
can receive government aid when the aid benefits students
directly , is available equally to public school students , 
and is free of explicit religious content . 
Initially , the Supreme Court rigidly applied the
Lemon test and outlawed many government aid
programs to private religious schools . Impermissible
608———Lemon Test
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 608
programs included those that subsidized teacher
salaries and field trips , loaned maps and audiovisual
equipment , and defrayed administrative and maintenance costs . Most often , the Court considered the
public aid impermissible because significant resources
would be needed to ensure that the public aid was not
being used for religious purposes . Then the Court considered the government to be excessively entangled in
the religious nature of the school . 
During this same period , the Supreme Court also
upheld a number of public aid programs that benefited
private religious schools . Permissible programs
included those that supplied state-prepared standardized tests , loaned textbooks , provided state employees
to assist special needs students , and allowed students
to participate in Title I programs . Textbooks were
distinguished from maps and audiovisual equipment
because their use was easily determined by inspecting
their content . No excessive entanglements were necessary to monitor textbook compliance . In these initial
cases , the Court presumed that any aid to private religious schools would benefit their religious mission . 
Over time , the Court began to interpret the entanglement prong of the Lemon test less strictly , eventually making it part of the primary effect prong . Using
this new interpretation , the Court began to permit programs requiring only that they be neutral on their face . 
For example , the Court permitted income tax deductions for expenses at private religious schools when
comparable tax deductions were available for
expenses at public schools . The income tax deduction
did not excessively entangle the government in religion because it was a general benefit open to the
parents of all students . Using similar reasoning , the
Court eventually permitted tuition vouchers for private
schools , even when they were used predominantly at
religious schools . 
In Mitchell v . Helms , 530 U . S . 1973 ( 2000 )  , the
Supreme Court reversed its presumption that aid to
private religious schools would benefit their religious
missions . The Court stated that it would permit the
government to provide aid that could be used for
either secular or religious purposes unless there was
proof that the school used the aid to advance or inhibit
religion . The aid at issue in this case was a government program that lent computers and other instructional materials to both public and private schools . 
The Lemon test continues to be the standard for
determining permissible government aid to private
religious schools ; however , religious neutrality rather
than excessive government entanglement is the guiding
principle . 
—Eric Haas
See also Catholic education ; charter schools ; fundamentalism ; 
prayer in school ; religion , in schools ; right-wing politics , 
advocates , impact on education ; special education ; standardized testing ; Supreme Court , United States , key cases
in education law ; technology and the law ; testing and test
theory development ; textbooks ; voucher plans
Further Readings and References
Mueller v . Allen , 463 U . S . 388 ( 1983 )  . 
Russo , C .  ( 2005 )  . The role of education law in leadership
preparation programs . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 168–185 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Zelman v . Simmons-Harris , 536 U . S . 639 ( 2002 )  . 
 LESBIAN / GAY / BISEXUAL / 
TRANSGENDER ISSUES IN
EDUCATION
Issues concerning same-sex desire and nonconforming gender identity have become among the most
common and contentious ones facing education
leaders today . Although persons who identify as lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender ( LGBT )  , or queer
long have worked or studied in schools , critical public
attention has focused on them in recent decades . 
Activists in the LGBT rights movement have drawn
attention to persistent employment discrimination
experienced by school workers who defy sexuality
and gender norms . Student organizers of gay / straight
alliances in high schools have compelled school communities to confront the harassment , violence , and
discrimination often directed toward LGBT and questioning students . Conversely , organized conservative
religious and political groups have fought against the
employment of school workers they claim corrupt the
nascent gender and sexuality identities of students , 
the inclusion of curricular materials depicting LGBT
persons in a positive light , or the founding of schoolbased groups that support the unique concerns of
LGBT and allied persons . While open clashes between
these groups began to flare during the 1970s in highprofile events such as Anita Bryant ’ s Save Our Children
campaign or John Briggs ’ s Proposition 6 referendum
Lesbian / Gay / Bisexual / Transgender Issues in Education———609
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 609
that would have enabled , if not required , California
schools to terminate the employment of LGBT school
workers and their allies , today such conflicts occur in
every community and school . All students and school
workers are affected by decisions such as those concerning ( a ) gender-bound dress codes ,  ( b ) what kinds
of couples may dance together at school events ,  ( c ) if
or when students may participate in activities traditionally reserved for one sex ,  ( d ) the boundaries
between acceptable social interchange and that which
harasses or intimidates on account of gender or sexual
identity , and ( e ) who is chosen to work with students . 
In short , LGBT issues are pervasive in schools and
affect everyone . 
Gender and sexual orientation are distinct concepts . 
Gender is a set of stories that people tell themselves and
each other about what it means to be men and women . 
These stories vary by culture and historical era . As is
the case with any socially created quality , gender is
quite complex . One ’ s gender is negotiated throughout
a lifetime in interaction with unique social contexts . 
Sexual orientation concerns sexual desire—who experiences it and for whom . Gender and sexuality are
linked in that gender assists individuals in navigating
sexual choices within a given culture , helping them
find others with whom sexual activity may be a possibility . Like gender , sexual orientation contains important socially constructed components . 
Despite distinctions between these concepts , they
typically have been conflated . For example , during
much of the twentieth century it has been popularly
assumed that persons manifesting conventional gender qualities must be heterosexual . Conversely , those
with cross-gender behaviors or characteristics have
been thought to be homosexual . Essentially , in popular thought , gender connotes sexuality and vice versa . 
Fearing the spread of homosexuality , communities
long have pressed schools to serve on the front lines in
ensuring that youth develop conforming gender
identities—and thus supposedly conventional heterosexuality . Schools have done so by encouraging gender-associated activities , supporting heterosexual
courtship rituals , and hiring persons deemed to be
models of acceptable sexuality and gender . This popular conception of a direct link between gender and
sexuality overlooks the fact that many persons who
desire those of the same sex present conventional gender ; likewise , many persons whose gender presentation / identity crosses conventional bounds identify as
heterosexual . Nonetheless , this misconception has
compelled strong school policies and practices aimed
at ensuring gender conformity as a means of regulating sexuality . Not surprisingly , issues concerning sexual orientation in schools , then , tend to be linked with
those about gender . 
HISTORICAL CONTEXTS
One of the defining events of schooling during the
1800s was the gender transformation of schoolwork . 
Early in the century , men typically taught during their
youth before establishing themselves fully in their communities . By the end of the century , women performed
the staggering bulk of schoolwork , but a new office had
emerged where male educators segregated themselves : 
school administration . The women who taught tended
to remain unmarried because , by tradition , married
women were thought to have untenable conflicts in
their primary allegiances between their husbands and
employers . By the 1930s , this practice of hiring single , 
rather than married , women had become so deeply
entrenched that most school districts in the country had
passed policies banning married women from the classroom . Meanwhile , the men who led schools and districts were expected to be married or engaged in serious
heterosexual courtship . Men who remained single or
wished to teach young children were viewed with suspicion . Those who crossed gender bounds risked being
thought homosexual . In his 1932 classic work The
Sociology of Teaching , the eminent sociologist Willard
Waller suggested that school administrators could screen
potential male teachers for homosexuality by watching
for signs of effeminacy or listening for excessive enthusiasm for working with male students . 
Through the 1930s , the practice of hiring large
numbers of unmarried women teachers was endorsed
widely as a cost-saving measure that also allowed 
 “ surplus women ” to support themselves . To accommodate the hundreds of thousands of such women , a
variety of new housing arrangements were needed
such as apartments and boarding houses in cities and
teacherages in rural districts . Unmarried women teachers
typically lived near or with other single women , often
establishing small communities that shared domestic , 
social , educational , and political activities . Some
unmarried women teachers also formed romantic
and / or sexual relationships with each other . Although
such companionships generally were accepted at the
time if women were discreet , in time , however , questions arose about the nature of these relationships . 
610———Lesbian / Gay / Bisexual / Transgender Issues in Education
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 610
A heightened general public awareness of lesbian relationships during the 1930s , fueled by popular novels , 
plays , movies , and high-profile national studies , gave
way to increased scrutiny of the private lives of unmarried women teachers . Eventually , such women came to
be suspected of having lesbian tendencies . 
By the mid-1940s , districts dropped their restrictions on hiring married women teachers—and simultaneously they dramatically , though quietly , scaled back
recruitment of unmarried women . Between 1940 and
1960 , the proportion of the teaching force comprised
of unmarred women dropped by half , while the proportion of married women doubled , greatly exceeding
the rate for women in the general workforce . 
While the displacement of unmarried women in the
teaching force occurred with little fanfare , soon the sexuality of the nation ’ s teachers would become an explicitly discussed focus of policy . In particular , the decades
following World War II brought intense public awareness
of homosexuality . This awareness was stimulated in part
by Alfred Kinsey ’ s 1948 and 1953 reports on human sexuality , which indicated , among other things , much higher
rates of homosexual behavior among men and women
than previously believed . Also , as the military downsized , it searched for and purged individuals thought to
be homosexual . Finally , the rapid growth of lesbian and
gay enclaves around urban military complexes during
World War II quickly became sustained communities
after the war . These new communities attracted media
attention and frequent harassment by police . 
As the visibility of homosexuality increased , a generalized public fear of it led to public panic that homosexuals would prey on children . One popular magazine
in 1950 carried a sensational story about an adolescent
boy who learned to engage in same-sex sexual activity
after a teacher had taught him . Newspaper reports
of supposedly intense homosexual activity around
Florida led state legislators to establish a commission
that eventually took as its charge the elimination of all
homosexuals from teaching positions in the state . A
change in California laws required police to report any
teachers they ensnared in stakeouts at public bathrooms . School officials then routinely revoked teaching credentials , regardless of the truth or relevance of
such charges . Around the country , teachers learned that
betraying any nonconforming gender qualities might
lead to suspicion of homosexuality , which meant
expulsion from the profession . 
Communities typically pressed school administrators to screen the teaching force carefully to eliminate
any taint of homosexuality . School board members
also chose school superintendents very carefully , 
looking specifically for married men with histories of
engagement in athletics . Essentially , the persons called
on to monitor the sexuality and gender of students and
school workers needed to conform to very narrow definitions of masculine heterosexuality themselves . To
this day , the proportion of male superintendents who
are married is 95% , vastly higher than the 58% in the
general population of adult men . 
Following the Stonewall Rebellion in 1969 , a
grassroots gay liberation movement emerged in urban
areas around the country . Lesbians and gay men began
claiming their identities openly and challenging
harassment and discrimination previously endured in
relative silence . Several teachers who lost their jobs
because of their lesbian or gay identities brought lawsuits that resulted in state or Supreme Court action . 
Lesbian and gay teachers in New York , San Francisco , 
Los Angeles , Boston , Chicago , Denver , and other
cities organized groups to agitate for sexual orientation nondiscrimination policies , to provide social support for the challenges faced by lesbian and gay
school workers , and to educate school communities
about sexual orientation . 
This increased visibility of gay and lesbian teachers , 
however , stirred the anxieties of persons such as Anita
Bryant , who , in 1977 , successfully led a campaign
against Miami / Dade ’ s fledgling nondiscrimination
ordinance that included sexual orientation . Bryant garnered massive financial support from around the
country as she raised the specter of gay men in skirts
seducing children into homosexual lifestyles . John
Briggs , a California legislator , followed suit a year later
by introducing a referendum to pressure school districts
to dismiss lesbian and gay teachers or persons who publicly supported gay rights . After a nationally reported
campaign , the referendum went down in defeat
because of effective grassroots organizing by lesbian
and gay activists . Also , the referendum was worded so
broadly that large numbers of persons stood to lose
civil rights . Undaunted , though , politicians in Oklahoma
and other states launched initiatives similar to Briggs ’ s , 
although these too faced defeat—in court rather than
by vote . 
Attention gradually shifted away from LGBT
school workers and toward LGBT students during
the 1980s and 1990s . The rising threat of AIDS and
the visibility of increasing numbers of students who
claimed LGBT identities changed the tenor and focus
Lesbian / Gay / Bisexual / Transgender Issues in Education———611
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 611
of clashes around sexuality and gender in schools . 
A federally funded study released in the early 1990s
detailed a severe risk of suicide among LGBT youth . 
Though conservative political and religious figures at
first sought to bury the report , then to undercut its
veracity , concern about the much-discussed suicide
rates among LGBT youth compelled the establishment of a variety of new services around the country . 
The National Education Association endorsed the creation of programs and resources to meet the needs of
LGBT youth . Chief among these was Virginia Uribe ’ s
Project 10 , which assisted students in working out
their sexual and gender identities and finding safety
in school . The Gay , Lesbian and Straight Education
Network ( GLSEN ) provided educational resources for
teachers and students . It placed a particular emphasis
on supporting the establishment of gay / lesbian / straight
alliances at schools , often initiated by students themselves . Within the first decade that gay / lesbian / straight
alliances existed , their numbers grew to nearly 1 , 000
across the country and have continued flourishing
since . Largely because of student activism , in the early
1990s Massachusetts passed the first law in the country
providing resources to support the unique needs of
LGBT youth in schools . Individual students who have
brought their concerns to court have claimed important
victories as well . In 1996 , Jamie Nabozny won a $1
million settlement against school administrators in his
Wisconsin district who tolerated the violence , harassment , and discrimination directed against him throughout his years as a student . This precedent-setting
judgment alerted school officials around the country to
examine the extent to which such behaviors are tolerated in their own schools . 
CURRENT CONTEXTS
Despite these accomplishments over the past decade , 
students who defy conventional sexuality and / or gender norms continue to experience intense mistreatment
in schools inflicted not only by students but also by
school workers . Some students have responded by
asserting their nonconforming sexual / gender identities
through the creation of spaces , traditions , styles , and
alliances that affirm who they are . School workers who
claim LGBT identities also remain vulnerable to discrimination and harassment . In 2004 , only 14 states
had passed laws barring discrimination because of sexual orientation , and of these , only four states include
gender identity . Even though in 2003 the Supreme
Court struck down state sodomy laws , which had been
used to legally justify discriminatory practices against
LGBT persons , employment discrimination continues . 
Many school officials still maintain informal practices
of screening job candidates for possible sexuality or
gender nonconformity . LGBT persons who are hired
sometimes fear that their identities will be discovered , 
that they will be dismissed from their chosen profession , 
and that their lives will be made miserable through
rumor , harassment , and social ostracism . Students in
turn are hurt by the lack of diversity among teachers , 
by a lack of LGBT role models or friends , and by the
larger system that enforces sexuality and gender conformity among workers and students alike . 
Educational leaders , who in the past have been
summoned to regulate a narrow range of acceptable
sexualities and genders among students and school
workers , now stand at the forefront of these contemporary issues . Such leaders must listen to students , 
community members , and school workers to craft
policies regarding appropriate dress , school-supported
courtship rituals such as dances , permissible displays
of affection on school grounds , and gender restrictions
on some school activities . School officials must articulate and enforce policies regarding harassment
because of sexuality and gender . They must consider
broadening the curriculum to include LGBT persons
in meaningful ways . Moreover , they must look carefully at long-entrenched but little-questioned personnel practices that have systematically denied schools
of the services of some of their most talented professionals . At the same time , school leaders enjoy little
protection of their own against discrimination based
on sexuality or gender nonconformity . They serve at
the pleasure of their school boards . Few of their professional associations have gone on record in support
of LGBT members . Educational leaders , then , play a
highly risky though centrally important role in contemporary debates on LGBT issues in schools . 
—Jackie M . Blount
See also homophobia ; queer theory ; sexuality , theories of
Further Readings and References
Blount , J .  ( 2005 )  . Fit to teach : Same-sex desire , gender , and
school work in the twentieth century . Albany : State
University of New York Press . 
Harbeck , K .  ( 1997 )  . Gay and lesbian educators : Personal freedoms , public constraints . Malden , MA : Amethyst Press . 
612———Lesbian / Gay / Bisexual / Transgender Issues in Education
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 612
Lipkin , A .  ( 1999 )  . Understanding homosexuality , changing
schools : A text for teachers , counselors , and administrators . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . 
Rofes , E .  ( 2005 )  . A radical rethinking of sexuality and schooling : 
Status quo or status queer . New York : Rowman & Littlefield . 
 LIBERALISM
This is a political philosophy , tradition , or movement
aiming toward development of freedom of groups or
individuals , originally founded on the Enlightenment
tradition , that tries to circumscribe the limits of political
power and to define and support individual rights . It can
be perceived as political tradition or philosophy , or a
general philosophical theory that encompasses the
conception of persons , their value , and morality . The
concept is itself a political current embracing several
historical and present-day ideologies that claim defense
of individual liberty as the purpose of government . It
typically favors the right to dissent from orthodox tenets
and established authorities in political or religious matters . In this respect , it is held in contrast to conservatism . 
Classically , liberals have tended to favor a free market
economy , rejected government influence in society , 
insisted against mercantilism and what they identify as
socialism or Marxism , and any form of collectivism . 
Historically , liberalism is rooted in the Renaissance
tradition of humanism but was first seen in coherent
action in the Glorious Revolution in Great Britain . 
Later , primarily but not exclusively in France , ideas
from the Enlightenment , which focused on the rule of
law , the importance of rational governance , and the
individual rights to contract and of ownership , were
incorporated into a growing body of thought that
asserted that a well-ordered society did not need to be
constrained by ancient laws regulating everything from
dress code to the price of a loaf of bread . By preaching
liberty and tolerance , these movements began to oppose
absolute monarchy , mercantilism , and various kinds of
religious orthodoxy and clericalism . 
The first conceptions of liberalism began in the
United Kingdom . John Locke ( 1632–1704 ) defended
religious freedom and so was the first philosopher
identified as liberal ( free in Latin )  . Enlightenment-era
liberalism contrasted its then current philosophy to
feudalism and mercantilism . As more radical philosophies were articulated in the course of the French
Revolution and American Revolution and throughout
the nineteenth century , liberal notions moved from
being proposals for reform of existing governments to
demands for changes . This notion added democracy to
the list of values that liberal thought promoted , and
based political sovereignty on the rights of man . This
idea , that the people were sovereign , and capable of
making all necessary laws and enforcing them , went
beyond the Enlightenment ’ s conception of rationality . 
Liberalism redefined and contrasted itself to the restrictiveness of socialism and communism . In the latter part
of the nineteenth century , what is believed to be the
classical liberalism and liberal thought was organized
into a coherent set of economic and political doctrines
that focused on the primary importance of the individual being unencumbered by the power of the state . 
From the end of the nineteenth century through
the onset of the twentieth century , a growing body of
opinion appeared that asserted that to be free , individuals need to have access to all things required for fulfillment . So individual liberty requires that society is
responsible for the provision of a basic level of opportunity , protection , and education in order to free the
individual from economic and social coercion . 
John Stuart Mill ( 1806–1873 ) was influential in
developing the modern concepts of liberalism . He
opposed collectivist tendencies while placing an
emphasis on quality of life for the individual . He also
had sympathy for female suffrage and ( later in life ) 
cooperatives . Mill became one of the key figures in
the development of this strand of liberalism . His philosophy of utilitarianism grounded liberal ideas in the
instrumental and pragmatic , allowing the unification
of subjective ideas of liberty gained from the French
thinkers in the tradition of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and
the more rights-based philosophies of John Locke and
the British tradition . After similar developments in
continental Europe , John Dewey and other pragmatic
philosophers become the first to be associated with
this idea in the United States . Dewey summarized the
roots of the trend in liberal thought , which rejected
what was seen as the degradation of the individual by
traditional social arrangements and industrialization , 
and argued that genuinely free markets would systematically refrain from the exploitation of human beings . 
Proponents of liberalism see themselves as affiliates of freedom , particularly the freedom from the fetters
of tradition . They favor constitutional government , 
representative democracy , and the rule of law . They
have at various times embraced both constitutional
monarchy and republican government , generally
oppose all but the mildest forms of nationalism , stand
Liberalism———613
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 613
in contrast to conservatives by their broader tolerance , 
and more readily embracing multiculturalism . Proponents believe in neutral government to the extent that it
is not for the state to determine how individuals can
pursue happiness . This self-determination gives way to
an open mind in ethical questions . Most liberal parties
support the pro-choice movement and advocate the
emancipation of women and sexual preference . 
Equality under the law is crucial in liberal policies , and
thus racism is incompatible with liberalism . 
Even so , as a political tradition , liberalism has varied in different countries . For example , in England—
in many ways the birthplace of liberalism—the liberal
tradition in politics has centered on religious toleration , government by consent , and personal , and especially , economic freedom . In France , liberalism has
been more closely associated with secularism and
democracy . In the United States , liberals often combine a devotion to personal liberty with an antipathy to
capitalism , while the liberalism of Australia tends to
be much more sympathetic to capitalism but often less
enthusiastic about civil liberties . 
In Great Britain and the United States , the classic
liberal program , including the principles of representative government , the protection of civil liberties , and
laissez-faire economics , had been more or less introduced by the mid-nineteenth century . The growth of
industrial society , however , soon produced great
inequalities in wealth and power , which led many
persons , especially workers , to question the liberal
creed . It was in reaction to the failure of liberalism to
provide a good life for everyone that workers ’ movements and Marxism arose . Because liberalism is concerned with liberating the individual , however , its
doctrines shifted with the change in historical realities . 
Because the concepts of liberty have changed in
different historical periods , so have specific programs
of liberalism changed . The ultimate aim and characteristic belief , however , remains rooted not only in
essential human goodness but also in human rationality . Liberalism assumes that people are cogent , are
able to recognize problems and solve them , and can
achieve systematic improvement in the human condition . Liberalism , which seeks what it considers to be
the improvement of progress , necessarily desires to
change the existing order . The degree of any intervention in liberalism is often hotly debated , but there are
greater extremes in the rhetoric than in practice . 
—Eunyoung Kim
See also bureaucracy ; civil rights movement ; cultural politics , 
wars ; democracy , democratic education and administration ; 
Dewey , John ; pragmatism and progressivism ; recognition
theory / identity politics
Further Readings and References
Dagger , R .  ( 1997 )  . Civic virtue : Rights , citizenship and republican liberalism . Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
Gaus , G . F .  ( 1994 )  . Property , rights and freedom . Social
Philosophy and Policy , 11 , 209–240 . 
Rawls , J .  ( 1993 )  . Political liberalism . New York : Columbia
University Press . 
Skinner , Q .  ( 1998 )  . Liberty before liberalism . Cambridge , UK : 
Cambridge University Press . 
Spector , H .  ( 1992 )  . Autonomy and rights : The moral foundations of liberalism . Oxford , UK : Clarendon . 
 LICENSURE AND CERTIFICATION
Although frequently used interchangeably , the terms
licensure and certification do not , in reality , have the
same meanings . Even many state departments of public
instruction responsible for regulating school leader
licensure often use certificate when they mean license . 
Confusion reigns . Licensure should be identified as
permission granted by an official regulatory agency to
practice a specific profession ; for example , state
departments of education or standards boards issue a
license to be a principal or superintendent . Certification
is the recognition by a professional association or other
peer-oriented groups that one is exemplary in one ’ s
practice of a profession , for example , the National
Board for Professional Teaching Standards ( NBPTS )  . 
A license is an official credential while a certificate
is recognition for performance that far exceeds expectations . Striving for a certificate is voluntary and holds
one to a higher level of excellence . It is recognition
of a school leader whose performance is judged to be
exceeding a commonly accepted set of standards . A
license , on the other hand , is required in order to practice as a school leader . Policy-making groups such as
state boards of education and state legislatures generally control licensure regulations . The professional
associations generally control certification . 
A licensure policy framework began to emerge with
the development of complex licensure policies following World War II . These policies , having the impact
of state law , actually control the entry requirements
for initial and renewed licensing . By the mid-1950s , 
614———Licensure and Certification
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 614
41 states required at least a master ’ s degree in order to
be granted an administrator ’ s license . Nearly 40 years
later , in 1993 , 45 states had this requirement . With an
expansion of criteria , at the present time all states
except Michigan require a license for principals . 
There has been no realistic movement toward a certificate program for school leaders . Discussions were
held in the late 1990s among the American Association
for School Administrators ( AASA )  , the National
Association of Elementary School Principals ( NAESP )  , 
and the National Association of Secondary School
Principals ( NASSP ) concerning possible development
of a certificate program for outstanding school leaders , 
but it was quickly determined that to make it a truly
meaningful process would be cost prohibitive , and the
effort was abandoned . 
Licensure , however , has had major impacts on the
profession of school leadership . There are approximately
500 institutions of higher education that offer preparation
programs for educational administration , and the focus
of these programs is on licensure requirements from the
state . Clear trends have emerged for licensure criteria . 
Most states require a master ’ s degree , and teaching
experience of from 3 to 5 years is usually expected . 
Since the release of the Interstate School Leaders
Licensure Consortium ’ s ( ISLLC ) Standards for
School Leaders , more than 40 states have established
licensure criteria linked to these standards . Fifteen
states are also requiring passing the School Leaders
Licensure Assessment ( linked to the ISLLC Standards ) 
in order to be licensed as a principal . 
There is no coherent , organized , or standardized format for licensure policies across state lines . Gathering
accurate information regarding criteria for licensure is
difficult due to uneven reporting from each state . 
However , it is clear that states ’ use of licensure policies to ensure a do-no-harm entrance level to the profession of school administration has had a major
effect on preparation programs in higher education , a
standards-based approach to curriculum development , 
and implementation of assessments for initial licensing of beginning school administrators . 
—Neil J . Shipman
See also American Association of School Administrators ; 
Educational Testing Service ; Interstate School Leaders
Licensure Consortium ; National Association of Elementary
School Principals ; National Association of Secondary
School Principals ; National Council for the Accreditation
of Teacher Education
Further Readings and References
Hart , A .  ,  & Pounder , D .  ( 1999 )  . Reinventing preparation programs : A decade of activity . In J . Murphy & P . B . Forsyth 
( Eds .  )  , Educational administration : A decade of reform 
( pp . 115–151 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
McCarthy , M .  ( 1999 )  . The evolution of educational leadership
programs . In J . Murphy & P . B . Forsyth ( Eds .  )  , Handbook
of research on educational administration ( pp . 119–139 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Sykes , G .  ( 1999 )  . The new professionalism in education : An
appraisal . In J . Murphy & K . Louis ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of
research on educational administration ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 227–
249 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Wilmore , E .  ( 2002 )  . Principal leadership . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
 LIFE SPAN DEVELOPMENT
Life span development refers to the particular stages
that are passed through during the course of a life span . 
This definition commonly refers to three elements : 
change , permanent or lasting impact , and growth
through a progression of certain stages . Development
involves movement from one state to another . A second
aspect of development leads one to a lasting or permanent impact . The third aspect involves a model of
human development moving through stages . 
The human life cycle as argued by Daniel J . 
Levinson consists of four periods , each consisting of 25
years . The four periods are childhood and adolescence , 
early adulthood , middle adulthood , and late adulthood . 
According to Levinson , each period is unique and has a
transition period to the next era . During the transition
period , which may take from 3 to 6 years to complete , 
humans undergo a basic change in the character of their
lives . 
Mark Tennant and Philip Pogson provided another
model for human development . They argue that the
developmental process is not necessarily linear . Three
elements were recognized as influencing development . 
First , the normative age-graded component included
variables that were highly correlated with age such as
physical maturation , commencement of education , and
parents ’ death . The second influence included normative-history graded . This includes events such as wars , 
technological changes , and environmental influences
that influence most members of a culture at the same
time . The last influence refers to events that were significant to the particular individual but not part of an
Life Span Development———615
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 615
overall pattern tied to the life cycle , like traffic accidents , lottery winnings , and / or religious conversion . 
The importance of life span development to education is that it allows for the creation and delivery of
instructional and other educational services that are
developmentally appropriate to students . Acquisition
of knowledge and skills in many K–12 school settings
is based on assumptions about life span development
as are state accountability and testing processes . 
Similar parallels can be drawn to the adult education
field . 
Although many theories exist that define the periods of human development , there are many debates
about the nature and extent of stages . Educators must
avoid relying on predictable development stages , recognizing that human development is complex . With
this knowledge , one will avoid the idea that stages of
development are predictable . 
—Larry McNeal , Talana Vogel , 
and Edwinta E . Merriweather
See also adult education ; career stages ; child development
theories ; cognition , theories of ; continuing education ; diversity ; flow theory ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; 
human resource development ; personality ; psychology , types
of ; self-actualization ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Crowther , J .  ,  & Sutherland , P .  ( 2005 )  . Lifelong learning . 
New York : Routledge . 
Jarvis , P .  ( 2004 )  . Adult education and lifelong learning . 
New York : Routledge . 
Leicester , M .  ,  & Field , J .  ( 2003 )  . Lifelong learning : Education
across the lifespan . New York : Routledge . 
Levinson , D .  ( 1978 )  . The seasons of a man ’ s life . New York : 
Knopf . 
Tennant , M .  ( 1988 )  . Psychology and adult learning . London : 
Routledge . 
 LINDSLEY , OGDEN R . 
Ogden R . Lindsley ( 1922–2004 ) was a pioneer in the
area of behavioral psychology . He was the first individual to employ behavioral principles in the treatment
of human subjects . His work directly affected the field
of education through establishing the foundations of
applied behavior analysis and behavioral interventions
with individuals who possess disabilities . 
Lindsley studied under B . F . Skinner at Harvard
and received his PhD in psychology in 1957 . During
his time as director of the Behavioral Research Center
of Harvard University , he applied the principles of
behaviorism in the treatment of persons with mental
retardation , emotional disorders , and developmental
disabilities . The center was the first human operant
laboratory , and Lindsley coined the term behavior
therapy during this period . 
Lindsley joined the growing number of behaviorally
oriented faculty at the University of Kansas in 1965 , 
where he served as a research associate in the Bureau
of Child Research and as the director of Educational
Research . While initially interested in special education , Lindsley eventually joined the Department of
Administration , Foundations , and Higher Education
to work with school administrators . It was his feeling
that educational leaders had the greatest influence in
reforming and restructuring the education system and
that behavioral principles offered one of the most effective means of ensuring school improvement . 
While much of his work involved curriculum and
curriculum development , his work with direct instruction , precision teaching ( a method he devised and
developed )  , and the personalized system of instruction had a positive and ongoing influence on schools
and schooling . Curriculum-based assessments were a
direct outgrowth of Lindsley ’ s work in the area of
instruction and measurement . Lindsley often warned
teachers of the danger in using high-takes consequences to enhance student performance and compliance ( a technique with which he was familiar from his
time as a POW during World War II ) with a dull , irrelevant curriculum . For Lindsley , teacher-controlled
consequences were the basis of initiating and maintaining student response . The pairing of these consequences with those that naturally occurred in the
school setting would lead to high rates of academic
response and low rates of problem behaviors . Eventually , 
the artificial , teacher-constructed consequences could
be faded out and those inherent in positive learning
activities and a relevant curriculum would control and
maintain student behavior . 
Lindsley was an outspoken critic of the public
education system . He felt that much of the failure of
the schools was due to their abandonment of effective , empirically validated instruction and assessment
methods . His work is important for educational
leaders because of his emphasis on consistent , regular
measurement of student learning and the application
616———Lindsley , Ogden R . 
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 616
of effective , research-validated practices as the
foundation of school improvement . 
—J . M . Blackbourn
See also behaviorism ; conditioning theory ; learning , theories
of ; psychology , types of ; Skinner , B . F . 
Further Readings and References
Lee , S .  ( 2005 )  . Encyclopedia of school psychology . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Lerner , R .  , Jacobs , F .  ,  & Wertlieb , D .  ( 2005 )  . Applied developmental science : An advanced textbook . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Sage . 
Lindsley , O . R .  ( 1992 )  . Precision teaching : Discoveries and
effects . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 25 , 51–57 . 
Tennant , M .  ( 2005 )  . Psychology and adult learning . 
New York : Routledge . 
 LINE AND STAFF CONCEPT
The line and staff concept is related to how organizations are structured and how power and authority flow
within them . Individuals who hold “ line ” positions are
administrators who have supervisory authority over
professional staff . Individuals who hold “ staff ” positions primarily serve a support function for the organization and report , directly or indirectly , to a line
administrator . 
Administrative positions vary in levels of responsibility and accountability from one school district to another . 
Although the titles used for administrative personnel
serving in line positions can differ among districts , the
most common titles used for line administrators are
superintendent , assistant or associate superintendent , and
principal . Individuals holding the position of coordinator
are usually considered staff administrators , as are curriculum directors and specialists . 
One objective of using the line and staff concept in
organizations is to improve coordination and control
through the design of task functions and authority
relationships . A structural recognition of the distinctiveness between line and staff positions is also important because the role of the administrator is determined
by these organizational patterns . The activities of line
administrators are directly concerned with achieving
organizational goals . Staff specialists provide technical expertise to support the appropriate line units in
this pursuit . 
The line and staff concept has its roots in the administrative management theory that emerged as part of
the classical organizational theory in the early years of
the twentieth century . While scientific management
focused on the efficiency of individual jobs , administrative management theory focused on the overall
administration of an organization . Henri Fayol and Max
Weber were two notable contributors to the administrative management perspective . Fayol , a French steel
and coal mining executive , defined basic functions of
management and developed management principles
that emphasized chain of command , allocation of
authority , order , stability , equity , and efficiency . Weber , 
a German intellectual who studied the growth of large
organizations , formalized organizational procedures
for administrators and used a name already in circulation by Vincent DeGournay ,  “ bureaucracy .  ” 
—Jane McDonald
See also administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; governance ; 
hierarchy , in organizations ; infrastructure , of organizations ; 
job descriptions ; leadership , task-oriented ; leadership , 
teacher ; leadership effectiveness ; locus of control ; management theories ; organizational theories ; organizations , types
of , typologies ; personnel management ; power ; principalship ; rational organizational theory ; resource management ; 
scalar principle ; span of control ; staffing , concepts of ; table
of organization ; Weber , Max
Further Readings and References
Borgatti , S . P . Bureaucracy . Retrieved March 10 , 2005 , from 
. 
Bush , T .  ( 2004 )  . Theories of educational leadership and management . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Jones , J .  ( 2004 )  . Management skills in schools . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Tomlinson , H .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Educational management . 
New York : Routledge . 
 LITERACY , THEORIES OF
Multiple theories of literacy and schooling explain
ways students gain competency in content fields such
as language arts , science , mathematics , the arts , and
computer technology . Literacy is inherently complex , 
and definitions range from describing skills , abilities , 
and knowledge at the individual level to examining
social practices and competencies at the functional
level to explaining it in terms of political goals and
Literacy , Theories of———617
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 617
ideological values . Here , literacy means essential
knowledge , skills , and abilities in receptive and expressive language processes that include reading , writing , 
oral language , listening , and thinking . Writing refers
both to composition and mechanics ( grammar , spelling , 
punctuation , letter formation )  . A brief review follows of
basic theories explaining the nature of development and
learning , representative theories / approaches regarding
literacy acquisition , and references to several broader
interpretations that include other current literacies . 
Theories of literacy and schooling rest on assumptions about the nature of development and learning , 
and many come from the field of psychology . Most
traditional print literacy acquisition theories derive , at
least in part , from either a developmental or an environmental theoretical orientation . Resultant long-standing “ nature versus nurture ” controversy fuels current
educational and literacy debates . 
John Locke , seventeenth-century father of environmentalism and learning theory ( followed by scientists
such as Ivan Pavlov and B . F . Skinner )  , viewed a
child ’ s mind as a tabula rasa , or blank slate , shaped
almost entirely by experience and learning . In the environmental view , the teacher is of imminent importance
in shaping the learner and is seen to “ pour out ” information and learning into passively receptive students
who are perceived as “ empty vessels ” waiting to be
filled . This perspective may be seen today in behaviorist theory and in medical models of instruction currently being applied to the field of literacy ( e . g .  , the
scientifically based reading research methodology and
language used in the No Child Left Behind [ NCLB ] 
Act of 2001 )  . In this skills-based view , teachers disseminate instruction that is segmented into a series of
sequential tasks that children master in order to be able
to perform complex operations such as reading , mathematics , and so on . Materials are of prime importance
and are often scripted so teachers follow models exactly
as prescribed by experts . 
A theoretical perspective almost opposite of
Locke ’ s is developmentalism . Jean-Jacques Rousseau , 
eighteenth-century father of developmentalism , was
followed by theorists such as Arnold Gessell , Maria
Montessori , Heinz Werner , and Jean Piaget . 
Rousseau ’ s developmentalist / naturalistic perspective
held that adults should not rush to teach children in 
 “ correct ” ways but rather allow them to develop as
nature had intended ( i . e .  , to develop their own powers
of thinking and judgment and to learn in their own
ways )  . Maturationist theories that advocated giving
children time to “ ripen ” before beginning instruction
were developmental in nature .  “ Readiness ” prereading instruction of earlier decades came from the maturationist theoretical perspective . Today naturalistic
theory is evident in preschools , kindergartens , and
first grades that use developmentally appropriate practice ( DAP )  . Constructivism is also a developmental
theory . Here the teacher acts as facilitator and guide , 
and students are active constructors of knowledge . 
From his sociocultural historical perspective , L . S . 
Vygotsky developed a dialogical theory of learning
that described the zone of proximal development . He
said children begin learning long before they attend
school and that learning and development are interrelated from the child ’ s very first day of life . He
described the zone of proximal development as the
distance between the actual developmental level as
determined by independent problem solving and the
level of potential development as determined through
problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers . In this theory , teachers
are important in supporting and challenging student
learning . Vygotskian Constructivism underlies many
of the newer interpretations of literacy . 
Until very recent years , rather than speaking of the
teaching of literacy , educators referred to the teaching
of reading and writing , treating them as discrete
subjects and teaching them as separate skills . Historically , educators first taught students to read , and then
they taught them to write . Reading was more important in the elementary years , while writing gained
prominence in the secondary years . 
Literacy expectations have changed drastically
over the years . For example , early in U . S . schooling , 
individuals who could sign their names were considered literate , while now literacy is seen as a complex
set of structures that allows individuals and communities to process meaning and communicate at high
levels of competence within social and cultural
frames . Reading and writing are often seen as so interrelated that one cannot be understood without the
other , with students moving seamlessly between them
so that they draw on their skills in one to develop the
other as they build proficiency in both . Nonetheless , it
is learning to read that remains so critical that entire
elementary schools are judged as successful or not
based on students ’ reading proficiency . And reading is
at the core of NCLB legislation that mandates to educators what will be taught in the area of reading ( and
how ) to students in the most struggling schools . 
618———Literacy , Theories of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 618
Looking historically at prevalent literacy theories
used in schools reveals that no one set of practices
works for every child and that U . S . educators have
tried , discarded , and resurrected multiple approaches
in search of a silver bullet ( quick fix instructional
method )  . Pendulum swings from one theory to
another demonstrate that literacy complexity requires
ample time and multiple approaches to meet individual needs of students . It is impossible to list here and
adequately explain the numerous literacy theories
used in the United States . Examples follow of a few
that have figured prominently in American schooling
and remain in use today . 
BEHAVIORIST THEORY IN
SKILLS EMPHASIZES INSTRUCTION
Behavioristic theory was the established literacy
theory throughout much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . It was evidenced by the alphabetic 
( letters-to-words ) approach used in the nineteenth
century that continued to dominate U . S . instruction
through World War I . In that classic synthetic phonics
approach , students learned the parts before the whole 
( letter names , then letter sounds , then syllable blending in a strict drill and practice format )  . A modern
version of synthetic phonics ( involving “ explicit , systematic , sequential ” phonics instruction ) is in effect
in many U . S . schools today , particularly in NCLBfunded Reading First schools . 
Another early twentieth-century approach , the
words-to-letters approach , is the flip side of the alphabetic ( letters-to-words ) approach . Words are introduced early in the learning experience and then
broken down into the component letters . This method , 
called analytic ( or whole-to-part ) phonics today , is
used in many U . S . schools . Children learn sound correspondences for each letter in both synthetic and analytic phonics . Both approaches view teaching as the
transmission of facts to students , who receive a fixed
body of knowledge and reading as being made up of
component skills studied in a set sequence , the order
of which varies by expert . 
DEVELOPMENTAL THEORY IN
MEANING EMPHASIZES INSTRUCTION
At various times in U . S . educational history , developmental theory has been set in sharp contrast to behaviorist theory . A case in point is the meaning emphasis
instruction of another early twentieth-century reform , 
the whole word or look-say method of teaching reading , in which students learned a substantial body of
words before attempting to analyze words into lettersounds . Behaviorists contended that the reason for
low reading performance in the 1940s and 1950s was
the failure of teachers to teach phonics , due primarily
to predominance of the look-say method in schools
and reading textbooks . Look-say instruction was usually combined with analytic phonics after students had
learned about 100 or so sight words , though it did not
break each word into its component letters but rather
used a more focused analysis of specific patterns in
words and groups of words . This combination was
used from 1930 to 1970 . 
Another meaning-emphasis instructional approach , 
the language experience approach , described 50 years
ago by Nila Banton Smith and other reading experts , is
one in which reading , writing , listening , and speaking
are intertwined . The experience chart was introduced
as early as 1900 , but the modern language experience
approach , which gathered momentum after World
War II , is much broader than that early predecessor . In
explaining the language experience approach in the
1960s , Roach Van Allen said that what children could
think about , they could talk about ; what they could say , 
they could write ( or have someone write for them )  ; 
what they could write , they could read ; and what
others wrote for them to read , they could read . This
approach builds language through interactions with
reading , writing , speaking , listening , and thinking . 
TESTING AND CURRICULUM
CHANGES IMPACT LITERACY THEORY
In the first third of the twentieth century , systematic testing gained prominence . An important contribution of
respected reading scholar William S . Gray was his 1914
creation of the first oral reading assessment , an individually administered instrument . Other assessments developed in the 1920s called for the newer silent reading
method , paving the way for group-administered assessments in use today . Theory traditionally dictates assessment forms and practices , which often drive instruction . 
During the first half of the twentieth century , attention turned to text difficulty , readability , readiness , 
reading skills , and reading comprehension as an
expanded curricular phenomenon , and the emergence
of child-centered reading pedagogy ( the art and
science of teaching )  . Nila Banton Smith explains these
Literacy , Theories of———619
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 619
changes in American reading education . The theoretical pendulum swings that controlled both assessment
and new emphases in reading actively shaped practice . 
MID-CENTURY RESEARCH
IMPACTS LITERACY THEORY
Two pieces of seminal research conducted in the middle of the twentieth century had an important impact
on literacy theory and instruction . The First Grade
Studies was an elaborate grouping of empirical studies
that tried to settle once and for all the best way to teach
reading . All that it settled was that the various methods
tested were equal to or superior to the basal and that
there were other significant issues that impacted reading , such as the importance of the teacher regardless of
the method . The second piece of seminal research was
Jeanne Chall ’ s book Learning to Read : The Great
Debate , which described a crisis in beginning reading . 
Chall cited arguments about the basic issues of reading
instruction and categorized reading instruction as
either code emphasis instruction or meaning emphasis
instruction , recommending an early emphasis on the
code ( i . e .  , phonics of some sort ) as a needed change
from the look-say basals in use at the time . She also
recommended a reexamination of basal content and
grade level recommendations , testing , and research . 
Following publication of her book , basal readers reemphasized analytic phonics and changed content , featuring adaptations of children ’ s literature rather than only
selections with controlled vocabulary or based on a
strict readability formula . 
READING THEORY FEELS THE
IMPACT OF OTHER FIELDS OF INQUIRY
In the 1950s and 1960s , reading was considered a
relatively basic process in which readers translated
graphic symbols ( letters ) into an oral code ( letter
sounds ) that they then produced as speech ( either in
the mind or aloud ) in order to comprehend . Changes
from this basic premise came as scholars from many
fields began to give attention to reading , causing several significant changes in the field . 
Linguists of the 1950s and 1960s gave attention
to reading by considering it part of the language
processing family , akin to writing , listening , and
speaking . Noam Chomsky , a leader in linguistics , 
developed his theory of language development , which
made a significant impact on the way psychologists
thought about and studied language acquisition
and language comprehension processes . In his theory , 
children are born with an innate system of language in
which they generalize internal rules so that they convey and understand intended messages in grammatical
transformations of language . 
A new field of inquiry , psycholinguistics , emerged
in the 1960s as scholars began to build on Chomsky ’ s
work and investigate rule-governed language acquisition . Leaders such as Kenneth Goodman and Frank
Smith persuaded many that reading was a natural
process , similar to the process of learning oral language . Psycholinguistic theory focused on meaning
making as the prime purpose of reading . Smith identified four sources of cues for readers—orthographic 
( spelling )  , syntactic ( grammatical )  , semantic ( meaning )  , and visual ( print ) —and said readers who used
prior knowledge in the first three areas could reduce
dependence on visual aspects and focus more easily
on meaning . Miscues ( deviations from printed text ) 
were seen as windows into a learner ’ s mind . 
Following psycholinguistic work with language , 
cognitive psychologists began studying the inner
workings of the mind . This was a departure from
traditional behaviorism that had studied observable
phenomena for the first half of the twentieth century . 
Some cognitive psychologists began to study reading
by looking at narrative text comprehension from a
theory of story grammar ( structural accounts of the
nature of narratives )  , and others developed a theory of
structural analysis of expository texts . Although both
theories of text structure did account for text comprehension , neither took into account the relationship of
a reader ’ s prior knowledge of the world with the information in the text . Building on that work , the schema
theory of the 1970s explained ways the structure of
human knowledge is represented in memory . Simply
put , in schema theory , schemata are “ slots ” in which
people store experiences . Every experience one has
ultimately must be stored in schemata that are constantly altered and rearranged to accept the new information . In this constructivist theory , prior experience
plays a central role . Applied to literacy , this theory
calls into question where meaning lies—in the text , in
the reader , or in some alternative combination . This
brought a renewed interest in Louise Rosenblatt ’ s
1938 Transactional Theory of the Literary Work , in
which she rejected the idea that a text carries a single
determinate meaning . Her theory posits that socially
generated language is always internalized by individuals
620———Literacy , Theories of
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 620
in transactions ( two-way interactions ) with the environment at specific times and in specific cultural and
social circumstances . She theorized that readers , writers , speakers , and listeners bring to transactions their
personal experiences and linguistics that are part of
their past transactions . 
Sociolinguistics developed as a discipline along with
psycholinguistics . In the early 1970s , Labov called attention to the importance of issues of dialect and reading , 
and Michael Halliday drew comparisons between oral
and written language . Halliday cited seven functions of
oral language and suggested that written language was
similarly social . Shirley Brice Heath ’ s early 1980s work
comparing forms of literacy in two Appalachian communities and ways they did and did not prepare children
for the literacy of schooling helped heighten awareness
of social and cultural aspects of literacy . Critical theorists 
( e . g .  , Paulo Freire ) heightened attention to power structures inherent in literacy instruction . 
CONSTRUCTIVIST
SOCIOPSYCHOLINGUISTIC THEORY
From these beginnings , a 1970s and 1980s grassroots
movement of teachers and other educators fashioned a
philosophy that eventually became known as whole
language . This philosophy was based on constructivist
sociopsycholinguistic theory in which children learned
about reading and writing as they engaged in both in
dynamic contexts . Learners made sense of reading and
writing based on the social and cultural classroom contexts surrounding them and through their own evolving
understandings of written language . In this top-down
model of literacy , learners sought meaning ( or understanding of the “ whole ”  ) before they broke literacy elements into smaller segments . This was opposed to
more traditional bottom-up theories in which learners
were taught bits and pieces that were put together to
form ever-larger chunks of meaning . 
During the decades of the 1980s and 1990s , whole
language held sway ; connections between reading
and writing were expanded . Experts such as Donald
Graves and Lucy Calkins went into schools to conduct
in-depth qualitative research about writing . From that
work came the writing process as it is known today , in
which writers work through a recursive process that
generally follows these phases : prewriting ( brainstorming / planning )  , drafting ( capturing thoughts on
paper )  , revising ( making the content stronger )  , proofreading / editing ( making the mechanics conventionally
correct )  , and publishing ( bringing the piece to a final , 
polished form for sharing in some way with an audience .  ) Portfolios of student work evidenced specific
literacy progress over time . Toward the end of the
1990s , there was a growing resistance to whole language from some quarters , because not all children
were successful using its techniques . At that point , a
new set of practices , balanced literacy , came into being
to try to use the best of both constructivist meaningemphasis approaches ( literature based with more
implicit instruction ) and behaviorist code-emphasis
approaches ( skills based with more explicit instruction )  . Because different factions meant different
things by the term balanced , its use declined over time
in favor of the earlier , more explicit code-emphasis
and meaning-emphasis terminology . 
LITERACY THEORY AND THE
POLITICS OF THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
In yet another pendulum swing , behaviorist theory
regained supporters due to the influence of ( a ) 
Marilyn Adams ’ s 1990 text in which she explained
language acquisition from a bottom-up perspective
and ( b ) brain research . In the late 1990s and early
twenty-first century , the medical community asserted
that reading was essentially a physiological response
to sound and print stimuli and used brain imaging to
demonstrate that various areas of the brain respond
differently as children learn to read . This work was the
impetus for the formation of the National Reading
Panel , whose report was the basis of a law that was
passed to ensure that the most struggling learners benefited from the experimental and quasiexperimental
studies of reading . Effects of this law and the prescriptive medical model underlying it have been far
reaching . The main objection to this type of reading
instruction from certain reading educators and scholars lies in the fact that this one-size-fits-all model
leaves teachers little room to adjust instruction to the
needs of individual learners . The scripted programs
and mandated materials may be effective with particular children ; however , in many cases , they restrict the
effective teacher ’ s autonomy in the classroom so that
other areas of literacy , such as oral language , writing , 
metacognition ( thinking about one ’ s thinking )  , the
reading-writing connection , and integrated instruction , 
may not be given needed attention due to time constraints and curricular directives associated with mandated programs . 
Literacy , Theories of———621
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 621
NEW THEORIES AND
BROADER DEFINITIONS
Many changes in the definition of literacy have given
rise to an upsurge in theorizing about it from many
fields . One might speak narrowly of the cultural literacy of E . D . Hirsch that refers to knowledge of a specific set of cultural facts found in books that had a
profound impact on Western culture . Or one may refer
broadly to the critical literacy of Henry Giroux , Allan
Luke , Colin Lankshear , and Norman Fairclough , or the
social literacy of Michael Halliday , Paulo Freire , and
others . Readers are encouraged to explore new literacies , such as media literacies and others , through texts
such as The New Literacy : Moving Beyond the 3Rs and
Literacy and Schooling . Use of Internet metasearch
engines helped readers locate current information on
the rapidly changing meanings of literacy . 
—Margaret T . Stewart
See also behaviorism ; brain research and practice ; child development theories ; cognition , theories of ; constructivism ; 
critical theory ; curriculum , theories of ; Dewey , John ; early
childhood education ; elementary education ; language
theories and processes ; learning , theories of ; Montessori , 
Maria ; philosophies of education ; Piaget , Jean ; politics , of
education ; portfolios ; positivism , postpositivism ; postmodernism ; power ; pragmatism and progressivism ; reading , 
history of , use in schools ; semiotics ; writing , teaching of
Further Readings and References
Adams , M . J .  ( 1990 )  . Beginning to read : Thinking and learning about print . Cambridge : Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Press . 
Chall , J . S .  ( 1967 )  . Learning to read : The great debate . 
New York : McGraw-Hill . 
Chomsky , N .  ( 1965 )  . Aspects of a theory of syntax . 
Cambridge : Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press . 
Gessell , A .  ( 1945 )  . The embryology of behavior . New York : 
Harper & Row . 
Graves , D . L .  ( 1983 )  . Writing : Teachers & children at work . 
Portsmouth , NH : Heinemann . 
Heath , S . B .  ( 1983 )  . Ways with words : Language , life , and work
in communities and classrooms . New York : Cambridge
University Press . 
Montessori , M .  ( 1917 )  . The advanced Montessori method : 
Vol . 1 . Spontaneous activity in education ( F . Simmonds , 
Trans .  )  . Cambridge , MA : Robert Bentley . 
National Association for the Education of Young Children .  
( 1996 )  . Statement of the position : Developmentally appropriate practice in early childhood programs serving children
from birth through age 8 . Retrieved August 1 , 2004 , from http :  /  / 
www . naeyc . org / resources / position_statements / dap2 . htm . 
Smith , N .  ,  & Robinson , H . A .  ( 1980 )  . Reading instruction for
today ’ s children ( 2nd ed .  )  . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice
Hall .  ( Original work published 1963 ) 
Stewart , M .  ( 2003 )  . Early literacy instruction in the climate of
No Child Left Behind . Reading Teacher , 57 , 732–743 . 
Vygotsky , L .  ( 1978 )  . Mind in society : The development of
higher psychological processes .  ( M . Cole , V . John-Steiner , 
S . Scribner ,  & E . Souberman , Eds .  )  . Cambridge , MA : 
Harvard University Press . 
 LOCUS OF CONTROL
Locus of control is a personality construct describing
an individual ’ s perceived source of control over his or
her behavior . Those with an internal locus of control
believe that what happens to them results primarily
from their own actions and behavior . They believe that
they control their own destiny . Those with an external
locus of control believe that sources outside themselves—
fate , chance , luck or others in authority over them—
determine what happens to them . Internal persons
accept responsibility for their own behavior and see
themselves as deserving praise for their successes and
blame for their failures . Externals see circumstances
beyond their control or the decisions and actions of
others as responsible for their behavior . 
The locus of control construct was formulated by
Julian Rotter in the 1960s . Rotter developed the internal-external locus of control scale ( I-E )  , an inventory
of forced-choice items that , among a variety of other
themes , focused primarily on belief in luck . The following are typical items : 
1 . a . Many of the unhappy things in people ’ s lives are
partly due to bad luck . 
b . People ’ s misfortunes result from the mistakes
they make . 
2 . a . In my case getting what I want has little to do
with luck . 
b . Many times we might just as well decide what to
do by flipping a coin . 
3 . a . What happens to me is my own doing . 
b . Sometimes I feel that I don ’ t have enough control
over the direction of my life . 
Item-to-total correlations of Rotter ’ s scale showed
that the average correlation of a belief in luck item
was 0 . 300 compared with 0 . 214 for the average of the
other themes ’ items . 
622———Locus of Control
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 622
Research studies on locus of control indicate that
both adult and children internals assume responsibility for their decisions , are not easily swayed by the
perspectives of others , and tend to perform better at
tasks when they can work at their own speed . 
Externals , on the other hand , are easily influenced by
the views of others and are more likely to attend to the
position of the opinion holder . Elementary- and middle-grade internals find it easier to delay gratification , 
and elementary-grade internals earn higher grades . As
children mature , individual development tends to proceed toward an internal locus of control . Some evidence exists that a greater sense of internality can be
developed . 
—James W . Keefe
See also at-risk students ; behaviorism ; child development
theories ; cognition , theories of ; conceptual systems theory
and leadership ; critical thinking ; esteem needs ; instructional interventions ; intelligence ; learning , theories of ; 
learning environments ; metacognition ; motivation , theories
of ; personality ; problem solving ; psychology , types of ; psychometrics ; research methods ; self-actualization ; testing
and test theory development ; trait theory ; underachievers , 
in schools ; validity and reliability ; variables
Further Readings and References
Gale Encyclopedia of Childhood and Adolescence .  ( 1998 )  . 
Locus of control . Retrieved from 
. com / cf_dls / g2602 / 0003 / 2602000356 / p1 / article . jhtml . 
Lee , S .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2005 )  . Encyclopedia of school psychology . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Rotter , J . B .  ( 1966 )  . Generalized expectancies for internal
versus external control of reinforcement . Psychological
Monographs : General and Applied , 80 ( 1 )  , No . 609 . 
 LOGIC , HISTORY AND USE OF
IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP
Before the 1920s , many people viewed educational
administrators as leaders primarily concerned with
promoting traditional spiritual values and developing
and maintaining strong social connections within a
school community . The community function of educational administrators mainly dealt with enlisting the
cooperation of faculty in finding solutions to institutional problems and accurately sensing the social
problems of the student body . Upon sensing social
problems , the administrator was then to accurately
correct them . School leaders of this era relied mainly
on intuition and ideology to guide their decisions . The
1920s was a decade of radical change in the history of
the use of logic in educational administration . 
During the 1920s , the scientific management principles of Frederick Taylor gained currency among educators , and administrators were required to adhere to
technical and organizational principles as they sought
to create and manage efficient and productive schools
and school systems . This orientation toward rational
systems , principles , and processes led leaders in many
fields , including educational administration , to develop
a managerial science specific to the needs of their
organizations . Broadly speaking , this movement represented a trend away from anecdotal and intuitive decision making as a logical framework and toward a
leadership grounded in logical positivism and structural functionalism . During this era , the dominant orientation of educational administration was toward
systematic , scientific practice that resulted in school
efficiency and achievement of human potential . 
Optimism about the new science of educational administration dominated writing about educational administration in the 1920s . While managing schools that
transmitted solid values and academic skills , principals
were expected to be social leaders as well , remaining
actively engaged in community activities and facilitating the development of relationships with community
members . Systematic evaluation of individual principals was not required as long as the principal ’ s efforts
were founded on efficient organization , scientific facts , 
methodological values , and religious values . 
The conception of the educational administrator as
scientific manager continued to dominate the writings
of the 1930s . The spiritual element of the administrator became less important , and the conception of
schools as businesses , with the principal as an executive , became more popular . Business values such as
cost-effectiveness and student-as-client came to dominate the individual and systemic logics of day-to-day
decision making in school systems . Educational
administrators were , metaphorically , business managers responsible for devising standardized methods
of pupil accounting and introducing sound business
administration practices in budgeting , planning , maintenance , and finance . While the prevailing metaphor
shifted from administrator-as-scientific-manager to
administrator-as-CEO , the zeitgeist of logical positivism
and structural functionalism continued . 
Logic , History and Use of in Educational Leadership———623
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 623
During the 1930s , school organization and supervision of employees were seen as critical components of
educational administration . School leaders concerned
themselves with designing rational and ordered school
systems where expertise and efficiency governed the
organization . As schools and school systems increased
in size and population , educational administrators promoted hierarchical-linear and compartmentalized
models of governance that positioned a single manager
at the apex of an organizational pyramid . Middle managers reported on their differentiated charges to superiors , who in turn guided the organization from above
with informed policy . During this era , university-based
educators further contributed to the development of
educational administration as a professional occupation
by creating degree programs and special courses of
study to prepare educational leaders . 
World War II had an important effect on the logical
orientation of educational administration . Society
expected principals to be leaders of the war effort on
the home front . With this new idea came a different
social purpose for schooling and for educational
administrators , who were expected to provide democratic leadership , thereby enabling students and
teachers to engage in a productive way of life . As curriculum developers , group leaders , coordinators , and
supervisors , principals increasingly became concerned with personnel development . During the
post–World War II era , involvement of various stakeholders in decision-making processes and promoting
a positive image for schools and systems became
increasingly important . 
Proponents of the administrative theory movement , 
which began in the late 1940s and continued through
the 1950s , advocated that educational administrators
develop and test theories like researchers in other
scientific disciplines , which would in turn lead to the
establishment of a stable knowledge base that could
inform research and practice . In addition , a multiplicity of external issues influenced educational administration during this time : universities began offering
administrator training courses on a larger scale , 
society became more centralized , the United States
began to play an increasing role in international
affairs , technology advanced rapidly , and schools
became more crowded and more complex . As a result
of these factors , educational administrators were
expected to draw insights from educational , psychological , sociological , and business research to inform
their actions and decisions . When schooling practices
were challenged , principals were expected to defend
those practices with empirical and theoretical findings
from behavioral science disciplines . Many theorists
continued to concentrate on administrators ’ effective
and efficient use of time and resources by focusing on
details of school operations , including methods for
handling daily attendance slips , change of classroom
procedures , and effective ways of introducing new
staff members to the school environment . 
Partially as a result of social and political unrest
of the 1960s , principals and academicians made efforts
to maintain stability and a sense of normalcy in schools . 
Institutional equilibrium was the goal . Theorists and
administrators upheld conceptions of schools as rational , goal-driven systems and relied heavily upon Max
Weber ’ s concept of organizations as rational bureaucracies . As a result , educational administrators came to
believe that this type of governance structure was
appropriate for schools , and began to stress bureaucratic processes as viable decision-making processes . 
With the proliferation of this belief in rationality , principals were expected to support the educational bureaucracy by protecting their own authority , respecting the
position of superiors , and guarding against appropriation of power by teachers . In addition , school
administrators became on-site researchers as categorical , 
quantitative , and empirical terms dominated discussions of the principal ’ s work . Educational administrators were asked to use increasingly sophisticated , 
scientific strategies for planning and measuring . The
belief that proper techniques and modern technology
would produce expected outcomes resulted in principals being held accountable for their decisions and
school activities . Because of this pressure and related
political demands , many principals felt vulnerable and
confused about role expectations . 
External factors again exerted a heavy influence on
administrators ’ use of logic in the 1970s . Increased
federal involvement in local schools and a growing
number of special interest groups altered many tasks
of educational administrators . As a result of a renewed
emphasis on community , administrators were
expected to build alliances to ensure that schools
and the community connected in meaningful ways . 
Most important , the professional success of principals
hinged on the support of stakeholders outside the
school organization . In the 1970s , principals were also
expected to see that meaningful educational experiences were offered to students , teachers , staff , and
community members . This emphasis on the human
624———Logic , History and Use of in Educational Leadership
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 624
resource development side of schooling also led to
the expectation that principals would engage in and
encourage positive , supportive interpersonal relationships . Theorists called for principals to adopt a human
resource model of administration . 
The 1980s and 1990s saw an upsurge in the plurality of perspectives on the use of logic to solve various
problems associated with educational inequity and
poor student achievement . As a result of these expectations that educational administrators could help
ameliorate these circumstances , leaders balanced
many roles , including interpersonal facilitator , information manager , and decision maker . As interpersonal
facilitators , principals acted as figurehead , leader , and
liaison . As information managers , they were monitors , 
disseminators , and spokespersons . And finally , as decision makers , principals became entrepreneurs , disturbance handlers , resource allocators , and negotiators . 
During these decades , powerful logical critiques
of the extant knowledge base meant to inform educational administration came from several angles . 
Specifically , the emergence of various forms of critical theory , postmodernism , and pluralism became an
important and sustained “ metadiscourse ” among
researchers and practitioners . By the turn of the century , educational administrators were questioning
whether there really was a field at all and were rather
suggesting that there were actually fields of educational administration that were only loosely connected . 
At the turn of the twenty-first century , educational
administration has made a “ postmodern turn ” and continues to explore ways that logic , and logics , inform
the decisions of school leaders . 
—Jeffrey S . Brooks and Mark T . Miles
See also administration , theories of ; behaviorism ; capacity building , of organizations ; climate , school ; collaboration theory ; 
conflict management ; creativity , in management ; critical
theory ; decision making ; dialectical inquiry ; efficiency
theories ; empowerment ; field theory ; frame theory ; governance ; human resource development ; innovation , in education ; 
leadership , teachers ; leadership , theories of ; management
theories ; networking and network theory ; rational organizational
theory ; resource management ; satisfaction , in organizations and
roles ; satisficing theory ; stewardship ; transformational leadership ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Bush , T .  ,  & Middlewood , D .  ( 2005 )  . Leading and managing
people in education . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . The postmodern challenge to the theory
and practice of educational administration . Springfield , 
IL : Charles C Thomas . 
Northouse , P .  ( 2003 )  . Leadership : Theory and practice . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Stanford-Blair , N .  ,  & Dickmann , M .  ( 2005 )  . Leading coherently . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Taylor , F .  ( 1911 )  . The principles of scientific management . 
New York : Harper & Row . 
Tyack , D .  ,  & Cuban , L .  ( 1995 )  . Tinkering toward utopia : A
century of public school reform . Cambridge , MA : Harvard
University Press . 
Willower , D .  ,  & Forsyth , P .  ( 1999 )  . A brief history of scholarship on educational administration . In J . Murphy & K . S . 
Louis ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of research on educational administration ( pp . 1–24 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
 LOSS OF POSITION 
( SCHOOL PRINCIPAL ) 
The principal ’ s job has become significantly more
demanding . State accountability mandates , changing
student demographics , and conflicting political pressures combine to make the principal ’ s role more complex and precarious . Sometimes principals are not
able to navigate this environment and find themselves
fired . Understanding why some principals are terminated is important for both practitioners and preparation programs . 
Two recent studies have examined principal termination . One study compared the perceptions of public
school principals and superintendents in California
about the reasons principals lose their jobs . Both
groups agreed that the primary causes for involuntary
departure were related to personal characteristics and
quality of interpersonal relationships rather than to
technical or management skills . They differed in the
ranking assigned to these factors . Principals more
often attributed termination to external political
forces , while superintendents were more likely to cite
poor interpersonal skills and poor relationships as primary causes . The two groups also differed in what
they perceived to be indicators of a principal at risk . 
Principals cited poor staff morale , while superintendents considered a high number of teacher and parent
complaints early warning signs . Neither superintendents nor principals gave high rankings to factors such
as failure to promote student achievement , inability
to maintain a safe and orderly campus , inability to
Loss of Position ( School Principal ) ———625
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 625
manage cultural diversity , and inability to manage time
and administrative tasks as important contributors to
principal termination , despite the prominence of these
factors in the literature on effective leadership . 
A similar study in Missouri examined the perceptions of superintendents and principals about the factors leading to principal terminations . Important
factors identified in this research included ineffective
communication skills , disregard for effective teaching
and learning , inability to manage the school improvement process , inability to sustain an inclusive culture , 
unethical behavior , and an inability to work within the
social and cultural context of the community . 
While these studies differ methodologically , their
results strongly suggest that personal characteristics
and inability to build strong interpersonal relationships with significant stakeholders are the critical
factors in a principal ’ s involuntary departure from a
school district . 
Principals faced with the loss of an administrative
position through termination may find limited legal
protection . A few states provide administrators with
tenure , including due process procedures . But many
states limit tenure protection to the administrator ’ s
status as a teacher only . Principals are normally shielded
from arbitrary removal from position during the life of
a contract , but reappointment as an administrator is at
the discretion of the local school board . The only legal
safeguard afforded principals from adverse action
during the life of a contract is the requirement that
the employer establish “ good ( or just ) cause ” for
dismissal . 
—Mike Boone
See also accountability ; boards of education ; bureaucracy ; 
consideration , caring ; governance ; human resource development ; job descriptions ; just cause ; leadership , complex
theory of ; leadership , theories of ; leadership effectiveness ; 
line and staff concept ; management theories ; performance
assessment ; principalship ; role conflict ; school improvement models ; stewardship ; systemic reform ; working conditions , in schools ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Brown , K .  ( 2005 )  . Pivotal points : History , development , and
promise of the principalship . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 109–141 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Grady , M .  ( 2004 )  . 20 biggest mistakes principals make and
how to avoid them . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Nelson , B .  ,  & Sassi , A .  ( 2005 )  . The effective principal . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Young , P .  ( 2004 )  . You have to go to school—You ’ re the principal . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
 LOTTERY SYSTEMS
Lotteries are common sources of financial support
for education . Their use for this purpose is politically
popular ; however , their effectiveness as a source of
revenue is limited , at best . Moreover , several persons
have raised moral objections and pointed to negative
economic consequences of lotteries . In spite of those
objections , lotteries ( and other gambling activities ) 
are a multi-billion-dollar industry in the United States
and will most likely remain a part of public education
for the foreseeable future . 
WHAT IS A LOTTERY ? 
A lottery has three elements under the law :  “ consideration ”  ( or an entry fee , which may but need not be
money )  , a prize ( cash or otherwise )  , and chance . If
skill is involved ( such as by solving a puzzle or making a hole-in-one )  , then the transaction , while it may
still be gambling , is not considered a lottery . Varieties
of lotteries include preprinted scratch-off tickets and
pull-tab tickets , and drawings of numbers , such as
Pick Three and Lotto games . A recent and wildly popular innovation in lotteries is the multijurisdictional
lottery , such as the multistate Powerball game . 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF LOTTERIES
Lotteries to finance public projects have been traced
to many cities in ancient Europe and Asia . The first
recorded instance where lottery patrons purchased tickets containing numbers occurred in Florence in 1530 . 
Lotteries and other forms of gambling were important to finance public works before and after the
American Revolution . Schools and other public works
were often financed by lotteries , as banking systems and municipal bond systems were insufficient or
nonexistent . Early American colleges and universities
were built using lottery proceeds , and lottery proceeds
supported the Continental army during the revolution . 
American lotteries were wildly popular but horribly
corrupt . Changing mores , in addition to disgust with
626———Lottery Systems
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 626
corruption , sent lotteries into a steep decline . By the
end of Reconstruction , nearly all lotteries were illegal . 
In 1963 , New Hampshire became the first state in
decades to operate a state-sanctioned lottery . By the
1970s , poor economic conditions and taxpayer revolts 
( such as California ’ s Proposition 13 ) led many states
to turn to lotteries . Lotteries are now widespread , and
ballot measures authorizing lotteries rarely fail . 
LOTTERIES TO SUPPORT EDUCATION : 
WHAT DOES THE RESEARCH SHOW ? 
Many lotteries were promoted to support highly visible
and popular social programs , such as education and environmental protection . Lottery advertising campaigns
push these ties to politically popular programs , the
effect of which is to “ sanitize ” an activity that many
would otherwise find objectionable . The great weight
of empirical research , however , shows no net financial
gain for public schools receiving lottery proceeds . After
finding no statistically significant relationship between
lottery proceeds and education funding , Thomas Jones
and John Amalfitano in 1994 recommended , as a matter
of policy , that states no longer use lotteries as a means
of supporting public education . 
Several factors contribute to this conclusion . First , 
lottery proceeds represent a very small portion of
financial support provided to public education . In
most states , lottery proceeds account for less than 2%
of education spending . Second , school leaders who
request additional public funding are often rejected , as
many policymakers either ( a ) wrongly assume lottery
proceeds cover a large share of education costs or ( b ) 
use a school ’ s receipt of lottery proceeds as political
cover to deny additional funding . Also , lottery proceeds are unstable sources of income . 
Perhaps the most important reason lottery proceeds
do not increase education funding is that lottery proceeds tend to supplant , rather than supplement , other
public financial support for public education . In other
words , lottery proceeds are fungible . Lottery revenues
are substituted for other public support , with minimal
gain ( if any ) for education funding . In their study of
lottery revenues and education funding in all 50 states
of the United States in 2002 , O . Homer Erekson and
colleagues found that increased lottery revenues were
fungible and were offset by decreases in other education funding sources in all states . 
In 2003 , Noel Campbell was one of very few
researchers to find a positive and statistically significant
relationship between lottery funding and education
spending . In his study of the Georgia lottery , he noted
that this relationship , while statistically significant , 
was so small that it had no practical significance . 
Following the view that any money is welcome , 
especially during tight economic times , as a practical
matter many school leaders do not object to lottery
financing . 
OTHER ISSUES ASSOCIATED
WITH STATE-SUPPORTED LOTTERIES
Aside from seeing lotteries as an inefficient source of
funding , many educators are uncomfortable with lotteries to support schools . Many education professionals
object to being inadvertent promoters of gambling
when their institutions receive lottery monies . Many
people continue to view gambling as immoral . Many
individuals object to profiting from addictive behaviors . 
In addition , many persons object to lotteries as
socially regressive . In a study of Georgia ’ s lottery in
2002 , Ross Rubenstein and Benjamin Scafadi found
that the lottery ’ s costs were more likely to be borne by
persons with low incomes and members of minority
communities , while its benefits were disproportionately distributed to school districts with higher average
incomes and higher levels of educational attainment . 
Finally , many persons note the harm to local
economies caused by gambling . For example , spending on gambling is often diverted from other important sectors of the local economy . Even in the face of
the great weight of empirical research and moralitybased arguments against lotteries to support public
education , they remain very popular . Although ineffective at best , lotteries as a source of education funding appear here to stay . 
—Thomas A . Mayes
See also accountability ; capital outlay ; cost-benefit analyses ; 
economics , theories of ; elastic tax ; fringe benefits ; market
theory of schooling ; politics , of education ; taxes , to support
education
Further Readings and References
Campbell , N . D .  ( 2003 )  . Do lottery funds increase educational
expenditure ? Evidence from Georgia ’ s lottery for education . Journal of Education Finance , 28 , 383–402 . 
Erekson , O . H .  , et al .  ( 2002 )  . Fungibility of lottery revenues
and support of public education . Journal of Education
Finance , 28 , 301–312 . 
Lottery Systems———627
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 627
Jones , T . H .  ,  & Amalfitano , J . H .  ( 1994 )  . America ’ s gamble : 
Public school finance and state lotteries . Lancaster , PA : 
Technomic . 
Reith , G .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2003 )  . Gambling : Who wins ? Who loses ? 
Amherst , NY : Prometheus . 
Rubenstein , R .  ,  & Scafadi , B .  ( 2002 )  . Who pays and who
benefits ? Examining the distributional consequences of
the Georgia lottery for education . National Tax Journal , 55 , 
223–238 . 
Thompson , W . N .  ( 2001 )  . Gambling in America : An encyclopedia of history , issues , and society . Santa Barbara , CA : 
ABC-CLIO . 
 LOYOLA , IGNATIUS
Ignatius Loyola ( 1491–1556 ) established a religious
order in the Catholic Church—the Society of Jesus , 
that is , the Jesuits . Loyola initiated , and members of
his order continued , the development of a network of
colleges and schools to deliver Jesuit education . Jesuit
education was founded on the ideal of education as
training of both mind and spirit and that certain core
studies were essential for all students . 
Loyola was born in Spain . He was the youngest
of 13 children in a family of low-level nobility . No
records of his early years exist , though it is known that
he was neither studious nor pious . He joined the military where his major activities were gambling , dueling , and casual romances . In 1521 , Loyola was
wounded , and during his recuperation , his religious
conversion occurred . 
Following his conversion , Loyola realized the
importance of education and so returned to school , 
attending with much younger students . He went on to
earn a degree at the University of Paris . When Loyola
and his companions were unable to travel to the Holy
Land to convert what they would consider infidels , 
they remained in Rome . During this time , the group
decided to stay together and form a new congregation
in the church devoted to obedience . Loyola summarized the group ’ s discussions and asked a cardinal to
submit them to the pope . Pope Paul III approved the
group immediately , and in 1539 , the Society of Jesus
was formally initiated . Jesuits went wherever church
officials indicated a need , successfully carrying God ’ s
word from city to city . As their influence increased , 
they founded colleges to provide training for youth of
the church . In 1551 , Loyola established the Roman
College , which was used as the model for Jesuit colleges throughout the world . Loyola died in 1556 . He
was beatified by Pope Paul V on July 27 , 1609 , and
canonized by Pope Gregory XV on March 12 , 1622 . 
The Jesuits introduced reform to the Italian electives system by establishing “ required credits .  ” This
reform was introduced by Loyola and systematized
some years later via the Ratio Studiorum . Jesuit education proposes to educate the whole person in the
tradition of Christian humanism . A basic principle is
that mind , will , and spirit must be trained as one . To
accomplish this , schools operated by a variety of rules
that governed the behavior of students , teachers , 
administrators of the school , and executives of the
schools . According to T . Maynard , the Ratio is not the
entirety of the curriculum but rather the foundation . 
The Jesuits insisted that every attempt be made to promote reasoning , intelligence , imagination , and observation instead of mastery of facts . They were the first
to engage in systematic teacher training . 
By 1773 , the Jesuits had about 750 colleges . 
Currently , the Jesuit Secondary Education Association
reports 46 member schools in the United States , serving
over 40 , 000 students annually ; the Association of Jesuit
Colleges and Universities report 28 U . S . members . 
—Anita Pankake
See also Catholic education ; high schools ; humanistic education ; normal schools ; philosophies of education ; schools of
education
Further Readings and References
Maynard , T .  ( 1956 )  . Saint Ignatius and the Jesuits . New York : 
P . J . Kenedy & Sons . 
Smith , L .  ,  & Smith , J .  ( 1994 )  . Lives in education : A narrative
of people and ideas . New York : St . Martin ’ s Press . 
Van Dyke , P .  ( 1968 )  . Ignatius Loyola : The founder of the
Jesuits . Port Washington , NY : Kennikat Press . 
628———Loyola , Ignatius
L-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 45 AM Page 628
 MACHIAVELLI , NICCOLÒ
One of the outstanding figures of the Renaissance , 
Niccolò Machiavelli ( 1469–1527 )  , civil servant , statesman , playwright , historian , and political philosopher , 
is most famous for his treatise The Prince , which has
become a cornerstone of modern political philosophy . 
Machiavelli began his political career in the Florentine
republic as a clerk to the second chancellor at the age
of 25 when the ruling Medicis were overthrown . Once
he became second chancellor and secretary , a position
comparable to secretary of state and defense secretary , 
he traveled on diplomatic missions to various Italian
city-states , France , and Spain ; he met many of the
important politicians of the day , including Cesare
Borgia . In 1506 he helped the Florentine ruler Soderini
with a plan to reorganize the military ; subsequently , 
when the Medici family regained power in 1512 , 
Machiavelli was dismissed from office , briefly imprisoned , tortured , and permanently removed from public
life . He was exiled from Florence , retired , and spent the
rest of his life writing on his country estate outside the
city limits . He wrote numerous essays on the military
and politics as well as comedy and drama . His chief
works include The Prince , La Mandragola ( a comedy )  , 
Discourses , The Art of War , and a History of Florence . In
1527 Machiavelli , the first great political philosopher of
the Renaissance and of the modern era , died , disappointed and embittered at his inability to regain political
appointment . 
Themes echoed in Machiavelli ’ s work offer insight
into sixteenth-century Florentine values . La Mandragola , for example , is about the characters ’ use of fraud
to accomplish their objectives . Machiavelli makes it
clear that fraud is acceptable , so long as it furthers a
worthwhile cause . In The Art of War , Machiavelli
combines Roman military theories with the innovative
concept that war and politics form a kind of functional
unity , with war serving as an instrument of politics . 
In 1519 , when the Medicis consulted Machiavelli on a
new constitution for Florence , he responded with
Discourses . Concerned with republics ( states controlled
by a politically active citizenry )  , he emphasizes that for
a republic to survive , it needs to foster a spirit of patriotism and civic virtue among its citizens . Machiavelli
argues in Discourses that a republic would be strengthened by conflicts generated through open political participation and debate . He stresses the importance of an
uncorrupted political culture and a vigorous political
morality . More vast and complex than The Prince , 
Discourses shows clearly Machiavelli ’ s republican principles , also reflected in his History of Florence . 
It is The Prince , however , that has become
Machiavelli ’ s most read ( often misunderstood ) and
quoted ( often misrepresented ) work . Written during
a historical period of blackmail , violence , political
conflicts , instability , fear , and intrigue , when Italy was
repeatedly won and controlled by foreigners , The
Prince was Machiavelli ’ s practical guide for Lorenzo
de ’ Medici ’ s as well as Machiavelli ’ s attempt to regain
influence with the ruling Medicis in Florence . The
Prince stands apart from other political writings of the
period because of its focus on the practical problems a
monarch faces gaining and staying in power , rather than
on more speculative , idealistic explanations of the foundation of political authority . Machiavelli suggests that
the best way to maintain power is to rule well , but if this
is not possible , then he presents a variety of practical
629
M
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 629
strategies for remaining in power . His political philosophy
was highly influenced by observations of Cesare Borgia , 
a cunning , cruel man , very much like the “ ideal prince .  ” 
While Machiavelli did not like his policies , he thought
that with a ruler like Borgia , the Florentines could unite
Italy—Machiavelli ’ s goal throughout his life . To liberate Italy from the influence of foreign governments , 
Machiavelli explains that strong indigenous governments are important , even if they are absolutist . 
Machiavelli recommended policies in The Prince that
would discourage mass political activism and channel
subjects ’ energies into private pursuits . He held that
the monarch could preserve power by the prudent use
of violence , understanding the art of war , avoiding
being hated , respecting private property and the traditions of his subjects , promoting material prosperity , 
and comporting himself with dignity . Allowing for the
unpredictable influence of fortune , Machiavelli argues
that it is primarily the character or skill of the individual leader , as well as the appearance of having certain
qualities , that determine the success of any state . He
recommends approaches to acquire , assemble , maintain , and rule the principality and evaluates each suggestion by the likelihood of princely glory and practical
success while serving the public interest . 
Machiavelli held that political life cannot be governed by a single set of moral or religious absolutes . 
Moreover , the monarch may sometimes be excused for
performing acts of violence and deception that would
be ethically indefensible in private life . It is this focus
on practical success by any means , even at the expense
of traditional moral values , that earned Machiavelli ’ s
approach a reputation for ruthlessness , deception , and
cruelty . His conception of the proper application of
morality to practical political life is one that judges the
skill of all participants in terms of the efficacy with
which they achieve noble ends . He is enjoying a resurgence of interest as some authors claim that his ideas
hold the key to the mystery of modern executive power . 
—JoAnn Danelo Barbour
See also administration , theories of ; charisma , of leaders ; 
conflict management ; democracy , democratic education
and administration ; ethics ; ethos , of organizations ; governance ; great man theory ; leadership , theories of ; leadership
effectiveness ; leadership styles ; power
Further Readings and References
De Grazia , S .  ( 1989 )  . Machiavelli in hell . Princeton , NJ : 
Princeton University Press . 
Machiavelli , N .  ( 1992 )  . The prince ( W . K . Marriott , Trans .  )  . 
New York : Alfred A . Knopf .  ( Original work published 1513 ) 
Machiavelli , N .  ( 1985 )  . Discourses ( L . J . Walker & B . Crick , 
Trans .  )  . New York : Viking .  ( Original work published 1531 ) 
Mansfield , H .  ( 1989 )  . Taming the prince : The ambivalence of
modern executive power . New York : Free Press . 
Mansfield , H .  ( 1996 )  . Machiavelli ’ s virtue . Chicago : 
University of Chicago Press . 
Viroli , M .  ( 2000 )  . Niccolo ’ s smile : A biography of
Machiavelli . New York : Hill & Wang . 
 MAINSTREAMING
AND INCLUSION
The term mainstreaming has come to be associated
with the principle of educating children with and without disabilities in the same classroom and providing
special education based on learning needs rather than
categories of handicaps . In the decades before 1970 , 
the most common treatment of children with mild to
severe disabilities was to provide education in selfcontained classrooms . The situation changed in the
United States as a result of the civil rights and educational reform movements of the late 1960s and early
1970s and as an outcome of two court cases in 1972 , 
the Pennsylvanian Association for Retarded Children
v . Commonwealth of Pennsylvania , and Mills v . Board
of Education of the District of Columbia . The rulings
in these cases directed at state education systems established the expectation of the placement of students
with disabilities in general education settings because
of fair and equal treatment as guaranteed by the 14th
Amendment of the U . S . Constitution . 
The U . S . Congress responded to these cases
with legislation guaranteeing all children a free and
appropriate public education . Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Education for
All Handicapped Children Act ( Public Law 94-142 ) 
approved in 1975 extended free and appropriate
schooling to children with disabilities and required
that children with special educational needs be educated in the least restrictive environment . Congress
revisited the act in 1990 , and the resultant Individuals
With Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA ) confirmed
the principle of including disabled children in regular
classroom settings in public education . In 1997 , an
amendment to IDEA further defined the principle that
special education should be a service for children
rather than a place where they are sent . None of the
630———Mainstreaming and Inclusion
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 630
aforementioned legislation uses the term mainstreaming , which has been superseded in general educational
usage by inclusion , referring to the philosophy and
practice of providing a common educational experience for all children in a common setting . 
Current court cases now follow IDEA requirements , 
finding that an inclusive placement with supplemental
aids and support as necessary are appropriate to a wide
range of students . A school district ’ s decision to place
a student in anything other than a general classroom
setting will only be upheld if school officials can show
that their efforts at inclusion have failed or have strong
evidence to support the need for a separate educational setting for the child . 
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
Underlying the move to an inclusive model of education
for students with and without disabilities is the belief in
the equal right of all students to access education and
to achieve equitable and quality educational outcomes . In
practice , this has implications for curriculum , finance , 
governance , and school personnel . Implicit in the development of an inclusive school is a single curriculum
model based on ( a ) curriculum frameworks or guidelines that are sufficiently comprehensive to support the
differentiated learning of all students ,  ( b ) a variety of
assessments linked to this curriculum to accommodate
different learning styles and disabilities ,  ( c ) a unified
funding system that supports the varied learning needs
and abilities of all students ,  ( d ) student representation under a single administrative structure rather than
a dual system for regular and special education , and 
( e ) teachers , administrators , and staff capable of working
with students with a wide range of needs and cooperatively with disability specialists . 
CONDITIONS FOR
SUCCESSFUL INCLUSION
Studies of inclusive education in the United States
suggest conditions that favor successful outcomes for
all students . These include ( a ) a leadership that actively
involves and shares responsibility with the entire school
staff ,  ( b ) an acceptance by teachers and school staff of
the need to change roles and responsibilities and work
collaboratively ,  ( c ) flexible learning environments that
emphasize participation but may still provide opportunities for children to receive separate instruction if needed ,  
( d ) curricular and instructional approaches that are
participatory in that they emphasize the social construction of knowledge , encourage diverse approaches
to problem solving , and allow for adaptations to accommodate individual needs and multilevel learning , and 
( e ) collaboration between educators and parents . 
Practices associated with successful inclusion of
students with disabilities are also promoted by the
advocates of whole-school reform , who see the
processes of inclusion and reform as closely linked . 
DEBATE
Whether or not mainstreaming / inclusion is the best
ideology from the perspective of the student with special needs remains the topic of much heated debate . 
Opponents of inclusion argue for a continuum of
educational placement , noting that the least restrictive
environment does not require full inclusion in a general classroom for all special needs students , some of
whom may benefit form a separate classroom and the
focused attention of a specialist teacher . Opponents
also argue that the most important equity issue is the
quality and not the place of instruction . The identification and funding issues have also figured significantly
in the mainstreaming / inclusion debate—students who
need special education , as well as the corresponding
funds and personnel that are required , must be clearly
identified to ensure they receive appropriate services . 
Special services will be compromised or lost unless
both funding and students are specifically targeted . 
Advocates of inclusion argue that the labeling of
students and physically separate education is inherently discriminatory and unequal , that special education has become a convenient way for general educators
to avoid their responsibility to teach all students and so
reduce the quality of instruction for all students , and
that the special targeting of funds for certain students
is inequitable and would be better used to provide a
high-quality education for every student . 
INTERNATIONAL OVERVIEW
The debate surrounding mainstreaming / inclusion is
no less fierce in national systems around the world . 
Ireland maintains a policy that integrates children
with special needs where possible , and retains the
right to segregate where necessary . Australia has a
state-by-state approach—the state of Queensland , for
example , has adopted a policy of inclusive schools
and curricula within a framework of social justice . 
Mainstreaming and Inclusion———631
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 631
Norway reversed its policy of segregated schooling
for children with disabilities in 1975 and required that
every child be given equitable and suitable education
in the local school , and now has less than 1% of the
school population in special units . New Zealand passed
legislation in 1989 giving every child the right to
attend a state school and age-appropriate mainstream
classes ; however , noncompliance by schools led to
new special education policy guidelines in 1995
requiring schools to accept and value all learners . In
the Netherlands , Germany , and Belgium—which
share a high rate of students in special schools—
attempts by policymakers to reduce exclusion are seen
as arising from a mixture of changing views about
segregation and a wish to reduce the expenditure on
special schools , but these policies have achieved little
success to date . A United Nations conference in
Jomtien , Thailand , in 1990 and a UNESCO conference in Salamanca , Spain , in 1994 promoted the
development of schools with an inclusive orientation
as part of national school reform worldwide . 
—Jill Sperandino
See also accountability ; affective education ; at-risk students ; 
bureaucracy ; consideration , caring ; deaf education ; Department of Education ; early childhood education ; Federal
Privacy Act ; giftedness , gifted education ; Head Start ; individual differences , in children ; intelligence ; parental involvement ; psychometrics ; Rehabilitation Act of 1973 ; resiliency ; 
special education ; state departments of education
Further Readings and References
Beveridge , S .  ( 2004 )  . Children , families and schools : 
Developing partnerships for inclusive education . 
New York : Routledge . 
Bowe , R .  ( 2005 )  . Making inclusion work . Columbus , OH : Merrill . 
Kluth , P .  , Straut , D .  ,  & Biklen , D .  ( 2003 )  . Access to academics
for all students . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Odom , S .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2002 )  . Widening the circle : Including
children with disabilities in preschool programs . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Rotatori , A .  , Obiakor , F .  ,  & Utley , C .  ( 2003 )  . Effective education
for learners with exceptionalities . St . Louis , MO : Elsevier . 
Salend , S .  ( 2005 )  . Creating inclusive classrooms : Effective and
reflective practices for all students . Columbus , OH : Merrill . 
 MALCOLM X
Born Malcolm Little on May 19 , 1925 , in Omaha , 
Nebraska , Malcolm X ( 1925–1965 ) was also known
as El Hajj Malik El-Shabazz , convert to the Nation of
Islam , and fighter for equality for all people . Malcolm
X ’ s early life was marked by the violent death of his
father , separation from his mother and siblings , prison , 
and his conversion to Islam . 
Malcolm X was the first minister ( spiritual leader ) 
of the Nation of Islam , Temple No . 11 , in Boston , 
Massachusetts . He quickly gained a reputation for his
oratorical skills , his dedication to the Nation of Islam , 
and his ability to draw others to Islam . He also became
known as a defender of human and civil rights and an
outspoken critic of the condition of Blacks in the
United States and abroad . He moved to New York
and later married Betty ( Sanders ) X . He and Betty ( also
known as Betty Shabazz ) were parents to six daughters . 
During his short life , Malcolm X was a frequent
speaker not only in Islamic mosques but also at schools
and universities , rallies , and marches . He had a charismatic personality and often gave scathing critiques of a
system that consistently oppressed Blacks . He was a
frequent guest on panels , forums , and television and
radio programs where he spoke about and debated the
condition of Blacks in America and the best ways to
achieve Black self-empowerment . In one of his early
appearances , he debated the then president of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People ( NAACP )  , Walter Carrington , in a forum titled 
 “ The American Negro : Problems and Solutions .  ” The
forum as well as other appearances and debates with
Black leaders were often heated and contentious and
revealed the division in the Black community about
Malcolm ’ s X ’ s influence . One of Malcolm X ’ s most
famous television appearances was a week-long special
with reporter Mike Wallace in 1959 . The program , 
titled “ The Hate That Hate Produced ,  ” was an in-depth
examination of the ideologies and philosophies of the
Nation of Islam . More important , Wallace sought to
reveal to the American public a complete picture of
Malcolm X . Viewed as anti-White and a controversial
figure in U . S . culture , the program traced Malcolm ’ s
rise as a leader in the Nation of Islam and the human
rights movement and his eventual designation as the
Nation of Islam ’ s national spokesperson . 
As spokesperson for the Nation of Islam , Malcolm
X frequently spoke about the social , racial , economic , 
and political injustices that negatively affected Blacks
and women and about the hegemonic practices in the
United States that disenfranchised voters and led to
destructive racial tensions in many parts of the United
States . He was an influential leader not only in the
632———Malcolm X
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 632
Nation of Islam but also for a significant number of
Blacks of varying religions and socioeconomic classes . 
A pilgrimage to Mecca represented a turning point
in the spiritual and political life of Malcolm X . On
April 4 , 1964 , he made his pilgrimage to Mecca and
thus began a change in his philosophy toward Whites
and his approach to Black self-empowerment . During
his pilgrimage , he met with Whites who showed a
spirit of unity and brotherhood , and that provided him
with a new , positive insight into race relations . 
Malcolm now believed that Islam could be a catalyst
to the power to overcome racial antagonism and to
erase it from a dominant White America . 
Malcolm X left school when he was a teenager , but
he realized the value of a formal education . Shortly
before his death , he revealed that one of his greatest
regrets was not having a formal education . His belief
in the power of education led him to speak frequently
to teachers and educational leaders about instilling a
thirst for academic excellence in students . He believed
that education could change the lives of African
American and other poor and minority students , and
he encouraged students to view education as a way to
develop academically , socially , and politically . His
teaching and beliefs are instructive today , as there
continue to be gaps in the educational achievement of
Black students and their White peers . 
Alex Haley collaborated in 1964 with Malcolm X
to write the most widely read work about him , The
Autobiography of Malcolm X . Haley wrote that
Malcolm X appealed to the two most disparate elements in the Negro community : the depressed mass
and the galaxy of Negro writers and artists who were
devoted to his ideals and cause . 
The year 1964 marked the beginning of a series
of attempts on Malcolm X ’ s life . He was killed on
February 21 , 1965 , at the age of 39 while delivering a
speech in Manhattan at the Audubon Ballroom . The
legacy of Malcolm X has been documented in numerous documentaries , books , and movies . A renewed
interest in his life and work occurred in 1992 , when
director Spike Lee released the movie Malcolm X . On
February , 21 , 2005 , the 40th anniversary of his death , 
a celebration of his life was held at the Audubon
Ballroom , renamed the Malcolm X and Dr . Betty
Shabazz Memorial and Education Center . 
—Linda C . Tillman
See also affirmative action ; Afrocentric theories ; Bethune , 
Mary McLeod ; Black education ; charisma , of leaders ; civil
rights movement ; Coppin , Fanny Jackson ; critical race
theory ; critical theory ; cross-cultural studies ; cultural capital ; 
cultural politics , wars ; desegregation , of schools ; discrimination ; DuBois , W . E . B .  ; ethnocentrism ; literacy , theories of ; 
minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; resiliency
Further Readings and References
Haley , A .  ( 1964 )  . The autobiography of Malcolm X . 
New York : Ballantine Books . 
Shabazz , I .  ( 2002 )  . Growing up X . New York : Ballantine
Books . 
West , C .  ( 1999 )  . The making of an American radical democrat
of African descent . In C . West ( Ed .  )  , The Cornel West
reader ( pp . 3–18 )  . New York : Basic Civitas Books . 
 MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES
Management by objectives ( MBO ) is a management
system that includes cooperative goal setting throughout the organization , cooperative process identification
for goal achievement , and appraisal of performance
based on achievement of goals set . When implemented correctly , MBO can positively influence unit
and organizational productivity , employee and managerial morale , employee attendance , and other organizational dimensions . Research on MBO has not
shown positive results ; generally , the causes for
these disappointing results relate to poor or incomplete implementation of the system rather than any
problem with the idea itself . Schools and districts
were participants in the early popularity of MBO ; 
while few reference MBO at this time , school
improvement planning and program implementation
and evaluation incorporate the major elements of the
MBO process . 
MBO was developed in the early 1950s and generally became a fad in the 1960s and early 1970s . The
concept fell into disrepute in the 1980s and 1990s , 
with the research on MBO indicating that the negative
reputation came about more as a consequence of how
it was implemented than as an idea . 
The term management by objectives was first
used by Peter Drucker in his 1954 book Practice of
Management . At that time , Drucker suggested that
managers in the future would be held accountable for
results rather than for the pattern of human relations
within their plants and offices . As a consequence of this
results-focused accountability , new roles , responsibilities , 
Management by Objectives——633
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 633
and needed knowledge and skills would be created
for managers that differed greatly from those required
in the past . This new manager was to ( a ) be judged
by what his or her followers do ,  ( b ) have no definable “ executive personality ,  ”  ( c ) make things happen ,  
( d ) be more of a generalist than in the past ,  ( e ) be an
organizer , and ( f ) be oriented toward results and
responsibility . 
A quality MBO program provides a synthesis of
three processes that relate directly to the new results
orientation expectations for managers : goal setting , 
participative decision making , and objective feedback . 
Several conditions contribute to the success of an
MBO program . First is the support of the top executives
in the organization . Second is the extent to which this is
a mutual process . Among the problems with implementation that have caused MBO to fall out of favor is that
the involvement of others was not pursued ; in fact , it
became more a practice in which people are told they
will be involved , but are not involved in any significant
way . In many instances , individuals were forced to
accept the boss ’ s goals rather than actually be involved in
the goal-setting process . When this occurred , people felt
pressured to pursue goals to which they were not committed and might even have found undesirable . This
development created mistrust , lowered commitment , and
even precipitated withdrawal from the process A third
important factor is continuous feedback . Once goals and
objectives are set and processes for achievement are
identified , monitoring of implementation must occur
throughout the year or budget cycle . Open and frequent
two-way communication between supervisors and subordinates aids in making adjustments as necessary in
objectives , processe , and / or resource allocations . 
When implementation of the process has these and
other characteristics and key factors , the system is
more likely to succeed , and productivity within the
organization favorably influenced . 
Unfortunately , however , the “ typical MBO ” 
process as implemented has little top management
support or involvement , generally influences only a
small percentage of employees , is more mandated than
cooperative in nature , and is loosely ( and poorly ) linked
to an appraisal system . 
The general sequence of the MBO process has two
major components : first , the process begins with the
establishment of overall objectives for the total organization for the target period ; second , once these
objectives have been approved , they must be translated into action steps to be taken by each manager . 
Management by objectives is made up of many of the
things that are already a part of many organizations
rather than an additional program . 
—Anita Pankake
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; decision
making ; economics , theories of ; goals , goal setting ; management theories ; organizational theories ; outputs , of
systems ; productivity
Further Readings and References
Bowditch , J . L .  ,  & Buono , A . F .  ( 2001 )  . A primer on organizational behavior ( 5th ed .  )  . New York : John Wiley & Sons . 
Drucker , P .  ( 1954 )  . The practice of management . New York : 
Harper & Row . 
Drucker , P .  ( 1974 )  . Management by objectives and selfcontrol . In Management : Tasks , responsibilities , practices 
( pp . 430–442 )  . New York : Harper & Row . 
Odiorne , G . S .  ( 1965 )  . Management by objectives : A system of
managerial leadership . New York : Pitman . 
 MANAGEMENT
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Management information systems ( MIS ) are designed
to arrange and interpret information stored in a digital
format . These systems automate sorting and inquiry
using computers and provide reports that are the bases
for decision making by staff and officials . Schools , 
districts , and state education agencies are increasingly
required to collect and manage large quantities of
information about students , especially to meet legal
reporting requirements such as those under the No
Child Left Behind Act of 2001 . 
These computerized databases carry a load far
greater than paper systems and allow the blending of
separate data files . Advanced technology and digital
communications require broad-based planning , interoperable components , training , and staffing . Ideally , 
the additional cost of implementation is offset by
increased ability to collect and analyze data . Information
management systems generally integrate data input
and collection , data storage , computer-coded instructions to combine and separate data for analysis , reports
to stakeholders , and security measures to protect , 
restore , and ensure privacy of the data . 
The implementation of computer-assisted school
information systems began in the mid-1980s . By
2001 , No Child Left Behind called on school districts
to test every K–12 student , collect these test scores , 
634———Management Information Systems
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 634
and sort the information on various student subgroups . 
Nowadays , schools must show that they examine and
scrutinize the achievements of all students in order to
isolate the most successful practices . Data are commonly collected using unique student identifiers , and
include information on enrollment , state test scores , 
course completion , college entrance and proficiency
exams and graduation , diploma and dropout rates . 
At the school , district , and state level , educational
agencies continue to build the capacity to collect and
manage sizeable quantities of data and sort individual
records in myriad ways . Computer equipment and software may vary , but good information management
systems contain certain characteristics : 
• Data are collected at the most elemental level possible . 
• Data are included on students , teachers , principals , 
and other staff . 
• Data are stored in relational databases that facilitate
sorting in ways that may be unanticipated . 
• Key elements are collected frequently , providing
nearly real-time availability . 
• Certain standard analyses are programmed into the
system . 
• Findings are reported to parents and the community
using friendly access , such as Web sites . 
• Systems ensure the privacy and security of individual
records . 
• Systems are automated to alert school officials if data
are reported outside of acceptable range . 
• To the extent possible , data are observable , reliable , 
and valid . 
• Inferred data are as stable , reliable , and valid as possible . 
• Systems allow maximum integration with existing
equipment and software applications to lower cost . 
Computer-based systems have become an integral
part of school information management , but technology is the tool , not the goal . The data are essentially
quantitative measures collected and stored electronically . Computers make information available to more
people with less effort , time , and cost . When placed in
context , interpreted , and disseminated to others , the
data provide information that engages discussion and
reflection for decision making about teaching , curriculum , and other education functions . In school
environments , the goal of information management
systems is ultimately to increase student success . 
—Tara Shepperson
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; 
capacity building , of organizations ; computers , use and impact of ; 
decision making ; forecasting ; human resource development ; 
instrumentation ; leadership , task-oriented ; management
theories ; measurement , theories of ; needs assessment ; operational definitions ; organizations , types of , typologies ; performance assessment ; planning models ; politics , of education ; 
power ; productivity ; professional development ; quantitative
research methods ; rational organizational theory ; reductionism / parsimony ; resource management ; school improvement
models ; site-based management ; standard setting ; standardized testing ; state departments of education ; strategic planning ; 
systems theory / thinking ; technology and the law ; time management ; variables ; work task measurement
Further Readings and References
Hardy , L .  ( 2003 )  . Information please : Managing all the data
required under NCLB is a task made for technology . 
American School Board Journal , 190 ( 7 )  , 20–22 . 
Jonassen , D .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Handbook of research on educational communications and technology . Mahwah , NJ : 
Erlbaum . 
Rosenberg , R .  ( 2004 )  . The social impact of computers . St . 
Louis , MO : Elsevier . 
Wenglinsky , H .  ( 2005 )  . Using technology wisely : The keys to
success in schools . New York : Teachers College Press . 
 MANAGEMENT THEORIES
Professional management positions in schools
evolved after other approaches failed to administer
effectively the growing , complex , urban systems of
public education . There have been four major theoretical shifts in management thinking , the roots of educational administration . 
Frederick Taylor was credited with founding the 
 “ scientific management ” or “ efficiency ” movement ; 
this was the first movement considered to have professionalized school superintendency . In his 1917
text , Scientific Management , Taylor stated that that the
waste and inefficiency prevalent in most industries
was rife in the educational system as well . He emphasized organization—including scientific analysis of
all aspects of work , the necessity of job descriptions , 
and clarification regarding recruitment , training , 
appraisal , and employee rewards—as the solution for
making operations leaner and more effective . Time
study , price rate , separation of planning from performance , and scientific methods of work were Taylor ’ s
chief principles of management . When those principles were applied to education , organization and efficiency would increase , but Taylor ’ s critics claimed
that education was becoming a production process , 
Management Theories———635
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 635
with schools as factories and students as raw materials en route to becoming products—all under the
guidance of teachers being closely monitored by managerial staff who specified production goals and controlled all methods of achieving those goals . 
Influenced by Taylor ’ s attitudes toward management and workers , Ellwood Cubberley concluded
that the duties of the superintendent were to organize
and direct the work of the schools , lead the school
board and staff , arbitrate between the board and
staff , and supervise instruction . In 1949 , Henry
Fayol described a set of common processes and principles adopted by educators as descriptive of the
functions of administrators . The processes included
planning , organization , commanding , coordination , 
and control . Thus Taylor and Fayol addressed the
same efficiency and productivity concerns using
the scientific method—Taylor for the bottom of the
organization pyramid up and Fayol for the top of the
organization down . 
In the 1930s and 1940s , the human relations
movement in management developed as a reaction to
Taylor ’ s heavy emphasis on production and the apparent lack of respect for workers . Mary Parker Follett , 
the most influential contributor to the philosophy of
the period , held in 1924 that the fundamental problem
of any organization was the building and maintenance
of dynamic , yet harmonious , human relationships . 
Among the first to speak out on the value and dignity
of satisfied workers , she helped lay the groundwork
for organizational behavior as an interdisciplinary
science . Perhaps her best known contribution is her
four principles of organization . Follett maintained that
adherence to the principles should contribute to
dynamic , harmonious human relationships ; there
should be direct contact with workers in the early
stages of their work ; coordination of work activities is
a reciprocal and a continuing process ; and , in dealing
with conflict , which Follett considered a normal
process in management , she urged the creative solution or problem-solving approach ,  “ integration ,  ” 
rather than domination or compromise . 
Follett ’ s theories were bolstered by the writings of
John Dewey and Kurt Lewin , but perhaps most significantly by the studies of Elton Mayo and colleagues at
Western Electric Company ’ s Hawthorne ( Illinois ) 
plant . From 1924 to 1932 , Mayo and his colleagues
dismissed the assumption that wages and physical
working conditions did not drive employee motivation
and productivity above all others . Mayo and colleagues
also found that the amount of work completed was
determined in part by workers ’ social capacities and
their self-perceived importance to management ; they
also found that social codes , conventions , traditions , 
and routine or customary ways of responding to situations influenced effective work relations . Their studies prompted further research of behavior as the
human relations approach to management escalated in
profile between 1930 and 1950 . 
Chester I . Barnard , former president of the
Rockefeller Foundation and the New Jersey Bell
Telephone Company , influenced a third theoretical
perspective of management—the management behavior theory within a social science framework . In 1938 , 
Barnard amalgamated scientific management and
humanistic concepts , resulting in a new view of effectiveness and efficiency . Barnard emphasized the importance
of management ’ s leadership role and organizational
cooperation , but he recognized the influence of the
individual , social groupings , and surrounding conditions on organizational leadership . 
Thus , he considered authority delegated from the
bottom of the organization rather than from the top . 
Using a functionalist ’ s argument ( that systems function in order to satisfy certain human needs )  , 
Barnard considered organizational effectiveness as
having to do with achievement of goals , which are
of two kinds , physical ( environmental ) and social . 
He suggests that the organizational systems of effectiveness and efficiency are linked together through
an identifiable , stable system of communications , 
maintained by the executive . He considered executives of complex organizations to have three chief
functions : 
1 . The executive preserves organizational communication through an organizational division of labor and
the control or supervision of the organizational
whole , which includes effective selection , promotion , 
demotion , and dismissal of personnel . The executive
also maintains an informal communication system
involving the compatibility of personnel . 
2 . The executive encourages recruiting and maintaining key personnel into cooperative relationships
with the organization . This is accomplished mainly
by maintaining morale , inducements and deterrents , 
supervision and control , inspection , education , and
training . 
3 . The executive devises and characterizes the goals and
objectives of the organization . 
636———Management Theories
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 636
Barnard ’ s sociological analysis of these two dimensions of organization ( effectiveness and efficiency ) 
is a precursor to other theories of management . 
Included among the social scientists extending
Barnard ’ s social systems theory of management are
Chris Argyris , Bernard Bass , Jacob Getzels , Daniel
Griffiths , Andrew Halpin , Barbara Hemphill , James
March , Michael Cohen , and Philip Selznick . Of these
scholars , the work of Getzels has been most influential
to the theory of educational management . With colleagues and students in the Midwest Administration
Center at the University of Chicago , Getzels ( and later , 
Getzels and Egon Guba ) formulated a theoretical model
that viewed administration as a social process , where
the social system influenced operations . This model
gave theoretical assistance to numerous empirical studies based upon the combination of the informal and the
formal aspects of administration . These social scientists
considered the educational organization as a unique
social system where management functions within a
network of interpersonal or social relationships . The
network of interactions is a crucial factor in the administrative process . Within this social system , behavior is
shaped by both psychological and sociological factors . 
In the two-component system of the Getzels-Guba
model , the observed behavior is a function of the institutional role as defined by the expectations attached to it
and the personality component of the role incumbent as
defined by the person ’ s needs . While social scientists
made great strides in management theory in a relatively
short period of time , a criticism of both efficiency and
human relation theories is their closed system emphasis . 
By focusing almost exclusively on individual and group
issues , the larger economic , social , political , and legal
contexts of educational administration are underemphasized and often ignored . 
A fourth theoretical perspective of management is a
hybrid approach from critical theory and postmodern
theory . From the Frankfurt School of Philosophy , critical
theorists include Theodor Adorno , Herbert Marcuse , 
and Jürgen Habermas . These philosophers and anthropologist Pierre Bourdieu are opposed to closed philosophical systems and pretensions to absolute truth . To
address the legitimacy of and potential for changing
existing power structures , critical theorists generally
hold the view that humans create their history and
society , which , they believe , should be a society of free
actors that go beyond the tension between , and abolish
the opposition to , one ’ s purposefulness , spontaneity , 
rationality , and the results of one ’ s labor . While offering
a critique of other social theories , critical theorists provide tools for seeing anew ideas or processes taken for
granted . Oppositional thinking is one of the keys for
gaining such insight . 
Postmodern management theory has as its focus
the constructing or resurrecting of stories and voices
of excluded , marginalized , and exploited members in
modern organizations . Among the theories subsumed
under postmodernism are structuralism , semiotics , 
poststructuralism , and deconstruction . Key theorists , 
including Jean Baudrillard and Jean-François Lyotard , 
posit the notion that culture is composed of fragments
of experiences and images bombarding individuals . 
The speed and ease of reproduction of these images
suggest that they can exist only as images , devoid of
depth , coherence , or originality ; there is no consideration for the unity of the whole . The postmodern manager , thus , should operate with an understanding that
a more enlightened and empowering manager who
has a great understanding of the whole as well as its
parts can counter exploitation within the organization . 
Conversely , there is skeptical postmodernism , where
any procedure for fairness and justice has the potential
to be exploited into a routine of higher performance
expectations and render any postmodern prescription
into a modernist command and control tool . 
In open systems theory , a bridge between social
and critical theory , organizations are capable of selfmaintenance based on environmental input or interaction , essential for open system functioning . Within the
open systems perspective are several schools of thought
of which contingency or situational theory has been
influential in management theory development . 
Contingency theory sees organizational and management processes and choices as contingent upon the
particular character or nature of the organization itself , 
the environment of the organization at that particular
moment , and the specific task or tasks the organization
seeks to accomplish at a particular time . Basically , 
when managers make a decision , they must take into
account all aspects of the current situation and act on
those aspects that are key to the situation at hand . Key
scholars in this theoretical field include Henry Fielder , 
Henry Mintzberg , and Victor Vroom . 
An emerging management theory within the critical postmodern perspective is chaos theory , the notion
that while events are rarely controlled , within those
existing events lie patterns of behavior . From the work
of physicists James Gleick in 1987 and Edward Lorenz
in 1993 , chaos theory grounds a postmodern science
Management Theories———637
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 637
of management that is ambiguous , at best unpredictable , 
and hence unknowable to the degree of precision
demanded by modern science . Chaos theory is about
how very simple things can generate very complex outcomes that could not be guessed by just looking solely
at the parts . While the theory predicts that complex
nonlinear systems are inherently unpredictable , concurrently , chaos theory ensures that often , the way to
express such an unpredictable system lies not in exact
equations but in representations of the behavior of a
system , that is , to watch a system over time to find the
patterns of behavior not immediately seen in the organization . Thus , chaos theory , which many think is about
unpredictability , is at the same time about predictability
in even the most unstable systems . 
Chaos theorists suggest that systems naturally go to
more complexity , and as they do so , these systems
become more volatile ( or susceptible to cataclysmic
events ) and must expend more energy to maintain that
complexity . As they expend more energy , they seek
more structure to maintain stability . This trend continues until the system splits , combines with another complex system , or falls apart entirely . According to the
theory , life is caught in the tension between order and
chaos . Too much order , everything becomes the same
and there is no room for creativity or anything new . Too
much chaos , and nothing can last long enough to create
anything useful ; the chaos is a jumble that destroys the
lot before it can get started . Between order and chaos is
found the “ edge of chaos ,  ” the point at which there is
enough chaos for creativity but enough order for appropriate patterns to endure . Complexity , also called the 
 “ edge of chaos ,  ” is the name given to the emerging field
of research that explores systems in which a great many
independent agents are interacting with each other in a
great many ways . Complexity can occur in natural and
human-made systems , and in social structures . There
are several principles in complexity theory , but one key
principle is the understanding that different parts of
complex systems are linked and affect one another in a
synergistic manner . 
In management science , chaos theorist Margaret
Wheatley and complexity theorists Peter Senge and
Richard Pascale suggest that systems naturally go to
more complexity , and as they do , become more volatile
and must expend more energy to maintain that complexity . As systems expend more energy , they seek more
structure to maintain stability . This trend continues
until the system splits , combines with another complex
system , or falls apart entirely . The focus of the manager
or leader in a chaotic environment becomes one of
managing change and the volatility brought by the
change . A postmodern organization would include a
network of diverse , self-managed , self-controlled
teams with many centers of coordination that fold and
unfold according to the requirements of the tasks . The
teams are organized in a flat design , employees are
highly empowered and involved in the job , information
is fluid , and continuous improvement is emphasized
throughout the organization . 
Other trends continue the critical postmodern movement in management theory . One area of study , as
noted by Michael Fullan in 2001 , includes the management of change and the change process . Critical theory
can make valuable contributions , for example , to the
management of change in work organizations by
revealing otherwise hidden agendas , power , and managerial assumptions embedded within organizations . 
Managers , within this perspective , are taught to look at
the dynamic of systems , the fragmentation of contexts , 
and the emergence of new cyberspace , a new narrative
understanding of management , one not trapped in linearity but based in complexity . Broader institutional
questions are raised regarding how particular systems
can be seen as “ colonizing mechanisms ” for those in
power . Hugh Willmott suggested in 1992 that critical
management learning should go beyond identifying
power differences to address the legitimacy of and
potential for changing the existing power structure , and
promotes the notion of management for critical action . 
Research in management , from a critical postmodern
perspective , might include political influence on decision
making , diverse interests in organizations , uses and / or
abuses of power , economics , managerial assumptions
underlying decision making , organizational factors preventing change , critical action research , manipulation
or social engineering masked as staff development , and
the influence of women and diverse cultural groups on
management . 
There are many varied approaches to the management of any organization . As noted , the approaches to
the management of schools and school districts seem
to be concentrated in four major areas , over a historical period of about 100 years . The scientific management or “ efficiency ” period of Frederick Taylor at the
turn of the nineteenth century led to the human relations movement of the 1930s and 1940s with Mary
Parker Follett leading the way . Chester I . Barnard provided the grounding for the third shift in management
theory promulgated by social scientists who provided
638———Management Theories
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 638
a variety of theoretical frameworks for research and
discussion about managing organizations . The conceptualization of management has begun to shift from
the social sciences to critical and postmodern theory
as scholars pursue research in chaos , complexity , and
dialectical approaches to further understanding of organizational management . 
—JoAnn Danelo Barbour
See also administration , theories of ; Barnard , Chester I .  ; bureaucracy ; chaos theory ; constructivism ; contingency theories ; 
critical theory ; Cubberley , Ellwood ; Dewey , John ; division of
labor ; empowerment ; feminism and theories of leadership ; 
Follett , Mary Parker ; functionalist theory ; Halpin , Andrew
William ; Hawthorne Studies , the ; leadership , theories of ; 
management by objectives ; McGregor , Douglas ; motivation , 
theories of ; nomothetic / idiographic dimensions ; organizational theories ; path-goal leadership theory ; postmodernism ; 
rational organizational theory ; scientific management ; systems theory / thinking ; Taylor , Frederick ; Theory X , Theory Y ; 
women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Alvesson , M .  ,  & Willmott , H .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1992 )  . Critical management studies . London : Sage . 
Barnard , C . I .  ( 1966 )  . The functions of the executive . 
Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press .  ( Original work
published 1938 )  . 
Cubberley , E . P .  ( 1915 )  . Superintendent of schools . 
Elementary School Journal , 16 , 149 . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . The postmodern challenge to the theory
and practice of educational administration . Springfield , 
IL : Charles C Thomas . 
Fayol , H .  ( 1949 )  . General and industrial management . 
London : Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons . 
Follett , M . P .  ( 1924 )  . Creative experience . New York : 
Longmans , Green . 
Getzels , J . W .  ( 1952 )  . A psycho-sociological framework
for the study of educational administration . Harvard
Educational Review , 22 , 235–246 . 
Jones , J .  ( 2004 )  . Management skills in schools . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Marcuse , H .  ( 1964 )  . One-dimensional man . Boston : Beacon
Press . 
Pascale , R .  , Millemann , M .  , and Gioja , L .  ( 2000 )  . Surfing the
edge of chaos : The laws of nature and the new laws of business . New York : Crown Business . 
Starratt , R .  ( 2003 )  . Centering educational administration . 
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Taylor , F . W .  ( 1917 )  . Scientific management . New York : 
Harper & Row . 
Wheatley , M .  ( 1999 )  . Leadership and the new science : 
Discovering order in a chaotic world ( 2nd ed .  )  . San
Francisco : Berrett-Koehler . 
 MANN , HORACE
Horace Mann ( 1796–1859 ) is widely known as the
Father of the Common Schools . Throughout his long
and distinguished career , he viewed common knowledge as the sine qua non of a civilized society . As
such , only a system of public education , specifically
common schools attached to normal teacher training
schools , could ensure social and economic progress
as well as sustain democracy . To Mann , education and
democracy were correlatives ; neither could exist without the other . However , what separated Mann from
other educational leaders , before and at least since
John Dewey , was his ability to be both philosopher
and the political activist on behalf of public education . 
Like many educated men of his day , Mann turned
to teaching as a way to support his own studies . He
attended Brown University and enrolled in one of the
most prestigious law schools of his day , Litchfield , in
Connecticut . A year after he earned his law degree , he
was elected to the Dedham , Massachusetts , School
Committee . He would serve in both the Massachusetts
state house and its senate as well as in the U . S . House
of Representatives . In 1837 , he was appointed by the
governor to a newly constituted board of education
and was selected as its first secretary . Mann held this
position for 11 years , from 1837 to 1848 . It was during his tenure that the first system of public education
was developed in Massachusetts . 
In his first lecture to the Massachusetts Common
School Convention , in 1838 , Mann described the current state of public schools as directionless . His plan
was to create an organization that would disseminate
the best practices of each local community school to
all schools . Along with his colleague Cyrus Peirce , he
built the state ’ s first normal school in Lexington to
train teachers in both pedagogy and subject matter . 
Among his many progressive ideas , one rule stood
above all others in teaching children , that is , that
learning and pleasure are inseparable . Mann opposed
corporal punishment and one-dimensional pedagogies
that turned teaching into telling and school subjects
into mere words on a page . He decried the deplorable
conditions in which children learned , arguing that
schoolhouses should be neat , attractive , and fittingly
comfortable for children to learn . He chided textbook
publishers for seeking profits and not publishing quality books appropriate to children . He was an ardent
supporter of both public and school libraries , seeking
to build collections of secular books for adults and
Mann , Horace———639
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 639
children consistent with his advocacy of the separation
of church and state . As for school improvement , Mann
believed in standards of excellence that extended
beyond individual schools and communities . 
To Mann , the moral and social issues always turned
on the necessity for a system of public education . He
held up education as the most important of all subjects . 
He could not compromise causes in which he believed , 
whether the issues be education , temperance , or antislavery . He opened his house in West Newton to Chloe
Lee , the first Negro applicant to that normal school . 
Later in his career , his antislavery views put him in
opposition to the great Massachusetts statesman Daniel
Webster . Mann , the system builder , understood that
slavery itself undermined the potential of public education for all citizens . 
As secretary of education , Mann wrote 12 Annual
Reports ( 1837–1848 )  , 10 volumes of the Common
School Journal ( 1839–1848 )  , and Official Lectures 
( 1838–1842 )  . After he left the position , he succeeded
John Quincy Adams in the House of Representatives . 
During one of the most significant congressional
debates in the history of the U . S . House of Representatives , on June 30 , 1848 , Mann argued that enslaving
a man destroys ambition and ingenuity . Paradoxically , 
Mann would become the target of attacks by the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison , who thought Mann
lukewarm in his opposition to slavery . Mann did not
seek reelection to the House but did allow himself to
become a candidate for governor to promote the Free
Soil Party . His resignation from Congress along with
his defeat for governor left Mann with no electoral
political future . 
Although he continued to work throughout the states
on behalf of common schools , he took on another
great educational challenge , the first presidency of
Antioch College in Yellow Springs , Ohio ( 1853–
1859 )  . From the beginning , this coeducational and
nonsectarian school faced financial hardships . As with
all of his past endeavors , he worked with a sense of
urgency to see tasks accomplished . 
—Ira Bogotch
See also administration , theories of ; Black education ; boards
of education ; capacity building , of organizations ; character
education ; curriculum , theories of ; discrimination ; early
childhood education ; ethics ; ethos , of organizations ; finance , 
of public schools ; governance ; great man theory ; individual
differences , in children ; infrastructure , of organizations ; 
instructional interventions ; knowledge base , of the field ; 
learning , theories of ; literacy , theories of ; management
theories ; motivation , theories of ; normal schools ; Peirce , 
Cyrus ; philosophies of education ; politics , of education ; 
power ; rational organizational theory ; resource management ; schools of education
Further Readings and References
Bogotch , I .  ( 2005 )  . A history of public school leadership : The
first century , 1837–1942 . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 7–33 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Mann , H .  ( 1969 )  . Lectures on education . New York : Arno
Press .  ( Original work published 1855 ) 
Messerli , J .  ( 1972 )  . Horace Mann : A biography . New York : 
Alfred A . Knopf . 
Tharp , L .  ( 1953 )  . Until victory : Horace Mann and Mary
Peabody . Boston : Little , Brown . 
Williams , E .  ( 1937 )  . Horace Mann : Educational statesman . 
New York : Macmillan . 
 MARKET THEORY
OF SCHOOLING
Under certain well-defined conditions , markets in
which buyers and sellers meet to exchange goods
and services are able to produce efficient results . 
However , most national governments all over the
world exercised great care not to rely on markets to
produce and distribute educational services , particularly at the K–12 level . The logic behind this mistrust
of market forces is grounded on the assumption that
markets experience imperfections in producing and
distributing some goods and services . These goods
and services are called public goods in the field of
public administration . Governments must intervene in
such markets to produce socially efficient results . 
Public goods theory uses five criteria for the evaluation of market efficiency for education and justification
of government intervention . These five conditions must
be met for a private sector of the economy—the
market—to function efficiently . Indeed , these conditions are essential if the private sector is to perform in
the public interest . These conditions are ( 1 ) perfect
information about what is available , at what price
throughout the economy ,  ( 2 ) all goods and services produced , as well as productive inputs , must be perfectly
mobile ,  ( 3 ) there should be no market domination by
either producers , consumers , or third parties of any sort ,  
( 4 ) there should be no jointness in supply , and finally 
( 5 ) there should be no externalities . 
640———Market Theory of Schooling
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 640
Evaluation of education markets indicates that it is
possible for them to operate , but at the same time it may
lead systematically to socially inefficient results , particularly for basic education . For instance , mobility can be
a serious problem in educational markets . A parent
might be knowledgeable about a program well suited for
his or her child but be stymied by the distance between
the school and the home . Mobility problems occur in
many other markets only once , at the time of purchase . 
On the other hand , in education markets , there is a recurring problem , and it can seriously undermine the efficiency of market solutions . To some degree , education is
a jointly supplied service . When two students sit in a
lecture hall , the fact that one student listens to the instructor does not preclude the other students from listening
simultaneously . However , this interpretation may be
oversimplistic , and at the price level , to which education
is jointly supplied , it remains ambiguous . Jointness at
least poses significant resource allocation issues
because it becomes difficult to measure the flow of
resources to individuals when it is unclear what conditions educational resources are in joint supply . 
There has been a widespread agreement that the
external effects of education are the main reason for both
the justification of education as a public service and a
failure of the market . In addition to private benefits to
students , education benefits parents and society in general . External benefits are important for two reasons . First , 
from an equity point of view , if costs of private or public
services are to be borne by those who benefit from them , 
then those who receive external benefits should contribute to the financing of education . Second , an optimal
level of educational expenditure will result only if omitted ; too little education will be consumed from an economic efficiency perspective . Despite these arguments , 
private production and distribution of education always
found strong supporters in theory as well as in practice . 
For instance , 11% of K–12 students are educated in private schools . The supporters of private delivery of education claim that efficiency and choice , two of the three
main principles of American education , are sacrificed to
achieve equality . Supporters of private delivery of educational services argue that government monopoly in K–12
produces inefficiencies , while a competitive education
market place would produce much greater upward pressures on quality and downward pressures on price . 
Similarly , satisfaction and choice by parents and the efficiency of schools have increased in competitive markets . 
The goals of competitive efficiency and educational freedom are inseparable . 
There are clear indications that private delivery of
basic education will carry the current momentum into
the future . The Supreme Court ’ s landmark 2002 decision in Zelman v . Simmons-Harris decisively approved
choice plans , and thus public funds may flow to private
schools . Another indication is the dramatic increase in
charter schools and educational management organizations in response to these new conditions . There were
about 700 , 000 students in 3 , 000 charter schools in
2004 . Over the last decade , more and more school district boards of education have looked to private companies to manage poorly performing schools and
school districts . The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 
( NCLB ) has further increased the chances of private
companies ’ involvement in public education . Schools
that continuously fail to make adequate progress
toward meeting state goals are eventually subjected to
fundamental restructuring by the state , which includes
turning the operation of the school over to a private
company . Success stories of privatization of basic education in some other developed nations , such as the
Netherlands , have exemplified the possible future look
of our understanding of the market theory of schooling . 
—Ibrahim Duyar
See also accountability ; charter schools ; choice , of schools ; 
competition , forms of , in schools ; cost benefit analyses ; 
economics , theories of ; equality , in schools ; equity and adequacy of funding schools ; finance , of public schools ; global
cultural politics ; globalism ; hierarchical developmental
models ; learning environments ; management theories ; 
parental involvement ; planning models ; productivity ; 
resource management ; voucher plans
Further Readings and References
Anderson , G .  ,  & Pini , M .  ( 2005 )  . Educational leadership and
the new economy : Keeping the “ public ” in public schools . 
In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational
leadership ( pp . 216–236 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Andre-Bechely , L .  ( 2005 )  . Could it be otherwise ? Parents and
the inequities of public school choice . London : Routledge . 
Belfield , C .  ,  & Levin , H .  ( 2005 )  . Privatizing America ’ s
schools : How parents choose , how schools perform . 
Boulder , CO : Paradigm . 
Duyar , I .  ( 1996 )  . Market imperfections in education . Journal
of Educational Administration , 2 ( 1 )  , 53–67 . 
Emery , K .  ,  & Ohanian , S .  ( 2004 )  . Why is corporate America
bashing our public schools ? Portsmouth , NH : Heinemann . 
Green , C .  ( 2005 )  . The privatization of state education . London : 
Routledge . 
Saltman , K .  ( 2005 )  . The Edison Schools : Corporate schooling
and the assault on public education . New York : Routledge . 
Market Theory of Schooling———641
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 641
 MARSHALL , THURGOOD
Thurgood Marshall ( 1908–1993 ) successfully led the legal
team in Brown v . Board of Education for Black plaintiffs
before the U . S . Supreme Court where the Court in 1954
declared racial segregation of public education unconstitutional . Marshall was born July 2 , 1908 , in Baltimore , 
Maryland , and died January 24 , 1993 in Bethesda , 
Maryland , at age 84 . He grew up in Baltimore in a middleclass home and attended Black schools and universities : 
Lincoln University in Pennsylvania , where he earned a
bachelor ’ s degree in American Literature and Philosophy
in 1930 , and law school at Howard University in
Washington , D . C . In 1933 , Marshall graduated from law
school first in his class and passed the Maryland bar that
same year . He was mentored in law school by the dean and
chief counsel for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP )  , Charles Hamilton
Houston , a distinguished Black attorney . Houston had finished first in his class at Amherst College and was a
member of the Law Review at Harvard Law School . 
Thurgood Marshall is most famous for successfully
directing and arguing the 1954 Brown v . Board of
Education case before the Supreme Court , but there
were other accomplishments after Brown . In 1965 , he
became the first Black attorney to be appointed U . S . 
solicitor general , the nation ’ s highest ranking lawyer . 
As solicitor general , Marshall won 14 of 19 cases
argued during his 2-year tenure in that position . In
1967 , he was the first Black to become a member
of the U . S . Supreme Court , where he authored many
majority and minority opinions for the Court . 
In 1935 , Marshall began the road to Brown by
joining his law school mentor Houston at the NAACP
as assistant legal counsel . His major cases in the early
1930s involved teacher salary equalization cases in
states with segregated school systems , voting rights
cases , and equal funding for Black schools . Marshall
won several cases in the southern and border states outlawing segregation in graduate and professional programs in White universities . His first legal brief
occurred in law school when he assisted with a 1932
case against the University of North Carolina . This and
other cases against segregated higher education set the
stage for his legal strategy to eliminate racially segregated schools . In 1938 , Marshall replaced his mentor
Charles Houston as chief counsel for the NAACP , and
in 1939 , he established a separate organization for the
NAACP to handle legal issues , the Legal Defense and
Education Fund , and became its director . 
In 1929 , upon graduation from Lincoln University , 
Marshall applied for admission to the University of
Maryland Law School but was refused admission
because of his race . He later successful litigated a case
that integrated the Maryland law school . Marshall
directed the Legal Defense and Education Fund for 21
years , argued 32 cases before the U . S . Supreme Court , 
and assisted with 11 other cases . He developed the strategy to end racial segregation under the law . He often
declined cases involving legal segregation in other areas
to focus exclusively on segregation in education . 
No single individual has had a more profound and
positive impact on American juris prudence in the
Supreme Court ’ s history than Thurgood Marshall . 
Marshall , almost single-handedly , improved democracy
in America by his long and determined battle to rid the
country of legally enforced racially segregated public
education . The Brown decision led to elimination of
racial segregation in other areas of America ’ s life such
as public transportation , movie theaters , restaurants , and
parks . But Marshall saw education as the centerpiece of
his strategy for improving the life chances for African
Americans and at the same time provided the world with
a more positive image of America . 
—Frank Brown
See also affirmative action ; Afrocentric theories ; Black education ; desegregation , of schools ; DuBois , W . E . B .  ; equality , 
in schools ; equity and adequacy of funding schools ; ethnicity ; governance ; Mendez , Felicitas ; minorities , in schools ; 
multiculturalism ; National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ; politics , of education ; resiliency ; 
Washington , Booker T .  ; Woodson , Carter G . 
Further Readings and References
Davis , M . D .  ,  & Clark , H . R .  ( 1994 )  . Thurgood Marshall : 
Warrior at the bar , rebel on the bench . New York : Carol . 
Kluger , R .  ( 1975 )  . Simple justice . New York : Random House . 
 MARX , KARL
Karl Marx ( 1818–1883 )  , a philosopher , journalist , 
economist , and revolutionary , was born on May 5 , 
1818 , in Trier , Germany . Marx ’ s father , Heinrich , was
a respected attorney , owned several vineyards , and
was a moderately prosperous member of the middle
class . Marx ’ s parents were Jewish , but in 1824 , Heinrich
converted the family to Protestantism to avoid the
642———Marshall , Thurgood
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 642
social and economic losses that would have followed
from Prussian laws that banned Jews from holding
public office or practicing in the professions . Supported
economically by his father , Marx spent a year at Bonn
University as a law student , studying sporadically , drinking heavily , and engaging in various acts of brawling
and hell-raising . Heinrich Marx , dismayed at his son ’ s
behavior , arranged for Marx ’ s transfer to the more rigorous University of Berlin , where Marx , though reading
voraciously , continued his rabble-rousing ways , rarely
attending lectures , and incurring many debts . 
When Heinrich Marx died in 1838 , Marx ’ s mother , 
with whom Marx did not get along , essentially disowned him by cutting off his allowance and withholding his part of the family estate . From this time on , 
Marx had little to do with his mother and his seven
siblings . Now experiencing economic hardship ( a
hardship that would last without interruption for the
next three decades )  , Marx also experienced an intellectual crucible through a profound engagement with
Hegel ’ s work . Turning from the study of law ( and an
assured economic future in the profession his father had
chosen for him ) to the study of philosophy ( which
held little promise of an economically stable professional future )  , Marx read all of G . W . F . Hegel ’ s work
and became deeply involved with the Young
Hegelians , a group that embraced Hegel ’ s dialectical
method while radically critiquing Hegel ’ s idealism . 
Marx eventually finished his dissertation in 1841 , but
because of an anti-Hegelian purge at the University
of Berlin , Marx submitted his dissertation to the
University of Jena , receiving his doctorate in absentia . 
In 1842 , Marx moved to Cologne and became editor
of the influential progressive newspaper Rheinische
Zeitung , which the Prussian ( i . e .  , monarchist , oppressive , 
militaristic ) government shut down because of Marx ’ s
incisive critiques of the monarchy and its bureaucracy . In
1843 , Marx married Jenny von Westphalen , the daughter
of Baron von Westphalen , a prominent member of Trier
society . Marx moved to Paris in the fall of 1843 and
worked for Vorwarts !  , a biweekly communist journal . 
Jenny gave birth to a daughter in May 1844 , and it was
at this time that Marx and Friedrich Engels ( 1820–1895 ) 
became friends . Engels ’ s father was a prosperous
German industrialist who owned cotton mills , one of
which was in Manchester , which Engels managed . 
Engels was shocked by the poverty in Manchester and
published Condition of the Working Classes in England , 
which deeply impressed Marx , who learned much from
the book . Marx and Engels ’ s friendship and collaboration
lasted for the rest of Marx ’ s life . In the summer of 1844 , 
Marx produced a series of writings that comprise the
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts , which were
not discovered until 1930 and published in 1932 . In this
work , Marx began to formulate his ideas on class struggle , proletarian revolution , and the abolition of private
productive property . Marx was expelled from Paris in
1844 for subversive journalism , and he and Jenny next
moved to Brussels , where Engels also moved at this time . 
During the next 3 years , Marx and Engels collaborated on one of their major achievements , The German
Ideology ( also published posthumously )  , which explains
their materialist conception of history to a degree unparalleled in their subsequent writings . Marx and Engels
joined the Communist League , which had its center in
London , and they quickly became the organization ’ s
major theoreticians , publishing The Communist Manifesto , 
perhaps the most widely read political pamphlet in
history . The Manifesto appeared just as a series of revolutionary uprisings were sweeping Europe ( France , 
Prussia , Austria , England )  . In 1848 , Marx moved first to
Paris and then on to Cologne , where he founded the
newspaper Neue Rheinische Zeitung , which was eventually suppressed by the government . In May of 1849 , 
Marx sought refuge in London , where he and Jenny
lived for the rest of their lives . 
When Marx and Jenny arrived in London , they had
four children and two more were soon born . During
the first half of the 1850s , the Marx family lived in a
small flat in the Soho district of London where they
continued to experience economic hardship , mainly
getting by through the economic support that Engels
provided , along with the payment Marx received from
his weekly articles for the New York Daily Tribune , a
popular radical newspaper in America . Between 1850
and 1852 , Marx wrote The Class Struggles in France
and The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte , 
lengthy pamphlets marked by a pessimistic tone that
contrasts with Marx and Engels ’ s earlier revolutionary
hopefulness . During this time , Marx was also spending long hours in the British Museum engaged in an
intense economic study , writing a huge manuscript 
( published posthumously ) called the Grundrisse 
(  “ Outline ”  )  , which contained the outline of the six
volumes of Capital that Marx had intended to write . 
In 1856 , and because of a modest yet invaluable inheritance from Jenny ’ s uncle , the Marx family moved
into a house in a middle-class neighborhood . Marx
continued to work on what would become the three
volumes of Capital . In 1864 , he was among the
Marx , Karl———643
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 643
founders of the International Workingman ’ s Association , 
and for the next 8 years he was the central figure of the
organization ’ s General Council in London . In 1867 , 
Marx finally published Volume 1 of Capital , his classic analysis of the capitalist processes of production . 
Marx worked on Volumes 2 and 3 of the Capital trilogy for the rest of his life , and Engels published them
posthumously . In 1870 , Marx finally achieved lasting
economic stability when Engels , having sold his partnership in the family business , provided Marx with a
comfortable yearly pension for the rest of his life . 
Jenny Marx died on December 2 , 1881 , of bronchitis . 
Marx died on March 14 , 1883 , in London and was
buried alongside Jenny in Highgate Cemetery . 
—James Trier
See also critical race theory ; critical theory ; dialectical
inquiry ; economics , theories of
Further Readings and References
Antonio , R .  ( 2003 )  . Introduction : Marx and Modernity . In
R . Antonio ( Ed .  )  , Marx and Modernity : Key readings and
commentary ( pp . 1–50 )  . Malden , MA : Blackwell . 
Callinicos , A .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1989 )  . Marxist theory . New York : 
Oxford University Press . 
Marx , K .  ( 1970 )  . Das kapital : A critique of political economy . 
Chicago : Henry Regnery . 
Marx , K .  ( 1969 )  . The communist manifesto . Chicago : Henry
Regnery . 
McLellan , D .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1979 )  . Marxism after Marx . Boston : 
Houghton Mifflin . 
Wheen , F .  ( 1999 )  . Karl Marx . London : Fourth Estate . 
 MASLOW , ABRAHAM
Abraham Maslow ’ s influence on the field of education
involved a movement away from the scientific emphasis and method and toward a person-oriented approach
to leadership and instruction . Maslow ’ s focus on the
needs common to all persons and each individual ’ s
struggle to fulfill specific needs changed both thought
and practice in administration and instruction . 
Maslow ( 1908–1970 ) was born in Brooklyn , 
New York , on April 1 , 1908 . He received his BA in
1930 , MA in 1931 , and PhD in 1934 from the University of Wisconsin . He became a Fellow at Columbia
University from 1935 to 1937 . He was on the
Brooklyn College faculty from 1937 to 1951 , and was
professor and chair of the department of psychology
at Brandeis University from 1951 to 1961 . 
Maslow ’ s theory concerns itself primarily with
growth motivation that can lead to self-actualization . 
Human beings , according to Maslow , are essentially and
innately good . The evil in human behavior is due to environmental factors rather than an inherent evil nature . 
Maslow emphasized growth motivation rather than
deficiency motivation . He stated that happier people
are oriented to growth motivation ( higher-degree needs )  , 
while more neurotic people are oriented toward deficiency motivation ( lower-degree needs )  . 
Maslow ’ s theory is a unified organismic theory . 
His theory attempts to synthesize the three approaches
to human personality : holistic , dynamic ( or motivational )  , and cultural . In every personality there is a
hierarchy of needs . These are degrees of psychological health in which one must successfully meet the
needs at one degree in order to go on to the next degree . 
This hierarchy ranges from the instinctual level to the
need for aesthetic reality . 
Maslow proposed five degrees of need priority that
lead to psychological health :  ( 1 ) physiological needs ,  
( 2 ) safety needs ,  ( 3 ) love and belongingness needs ,  ( 4 ) 
self-esteem needs , and ( 5 ) self-actualization needs . 
The first and second are of the lower order . If they are
not met , the following three cannot be met . Thus , love
and belongingness , self-esteem , and self-actualization
are considered to be needs of a higher nature . He proposed that self-actualization needs are different from
the others . They involve the needs for cognition and
for aesthetic reality . Humans have a strong desire and
need to know and understand not only themselves but
the world around them . 
Maslow described the characteristics of psychologically healthy , self-actualized people . Among these
are ( 1 ) being realistically oriented ,  ( 2 ) accepting self , 
others , and situations “ as they are ,  ”  ( 3 ) having a high
degree of spontaneity and unaffected behavior ,  
( 4 ) being problem-centered rather than self-centered ,  
( 5 ) having a need for occasional privacy ,  ( 6 ) being
autonomous and self-dependent ,  ( 7 ) having a unique
view of people and the world ,  ( 8 ) being somewhat
mystical with profound inner experiences ,  ( 9 ) having
a strong identity with all of humanity ,  ( 10 ) having
close , deep , and intimate relationships with a select
few ,  ( 11 ) having strong democratically oriented values ,  ( 12 ) being highly ethical and moral ,  ( 13 ) being
philosophical with a whimsical , inner-motivated
sense of humor ,  ( 14 ) having a tremendous capacity for
644———Maslow , Abraham
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 644
creativity and novel approaches to operating , and 
( 15 ) being resistant to conformity and open to new
experiences . 
Maslow is significant to educators for his emphasis
on the affective side of education and development . 
He also provided insight into the psychological features of leadership and the personal attributes of different types of leaders . His constructs can be applied
equally to students , teachers , and administrators as
strategies for growth and development . 
—J . M . Blackbourn
See also coeducation ; cognition , theories of ; consideration , 
caring ; constructivism ; creativity , theories of ; curriculum , 
theories of ; esteem needs ; Freud , Sigmund ; humanistic
education ; imagination ; Jung , Carl ; learning , theories of ; 
McGregor , Douglas ; perceptual psychology ; personality ; 
philosophies of education ; psychology , types of ; qualitative
research , history , theories , issues ; resiliency ; role theory ; 
self-actualization ; Theory X , Theory Y ; transformational
leadership
Further Readings and References
Maslow , A .  ( 1954 )  . Motivation and personality . New York : 
Harper & Row . 
Maslow , A .  ( 1999 )  . Maslow on management . New York : John
Wiley & Sons . 
Milton , J .  ( 2002 )  . The road to malpsychia : Humanistic psychology and our discontents . San Francisco : Encounter
Books . 
 MASTERY LEARNING
Mastery learning is a method of learning and teaching
that involves the student reaching a level of predetermined mastery on units of instruction before being
allowed to progress to the next unit . Proponents of mastery learning affirm that all students can learn and achieve
the same level of content mastery when provided with
the appropriate learning conditions in the classroom but
within individual or personal time frames . 
Introduced into American education in the first quarter of the twentieth century , mastery learning has its
genesis in the work of Henry Morrison and Carleton
Washburne . While Morrison developed scales to study
instructional time and student attention , which led to
the mastery system of teaching and learning now
associated with Benjamin Bloom , Washburne developed the Winnetka Plan , a movement away from the
classic model of learning based on theories of intelligence in which all students are given the same amount
of time to learn and the focus is on differences in ability . Washburne urged a departure from recitation as
the primary form of classroom instruction . Students
worked individually on assignments with a focus
toward specific skill attainment and promotion based
on individual subject achievement rather than grade
placement . Interest in the mastery system waned in
the 1940s due , most likely , to the lack of technology
to sustain program development and implementation . 
Then , in the late 1950s , partly derived from B . F . 
Skinner ’ s emphasis on individualized learning and
the importance of feedback and reinforcement , a
revival of mastery learning began with programmed
instruction , an attempt to provide students with
instructional materials that would allow them to
move at their own pace and receive constant feedback
on mastery level . 
Although the work of others preceded them , John
Carroll and Benjamin Bloom are generally acknowledged as the architects of mastery learning . Carroll
posited that aptitude is the amount of time it takes
someone to learn any given material , rather than the
capability to master it , the traditional focus . His new
theory was based on the idea that all students have the
potential to learn material , but take different amounts
of time to learn . Two factors identify the learning rate
of a student : perseverance or motivation , the amount
of time a student is willing to spend on learning ( controlled by the student ) and the opportunity to learn 
( controlled by other persons or factors )  . A student ’ s
aptitude determines how much time is needed to master a unit , not the likelihood that one will ever be able
to master it . Carroll ’ s theoretical shift in focus places
more responsibility on the teacher , so the blame for a
student ’ s failure becomes instructional , a notion also
embraced by Bloom . In a mastery learning environment , the challenge becomes providing enough time
and appropriate instructional strategies so all students
can achieve similar levels of learning . 
Bloom closely followed Carroll , and is considered
the creator of mastery learning . With attention toward 
 “ learning for mastery ,  ” Bloom believed that given sufficient time and quality instruction , nearly all students
could learn . His mastery approach is based on three
fundamental conditions :  ( 1 ) the teacher provides initial instruction ; it is group-based , whole-class , more
or less conventional classroom teaching ,  ( 2 ) instruction is to be mastery-oriented , and students do not go
Mastery Learning———645
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 645
on to new material until they demonstrate mastery ,  ( 3 ) 
help is to be available when needed ; in order to help
students achieve mastery , aid is provided , for example , 
in the form of test feedback , tutoring , supplemental
materials , or small group instruction . 
The instructional cycle of mastery teaching includes
several components . A teacher or faculty develops a curriculum with major objectives representing the purposes
of a course or unit and defines mastery of the subject . 
Subject matter is divided into units that have predetermined , clearly specified objectives of what is to be learned
or expected ( a sequence of learning units with a set of
facts , concepts , principles , and skills )  , mastery performance standards , and evaluation processes , including
short , highly valid assessment procedures and tests for
criterion mastery . Learning materials and instructional
strategies are identified that include a cycle of teaching .  
( Madeline Hunter ’ s model is sometimes utilized .  ) 
Teachers use both group and individual instructional
methods as students work through each unit in an organized manner , learning at their own pace . Because
students must demonstrate mastery on unit exams before
moving on to new material , teachers provide consistent
and specific assessment , feedback , remediation , and
extensions , as needed . 
The research literature seems to indicate positive
effects of mastery learning on students , especially in
the areas of achievement , attitudes toward learning , 
and the retention of content . Mastery learning seems
to work best with the traditional curriculum , one
based on well-defined learning objectives organized
into smaller , sequentially organized units , where prior
knowledge is essential to progress , such as chemistry , 
mathematics , physics , and foreign languages . 
Proponents hold that the approach is most useful with
basic skills in the elementary grades . They argue that
this method of learning should break the cycle of failure , especially with low-achieving populations of
students and that students have prerequisite skills to
move to the next unit . In addition , teachers are required
to perform task analyses and to state objectives before
designating activities , thereby becoming better prepared to teach the unit . 
Conversely , critics point to some theoretical and
practical weaknesses in mastery learning . They note
that people do differ in ability and tend to reach different levels of achievement . Not all students will
progress at the same pace ; this requires students who
have demonstrated mastery to wait for those who have
not , thus holding back fast learners . Opponents add
that mastery learning will not reduce the learning time
that slow learners need ( relative to the time needed by
fast learners )  . When faster learners are given enrichment activities , those activities may be less value
added and more time fillers to allow others to catch up . 
Some critics contend that mastery learning takes independent learning away from students , while others
suggest that it may be more appropriate for teachers to
concentrate on maximizing each student ’ s achievement progress , even if this means maintaining or even
increasing the range of individual differences in
achievement levels in a class . Furthermore , mastery
learning programs tend to require considerable
amounts of time and effort to implement , committing
major resource allocation to slower learners . Others
challenge the assumptions of mastery learning that all
subject matter can be hierarchically criterion-delineated
and that all objectives in an instructional unit must be
learned equally well by all . Also , teachers must have a
variety of materials for remediation and have several
tests for each unit . If only objective tests are used , critics note this can lead to memorizing and learning
specifics rather than higher levels of learning . Finally , 
teachers ’ time and focus switch to evaluation rather
than to explaining , discussing , and demonstrating . 
Mastery learning as an instructional method is not
new ; it is based on the concept that all students can
learn when provided with conditions appropriate to
their situation . While traditionalists would preserve
time as a constant and allow mastery to vary , proponents of mastery learning hold mastery constant and
allow time to vary . The student must reach a predetermined level of mastery on one unit before being
allowed to progress to the next . In a mastery learning
setting , students are given specific feedback about
their learning progress at regular intervals throughout
the instructional period . This feedback helps students
identify what they have or have not learned well . 
Principles of mastery learning have become part of
directed instruction , computer-assisted instruction , 
and have provided the rationale for reform movements
such as school accountability and outcomes-based
education . 
—JoAnn Danelo Barbour
See also at-risk students ; behaviorism ; Black education ; brain
research and practice ; child development theories ; cognition , theories of ; cognitive dissonance ; cognitive styles ; 
conditioning theory ; constructivism ; differentiation of stimuli ; early childhood education ; grades , of students ; Head
646———Mastery Learning
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 646
Start ; intelligence ; learning environments ; learn , opportunity to ; mainstreaming and inclusion ; measurement , 
theories of ; metacognition ; motivation , theories of ; performance assessment ; psychology , types of ; psychometrics ; 
Skinner , B . F .  ; tutoring ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Bloom , B .  ( 1968 )  . Learning for mastery . Evaluation Comment , 
1 ( 2 )  , 1–12 . 
Bloom , B .  ( 1971 )  . Mastery learning . In J . H . Block ( Ed .  )  , 
Mastery learning : Theory and practice . New York : Holt , 
Rinehart ,  & Winston . 
Carroll , J .  ( 1963 )  . A model of school learning . Teachers
College Record , 64 , 723–733 . 
Guskey , T .  ( 1985 )  . Implementing mastery learning . Belmont , 
CA : Wadsworth . 
Hunter , M .  ( 1982 )  . Mastery teaching . El Segundo , CA : TIP . 
Morrison , H . C .  ( 1926 )  . The practice of teaching in secondary
school . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Washburne , C .  ( 1922 )  . Educational measurements as a key to
individualizing instruction and promotions . Journal of
Educational Research , 5 , 195–206 . 
 MATH EDUCATION
The field of math education , both the teaching of
mathematics and the preparation of math teachers , 
remained constant during much of the twentieth century . Yet , since the 1960s , reforms in math education
have raised questions and caused debate about best
practices in the teaching of mathematics and the preparation of math educators . These questions and debates
have sparked a series of changes in the nature of the
public school and college curricula and the focus of
research on the teaching and learning of mathematics . 
The rise of technology for instruction , the standards
and accountability movement , and new national and
international measures of comparative assessment have
further fueled the debates and continue to shape the
evolution of the field of math education . 
Prior to the twentieth century , math educators were
primarily viewed as drillmasters charged with the utilitarian responsibility of teaching for the memorization
of basic arithmetic skills , computation , and problem
solving in mathematics . During the early part of the
twentieth century , most math teachers were prepared
with 1 or 2 additional years of schooling at a specialized high school called a “ normal school .  ” After 1900 , 
when the concept of a universal high school curriculum
took hold , math educators majored in mathematics
in a teacher ’ s college and were prepared to serve as
secondary content specialists . Inherent in this program design was the assumption that math teachers
for the elementary and primary grades learned all the
mathematics they needed during their postsecondary
schooling , and because of such thinking , most elementary and middle grade math teachers received
only mathematics required of an elementary education
major . After World War II , however , the curriculum
emphasis shifted to more modern , sophisticated levels
in public schools and colleges , including the inclusion
of elements of geometry and algebra in elementary
curriculum , greater emphasis on functions and less
emphasis on trigonometry in high school , and the
introduction of calculus into the curriculum of the first
year of college . This shift caused subsequent rethinking of the math curriculum in colleges and schools of
education for the preparation of math educators . 
Today , the downplaying of basic memorization and
computational skills during the twentieth century has
surfaced as a serious problem in the P–16 curriculum
evidenced by international comparisons of student
performance on standardized tests . Students in the
United States consistently perform below that of their
counterparts in highly developed countries . Since the
mid-1980s , international comparison studies , such as
the Third International Mathematics and Sciences
Study ( TIMSS )  , show that mathematics instruction in
many developed nations , particularly Eastern Asia , is
definitely richer in comparison to math instruction in
American classrooms . The TIMSS study , the largest
cross-national , multiyear research study conducted in
the history of math education , included 41 countries
across five continents and compared over 500 , 000
students ’ scores in mathematics and science . 
Other comparative assessments , such as the National
Assessment of Educational Progress ( NAEP )  , show
equally alarming data . Positive press that was provided early during the release of main NAEP data
occurred primarily because of the fact that fourth
graders and eight graders increased overall from 1999
to 2003 by a range of 15 to 22 scale points respectively . However , a closer look at the comparisons of
student performance over time as revealed on the
specialized long-term-trend NAEP show that the gains
portrayed by the main NAEP are 10 times larger
than on the trend NAEP . In fact , in 1999 only 56% of
17-year-olds scored correctly on basic computation
skills . Trend analysts blame hidden differences such
Math Education———647
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 647
as this one on differing curriculum frameworks . Test
items for the main NAEP tests are developed from the
National Assessment Governing Board ( NAGB ) and
closely approximate changes within math instruction
in the field , while the trend NAEP utilizes the same
testing instruments in order to be able to make comparisons over time . Regardless of the reason , the dismal performance of American students on national
measures of standardized assessment and in comparison to other developed nations has called the math
curriculum and the preparation of math teachers into
question . As the United States neared the end of the
twentieth century , it was apparent that we would not
achieve the federally legislated goal of Academics
2000 for American students to place first in math and
science achievement in the world . 
Comparisons between textbook and curriculum guide
content performed by researchers in the TIMMS study
show a similar magnitude of difference across various
countries in the TIMMS study . Textbooks produced
for math instruction in the United States are on the
average 25% larger and outweigh the average international length . For example , a fourth-grade mathematics textbook contains an average of 530 pages , while
the international length for a fourth-grade math textbook is 170 pages . The reason for the difference in
length is the breadth of coverage . U . S . textbooks contain a far greater number of topics than most other
countries participating in the TIMSS . This broad coverage is typically presented at the expense of thorough
in-depth treatment of the content . 
These findings of this and other TIMMS studies
show that the math curriculum in America is highly
repetitive , revolving around a definition of basics
that are largely repeated from the fourth grade and
upward , while the view of what constitutes a focused
curriculum in other countries involves a tightly regimented introduction of new content throughout the
upper grades . For example , in the U . S . math curriculum , American textbooks introduce most of the core
content by fourth grade , with only one topic introduced in depth in each grade between fourth and
eighth grades . Yet , in most TIMMS countries , textbooks and curriculum guides between fourth and
eighth grade introduce roughly 75% of new material
each year from fourth grade and beyond , approximately 15 new topics in depth per year . As identified
in the TIMMS study , the lack of focus and coherence
in the American curriculum and other factors contributing to the mediocre performance of American
schoolchildren in mathematics suggest that the
schooling itself—in other words , inadequate preparation of math teachers—may be responsible . 
Following the initial release of the TIMMS data in
the 1980s , heightened interest and intense debate about
strengthening math curriculum and instruction began
among the various math societies and professional associations , and in response , the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics ( NCTM ) published the first
academic standards for subject matter instruction in
mathematics , the Curriculum and Evaluation
Standards . First released in 1989 and updated in 2000 , 
the standards address issues of making math more
engaging and demanding to meet the needs of a changing America in a global economy . However , the lack of
guidance in the implementation of the standards and
competition from state standards with accompanying
subject matter test frameworks have diffused the
results that were anticipated initially . 
Some of the criticism of the NCTM standards and
state standards stem from issues of racial equality as the
achievement gap that persists among White , Black , and
Hispanic subgroups on standardized tests widened in
mathematics computation during the 1990s . Numerous
research studies attest to the importance of arithmetic , 
in particular that computation skills are necessary for
advancement in careers in math and science . Research
studies also show that computation skills are a valuable
predictor of adult earnings . Yet , reducing inequity in
mathematics instruction by enforcing high standards
for all , by raising teacher expectations , and by appropriating resources does not appear to be a priority of
local school systems within the United States . Poor
teacher preparation , the extensive reliance on calculators in early- and middle-level instruction in mathematics , and the reformist standards of the 1990s are
recognized as contemporary issues in math education
in the twenty-first century . Changing expectations for
math knowledge , coupled with increased uses of technology applications for school mathematics instruction , has directed the rethinking of the current
curriculum and preparation that is needed in the math
education of prospective teachers . 
In response to the criticism and in order to undertake such a massive curriculum reworking , the
American Mathematical Society and the Mathematical
Association of America joined and formed the
Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences . 
During the latter part of the 1990s , the board designed
a series of federally funded research and development
648———Math Education
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 648
projects commonly called the Mathematics Education of
Teachers Project ( METP )  . Stemming from the ongoing
debate over student performance , curriculum , and
teacher education , METP was designed to examine
two general themes :  ( 1 ) the intellectual substance in
school mathematics and ( 2 ) the special nature of the
mathematical knowledge needed for teaching . The
final report of the METP was published in 2000 as a
resource for math faculty , administrators in schools
and colleges , and others involved in the education of
math teachers . While the report itself was not aligned
with any particular mathematics curriculum for
schools , its findings are consistent with the NCTM ’ s
Principles and Standards for School Mathematics and
other recent national reports on school mathematics . 
Recognized as a synthesis of contemporary thinking
on policy and issues affecting math educators , the
METP report is being explored widely by the mathematical sciences community and educational sector to
design new preparation programs for prospective math
teachers , such as fostering math specialists for middlelevel math instruction , and to redesign new professional development opportunities to implement
national initiatives in public schools . 
The METP report provides the 11 general recommendations to mathematics departments and the
larger educational community to guide contemporary
discourse and the direction of practice for math education stated below . 
1 . Prospective teachers need mathematics courses that
develop a deep understanding of the mathematics
they will teach . 
2 . Although the quality of mathematical preparation is
more important than the quantity , the following
amount of mathematics coursework for prospective
teachers is recommended : 
a . Prospective elementary teachers should be
required to take at least nine semester hours on fundamental ideas of elementary school mathematics . 
b . Prospective middle grades math teachers should
be required to take at least 21 semester hours of
mathematics , which include at least 12 hours of
fundamental ideas of school mathematics appropriate for middle grades teachers . 
c . Prospective high school teachers of mathematics
should be required to complete the equivalent of
an undergraduate major in mathematics , which
includes a 6-hour capstone course connecting
their college mathematics courses with high
school mathematics . 
3 . Courses on fundamental ideas of school mathematics
should focus on a thorough development of basic
mathematical ideas . All courses are designed for
prospective teachers , who should develop careful
reasoning and mathematical common sense in analyzing relationships and in solving problems . 
4 . Along with building mathematical knowledge , mathematics courses for prospective teachers should develop
the habits of mind of a mathematical thinker and
demonstrate flexible , interactive styles of teaching . 
5 . Teacher education must be recognized as an important part of mathematics department missions at
institutions that educate teachers . More mathematicians should consider becoming deeply involved in
K–12 mathematics education . 
6 . The mathematical education of teachers should be
seen as a partnership between mathematics faculty
and mathematics education faculty . 
7 . There needs to be greater cooperation between 2-
year and 4-year colleges in the mathematical education of teachers . 
8 . There needs to be more collaboration between mathematics faculty and school mathematics teachers . 
9 . Efforts to improve standards for school mathematics
instruction , as well as for teacher preparation accreditation and teacher certification , will be strengthened
by the full-fledged participation of the academic
mathematics community . 
10 . Teachers need the opportunity to develop their
understanding of mathematics and its teaching
throughout their careers , through both self-directed
and collegial study , and through formal coursework . 
11 . Mathematics in the middle grades ( five through
eight ) should be taught by mathematics specialists . 
SOURCE : Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences .  
( 2001 )  . The Mathematical Education of Teachers . Providence , 
RI , and Washington , DC : American Mathematical Society and
Mathematical Association of America . Reprinted with permission . 
The recommendations of the METP report are
highly specific and differ widely from earlier recommendations found in reports such as Mathematics
Association of America ’ s 1983 Recommendations on
the Mathematical Preparation of Teachers . The METP
recommendations are organized around three common
grade clusters—elementary , middle , and high school—
and address the need for teachers to study within one
of these three specialized clusters . The recommendations further contend that teachers need a deeper and
Math Education———649
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 649
broader understanding of the curriculum , in particular
where their grade-level content is situated within the
larger context of mathematical knowledge in the total
curriculum . A number of statements in the recommendations express the need for prospective teachers to
acquire a “ deep understanding ” of mathematics with
the emphasis on nurturing the teacher ’ s ability to be
able to assess student work , to understand the nature of
student errors in relation to student understanding , and
to be able to foster high levels of engagement among
students , thereby promoting interest in the study of
mathematics . 
The METP report acknowledges that the P–12
mathematics content is qualitatively different across the
curriculum , and thus teachers need to be prepared to
make connections that exist among math concepts as
they are sequenced along the curriculum . One assumption of the METP report is that with this deeper understanding , math teachers across the various grade levels
and clusters will be able to build on students ’ earlier
mathematics knowledge . While the recommendations
seem lofty for prospective teachers , the METP report
allows that preservice teacher education is essential to
a true understanding of school mathematics . 
The expectations for high school math teachers
in the METP report calls for teacher preparation
programs to enable prospective teachers to develop
awareness of the mathematics their students are likely
to face after high school , either in college , technical
studies , or employment , and to foster a mature attitude
that will encourage continued growth in the teaching
and learning of mathematics . In order to support the
METP recommendations , mathematics departments
are charged with redesigning their core courses to
help secondary teachers make connections across the
curriculum content and to offer a capstone course collaboratively taught by faculty in math education and
secondary pedagogy for advanced exploration of conceptually challenging points in the teaching and learning of high school mathematics . 
As the study of math education evolves to meet
the needs of a diverse and changing student population in the United States , the direction of research in
the twenty-first century continues to expand to
address the complex issues of advancing the study of
mathematics in our public schools and society . 
Instructional leadership for advanced mathematics , 
the role of technology in math instruction , and the
inclusion of special needs students in mathematics
programs are pressing topics being explored through
research and development in math education . 
Together with the NCTM , the Mathematical Society of
America , and other professional associations of math
educators , the mathematical sciences community
seeks ways to improve the preparation and professional development through national research and
international comparative studies with other countries
whose mathematics programs offer insight into best
practices for understanding and improving the field of
mathematics education in the United States . 
—Karen Embry Jenlink
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; Black education ; 
brain research and practice ; cognition , theories of ; constructivism ; curriculum , theories of ; gender studies , in educational
leadership ; learning , theories of ; learning environments ; 
literacy , theories of ; measurement , theories of ; National
Assessment of Educational Progress ; Trends International
Mathematics and Science Study ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Clements , D .  , Sarama , J .  ,  & DiBlase , A .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . 
Engaging young children in mathematics . Mahwah , NJ : 
Erlbaum . 
Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences .  ( 2001 )  . 
The mathematical education of teachers . Providence , RI ,  
& Washington , DC : American Mathematical Society and
Mathematical Association of America . 
English , L .  ( 2002 )  . Handbook of international research in
mathematics education . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
English , L .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Mathematical and analogical
reasoning of young learners . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Fernandez , C .  ,  & Yoshida , M .  ( 2004 )  . Lesson study : A
Japanese approach to improving mathematics teaching and
learning . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Lamon , S .  ( 2005 )  . Teaching fractions and ratios for understanding . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Loveless , T .  ,  & Coughlan , J .  ( 2004 )  . The arithmetic gap . 
Educational Leadership , 61 ( 5 )  , 55–59 . 
Martin , D .  ( 2000 )  . Mathematics success and failure among
African-American youth . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
National Assessment Governing Board .  ( n . d .  )  . Overview of
recommendations . In NAEP 2005 mathematics assessment
framework ( ch . 1 )  . Retrieved August 10 , 2004 , from 
. 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics .  ( 2003 )  . The use
of technology in the learning and teaching of mathematics . 
Retrieved August 10 , 2004 , from http :  /  / www 
. nctm . org / about / position_statements / position_statement_13 . htm . 
Rodriguez , A .  ,  & Kitchen , R .  ( 2005 )  . Preparing mathematics
and science teachers for diverse classrooms . Mahwah , NJ : 
Erlbaum . 
650———Math Education
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 650
Romberg , T .  ( 2004 )  . Standards-based mathematics assessment
in middle school . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Senk , S .  ,  & Thompson , D .  ( 2003 )  . Standards-based school
mathematics curricula . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Sherman , H .  , Richardson , L .  ,  & Yard , G .  ( 2005 )  . Teaching
children who struggle with mathematics : A systematic
approach to analysis and correction . Columbus , OH : Merrill . 
Watson , A .  ,  & Mason , J .  ( 2005 )  . Mathematics as a constructive activity . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Wright , R .  , Martland , J .  , Stafford , A .  ,  & Stanger , G .  ( 2002 )  . 
Teaching number : Advancing children ’ s skills and strategies . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
 MATRIX ORGANIZATION 
( THE “ ADHOCRACY ”  ) 
Often called the “ throwaway organizational pattern ” or
the “ adhocracy ” by futurist Alvin Toffler , matrix organizational structure involves the creation of a temporary
structure within or apart from a traditionally organized
structure when the following conditions pertain : 
• There is an immediate challenge or crisis faced by the
organization that involves multilevels and / or multifunctions of the organization as a rational response . 
• The conditions of the organization ’ s environment
become highly unstable , ambiguous , and fluid , leaving much uncertainty as to how the organization
should respond and casting doubt that any permanent
or stable organizational pattern would last very long . 
• The nature of a required organizational response
would overload the existing chain of command . 
• A situation requires a highly unusual and innovative
response previously not faced by the organization . 
• The political balance of power within an organization is constantly shifting because the organization ’ s
objectives and its technology cannot be fixed upon a
stable set of objectives or tasks . 
• The nature of the problem of issues to be addressed
is highly complex and requires a long lead time to
pursue , meaning that there will a long chunk of time
in which no tangible results will be forthcoming . 
The term matrix is often affixed to the U . S . aerospace industry , especially NASA . One set of managerial experts indicates that the most distinguishing
feature of a matrix organization versus the traditional
bureaucratic , pyramidal structure is that the former is
characterized by a multiple command system in which
persons may have multiple bosses . Along with this
development is the creation of a “ matrix culture ,  ” 
which is quite different from cultures that are
connected with permanent bureaucracies . And matrix
structures present a whole new array of personnel
problems that traditional bureaucratic structures work
hard to eliminate , notably a subordinate being caught
between two bosses who cannot agree on what the
subordinate should be doing . Job and role ambiguity
present additional problems for employees who may
not be assured of work after a project is completed . 
Matrix structures have been described as “ high tension ” systems , where the potential for conflict is intensified by the demands for interdependent work among the
members , the need to process huge amounts of information quickly , and the difficulty of finding a “ boss ” to arbitrate differences among and between the members . 
Matrix structures require a high degree of trust and collaboration to become productive and remain productive . 
The leadership skills required to manage a matrix
structure involve the ability of a boss who is secure
professionally , remains objective about various functions and subfunctions and sees the big picture , works
collaboratively and easily with people , involves others
in decision making when appropriate but is not afraid
to make decisions when required , can work in situations with high levels of ambiguity and uncertainty
without becoming disoriented or affixed on single
solutions , and knows how to work through problems in
groups . 
In the larger society , examples of matrix structures are
the Manhattan Project ( building the atomic bomb ) and
putting a person on the moon . Political campaigns are
also examples of matrix organizations in action . The 1993
Academy Award film nominee The War Room showing
the organization and operation of President Clinton ’ s
campaign managers , James Carville and George
Stephanopoulos , is an excellent example . 
Educational organizations have used matrix structures for passing bond referendums or tax overrides . 
However , the potential to attack other kinds of problems such as the achievement gap remain as possible
situations to use a matrix structure as it meets many of
the conditions requiring a matrix structure . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also administration , theories of ; boards of education ; 
bureaucracy ; capacity building , of organizations ; chain of
command ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; 
governance ; line and staff concept ; management theories ; 
organizational theories ; role ambiguity ; role conflict ; scalar
principle ; strategic planning
Matrix Organization ( the “ Adhocracy ”  ) ———651
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 651
Further Readings and References
English , F .  ( 1977 )  . Matrix management in education : Breaking down
school bureaucracy . Educational Technology , 17 ( 1 )  , 19–26 . 
Hill , C . W .  ,  & Jones , G . R .  ( 1989 )  . Strategic management . 
Boston : Houghton Mifflin . 
Nadler , D .  ,  & Tushman , M .  ( 1988 )  . Strategic organization
design . Glenview , IL : Scott , Foresman . 
Toffler , A .  ( 1970 )  . Future shock . New York : Bantam Books . 
 MAXWELL , WILLIAM H . 
William H . Maxwell ( 1852–1920 )  , an Irish immigrant , 
rose to become city superintendent of schools , greater
New York , in 1898 . He arrived in the United States at the
age of 22 and found work as a journalist with various
New York City newspapers . As a reporter and later as
managing editor of the Brooklyn Times , he developed an
interest and concern for public education . Maxwell then
taught briefly in evening high schools and in 1882 was
elected associate superintendent of Brooklyn schools . 
For the next quarter of a century , Maxwell served as
a big-city superintendent in Brooklyn and New York
City . He was of a generation of educators who combined leadership with both scholarship and public service . In his annual reports and presentations to the
National Educational Association , he wrote about all
aspects of school and district leadership . Among the
many reforms he helped introduce to New York City ’ s
schools were the need for kindergartens ; summer
schools ; physical education ; elective courses , including music , singing , and cooking ; teaching reforms in
reading and writing ; responsibilities of principals ; 
pupil progression ; teacher and administrative certification ; remedial education ; special education ; school
lunch program ; the efficient use of school facilities ; 
and a professional code of ethics . 
Maxwell fought against the lack of adequate funding and corruption that permitted political bosses to
hire teachers . He sought to hire better trained teachers , 
selected for their qualifications . He argued vigorously
against scientific management ( i . e .  , the cult of efficiency ) and its excessive demands for data-driven decisions that turned teachers into bookkeepers . He
opposed teaching that was dull , mechanical , routine , 
and where the child was burdened with a load of matter to be memorized at home—long lists of names without meanings or words without connections . He feared
that principals were turning teachers into machines by
demanding that they do everything exactly as prescribed . 
Maxwell called on superintendents to step in and secure
to the classroom teacher that reasonable liberty of
thought and action . According to the historian Raymond
Callahan , few educational leaders of this time dared to
speak out as vociferously as Maxwell did against big
business and local politicians and the direction being
taken by school leadership . 
Maxwell attributed weaknesses in curriculum and
instruction to two factors :  ( 1 ) teachers were not as well
educated or trained in pedagogy as they should be
and ( 2 ) in the absence of interesting subject matter , 
teachers required students to memorize dry and useless
details in order to fill up the prescribed school day . In
contrast , Maxwell proposed curricula based on
children having a progressive knowledge of the outside
world . His emphases were on real-life experiences , 
solving problems , and invention . He also pushed for
subject matter to be taught thematically . As for principals , they should use their entire time during school
hours to inspect and supervise teaching and do all of
their record keeping outside of the regular school day . 
Although Maxwell did not succeed in every aspect
of his reform agenda , he was successful not only in
changing the physical structures of schools to include
fine architecture and roof playgrounds but also in
addressing what he perceived to be the evils of poverty
in which so many of the immigrant children lived . 
—Ira Bogotch
See also architecture of schools ; bureaucracy ; chief executive
officer ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; elementary education ; high schools ; innovation , in education ; 
leadership effectiveness ; normal schools ; principalship ; 
reform , of schools ; superintendency ; vulnerability thesis , of
superintendents
Further Readings and References
Bogotch , I .  ( 2005 )  . A history of public school leadership : 
The first century , 1837–1942 . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 7–33 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Maxwell , W . H .  ( 1912 )  . A quarter century of public school
development . New York : American Book . 
 MCGREGOR , DOUGLAS
Douglas McGregor ( 1906–1964 )  , a forefather of
management theory , is considered to be one of the top
652———Maxwell , William H . 
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 652
business thinkers of all times . His greatest recognition
came from his proposal that management must not treat
employees as cogs in machines . McGregor believed
that management ’ s greatest responsibility was to unleash
the vast creative potential of human beings . 
With his management theories , McGregor debunked
Frederick Taylor ’ s scientific management styles and
became one of the first persons to apply findings from
the behavioral sciences to the world of business . His
popular 1960s book , The Human Side of Enterprise , 
examines authoritarian management ( Theory X ) and
participative management ( Theory Y )  . McGregor proposed that under Theory X management , employees
would not work if left to their own devices and that
these employees would be inherently lazy and would
need to be coerced to work . Under Theory Y management , however , McGregor proposed that employees
would find work as natural as play . McGregor ’ s contention was that all employees , if properly managed , 
are in actuality Theory Y employees . This assumption
that employees can be motivated to be Theory Y
employees places the responsibility for employee problems at the management level . McGregor contended
that when management creates conditions whereby
members of the organization can achieve personal
goals , the employees will direct their efforts toward the
success of the enterprise . 
McGregor also had tremendous impact on what
became known as total quality management ( TQM )  . 
He promoted stress-distributed leadership , openminded appraisal techniques , and employee / customer
commitment
McGregor ’ s upbringing greatly shaped his management vision . At a young age , he worked at the
McGregor Institute , established in 1895 by his grandfather , housing and feeding 1 , 000 Great Lakes sailors
and other transient workers a year . It was at his grandfather ’ s institute that McGregor gained insight into
problems of labor . During his college years , 
McGregor took a position as a gas station attendant
and rose through the ranks to become a district manager for a retail gasoline company . It was during these
experiences that McGregor credits himself with learning the concerns of management . 
McGregor attended Oberlin College and Wayne
State University , and in 1935 earned a PhD from
Harvard in experimental psychology . He taught at
Harvard for 2 years and then at M . I . T .  , where he was
the first full-time psychologist on faculty . Several
years later , he took the position of president of
Antioch College , where he served for 6 years . Then he
returned to M . I . T . and served as a professor of psychology and as the executive director of the Industrial
Relations Section . At this same time , he served as a
consultant to the Dewy Alma Company of Cambridge , 
Massachusetts , where it was his job to explore and
conduct experiments in industrial relations . The general manager of Dewy Alma has stated that the boldness of McGregor ’ s experiments was disconcerting , 
but as McGregor ’ s hypotheses were always right , 
the company gave him carte blanche to establish the
company ’ s industrial relations policy . 
—Brenda Kallio
See also human resource development ; management
theories ; Taylor , Frederick ; Theory X , Theory Y ; total quality
management
Further Readings and References
Drucker , P .  ( 1974 )  . Management : Tasks , responsibilities , 
practices . New York : Harper & Row . 
McGregor , D .  ( 1960 )  . The human side of enterprise . 
New York : McGraw-Hill . 
McGregor , D .  ( 1967 )  . The professional manager ( W . Bennis & 
C . McGregor , Eds .  )  . New York : McGraw-Hill . 
 MEASUREMENT , THEORIES OF
Measurement is the process of estimating psychometric properties of variables or constructs . There are a
number of measurement theories that represent different assumptions about and approaches to the estimation process , including the classical test theory ( CTT )  , 
the generalizability theory ( G-theory )  , the congeneric
theory , and the item response theory ( IRT )  . 
CLASSICAL TEST THEORY
The most influential theory in psychometric measurement is the CTT . The theory relies on the test score to
measure a person ’ s ability or other psychometric
properties . Central to the theory is the concept of
reliability , first used by Charles Spearman in 1904 . 
According to Spearman , the observed score of a variable
or construct consists of two separate components : the
true score and the error of measurement . The true score
represents the perfect measurement of a construct , for
instance , the true ability of a person to accomplish a
Measurement , Theories Of———653
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 653
task . In theory , if a person takes the same test an
infinite number of times , the average of the scores will
equal the true score . The measurement error , which
accounts for the difference between an observed score
and the true score , can be divided into systematic error
and random error . The former is related to either the
examinee or the measure , although not to the construct
being measured ; the latter results from chance happenings such as guessing and distractions in test administration . The presence of measurement errors makes a
measure unreliable . Mathematically , the coefficient of
reliability is the ratio of variance of the true score to
that of the observed score . The estimation of reliability
coefficient is based on the scores of a group of examinees . There are three methods for estimating reliability :  ( 1 ) the test-retest method is based on repeated
administrations of a measure to the same group of
examinees and correlates the results from the different
administrations ,  ( 2 ) the alternate form approach uses
equivalent forms of the same test to be administered to
a group of examinees and examines the correlation
between the results , and ( 3 ) the most frequently used
method for reliability estimation is the internal consistency approach that looks at the homogeneity of
items within the same instrument . Related to this
approach is the split half method of estimating reliability that divides an instrument into two halves and
correlates the results from the halves . Estimation of
internal consistency for dichotomous items is based
on the Kuder-Richardson formulas , while the estimation for polytomous items is based on the Cronbach ’ s
coefficient alpha . 
Another important index of reliability , the standard
error of measurement , is based on individual examinee ’ s scores . It is the standard deviation of the differences between observed scores and the true score for
an individual . Standard error of measurement can be
used to determine the score band for an individual
examinee , the range of scores where the person ’ s true
score is most likely located . The standard error of
measurement is equal to the standard deviation times
the square root of 1 minus the reliability of the measurement . 
The second important CTT concept is validity , 
which is defined as the extent to which an instrument
measures what it is supposed to measure . This concept , 
however , is not considered a feature unique to CTT . 
Traditionally , there are three types of validity . Content
validity concerns whether the sample of test items
adequately represents the content of a subject tested . 
Criterion-related validity uses an external measure
as a criterion to validate the results of an instrument . 
A subcategory of criterion-related validity is concurrent validity , which can be established if high correlation is found between results of the test and results of
a concurrent measure of the same variable . When the
criterion is a measure available in the future rather
than concurrent , the correlation between results of the
test and results of the criterion can be used as evidence
for predictive validity of the test , the other subcategory of criterion-related validity . Construct validity
concerns whether a construct functions in a way consistent with a relevant theory . It can be established
through convergent analysis or discriminant analysis . 
Evidence for convergent validity is established if high
correlation is found between the construct in question
and a theoretically related variable . Evidence for
discriminant validity is established when a low correlation is found between the construct and a theoretically unrelated variable . Construct validity can also
be established if the internal structure of a construct
is confirmed through a statistical procedure called
factor analysis . 
GENERALIZABILITY THEORY
Originally developed by L . J . Cronbach and his
colleagues , the G-theory uses the analysis of variance
to estimate reliability and errors of measurement . The
goal of the G-theory is to examine the degree to which
the results of a set of measurements may be generalized to a more extensive set of measurements . All the
conditions of the more extensive set of measurements
are called the universe of generalization , which determines the universe score variance . The design used for
collecting a set of measurements determines the
observed score variance . The ratio of the latter to the
former is the generalization coefficient . In G-theory , 
measurement conditions are referred to as facets , 
which may be fixed or random , and can be crossed
with or nested within each other or with the examinees . A distinction is made between a generalizability
study and a decision study . The former is concerned
with the generalizability of a measurement procedure , 
while the latter is concerned with the use of data for
making decisions about an examinee . 
The G-theory is similar to CTT in that both make
use of the concept of true score . In CTT , the true score
is considered the average of all parallel measurements . In the G-theory , the true score is defined as the
654———Measurement , Theories Of
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 654
average of the universe of observable scores . One difference is that CTT assumes the same error variance
across all examinees , while the G-theory allows the
examinee error to vary . Another difference is that in
CTT , the three types of reliability that represent different aspects of reliability are not estimated simultaneously . In G-theory , all sources of error may be
estimated at the same time . This feature enables a
researcher to decide which types of errors should be
given sufficient attention during a study . 
CONGENERIC THEORY
The congeneric or factor analytic theory is a statistical
model in analyzing the structure of a construct . Often
used in structural equation modeling , the model checks
the relationships between items or indicators of an
underlying construct or factor . Evidence for the existence of a construct is established if there is high correlation or factor loading between the items and the
factor . The model can be broken down into exploratory
and confirmatory factor analysis . The former is used
when there is no theory available to guide the grouping of items or indicators as to what construct they
measure . The latter is used to confirm a theoretically
established relationship between a set of items and
their corresponding latent variable or construct . It is
an important tool in structural equating modeling and
studies of construct validity . 
According to the congeneric theory , each item
score is a weighted function of the measured construct
plus an error term that is attributed to unmeasured
constructs . Because the weighting varies across items , 
each item can have a different true score as well as a
different error . By allowing both the true score and the
error to vary , the congeneric theory represents a less
stringent assumption than CTT or the G-theory . 
Another major difference between the congeneric
theory and the CTT is that the former is based on item
scores rather than the total test score . Since the item
true score and error may vary , item reliabilities may
also vary across items . In CTT and G-theory , the item
reliability is assumed to be the same . 
Although the congeneric theory shifts its attention
from a test to the item , it is still based on the response
of a sample of examinees , just like the CTT and the
G-theory . In other words , all three theories use a
measurement model that is sample dependent . A major
problem with this is that a different sample may yield
a different estimate of the person or item parameter . 
ITEM RESPONSE THEORY
The problem with sample dependency in parameter
estimation is solved by another measurement model , 
item response theory ( IRT )  . As a relatively new yet
rapidly growing area in the field of measurement , IRT , 
sometimes called latent trait theory , is based on a
probability model to link a person ’ s level of a measured trait to item characteristics . Given the specific
response patterns of an examinee to a set of items , IRT
uses the maximum likelihood estimation to calibrate
the person ’ s trait level ( theta ) as well as item difficulty
and item discrimination on a logit scale . The oneparameter logistic model or the Rasch model assumes
that a person ’ s response to a test item is determined by
the person ’ s level of trait in relation to the difficulty of
the item . The two-parameter logistic model assumes
that a particular response is determined by an interaction of the trait level , item difficulty , and item discrimination . The three-parameter model adds
guessing into the factors that affect the probability of
a correct response . The relationship between the probability of a correct response as a joint result of the
person and item parameters can be represented as an
S-shaped item characteristic curve ( ICC )  . 
IRT is widely used in large-scale test development , 
differential item functioning ( DIF ) analysis for potential bias , and equating of tests . One advantage of IRT
is that the estimation of item parameter is not dependent on a particular sample . In other words , the use of
two different samples of examinees will result in the
same result in terms of item calibration . At the same
time , the estimation of person parameter is not dependent on a particular set of test items . In fact , there is
no need for a fixed number of items in the estimation
of a person ’ s trait level . IRT may be used to identify
items that maximally match the trait level of a particular person . Such items are supposed to provide maximum information , hence increasing the efficiency
of a test . For this reason , it is possible to customize
items to different test takers , as in the case of computer adaptive testing , thus greatly reducing the
number of items needed to test a person . Another
advantage of IRT over CTT is that the former is based
on an equal interval scale , while the latter uses an
ordinal scale . This makes IRT the favored choice in
studies of educational progress and in comparison and
linking of different tests . 
A drawback of IRT is the need for a large sample of
examinees in order to obtain stable parameter estimates . 
Measurement , Theories Of———655
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 655
SUMMARY
The four measurement theories presented above
represent different approaches to the measurement of
psychological constructs . At the same time , they complement each other . For instance , the G-theory is built
on CTT and yet represents a significant revision in its
approach to the study of reliability and measurement
errors . The congeneric theory , on the other hand , provides a powerful tool in analyzing the underlying structure of a construct . As a result , it can be used in the study
of internal consistency as well as construct validity . The
IRT , as a serious competitor of CTT , is a favorite tool in
large-scale test development . The estimation results
using IRT have been found to be more accurate than
those from CTT , even though not always significantly
different . However , the CTT is easy to comprehend and
use , thus an indispensable tool to the classroom teacher . 
Its basic concepts of validity and reliability constitute
the cornerstones in the measurement field . 
—Yuankun Yao
See also attitudes ; Spearman , Charles ; testing and test theory
development ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Anastasi , A .  ,  & Urbina , S .  ( 1997 )  . Psychological testing . 
Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Masters , G .  ,  & Keeves , J .  ( 1999 )  . Advances in measurement
in educational research and assessment . St . Louis , MO : 
Elsevier . 
Measurement Excellence and Training Resource Information
Center .  ( n . d .  )  . Retrieved June 1 , 2004 , from theories . asp . 
Messick , S .  ( 1995 )  . Validity of psychological assessment : 
Validation of inferences from persons ’ responses and performance as scientific inquiry into scoring meaning . American
Psychologist , 9 , 741–749 . 
Schultz , K .  ,  & Whitney , D .  ( 2005 )  . Measurement theory in
action . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Spearman , C . E .  ( 1904 )  . General intelligence objectively determined and measured . American Journal of Psychology , 2 , 
201–293 . 
Wilson , M .  ( 2005 )  . Constructing measures : An item response
modeling approach . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
 MEIER , DEBORAH
Throughout her life , Deborah Meier ( 1931– ) has
striven to improve the quality of inner-city schools . 
She has been a teacher , writer , school principal , and
advocate for educational reform for over 30 years . 
Meier was born in New York City in 1931 to Joseph
and Pearl Willen . She has had an extensive education , 
attending precollege at the Ethical Culture School in
New York , Antioch College in Ohio , and later pursuing a doctoral degree in history at the University of
Chicago . While attending graduate school , she married
Fred Meier . They had three children and later divorced . 
At first , Meier had no plans to teach , but after working
part time as a substitute kindergarten teacher , she
developed a passion for the profession and quickly
became a vocal advocate for educational reform . 
Meier ’ s achievements are many . She has been an
adviser to New York City ’ s Annenberg Challenge , and
she was a senior fellow at the Annenberg Institute at
Brown University from 1995 to 1997 . She was on the
editorial board for Dissent magazine , the Harvard
Education Letter , and the Nation . She was the founding
member of the National Board of Professional Teaching
Standards , and in 1987 she became the first educator
to receive the MacArthur Grant , sometimes called the 
 “ genius grant .  ” In 1992 , in partnership with Theodore
Sizer , she raised $3 million and used the money to launch
10 new , small high schools in New York City . Through
the course of her life , Meier has founded three elementary schools , started a high school , and influenced many
school systems through her methods and practices . 
Meier ’ s career was launched by working as a teacher
in several different cities . In 1972 , Superintendent Tony
Alvarado asked Meier to test her small-school theories
in Harlem ’ s District 4 , the district with the lowest test
scores in New York . Meier responded to this request by
founding Central Park Elementary ( CPE ) and encouraging active learning . Meier offered teachers greater
autonomy and created a democratic , interactive learning community . She encouraged strong parent involvement and provided adult role models and mentors for
her students . Soon after the success of CPE , Meier
opened two more Central Park Elementary Schools . In
1985 , she opened Central Park East Secondary School 
( CPESS ) and incorporated the same small-school
methods and theories of active learning . Today , 18
buildings in Harlem ’ s District 4 house 51 small elementary and junior high schools . 
Meier argues that her schools worked because the
teachers and the support staff had high expectations
and goals for their students . Building strong relationships between children and adults outside the family , 
and going beyond test scores to assess student learning , are essential elements of this success . Meier has
656———Meier , Deborah
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 656
long been opposed to the use of high-stakes testing
as the sole measurement of student success . At CPE / 
CPESS , rather than incorporating standardized testing , 
the students ’ success rate was measured by the graduation rate , how many students went on to college , and
what they accomplished after they completed school . 
Meier has developed seven concepts to help guide educational systems as they adapt to the small-school
design :  ( 1 ) governance ,  ( 2 ) respect ,  ( 3 ) simplicity ,  
( 4 ) safety ,  ( 5 ) parent involvement ,  ( 6 ) accountability , 
and ( 7 ) belonging . 
—Jane Dettmer and Margaret Grogan
See also accountability ; achievement gap , of students ; adaptiveness of organizations ; at-risk students ; capacity building , of organizations ; class size ; equality , in schools ; 
governance ; high schools ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , teacher ; middle schools ; No Child Left Behind ; 
parental involvement ; reform , of schools ; school improvement models ; school safety ; school size ; standardized testing ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Bensman , D .  ( 2000 )  . Central park east and its graduates . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Meier , D .  ( 1995 )  . The power of their ideas . Boston : Beacon
Press . 
Seller , M . S .  ( 1994 )  . Women educators in the United States . 
Westport , CT : Greenwood Press . 
 MENDEZ , FELICITAS
Born in Juncos , Puerto Rico , Felicitas Mendez 
( 1916–1998 ) married Gonzalo Mendez and moved to
Westminster , California , in 1943 . They became tenant
farmers on land owned by an interned Japanese family . 
When they attempted to enroll their three children in
the nearest elementary school , they were informed
that they had to attend an all-Mexican school . A meeting with the school superintendent was not productive in ending this form of racial segregation . The
Mendezes worked with other parents to try and pass a
bond issue for an integrated elementary school . When
it failed , the Mendez family joined with the Guzman , 
Palomino , Estrada , and Ramirez families , and with the
help of the League of United Latin American Citizens 
( LULAC )  , appointed attorney David Marcus and
brought suit against four school districts ( Westminster , 
Garden Grove , Santa Ana , and El Modena ) to end the
practice of racially segregating Mexican students . 
In the 1945 trial before Judge Paul J . McCormick , 
the school systems ’ defense hinged on three arguments . The first was that community pressure was
against schooling the children together . The second
was that segregated schooling benefited Mexicans who
were unable to keep up with white students . The third
was that psychological testing ( I . Q . tests ) revealed
that Mexican students were not as capable as White
students . The Garden Grove superintendent personally
declared that Mexicans were unkempt and inferior
in their economic outlook , thus justifying racial
segregation . 
Amicus briefs were filed by the American Civil
Liberties Union , American Jewish Congress , National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People , 
National Lawyer ’ s Guild , and the Japanese American
Citizens League . The NAACP ’ s brief was written by
Thurgood Marshall . Judge McCormick took a year to
reach a decision . However , he ruled that the segregation
of Mexican students could not be supported in California
law and that this practice was a clear violation of the
equal protection clause of the U . S . Constitution ’ s
Fourteenth Amendment . The school district appealed the
case , but again lost in 1947 when the Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals ruled in favor of the plaintiffs . 
Felicitas Mendez ran the family farm while her
husband , Gonzalo , worked with the attorneys . She also
supplied vivid testimony during the trial . The success
of the Mendez v . Westminster case was instrumental in
ending racial segregation of Mexicans in California
schools . It was the first case to persuade a federal court
that the concept of “ separate but equal ” was unconstitutional . It was also influential in shaping the better
known Brown v . Board of Education . For example , the
Mendez case used arguments against segregation from
educational research and the social sciences . Both of
these lines of evidence were later adopted in the strategy of the NAACP in Brown eight years later . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; at-risk students ; 
child development theories ; cognition , theories of ; critical
race theory ; critical theory ; cross-cultural studies ; cultural
capital ; cultural politics , wars ; desegregation , of schools ; discrimination ; diversity ; dropouts ; early childhood education ; 
equality , in schools ; equity and adequacy of funding schools ; 
eugenics ; expectations , teacher and student cultures ; high
schools ; immigration , history and impact in education ; 
Mendez , Felicitas———657
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 657
individual differences , in children ; Latinos ; minorities , in
schools ; multiculturalism ; National Assessment of Educational Progress ; psychometrics
Further Readings and References
Brisk , M .  ( 2005 )  . Bilingual education . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Cortina , R .  ,  & Gendreau , M .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2003 )  . Immigrants and
schooling : Mexicans in New York . New York : Center for
Migration Studies . 
Mendez v . Westminster , A look at our Latino heritage .  ( n . d .  )  . 
Retrieved on April 17 , 2005 , from http : www . mendezvwest
minster . com /  . 
Mendez v . Westminster School District of Orange County , 64
F . Supp .  ( D . C . CAL . 1946 )  . 
McWilliams , C .  ( 1948 )  . North from Mexico . New York : 
Greenwood Press . 
 MENSA
Mensa is an international , not-for-profit organization
for people who score at or above the 98th percentile
on a standard test of intelligence . This is the only
requirement for membership . Mensa ’ s message for
and example to educational leaders is simple : intelligence can flourish in social settings that promote its
use and usefulness . 
The goal of Mensa is to form a nonpolitical society
free from any forms of discrimination . Founded in
1946 by Roland Berrill , a lawyer , and Dr . Lance Ware , 
a scientist and lawyer , Mensa is a society with the
purposes of identifying and fostering intelligence , 
encouraging research , and promoting members ’ intellectual and social opportunities . 
Mensans come from all walks of society . Some
live in poverty . Others are multimillionaires . Age limits are nonexistent as preschoolers , high school
dropouts , and octogenarians belong . In the United
States , at least 5 million Americans are eligible for
membership . To be a member in good standing , 
members must agree to abide by the Mensa constitution , pay the annual dues , and permit their names and
addresses to be published in Mensa listings . 
The organization believes that intelligence should
be used for the benefit of humanity . As a result , the
free expression of ideas and multiple points of view
are encouraged . How do Mensans accomplish that ? 
They get together and discuss ideas plus attend a variety of social functions sponsored by the organization . 
For example , in the United States , over 150 special
interest groups ( SIGs ) exist . Some national events
include the Colloquium , which offers members an
opportunity to debate , evaluate , and study issues of
importance to society . The Culture Quest is a 90-
minute test of cultural knowledge that takes place at
the same time on the same day in both Canada and the
United States . Every spring , national games competitions are held . Members select winners based on originality , game play , play value , aesthetics , and clarity
of instructions . 
As a forum for the exploration of opinions , Mensa
rests on the idea that humans are social animals and
that intelligence works better in stimulating social circles . Mensa also believes that intelligence can be measured . Intelligence , however , is not the same as
goodwill , and Mensa has had its share of malcontents
and mischief makers . 
Mensa makes no attempt to define intelligence . 
However , it does encourage members to contribute to
the field of intelligence and conduct research into the
characteristics and uses of intelligence . The Mensa
Education and Research Foundation ( MERF ) gives
out five different awards for outstanding research , creative achievement , teaching , and writing . MERF also
awards college scholarships . The Mensa lifetime
achievement award recognizes those members who
have contributed to the fields of giftedness , brain function , human intelligence , creativity , or intelligence
testing over a period of 15 years or more . Other competitions are also available . The American chapter
annually challenges Americans to find out how smart
they are by taking a test administered at more than
100 locations . 
The hierarchical structure of Mensa consists of an
international general council , which includes the CEO
of each national Mensa and the international chairman . 
This council meets annually . The international board of
directors formulates policy and conducts Mensa ’ s international growth and internal affairs . As of 2003 , Mensa
had active organizations in 40 countries . 
—JoAnn Franklin Klinker
See also achievement tests ; Burt , Cyril ; giftedness , gifted education ; intelligence ; psychometrics ; Spearman , Charles ; 
Thorndike , Edward
Further Readings and References
Borland , J .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2003 )  . Rethinking gifted education . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
658———Mensa
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 658
Coleman , L .  ( 2005 )  . Nurturing talent in high school . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Mensa International .  ( 2000 )  . Retrieved January 29 , 2004 , from 
. 
 MENTAL ILLNESS , 
IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN
Mental illness is any disease of the brain or mind
that seriously affects an individual ’ s emotions or mood , 
thoughts , behavior , or personality . Mental illness can
significantly interfere with such everyday functions
as learning , thinking , and communicating . Other terms
used synonymously with mental illness include mental , 
psychological , and psychiatric disorder or disease . 
Symptoms of mental illness may include extreme
moods such as excessive sadness / depression or anxiety , 
a decreased ability to think clearly , memory impairment , or delusions and hallucinations . The type , intensity , and duration of symptoms vary from person to
person . The symptoms of mental illness often can be
controlled effectively through medication and / or psychotherapy . For some individuals , however , the illness
continues to cause periodic episodes requiring treatment . Consequently , some people with mental illness
will need little if any support , others may need only
occasional support , and still others may require more
substantial , ongoing support . 
Diagnosis is the act of identifying and naming a
disorder or disease by using an agreed-upon system . 
In the United States , mental illnesses are currently
diagnosed according to the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders , Fourth Edition . The
DSM-IV-TR is the standard handbook for psychodiagnosis employed by clinicians and researchers in the
United States . 
The terms neurosis and psychosis are sometimes
used to describe the severity of various mental illnesses . A neurosis is a mild disorder that causes distress but may not interfere greatly with a person ’ s
everyday activities . A psychosis is a severe mental
disorder that prevents an individual from functioning
effectively and is a major mental illness with severe
symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations as
seen in schizophrenia and bipolar disorders . Neuroses
are much less severe and include such illnesses as
mood disorders , anxiety disorders , and posttraumatic
stress disorders . 
Mental illness has many forms , and it affects people
of all ages , ethnic / racial backgrounds , and economic
levels . Determining just how many people have mental illness is one of the many purposes of the field of
epidemiology . According to current epidemiological
estimates , at least one in five people has a diagnosable mental disorder during the course of a year . That
is , about 20% of the U . S . population are affected by
mental disorders during a given year . This estimate
comes from two epidemiological surveys : the
Epidemiologic Catchment Area ( ECA ) study of the
early 1980s and the National Comorbidity Survey 
( NCS ) of the early 1990s . Those surveys defined
mental illness according to the prevailing editions of
the DSM-IV-TR . 
The most common types of mental illness are
anxiety disorders ( e . g .  , panic disorder , phobias )  , 
mood disorders ( e . g .  , major depression , bipolar
disorder )  , and schizophrenia . Some mental disorders , such as Alzheimer ’ s disease , are caused by disease of the brain , but the causes of most others are
not clearly known . Schizophrenia appears to be
partly caused by genetic factors . Some mood disorders , such as mania and depression , may be caused
by imbalances of certain chemicals in the brain . 
Neuroses seem to be caused by environmental factors
such as emotional deprivation or abuse during childhood . Today , there is a growing consensus toward a
biopsychosocial view of abnormal behavior—that
the abnormal behavior of mental illness arises from
an interaction of biological ( genetic and physiological ) factors and psychosocial influences ( past and
present experiences )  . 
Mental health professionals have made important
advances in the treatment of mental illness . Treatment
methods used today usually help people recover from
their symptoms more quickly than in the past . 
Although milder mental illness may not require any
treatment , severe cases of mental illness may require
extensive professional treatment , including psychopharmacology and therapy . 
Neuroses are less severe and more treatable . Some
mood disorders , such as mania and depression , are
often treated by drugs that act to correct chemical
imbalances . However , counseling and psychotherapy
are typically the treatment of choice for the majority
of individuals with neurotic conditions . Psychosis
requires an intensive treatment protocol that usually
includes strong prescriptions and , for some individuals , hospitalization . 
Mental illness , in Adults and Children——659
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 659
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
The annual prevalence of mental disorders in children
and adolescents is not as well documented as that for
adults . The 2000 Surgeon General ’ s Report gave prevalence estimates from 17 . 6% to 22% in one study and
16% in another . Furthermore , child mental disorders
often persist in adulthood . Regarding education , federal
regulations define a subpopulation of children and adolescents with severe functional limitations known as 
 “ emotional disturbance .  ” Under the federal Individuals
With Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA )  , this term means
a condition exhibiting one or more of the following characteristics over a long period of time and to a marked
degree that adversely affects a child ’ s educational performance : an inability to learn that cannot be explained
by intellectual , sensory , or health factors ; an inability to
build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships
with peers and teachers ; inappropriate types of behavior
or feelings under normal circumstances ; a general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression ; or a tendency to
develop physical symptoms or fears associated with personal or school problems . This definition also includes
schizophrenia . This term does not apply to children who
are socially maladjusted , unless it is determined that they
have an emotional disturbance . Under IDEA , such
children should be formally evaluated and , if found eligible , either placed in a special classroom or provided
assistance in their regular classroom . 
Children with mental health needs are usually identified by the schools only after their emotional or behavioral problems cannot be managed by their regular
classroom teacher . For this reason , and the stringent
functional limitations legislated by IDEA for the category “ emotional disturbance ,  ” few children are found eligible in the school category of “ emotional disturbance .  ” 
Although the percentage of children who need intensive
and consistent special education programming as a result
of their emotional problems is small , the same behavioral
and emotional symptoms at a lesser level of intensity are
present in much larger numbers of youngsters . 
—Michael Mann
See also affective domain ; at-risk students ; child development
theories ; counseling ; emotional disturbance ; psychology , 
types of ; psychometric
Further Readings and References
American Psychiatric Association .  ( 2000 )  . Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders ( 4th ed .  , text rev .  )  . 
Washington , DC : American Psychiatric Association . 
Brown , R .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Handbook of pediatric psychology in
school settings . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Merrell , K .  ( 2003 )  . Behavioral , social , and emotional assessment of children and adolescents . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 2002 )  . Twenty-fourth annual
report to Congress on the implementation of the Individuals
With Disabilities Act . Washington , DC : Author . 
U . S . Department of Health and Human Services .  ( 2000 )  . 
Report of the Surgeon General ’ s Conference on Children ’ s
Mental Health : A national action agenda . Washington , 
DC : Author . 
Valasquez . R . A .  ,  & McNeill , B .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . The handbook
of Chicana / o psychology and mental health . Mahwah , NJ : 
Erlbaum . 
 MENTORING
Mentoring is often used interchangeably with assisting , 
guiding , teaching , learning , readiness , compensation , 
support , and socialization . Studies have focused on
the mentoring of preservice and inservice teacher populations with attention gradually accommodating
prospective and practicing administrators . This disequilibrium in mentoring is reflected in public school
culture , as beginning and prospective administrators
from among staff have been largely overlooked . 
TRADITIONAL AND ALTERNATIVE
CONCEPTIONS OF MENTORING
Traditionally , mentorship involves training in skills
building and knowledge acquisition , both inside and
outside education , and of youth or adults . This kind of
relationship—typically needs based and short term—
is guided by experienced persons in schools , universities , businesses , or other professional domains who
transfer understanding and knowledge to apprentices . 
Within this framework , mentoring is a unidirectional
process wherein the more experienced person teaches
and the neophyte learns . This transmission model
focuses on objectives in an advising or other situation , 
not the deeper , more sustaining processes of professional development , lifelong learning , or relationship
building . Characteristically , traditional mentoring
implies conditions for noncritical reflection and feedback whereby “ authoritative knowledge ” is mediated
and satisfaction and recognition derived from the protégé ’ s accomplishments . 
The idea of a mentor as somehow separate from
or above the group that follows one ’ s charge is considered outdated . More contemporary conceptions of
660———Mentoring
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 660
mentorship in the literature include co-mentoring , a
proactive force that unites the mentor and mentee or a
group of individuals in a reciprocal , mutual exchange
that creates a context for the learning relationship . 
This structure can function as a catalyst for changing
traditional practices , hierarchical systems , and homogeneous cultures . Specifically , co-mentoring is a relational or feminist value that seeks to transcend status
and power differences and promote diversity by bringing women and minorities into the network . Similarly , 
collaborative mentoring offers a countercultural
approach to entrenched exclusivity : when practiced
effectively , this kind of mentoring mobilizes social
equality among individuals of various statuses and
ability levels , enabling productive synergy . 
MENTORSHIP AS A CONTINUUM
Other forms of mentoring include autonomous or selfmentoring through such means as vicarious learning
from seasoned professionals . The educational literature
taken as a whole suggests that mentorship theory and
practice reflect a continuum from self-mentoring to traditional mentoring , to co-mentoring or collaborative
mentoring , to systemic or organizational mentoring . 
Traditional and alternative mentoring encompasses
mentor-protégé relationships at the individual or group
level , and they occur consciously or unconsciously and
formally or informally . 
Faculty-led mentoring programs produce benefits
for participants . Mentoring cohorts that function
powerfully as a compensatory network can increase
student success , including for organizationally disadvantaged groups . At the extreme end of this continuum , support groups have been experimenting with
more empowering approaches , operating , for instance , 
not only as a diverse entity but also as a collective critically studying itself . One such group in higher education implemented a “ mentoring mosaic ,  ” making
available to any one member multiple mentors and
opportunities for growth . A significant strategy for
schools therefore highlights how mentoring should be
performed not just one-on-one but rather as a wholeschool culture engaged in “ re-culturing ” itself . 
Another variation , formal mentorship includes ( 1 ) 
a one-on-one mentor-protégé arrangement predicated
upon assignment to the relationship and ( 2 ) a cohort
that has been institutionalized and is led by a qualified
mentor ( s )  . In contrast , informal mentorship is spontaneous and supported through the mentor ; consequently , 
these relationships are not managed , structured , or
officially recognized , and they involve risk , as the
assistance may or may not occur . Interestingly , corporate management studies have found that informal
mentoring can actually yield greater benefits for protégés than formal mentoring . Few descriptive studies
of informal cohort mentoring in education have been
published , but newly emerging research suggests that
such contexts offer particular advantages and disadvantages , not unlike formal contexts . 
SOME OBSTACLES AND SOLUTIONS
Mentoring , previously labeled as a compensatory
support for the once excluded , is now identified as an
essential element of graduate education , as well as a
critical socializing force for beginning teachers and
administrators . While many doctoral students consider their advising and mentoring relationship as the
single most important element in graduate education , 
many have also appraised it as the most disappointing
relationship . 
Regarding the socialization of prospective school
leaders , this population has primarily viewed administrative staff and principals as the critical influence
in their own preparation , not graduate programs . 
Although such administrator programs teach
examples of leadership behaviors , they are unlikely to
transmit the practical knowledge that characterizes
exemplary leadership . Many practitioners and scholars alike argue for adequate training opportunities for
aspiring principals through longer , more rigorous
internships , mentoring and shadowing practical experiences , and instruction by model practitioners . 
—Carol Mullen
See also accountability ; adaptiveness of organizations ; adult
education ; attitudes toward work ; capacity building , of
organizations ; career stages ; democracy , democratic education and administration ; instructional interventions ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , participatory ; leadership , 
system oriented ; leadership , theories of ; professional development schools ; reform , of schools ; role model ; school
improvement models ; tutoring
Further Readings and References
Blake-Beard , S . D .  ( 2001 )  . Taking a hard look at formal mentoring programs : A consideration of potential challenges
facing women . Journal of Management Development
20 ( 4 )  , 331–345 . 
Bloom , G .  ,  & Krovetz , M .  ( 2001 )  . A step into the principalship . Leadership , 30 ( 3 )  , 12–13 . 
Mentoring———661
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 661
Gross , R . A .  ( 2002 )  . From “ old boys ” to mentors . Chronicle of
Higher Education . Retrieved from 
jobs / 2002 / 02 / 2002022801c . 
Lucas , K . F .  ( 2001 )  . The social construction of mentoring
roles . Mentoring & Tutoring , 9 ( 1 )  , 23–47 . 
Malone , J .  ( 2001 )  . Principal mentoring , Research Roundup , 
17 ( 2 )  , 1–8 . Retrieved from tions / roundup / Winter_2001 . 
Mullen , C . A .  ( 2000 )  . Constructing co-mentoring partnerships : 
Walkways we must travel . Theory Into Practice , 39 ( 1 )  , 4–11 . 
Mullen , C . A .  ( 2003 )  . The WIT cohort : A case study of informal doctoral mentoring . Journal of Further and Higher
Education , 27 ( 4 )  , 411–426 . 
Wellington , S .  ( 2001 )  . Be your own mentor : Strategies from top
women on the secrets of success . New York : Random House . 
 MERIT PAY
Merit pay is the simple notion that teachers should be
paid in whole or in part on their performance in the
classroom . Although there are records that teachers ’ 
salaries were determined in part on their students ’ examination scores in England in 1710 , the first recorded
attempt to install a merit pay plan in a school system
in the United States was in 1908 in Newton , 
Massachusetts . Since then , about 183 school systems
have tried and abandoned the idea . The latest attempt at
merit pay was the Denver , Colorado , performance pay
pilot . Early evidence has been that it did not work . The
major drawbacks with merit pay are administrative
problems , personnel problems , collective bargaining
restrictions , financial problems , and adverse publicity . 
Salary is not one of the reasons persons typically
enter teaching . Therefore , persons entering teaching are
not primarily motivated by money . Furthermore , the
bulk of the teaching force is female . A female-oriented
profession has been highly sensitive to forms of socialization and to matters of rank and differentiation . 
Females prefer to be in an egalitarian workforce . 
Working relations with others is a very important factor
in such a workforce . Salary differentiations based on
subjective factors other than seniority have not been
widely accepted . 
Alternative forms of pay that have a higher rate of
acceptance are job enlargement ( where increased pay
is related to increased workload ) and / or an extended
contract year ( where increased pay is related to spending more time on the job )  . Both of these approaches
are more acceptable to teachers as forms of increasing
their base pay than separation based on measures of
performance . Another approach has been the creation
of a career ladder related to differentiated staffing , that
is , teachers are paid for different roles instead of on
measures of pure classroom performance . 
Other approaches to pay differentials involve such
areas as market-sensitive pay . From this perspective , a
science teacher might be paid more than a physical
education teacher because fully qualified and certified
science teachers are much scarcer than physical education teachers . Salary becomes a measure of scarcity , 
a factor that is already utilized extensively in higher
education hiring and compensation practices . Some
forms of market-sensitive pay are already utilized in
some school districts where ESL teachers are paid a
bonus or teachers who represent areas that require
training beyond those otherwise employed , for
example , in special education . However , market-sensitive pay is not a form of merit pay . 
The major problems with merit pay have been
identified as ( 1 ) the nonavailability of state funds
to use in salary incentives ,  ( 2 ) the nonavailability of
local funds for similar purposes , and ( 3 ) the potential
threat of lowered teacher morale . From a teacher
acceptance perspective , most merit pay plans are
based on an assumption that only a few teachers can
ever qualify for merit and that the amounts will not
be very large . From this vantage point , the appeal of
merit pay to the largest segment of the teaching force
does not have enough critical mass to be an important
leverage point to install a merit pay plan . 
Other difficulties with installing merit pay cluster
around finding acceptable indices to determine superior
teaching , ensuring the technical competence of those
doing the evaluations so that it is reliable and valid , and
clarifying the reasons for the plan in the first place . Most
traditional evaluation plans for teachers are inadequate
for purposes of installing a merit pay approach . In considering implementing a merit pay plan , some districts
have developed two teacher evaluation systems . The
first is the traditional system centered on promoting
growth . The second system is installed for the purpose
of gathering data to make the finer distinctions required
for determining merit increases . The traditional evaluation system is centered on creating minimal responses to
uniform standards or expectations . A merit pay evaluation system assumes a common base and is aimed at
providing the finer-honed criteria to determine exceptions to the common standards . 
Merit pay continues to be much discussed in public
education . The popularity of the topic waxes and
662———Merit Pay
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 662
wanes with the political tides . Since salaries of
teachers are the largest single monetary item in school
system budgets , when money becomes tight , talk of
merit or performance pay escalates at these times . No
one doubts that salary is an important tool to recruit
and maintain competent personnel . But compensation
does not occur in a vacuum . It takes place within a
culture and a climate that often determine the success
or failure of the salary mechanism beyond simply the
methods and means of payment . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also accountability ; attitudes toward work ; authority ; boards
of education ; career stages ; clinical supervision ; contracts , 
with teacher unions ; expectations , teachers and student cultures ; fringe benefits ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; involvement , in organizations ; performance evaluation
systems ; power ; role conflict ; salary and salary models ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; sexism ( glass ceiling )  ; 
staffing , concepts of ; unions , of teachers
Further Readings and References
Chamberlin , R .  , Haynes , G .  , Wragg , E .  ,  & Wragg , C .  ( 2004 )  . 
Performance pay for teachers . London : Routledge . 
English , F .  ( 1984 )  . Merit pay : Reflections on education ’ s
lemon tree . Educational Leadership , 41 ( 4 )  , 72–79 . 
English , F .  ( 1992 )  . History and critical issues of educational
compensation systems . In L . Frase ( Ed .  )  , Teacher compensation and motivation ( pp . 3–24 )  . Lancaster , PA : 
Technomic . 
Gratz , D .  ( 2005 )  . Lessons from Denver : The pay for performance pilot . Phi Delta Kappan , 86 ( 8 )  , 569–581 . 
Wolfe , M .  , McIntosh , P . I .  ,  & Steffy , B .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Life
cycle of the career teacher in practice : Applications and
outcomes for individual and school renewal . Indianapolis , 
IN : Kappa Delta Pi . 
 METACOGNITION
Metacognition is the executive function of the human
intellect . It is a mediating process that includes the ability to predict performance , monitor activity , and understand content . It also allows individuals to organize
information to know when , what , and how to remember . Metacognition further involves the act of “ thinking
about how one thinks ,  ” or knowledge and cognition
about cognitive phenomena . In essence , metacognition
allows individuals to not only acquire content knowledge but also learn about themselves within the context
of that content . Metacognition has been defined as “ the
deliberate conscious control of one ’ s cognitive actions .  ” 
However , metacognition was and remains a fuzzy concept in that it has no consistent , standard definition . It
has become an even fuzzier concept as research on
metacognition has proliferated and expanded into a
variety of disciplines and directions . Metacognitionbased instructional strategies include , but are not limited to ( a ) the strategic instruction model ,  ( b ) content
enhancement , and ( c ) self-evaluation . 
Initial research on metacognition began in the 1950s , 
and the development and application of metacognitionbased instructional strategies began in the late 1960s and
early 1970s . Metacognitive approaches are designed
to foster an understanding of content and flexibility / 
adaptability in applied settings . Usable , functional
knowledge , which is easily retrievable , is an observable
outcome of the effective use of metacognition . Once
individuals become proficient in the use of metacognitive approaches and employ them on a regular basis , 
those persons tend to become more effective at attacking and understanding content . In essence , the more
these approaches are used by an individual , the greater
the degree of the person ’ s mastery of both the method
and content . 
Significant differences exist in the problem-solving
approaches of those three groups of high school students
who ( a ) are academically successful ,  ( b ) are academically at risk , and ( c ) possess specific learning disabilities . In essence , academically successful students
spontaneously generate strategic methods for attacking , encoding , storing , and retrieving academic content . Students who are academically at risk or who
possess specific learning disabilities do not systematically attack or process academic content . The latter
two groups are almost identical in their low level of
metacognitive skills . In addition , students in the former group possess an ability to distinguish vital information from irrelevant information , while this ability
is absent in the latter groups . Overall , those students
who are proficient at developing and applying strategies to process information ( a ) notice meaningful features of content and information that are not apparent
to others ,  ( b ) can easily and flexibly retrieve various
aspects of content with little difficulty , and ( c ) understand contextual applications of content instead of an
isolated set of facts . 
Beyond the differentiation of salient from irrelevant content features , metacognition also involves
the generation and evaluation of alternative uses of
Metacognition———663
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 663
content and the generalization of that content to novel
situations . As only about 25% of all students spontaneously generate and apply metacognitive approaches
in instructional settings , activities in such settings must
support and encourage the development of metacognition in students . 
Research has indicated that metacognitive strategies
can be taught and can have a positive impact on student
performance . However , the effectiveness of training
and application of metacognitive strategies is influenced by a variety of factors . These factors include ( a ) 
the receptive and expressive language of an average 9-
year-old ,  ( b ) intellectual capacity within or above the
normal range , and ( c ) a long-term commitment to an
intensive metacognitive training regime . This is not to
mean that persons with cognitive disabilities or
younger children cannot be taught to use metacognitive strategies to improve academic or social functioning . Simple strategies can be acquired , applied , and
generalized by these persons . However , those
metacognitive strategies that are more complex in
nature may be more difficult ( if not impossible ) for
such persons to acquire , due to the role that internal
language or “ self-talk ” plays in strategy mediation by
the individual . Furthermore , the more complex academic metacognitive approaches often require long-term
instructional intervention and support before students
become proficient in their use or can spontaneously
generalize application to new settings and content . 
The use of metacognitive strategies to improve
student performance is not limited solely to the area of
academic performance . A variety of metacognitive
approaches to enhance the interpersonal , social , and
organizational skills of students have been identified . 
These strategies include approaches to improve the perceptions and interactions between students and
between students and their teachers in order to facilitate
successful student movement between classes ( i . e .  , 
arrive on time with all materials )  . 
Metacognition as the basis for intervention and
instruction holds promise for educational institutions . 
The approaches developed from research in metacognition are more consistent with how the human brain
operates than more traditional approaches to instruction .  “ Brain-friendly ” instruction allows for more
effective processing of content information and , by
definition , more rapid and extensive intellectual
growth . As traditional and metacognitive instructional
practices become aligned more closely , as new
metacognitive instructional materials are developed , 
as assessment focuses more on understanding as
opposed to memory , as state and national achievement
standards better reflect how students process and
acquire information , and as the professional development of teachers incorporates metacognitive research
to a greater extent , a new model for instruction and
learning will emerge that better reflects the role of
contextual understanding and cognitive diversity in
the education process . 
—J . M . Blackbourn
See also brain research and practice ; cognition , theories of ; 
cognitive dissonance ; cognitive styles ; intelligence ; neuroscience ; perceptual psychology ; psychology , types of
Further Readings and References
Alley , G . R .  ,  & Blackbourn , J . M .  ( 1980 )  . Acquisition and generalization of learning strategies in preschool handicapped
children : A review of research ( Document 150 )  . Lawrence : 
Kansas University Early Childhood Research Institute . 
Blackbourn , J . M .  ( 1989 )  . Acquisition and generalization of
social skills in elementary-age students with learning
disabilities . Journal of Learning Disabilities , 22 , 28–34 . 
Bransford , J . S .  , Brown , A . L .  ,  & Cocking , R . R .  ( Eds .  )  .  
( 2000 )  . How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , and
school . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . 
Efland , D .  ( 2002 )  . Art and cognition . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Taylor , L .  ( 2004 )  . Introducing cognitive development . 
New York : Routledge . 
 MIDDLE SCHOOLS
Middle schools grew out of the idea that the secondary
schools at the time—1910 to 1925—should be separated into junior and senior divisions . Designed around
the thought that the seventh grade was the natural turning point in an adolescent ’ s life , junior high schools for
Grades 7 to 9 gained in popularity through the 1950s . 
However , the demand for a rigorous ninth-grade curriculum at that time drove junior highs into becoming
preparatory secondary schools . These mini–high
schools were characterized by a departmentalized
organization of subjects , a six-period schedule of 50-
minute blocks , and instructional methods dominated
by the lecture style of delivery . By 1960 , educators
began to reorganize schools for 10- to 15-year-old
adolescents into what is known as the middle school
concept of schooling . 
664———Middle Schools
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 664
In its seminal report Turning Points : Preparing
American Youth for the 21st Century , the Carnegie
Council on Adolescent Development provided a framework for middle-level education , the components of
which would work collectively to ensure the success of
all students :  ( a ) create small communities for learning ,  
( b ) teach a core of common knowledge to all students ,  
( c ) empower teachers and principals with the responsibility to transform middle grade schools ,  ( d ) staff middle grades with teachers specifically prepared to teach
young adolescents ,  ( e ) link the education and health
of young adolescents , and ( f ) establish family-schoolcommunity partnerships . Ten years later , Turning Points
2000 by Anthony Jackson and Gayle Davis provided
guidelines on how to implement the middle school
model . Core values outlined by Jackson and Davis , and
an important change from the original Turning Points , 
include expectations of success for every student and a
curriculum grounded in academic standards . 
The mission of the middle school is to facilitate
learning among young students at a critical time in their
adolescent development—i . e .  , intellectual , physical , 
psychological , social , and moral development . The
dominant grade structure of middle schools today is a
Grades 5 to 8 pattern , but middle schools may also be
comprised of Grades 5 to 7 , 7 to 8 , or 6 to 9 . 
This We Believe , the 2003 position paper of the
National Middle School Association , outlines 14 characteristics for successful schools for young adolescents . The
first eight present facets of the school culture : prepared , 
engaged educators ; brave and collaborative leadership ; 
decisions guided by a single vision ; safe and supportive
environment ; raised expectations ; active learning ; adult
advocates ; and family-community partnerships . 
The remaining six characteristics address the
programmatic components of a developmentally
responsive middle school : relevant and challenging
curriculum ; approaches to learning and teaching based
on diversity ; supportive assessment / evaluation programs ; organizations supporting meaningful relationships and learning ; policies and efforts toward health , 
wellness , and safety ; and multifaceted guidance and
support services . 
Some emerging research has , however , indicated
that students do better with grades and discipline if
they remain in a K–8 setting . Some large school systems have dropped their middle school programs and
are reverting to a K–8 pattern . 
—Kathleen Roney
See also adolescence ; affective domain ; curriculum , theories
of ; discipline in schools ; dropouts ; elementary education ; 
grades , of students ; junior high schools ; learning , theories
of ; literacy , theories of ; philosophies of education ; politics , 
of education ; school districts , history and development ; 
school improvement models ; site-based management
Further Readings and References
Brown , E .  ,  & Saltman , K .  ( 2005 )  . The critical middle school
reader . London : Routledge . 
Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development .  ( 1989 )  . 
Turning points : Preparing youth for the 21st century . 
New York : Carnegie Corporation . 
Jackson , A .  ,  & Davis , G .  ( 2000 )  . Turning points 2000 : 
Educating adolescents in the 21st century . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
National Middle School Association .  ( 2003 )  . This we believe : 
Successful schools for young adolescents . Westerville , OH : 
Author . 
 MIGRANT STUDENTS
Migrants are defined in the U . S . Department of
Education guidelines as migratory workers or the
children of migratory workers who move for the purposes of obtaining seasonal or temporary work in agriculture or fishing . Each year approximately 3 million to
5 million farm workers and their families leave their
homes to follow the crops . Their lives revolve around
working and moving on , and these families travel from
one harvest to another hoping to improve their finances . 
Migrants in the United States are extremely
diverse ; approximately 92% of all migrants are culturally and linguistically diverse , of whom 85% are
Hispanic . Of the Hispanic migrant population , 60%
are Mexican American and are the largest subgroup , 
followed by Puerto Ricans , Cubans , and Central and
South Americans . 
Migrants primarily harvest fruits and vegetables . 
In the summers , they may harvest tomatoes or broccoli in Texas or possibly apricots , peaches , or grapes
in California . They tend to migrate up and down along
three known geographic routes : the East Coast stream , 
the midcontinent stream , and the West Coast stream
following seasonal crops . 
Over 80% of migrants and seasonal farm workers
are U . S . citizens or are legally in the United States . The
average annual income for these families is less than
$7 , 500 per year , far below the federal poverty level . 
Migrant Students———665
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 665
The work of migrant farmworkers tends to be seasonal
and often very inconsistent . The number of farmworkers needing housing exceeds the number of available
substandard housing units . Therefore , farmworkers , 
particularly migrants , confront obstacles or barriers to
obtain housing . Agricultural employers recognize that
the lack of adequate housing is a serious challenge . 
They resort to temporary housing such as labor camps ; 
however , construction and maintenance of these labor
camps can be expensive , especially since labor camps
are only occupied during harvest season . The housing
that is readily available for most migrant families may
not meet the minimum inspection standards , consequently posing a national health problem . Migrant
families tend to live without adequate restroom facilities
and clean drinking water in substandard housing , which
are usually barrack-like structures , run-down farmhouses , trailer homes , or small shacks . Some migrants
may be forced to sleep in tents , cars , or even ditches
when housing is not available . 
The census indicates that among Hispanic migrant
children , 38 . 4% lived in poverty in 1990 as compared
to 18 . 3% of non-Hispanic children . Some commonly
reported health problems among migrant children
include lower height and weight , respiratory diseases , 
parasitic conditions , chronic diarrhea , and congenital
and developmental problems , to name a few . Poverty , 
hunger , fear , and uncertainty fill the lives of migrant
children . 
EDUCATIONAL EXPERIENCES
OF MIGRANT STUDENTS
Children of migrant farmworkers have not been
academically successful in public schools . Poverty and
migration make it difficult for migrant children to create a different life and future than that of their parents . 
Their schooling may be interrupted several times
throughout one school year ; this high mobility puts
an enormous stress on migrant children and on the
schools . The challenges they confront as they progress
through the grades eventually can become obstacles . 
These challenges must be removed so these students
can realize their intellectual potentials . For example , 
their educational needs vary considerably ; some lack
the literary skills in Spanish , while English language
abilities are limited for others . The quality of instruction for migrant students could be hampered if the
curriculum does not adequately address their needs
or provide supplemental instructional services to
overcome academic difficulties that result from frequent
educational disruptions . Most school personnel have
not prepared to adequately serve the academic needs
of Hispanic students , but in particular , migrant
students . 
Migrant students have the lowest graduation rate of
any population group in the U . S . public schools . The
dropout rate among children of migrant farm workers
is almost twice that of children from nonmigrant
families . Their dropout rate is conservatively estimated
at 45% , well above the national average of 25% . In two
other studies , the dropout rates for migrant students
ranged from 45% to 65% . These longitudinal studies
focused on Hispanic students identified while they
were in sixth grade ; however , these students were not
tracked for long because of a high disappearance rate . 
They moved , disappeared , dropped out , or no longer
qualified for services . Some migrant students choose to
drop out of school ; research indicates that several factors influence the students to leave school before graduating . For example , approximately 50% of migrant
students are one or more years below grade level . 
Thus , half of all migrants could be at risk of leaving
school early . Poverty is another factor that leads to
dropping out ; the addition of another family member
contributing to the family income is welcomed . 
Students also tend to drop out of school if they are not
proficient in English ; yet , learning English for all
migrants is an economic asset . These students generally have suffered academically , dislike school , participate little in school activities , have no home base , are
economically disadvantaged , and have low motivation
and low persistence . Some teachers become uninterested in migrant students due to their diverse academic , social , and economic needs ; consequently , the
students leave school . 
Migrant children must be assisted in adjusting
to new environments . These children transfer to several schools during the span of their education . Some
migrant children transfer to different schools as many
as three times a year . These experiences are not pleasant and at times can be uncomfortable , because the
children never feel grounded or feel like they truly
belong . When some students do feel a sense of belonging or have made friends , they are uprooted to go to the
next harvest site . What may compound the situation
more is that these children may not be proficient in
English ; therefore , they may not be accepted by some
of their classmates . These children tend to withdraw , 
are not noticed , and thus overlooked . They experience
666———Migrant Students
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 666
isolation for not being accepted for who they are , thus
contributing to having low self-esteem . Thus , schools
must provide an environment for migrant students to
adjust as quickly as possible at each site . 
Principals and teachers must be committed to high
expectations and make every effort to ensure high
student achievement for migrant students . They must
be committed to improve the multiple changes that
contribute to student achievement . When available , 
teachers can use bilingual education approaches with
students who enter with limited English skills . 
Administrators should emphasizes regular attendance
and recognize classrooms with all children present ; 
good citizenship can be recognized and rewarded . 
—Velma D . Menchaca
See also Chavez , Cesar Estrada ; critical race theory ; cross-cultural studies ; desegregation , of schools ; diversity ; dropouts ; 
immigration , history and impact in education ; intelligence ; 
Latinos ; League of United Latin American Citizens ; 
Mendez , Felicitas ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Chapa , J .  ,  & de la Rosa , B .  ( 2004 )  . Latino population growth , 
socioeconomic and demographic characteristics , and
implications for educational attainment . Education and
Urban Society , 36 ( 2 )  , 130–249 . 
Contreras , A .  ( 2004 )  . Latinos at the portal of the 21st century . 
Education and Urban Society , 36 ( 2 )  , 223–234 . 
Garcia , E .  ( 2005 )  . Teaching and learning in two languages . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Gonzales , G .  ( 2003 )  . Segregation and the education of
Mexican children , 1900–1940 . In J . Moreno ( Ed .  )  , The elusive quest for equality : 150 years of Chicano / Chicana education . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Educational Review . 
Lee , S .  ( 2005 )  . Up against whiteness : Race , school , and immigrant youth . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Ritchie , W .  ,  & Bhatia , T .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2003 )  . Handbook of second
language acquisition . St . Louis , MO : Elsevier . 
 MINORITIES , IN SCHOOLS
Small or different groups of students have posed a
problem and a threat to majoritarian school practices
ever since Irish immigration brought huge numbers of
Catholics into the public , largely Protestant schools
on the East Coast . The humiliation of Catholics
exposed to Protestant Bible readings and other pejorative practices helped create a separate school system . 
In the Southwest , missions and presidios were
the institutions providing informal education for the
Indian population . The purpose of schooling this population was to replace the Indian identity with a
Spanish identity and to inform them of their subordinate place in society . The intent was to smother or
destroy their “ indigenous religious and social beliefs ” 
by teaching the Catholic ideals , Spanish customs , 
music , and literacy . Some Indian groups resisted the
rule of the Spanish by engaging in significant battles
over who controlled the Southwest . Others rejected
the Spanish by leaving the missions or killing missionaries . Others were willing to learn the ways of the
Spanish and accept their religion , rules , and customs . 
This provided them the opportunity to learn to read
and write in Spanish , which brought forth the knowledge needed to inform other Indians of the Spanish
culture . 
With the decline of the missions and presidios in the
early nineteenth century , the importance of educating
the Indian population shifted to educating the Spanish
settlers . Education became important in settlements
that had large numbers of Spanish-speaking settlers
such as Los Angeles , Santa Fe , and San Antonio . The
purpose for educating them was to transmit the “ social
and cultural status ” of the Anglo population by teaching literacy , religious ideals , and social order . 
Between 1836 and the early 1850s , the United
States annexed Texas , Arizona , California , and
Colorado , and the Mexicans became subordinate to the
Anglos . Catholic churches began to establish formal
schooling for Mexican children . These schools had
been established to maintain the Catholic ideals and
beliefs , to learn about the Anglo traditions , and to
acquire a place in the social order in American society . 
Later , Anglo officials began to establish public schools
for Mexican American children . These schools were
established to assimilate the growing numbers of racial
minorities into the Anglo culture . 
Between 1825 and 1870 , the states began funding
public education with trained staff and managed by a
central organization . It was during this time that
the organization , scope , and role of schooling became
transformed and solidified . Schools became age
graded , often compensatory , taught by trained
teachers and led by full-time experts . Yet , minority
students were excluded from these formal educational
environments for Anglo children . In the South , most
Blacks were denied schooling , while the North had
a few pockets of Blacks attending public schools in
Minorities , in Schools———667
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 667
segregated classrooms or informal settings . Laws were
passed to prevent racial minorities from attending
public schools
A similar dilemma faced Asians who came to
America , particularly in the West . The discovery of gold
in California brought Chinese adventurers like so many
others . Later , Chinese were sought to help lay railroad
beds and track . The image of Chinese “ coolies ” was
established in textbooks and the public mind ; the
Chinese later became the subject of virulent attack by
Samuel Gompers of the American Federation of Labor . 
Asiatics were considered inferior to Whites , which led
to the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Acts of 1882 . In
San Francisco , Chinese children were prohibited from
attending the public schools . Later , when the California
Supreme Court ruled that Chinese students could not be
barred from attending school , a separate school for them
was constructed . Racial segregation lasted until 1946 , 
following the Mendez v . Westminster school case in
which it was prohibited . 
Similarly , Japanese on the West Coast were
maligned , their children excluded from attending
public schools , fanned by newspaper stories warning
Whites about the “ yellow peril .  ” 
By 1868 , laws prohibiting racial minorities were often
considered illegal , yet states were prohibiting school
boards from using state funds to school racial minorities . At the end of the nineteenth century , it became
apparent that the federal government did not value education for racial minority students . In fact , the
Supreme Court ’ s 1896 decision in Plessy v . Ferguson
validated this ideology . Plessy v . Ferguson gave states
the right to segregate racial minorities from their
Anglo counterparts . This court decision supported
the segregation of racial minorities in all aspects of
American society by also prohibiting them access to
White establishments . 
During the early twentieth century , most schools had
begun to provide some form of education to Blacks , 
Mexican Americans , Asians , and Native Americans . 
While Native Americans were schooled in reservations , 
Blacks , Asians , and Mexican Americans were kept in
separate facilities from their White counterparts . These
all-Black , Asian , and Mexican schools were without
adequate or appropriate resources and were usually
rundown , dilapidated schools . They were usually
located away from the schools for Anglo children . The
Mendez v . Westminister case in California heralded the
end of segregation for Mexican students in 1946 . Eight
years later , the U . S . Supreme Court passed Brown v . 
Board of Education to desegregate American public
schools and assigned the lower courts to implement the
changes to come . However , more than a decade later , 
lower state courts were not forcing public schools to
desegregate ; consequently , schools in the South were
making assignments according to race , and many
Blacks were still attending all-Black schools . 
The middle of the twentieth century was very challenging for racial minorities . Migrants or migratory
workers uprooted their families several times a year for
the purposes of obtaining seasonal or temporary work
in agriculture or fishing . These families became an
important thread of America ’ s agricultural economy . 
Their lives revolved around working and moving from
one harvest to another hoping to improve their lives . 
The schooling of migrant children was interrupted
several times each year , and the challenges they
confronted eventually became obstacles . This high
mobility put an enormous stress on migrant children
and on the schools , since most school personnel were
not prepared to adequately serve the academic needs of
migrant students . 
During the 1960s , the civil rights movement
brought dramatic reforms to American public schools
and society . School reformers were trying to provide
more equitable opportunities for Blacks and Mexican
American children . As schools became desegregated , 
Blacks and Mexican American children were placed in
segregated classrooms . Most racial minority students
were moved into noncollege or vocational tracks . 
Tracking of Mexican American students was also
based on linguistic differences . Blacks and Mexican
American students were also more likely to be segregated into special education classrooms . While racial
minority students were in lower-level classes , their
White counterparts were in the higher-level , collegebound classrooms . 
Throughout the rest of the twentieth century , 
research studies differed on the successes and failures
of Blacks , Native American , and Latino children and
the achievement gap that exists between Anglo and
some racial minorities . Most recently , however , the
Civil Rights Project at Harvard found that a dangerously high percentage of poor and minority students
are not graduating from American high schools . 
Approximately 50% of Blacks , Native Americans , and
Latino students drop out of schools . Graduation rates
are even lower for minority males . These dropout
students are more likely to be unemployed , in prison , 
and / or living in poverty . 
668———Minorities , in Schools
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 668
In 1998 , Latinos / Latinas comprised a larger percentage of the national school-age population than African
Americans . While it is anticipated that within the next
40 years Whites will become a statistical minority , with
Latinos making up a quarter of the entire population , 
traditional “ minorities ” are expected to continue to
have difficulties in school systems dominated by White
norms and White school culture . 
—Velma D . Menchaca
See also accountability ; achievement gap , of students ; achievement tests ; Asian Pacific Americans ; Black education ; boards
of education ; bureaucracy ; Catholic education ; civil rights
movement ; critical race theory ; cross-cultural studies ; cultural
capital ; cultural politics , wars ; desegregation , of schools ; 
determinism , sociocultural ; discipline in schools ; discrimination ; diversity ; dropouts ; early childhood education ; elementary education ; ethnicity ; ethnocentrism ; eugenics ; finance , of
public schools ; high schools ; immigration , history and impact
in education ; Indian education ; individual differences , in
children ; intelligence ; Latinos ; migrant students ; multiculturalism ; National Assessment of Educational Progress ; politics , 
of education ; resiliency ; schooling effects ; social capital ; 
social context ; special education ; standardized testing ; tracking , of students ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Contreras , A .  ( 2004 )  . Latinos at the portal of the 21st century . 
Education and Urban Society , 36 ( 2 )  , 223–234 . 
Fine , M .  , Weis , L .  , Pruitt , L .  ,  & Burns , A .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Off
white : Readings on power , privilege and resistance . New
York : Routledge . 
Gaiten , C .  ( 2004 )  . Involving Latino families in schools . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Kivisto , P .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Incorporating diversity : Rethinking
assimilation in a multicultural age . Boulder , CO : Paradigm . 
McCarthy , C .  , Crichlow , W .  , Dimitriadis , G .  ,  & Dolby , N .  
( 2005 )  . Race , identity , and representation in education . 
New York : Routledge . 
Mendez v . Westminster School District of Orange County , 64 F . 
Supp . 544 ( D . C . CAL . 1946 )  . 
Orfield , G .  , Losen , D .  , Wald , J .  ,  & Swanson , C . B .  ( 2004 )  . 
Losing our future : How minority youth are being left
behind by the graduation rate crisis . Cambridge , MA : 
Civil Rights Project at Harvard University . 
Plessy v . Ferguson , 163 U . S .  , 537–564 ( 1896 )  . 
 MIXED METHODS , IN RESEARCH
Mixed methods or integrated methods ( MMs ) have
gained popularity following a long history of debates
over the legitimacy and preeminence of either the
qualitative or the quantitative approaches to research . 
Traditionally , quantitatively oriented researchers 
( QUANs ) have worked within the positivist ( or postpositivist ) paradigm and are principally interested in
numerical data and statistical analyses , while qualitatively oriented researchers ( QUALs ) followed a
constructivist paradigm and are interested in narrative
data and analysis . In contrast , researchers who identify themselves as mixed , or integrative , work primarily within the pragmatist paradigm and utilize both
narrative and numeric data and analyses for answering
research questions . 
Labeled as a “ third methodological movement ” in
social and behavioral research , MMs have emerged as
an alternative to the QUAN and QUAL traditions . This
main tenet of the MM approach is that the research
question ( not the paradigm or the purpose ) dictates
the method of inquiry . Therefore , the MM approach
encourages researchers to utilize the best combination
of QUAN and QUAL methodological tools to provide
the optimal and most comprehensive information for
answering the research questions under study . 
Although researchers across the social , behavioral , 
and health sciences have frequently employed MM in
their studies throughout the twentieth century and into
the twenty-first century , MM designs and procedures
are still evolving . Also , despite the fact that combining QUAL and QUAN methods is largely widespread
in applied research , there is still debate over the definition and the feasibility of MM . 
Critiques of MM have advocated an incompatibility
thesis , stating that it is inappropriate to mix QUAL and
QUAN methods due to fundamental differences in the
paradigms underlying those methods . Using pragmatism as their paradigmatic foundation , MM proponents
advocated a compatibility thesis , which stressed the
primacy of the research question and focusing on “ what
works ” as the truth regarding the research questions
under investigation . Pragmatism rejects the either / or
choices associated with the paradigms debate , advocates
for the use of MM in research , and acknowledges that
the values of the researcher play a large role in interpretation of results . 
Debate over MM has also focused on the definition
and typology . It has been argued that studies should
not be called mixed if they are simple collections
of QUAL and QUAN data and their analyses , without serious attempts at integrating the conclusions . A
strong appeal of MM is that it provides an opportunity
Mixed Methods , in Research———669
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 669
for the investigator to integrate the understanding
gleaned from QUAL and QUAN components into
what has been labeled meta-inferences . 
As a possible strategy for clarification of these
issues , in 2003 Charles Teddlie and Abbas Tashakkori
proposed a differentiation between mixed method and
mixed model designs . Mixed method designs utilize
both QUAN and QUAN data and analysis to answer
research questions . Mixed model designs utilize
QUAL and QUAN approaches in formulating research
questions , in their research design , and in making final
inferences . MM questions are queries that include both
the known ( explanatory / confirmatory ) and unknown 
( exploratory ) aspects of a phenomenon ( e . g .  , do certain differences exist between schools ? What kind of
differences ? Why do these differences exist ?  )  . These
questions have both inductive and deductive components , and are answered with information that is typically presented in both narrative and numerical forms . 
Mixed methodologists have proposed typologies of
designs on the basis of four different dimensions : 
number of strands ( component studies )  , priority / dominance of QUAL or QUAN approach , their sequence
of implementation , and the purpose for mixing . MM
studies might be monostrand , in which one type of
data ( QUAL or QUAN ) is collected and analyzed , 
then transformed to the other format ( i . e .  , QUAL data
are quantitized , QUAN data are qualitized ) and analyzed again . The inferences gleaned from the two sets
of results are combined for a fuller understanding
of the phenomenon under study . In comparison , they
might be multistrand , in which two sets of data are
collected and analyzed and the results integrated . 
MM designs have also been differentiated based on
priority / dominance of QUAL or QUAN approaches . 
Several authors have provided detailed typologies
based on this as well as the sequence dimension . 
Sequence of implementation is by far the most widely
used dimension for classification . Strands ( or phases ) of
an MM study might be concurrent or sequential . In concurrent designs , both QUAL and QUAN data are collected and analyzed in a parallel manner to answer
different aspects of a research question , and the results
are integrated . In sequential MM designs , a new set of
QUAL or QUAN data are collected to clarify , expand , or
test the findings of a previous strand . 
Finally , purpose of mixing has been used for classification of designs that focus on either expansion
of the findings of a previous phase , explanation of
unclear or controversial findings , or testing of emergent
hypotheses . The purposes for conducting MM
research can be personal , practical , or intellectual . 
Currently , the most commonly cited typology simultaneously focuses on sequence and purpose , and
distinguishes between triangulation , exploratory , and
explanatory designs . In triangulation design , the
investigator collects and analyzes QUAL and QUAN
data concurrently . In exploratory design , QUAN data
are collected and analyzed in order to test or expand
the findings of a QUAL study . Explanatory designs
use a QUAL strand to gain an in-depth understanding
of the findings of a QUAN study . 
Mixed methodologists have discussed the importance of developing validity criteria and audits that
incorporate and expand the QUAL and QUAN concepts . For example , they have proposed using the term
inference quality as a term to incorporate the QUAN
term internal validity and the QUAL terms of trustworthiness and credibility . Inference quality has a twofold
definition :  ( 1 ) the degree to which the interpretations
and conclusions made on the basis of the results meet
the professional standards of rigor , trustworthiness , and
acceptability and ( 2 ) the degree to which alternative
plausible explanations for the obtained results can be
ruled out . Inference quality consists of design quality
and interpretive rigor . 
Another newly proposed MM term is inference
transferability , which incorporates the QUAN
concepts of generalizability and external validity
with the QUAL term transferability . It is defined
as the degree of generalizability or applicability of
inferences obtained in a study to other individuals or
entities ( population transferability )  , other settings
or situations ( ecological transferability )  , other
time periods ( temporal transferability )  , or other
methods of observation / measurement ( operational
transferability )  . 
—Abbas Tashakkori and Charles Teddlie
See also pragmatism and progressivism ; qualitative research , 
history , theories , issues ; quantitative research methods ; 
validity and reliability ; variables
Further Readings and References
Chatterji , M .  ( 2004 )  . Evidence on “ what works ”  : An argument
for extended-term mixed-method ( ETMM ) evaluation
design . Educational Researcher , 33 ( 9 )  , 3–13 . 
Creswell , J .  ( 2005 )  . Educational research : Planning , conducting , and evaluating quantitative and qualitative research 
( 2nd ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Merrill . 
670———Mixed Methods , in Research
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 670
Johnson , B .  , and Christensen , L .  ( 2004 )  . Educational research : 
Quantitative and qualitative approaches ( 2nd ed .  )  . Boston : 
Allyn & Bacon . 
Johnson , B .  ,  & Onwuegbuzie , A .  ( 2004 )  . Mixed methods
research : A research paradigm whose time has come . 
Educational Researcher , 33 ( 7 )  , 14–26 . 
Niglas , K .  ( 2004 )  . The combined use of qualitative and quantitative methods in educational research . Tallinn , Estonia : 
Tallinn Pedagogical University . 
Tashakkori , A .  ,  & Teddlie , C .  ( 1998 )  . Mixed methodology : 
Combining qualitative and quantitative approaches . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Tashakkori , A .  ,  & Teddlie , C .  ( 2003 )  . The past and future of
mixed methods research : From data triangulation to mixed
model designs . In A . Tashakkori & C . Teddlie ( Eds .  )  , 
Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral
research . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Teddlie , C .  ,  & Tashakkori , A .  ( 2003 )  . Major issues and controversies in the use of mixed methods in the social and
behavioral sciences . In A . Tashakkori & C . Teddlie ( Eds .  )  , 
Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral
research . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 MONTESSORI , MARIA
Maria Montessori ’ s unique methods and practices
sparked a classroom revolution , and hundreds of
Montessori schools are thriving throughout the world
today . Montessori ( 1870–1952 ) was born August 31 , 
1870 , to Alessandro Montessori and Renilde Stoppani
in Chiaravalle , Italy . In 1875 , her family moved to
Rome , where at the age of 6 she enrolled in public
school . In 1883 , at the age of 13 , Montessori enrolled
in technical college . 
Montessori graduated from the technical college in
1886 and went to another technical institute , where
she graduated in 1890 . Afterward , she decided to pursue a career in medicine . At the time , there had never
before been an Italian female doctor . Montessori
attended the University of Rome in 1890 as a student
of mathematics and natural science , and in 1892 she
graduated with honors . 
In medical school at the University of Rome , 
Montessori ’ s male colleagues treated her with contempt . 
It was so unthinkable that a female student would be
enrolled in the field of medicine that Montessori was
forced to dissect her cadavers alone at night . Despite difficulties , she won the academic admiration of many . 
In 1896 , she graduated as doctor of medicine , with
honors . In 1904 , she earned her PhD in anthropology
from the University of Rome . In 1896 , a month after her
graduation , she was offered a position as a surgical
assistant at the University of Rome ’ s psychiatric ward . 
In the psychiatric ward , Montessori worked with
children who had been named mentally “ deficient ,  ” but
who were most likely autistic or mentally handicapped . 
She experimented with these children and after several
years found that some of them were able to read and
write and pass public standardized tests . 
In 1907 , she began working with the children of
impoverished families in the slums of Rome . With
these children she started what would become known
as the Casa dei Bambini , or Children ’ s House . Her idea
was to implement the methods she used at the psychiatric ward . Montessori was the first educator to incorporate child-sized furniture , toys , and other objects
to manipulate in the classroom . She gave the children
various tasks to do , such as making lunch , cleaning up , 
gardening , and caring for pets . Eventually , Montessori
found that the children actually preferred work to play . 
Slowly and successfully , Montessori began to teach the
children to read and write by using sensory objects . 
Soon she was demonstrating to educators and others
her techniques , which became known as the Montessori
Method . A very charismatic figure , Montessori continued to travel and lecture , and by 1935 , hundreds of
Montessori schools opened throughout Europe and the
United States . In 1929 , she created the Association
Montessori International . During World War II , she was
forced to leave Italy , to live and work in India . In India , 
she was twice nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize . 
Montessori died in 1952 at the age of 81 , but her teachings live on throughout the world today . Teachers incorporate the Montessori Method into their classrooms by
encouraging children to work at their own pace and by
using sensory materials . 
—Jane Dettmer and Margaret Grogan
See also charisma , of leaders ; child development theories ; 
classroom management ; consideration , caring ; constructivism ; creativity , theories of ; curriculum , theories of ; discipline in schools ; early childhood education ; elementary
education ; expectations , teacher and student cultures ; individual differences , in children ; innovation , in education ; 
international education ; learning , theories of ; learning environments ; special education
Further Readings and References
Kramer , R .  ( 1988 )  . Maria Montessori : A biography . Reading , 
MA : Addison-Wesley . 
Montessori , M .  ( 1965 )  . Dr . Montessori ’ s own handbook . 
New York : Schocken Books .  ( Original work published 1914 ) 
Montessori , Maria———671
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 671
Montessori , M .  ( 1965 )  . Spontaneous activity in education . 
New York : Schocken Books .  ( Original work published 1917 ) 
Standing , E .  ( 1962 )  . Maria Montessori : Her life and work . 
New York : Mentor-Omega . 
 MORAL EDUCATION
There has been a growing interest in moral education
in the last decade , leading to lengthy discussions on the
approaches to teaching moral education in schools . 
Moral education has experienced a renaissance of sorts
by calling attention to teaching and learning values
and standards that everyone should have about what it
takes to teach our children to be good citizens . While
there is a vast amount of research available on moral
education , there is a consensus that a specific curriculum involving moral education does not fit every situation . Instead , the majority of research suggests that
moral education be integrated into the school community and reinforced in the home environment . 
Moral education is a broad term used to describe
many aspects of teaching and learning for personal
development . It is what the schools do to help students
become ethically mature adults , capable of moral
thought and action . The Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development ( ASCD ) Panel of Moral
Education ’ s definition of moral education states that
moral education is whatever schools do to influence how
students think , feel , and act regarding issues of right or
wrong . This definition leaves room for many different
approaches and pedagogies related to moral education . 
Overall , moral education addresses the ethical dimensions of the individual and society and examines how
standards of right and wrong are developed . 
The inclusion of moral education in schools is often
a point of contention for schools . Questions arise about 
 “ whose values ” are to be taught . Others cite a national
diversity in beliefs and values that make such education a family , rather than an institutional , imperative . 
Traditionally , three basic approaches were taken in
moral education . First , there is the indoctrinative
approach , which suggests a justified content ( i . e .  , code
of behavior ) and proposes to teach that content by a
variety of methods . The second approach is the romanticist approach in which the individual is assumed to
have an innate tendency to develop into the role of a
moral agent . The role of education is to provide the
nurturing context in which this nature “ flowering ” can
occur . The third approach is the cognitive-structural
approach that focuses on the construction of moral
reasoning capacities , which are understood to be a
product of the interaction of one ’ s genetic , developmental , and biological endowments with one ’ s experience with the physical and social worlds . Proposed
curricula do not endorse specific content ; rather , they
provide opportunity to apply one ’ s reasoning to a variety of content . Kohlberg ’ s Just Community Schools are
examples of this approach . All three approaches have
met criticism . However , the critical issue in evaluating
the relativism of a moral education approach is not
whether or not it relies on a specific content ; rather , it
hinges on how that content is justified . 
There is extensive research on the core values / 
virtues that embody a moral person , regardless of
religion or culture , that can be taught in schools . 
Suggested desirable traits are honesty , civility , 
courage , perseverance , loyalty , self-restraint , compassion , tolerance , fairness , respect for the worth and
dignity of the individual , and responsibility for the
common good . 
While research has suggested a number of
approaches to moral education , educators can help
children differentiate between the norms and conventions of their culture and the universal concerns for
justice ( fairness ) and human welfare . Larry Nucci
identified five educational practices that enable
teachers to engage in moral education that is neither
indoctrinative nor relativistic :  ( 1 ) moral education
should focus on issues of justice , fairness , and human
welfare ,  ( 2 ) effective moral education programs are
integrated within the curriculum , rather than treated
separately as a special program or unit ,  ( 3 ) moral discussion promotes moral development when students
use “ transactive ” discussion patterns , are at somewhat different moral levels , and are free to disagree
about the best solution to a moral dilemma ,  ( 4 ) cooperative goal structures promote moral and academic
growth , and ( 5 ) firm , fair , and flexible classroom
management practices and rules contribute to
students ’ moral growth . Teachers should respond to
the harmful or unjust consequences of moral transgressions rather than to broken rules or unfulfilled
social expectations . 
—Carolyn Stevenson
See also affective domain ; attitudes toward work ; character
education ; cognition , theories of ; dogmatism and scales of
Rokeach ; esteem needs ; ethics ; learning environments ; 
morality , moral leadership ; values education
672———Moral Education
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 672
Further Readings and References
Kohlberg , L .  ,  & Mayer , R .  ( 1972 )  . Development as the aim of
education . Harvard Educational Review , 42 , 449–496 . 
Lakoff , G .  ( 2002 )  . Moral politics . Chicago : University of
Chicago Press . 
Nucci , L .  ( 1982 )  . Conceptual development in the moral and
conventional domains : Implications for values education . 
Review of Educational Research , 49 , 93–122 . 
Power , F . C .  , Higgins , A .  ,  & Kohlberg , L .  ( 1989 )  . Lawrence
Kohlberg ’ s approach to moral education . New York : 
Columbia University Press . 
Simon , K .  ( 2001 )  . Moral questions in the classroom . New
Haven , CT : Yale University Press . 
Walker , V .  ,  & Snarey , J .  ( 2004 )  . Race-ing moral formation : 
African American perspectives on care and justice . New
York : Teachers College Press . 
 MORALE
The concept of morale refers to broad feelings of
well-being , satisfaction , and value for being part of a
workplace . Morale is manifested in many ways , 
including enthusiasm , commitment or loyalty to an
organization , willingness to work , and dedication to
common goals . 
Industrial-organizational psychologists consider
morale and job satisfaction in studies of workermanagement relations . Morale is viewed as an attitudinal response to one ’ s work or work conditions .  
 “ High ” morale is manifested when individuals feel
satisfaction in work and the workplace and show
determination to do their best under any circumstance .  
 “ Low ” morale implies that individuals see themselves
as those who are powerless or socially unimportant . 
Formal organizational structures are often seen as
having a negative influence on morale . However , formal structures can enhance morale if that structure
helps employees get their work done . Formal structure
has a negative impact on morale if it gets in employees ’ 
way , inundates them with red tape , and increases management control over their work . Formal structures that
enable people to do their best can increase morale , and
morale can be high even in bureaucratic organizations . 
The morale of teachers and staff is often used to
characterize the quality of a school or district as a
workplace . Research on developing strong school
communities suggests that increased professional
community increases a sense of satisfaction with the
personal dignity of work and a sense of belonging to
and being part of the school organization—both of
which contribute to teachers ’ sense of well-being or
morale . Increased feelings of satisfaction and higher
morale may help to ameliorate teachers ’ feelings of
discouragement when they perceive that peers , supervisors , or the public do not respect or value their work . 
—Judith A . Ponticell
See also attitudes toward work ; bureaucracy ; capacity building , of organizations ; consideration , caring ; decision making ; empowerment ; esprit ( school climate )  ; esteem needs ; 
ethos , of organizations ; fringe benefits ; group dynamics ; 
human resource development ; job security ; just cause ; 
management theories ; motivation , theories of ; persuasion ; 
productivity ; professional development ; reduction in force ; 
satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; satisficing theory ; 
self-actualization ; working conditions , in schools
Further Readings and References
Adler , P . S .  ,  & Borys , B .  ( 1996 )  . Two types of bureaucracy : 
Enabling and coercive . Administrative Science Quarterly , 
41 , 61–89 . 
Johnsrud , L . K .  ( 1996 )  . Maintaining morale : A guide to
assessing the morale of midlevel administrators and faculty . Washington , DC : College and University Personnel
Association . 
Louis , K . S .  , Marks , H .  ,  & Kruse , S . D .  ( 1996 )  . Teachers ’ community in restructuring schools . American Educational
Research Journal , 33 ( 4 )  , 757–798 . 
 MORALITY , MORAL LEADERSHIP
Morality , ethics , and values are all terms used to indicate what is right or good . Some scholars distinguish
moral from ethical by using moral to describe the
rightness or wrongness of particular conduct or character , and ethical to refer to a more universal understanding of standards and principles . It is common to
discuss personal morality in contrast to professional
ethics , for instance . The term values is sometimes used
interchangeably with principles , but some researchers
and scholars define values as nonmoral preferences , 
opinions , beliefs , and attitudes that people hold in a
relative sense . For educators , the notion of moral
agency is a powerful one . Hugh Sockett defines moral
agency in terms of an individual ’ s capacity to consider
the interests of others while being grounded in a clear
set of virtues or principles that guide action . Elizabeth
Campbell discusses moral agency both in the context
Morality , Moral Leadership———673
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 673
of how educators treat students and in reference to
what educators teach students . 
These concepts have been applied variously to
leadership . Two classical leadership theories stand out
as ones incorporating a moral or ethical standpoint . 
They are James MacGregor Burns ’ s theory of transactional leadership and transformational leadership and
Christopher Hodgkinson ’ s values typology . Burns differentiated between transactional leadership and
transformational leadership based on which values
were at work in each instance . In transactional leadership , modal values such as honesty , responsibility , 
fairness , and the honoring of commitments form the
basis of the relationship between leader and follower . 
Such interactions can contribute to human purpose in
the realization of individual goals within an organization . Transactional leadership involves an exchange of
goods or services between leader and follower that
results in the mutual satisfaction of independent
objectives . On a higher level , transformational leadership deals with such end values as liberty , justice , 
equality , and equity . Transformational leaders are concerned with collective purpose and the common good . 
Both kinds of leadership include a moral dimension
with attention paid to the role of the leader in helping
to encourage followers through the stages of moral
development . Burns argues that as leaders and followers both progress through the individual stages of
needs , values , and morality , a broad base is formed for
collective responsibility and common goals . Seeking
success in this common enterprise encourages in
leaders and followers the development of more principled judgment and better citizenry . 
Hodgkinson posited that there are four motivational bases informing individual values , beliefs , 
attitudes , and actions . These are personal preference , 
consensus , consequences , and principles . He divides
these into three categories of subrational , rational , and
transrational . Personal preferences , including the concept of what is good , are grounded in self-interest and
thus are subrational ; consensus guided by expert opinion or peer pressure is rational , as are consequences , 
which include intentional action to bring about a
desired outcome ; and principles , at the top of
Hodgkinson ’ s hierarchy , informed by ethical codes or
religious beliefs , are transrational , not scientifically
verifiable . Since leaders operate primarily in the context of organizations , Hodgkinson argues that they are
unlikely to be aware of their own consciousness , individuality , or will . All is subsumed by the interests of
the organization . Nevertheless , as a human actor , the
leader has the capacity to make conscious and free
choices to advance the human potential within organizational limitations . To achieve this , leaders must engage in
reflection , introspection , and self-observation to
increase their moral awareness . 
Other scholars ground their notions of moral leadership in questions of purpose . For instance , as a
public good , public education provides a clear context
for moral leadership . Guided by the question of leadership for what , principals and superintendents of
public school districts must keep the goal of educating
all students in the forefront of their administrative
activities . Principles of equity and equality compel the
drive to eliminate the gaps in learning and achievement across race , ethnicity , class , gender , ability , and
other markers of exclusion . Jerry Starratt introduced
the multiethical lens of care , critique , and justice to
guide educational leaders in examining the policies
and practices in their own contexts that privilege some
students at the expense of others . Moral leadership
includes the ability to be mindful of the unequal distribution of wealth and happiness that is associated
with students ’ educational attainment . A firm grasp of
purpose assists leaders in making choices and decisions that help move them beyond focusing only on
the instrumental ends of education to include the
ideals of educating a democratic citizenry . Decisions
of what to include in a curriculum as well as how to
teach content ultimately determine students ’ capacity
to be informed and critical thinkers prepared to accept
the responsibilities of citizenship in a democracy . 
An emphasis on the leader ’ s behaviors and understanding is also found in the literature . Feminist scholars write of the importance of appreciating the local
and the particular context within which decision making takes place . Informed by an ethic of care , leaders
are encouraged to pay attention to the individual child
or teacher to understand his or her specific needs , 
wants , and attitudes . This approach is person centered
rather than rule oriented . It is founded on the establishment and maintenance of healthy relationships
between leaders and those in their care . The knowledge to act on others ’ behalf in their best interest
comes from deep knowledge of the other . Nel
Noddings makes the important point that one arrives
at knowledge and understanding of the other by
attending to the other as he or she expresses himself or
herself , not as a representative of a generalized category of student , teacher , parent , and so on . Feminist
674———Morality , Moral Leadership
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 674
morality also includes a valuing of empathy as a reliable source of moral action . As a corollary to a reliance
on reason , a leader ’ s capacity to enter into another ’ s
situation empathetically improves the likelihood of
morally appropriate decision making . Finally , feminist
morality highlights the desirability of communication
between leaders and those in their care as a means to
improve and enrich the capacity for moral reasoning . In
contrast to the more traditional notion of leaders arriving at appropriate moral action through contemplation and individual introspection , feminist approaches
encourage dialogue with others in a common search for
satisfactory ways of addressing competing claims . 
—Margaret Grogan
See also Burns , James MacGregor ; civics , civic education ; consideration , caring ; democracy , democratic education and
administration ; discrimination ; equality , in schools ; equity
and adequacy of funding schools ; ethics ; feminism and
theories of leadership ; homophobia ; leadership , theories of ; 
moral education ; sexism ( glass ceiling )  ; transformational
leadership ; values , of organizations and leadership
Further Readings and References
Burns , J . M .  ( 1978 )  . Leadership . New York : Harper & Row . 
Campbell , E .  ( 2003 )  . The ethical teacher . Philadelphia : Open
University Press . 
Henz , R .  , Norte , E .  , Sather , S .  , Walker , E .  ,  & Katz , A .  ( 2002 )  . 
Leading for diversity . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Hodgkinson , C .  ( 1999 )  . The will to power . In P . Begley ( Ed .  )  , 
Values and educational leadership ( pp . 139–150 )  . Albany : 
State University of New York Press . 
Noddings , N .  ( 2002 )  . Educating moral people . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Sockett , H .  ( 1993 )  . The moral base for teacher professionalism . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Starratt , R . J .  ( 1994 )  . Building an ethical school . London : 
Falmer Press . 
 MOTIVATION , THEORIES OF
A general assumption of motivational theory is that individuals avoid tasks or activities that exceed their abilities
and competencies . The literature reports conflicts and
shortfalls associated with different perspectives theories
that attempt to describe the assumption . Debates exist
about the extent to which mastery goals versus performance goals motivate individuals and the use of rewards
to reinforce behaviors . The differences have led to the
promotion of self-choice , self-determination , and
instructional applications aimed to increase motivation . 
One perspective of motivation aligned with early
behaviorist traditions suggested that motivation could
not exist . They positioned behaviors as sole results of
past experiences and conflicted with a present-future
paradigm of motivation . A second perspective includes
the theory of planned behavior that links motivation
with intentions . A third perspective relates to the
selective goal hypothesis , which proposed that individuals enhance their motivation when they choose
goals relevant to their present situations . A fourth perspective , organismic worldview , asserts that the onset
of motivation occurs when individuals ’ sensory organs
respond to stimuli that require reactions . A fifth perspective , sociocultural engagement , suggests that
individuals must alter their motivation in accord with
social practices . 
Research reported in the literature cannot be used to
rule in or rule out certain perspectives of motivation . 
Gaps exist and result from faults associated with
research designs and subject selections . Critics of motivational research doubted uses of particular perspectives
theories that may have overlooked essential variables . 
They questioned whether researchers imposed goals
that required subjects ’ motivation or observed
subjects ’ self-initiated goals and related motivation . 
Furthermore , they questioned researchers ’ control for
variance among subjects and accounted for experiences outside the research setting that may have influenced subjects ’ motivation ( e . g .  , teacher-student
interactions )  . The accumulated lack of universal
acceptance of research designs fueled arguments
about published motivational studies in the 1990s for
which the educational research community debated
the acceptance of meta-analyses results . At present , 
greater research attention focuses on subjects ’ broader
contexts that may influence motivational behaviors . 
Specifically , it addresses individuals ’ orientations
toward performance goals , mastery goals , or a combination of both goal types . 
Individuals in pursuit of performance goals attempt
to outperform their peers ( e . g .  ,  “ My goal is to sell
more houses than any other real estate agent in the
firm ”  )  . An individual ’ s motivation is dependent on
feedback from others . Common characteristics
include ( a ) dependence on public recognition ,  ( b ) negative effects post failure ,  ( c ) overuse of short-term
strategies ( e . g .  , memorization )  , and ( d ) avoidance of
challenging tasks . In contrast , individuals in pursuit of
Motivation , Theories Of———675
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 675
mastery goals attempt to acquire knowledge and skills
for their personal betterment ( e . g .  ,  “ My goal in working at this firm is to learn as much as possible about
successful real estate sales ”  )  . An individual ’ s motivation is devoid of dependence on others and is selfregulated . Extensive positive characteristics include 
( a ) increased task engagement ,  ( b ) adaptive patterns
of achievement ,  ( c ) global perceptions of the self ,  
( d ) pursuit of and persistence with challenging tasks ,  
( e ) universal strategies ,  ( f ) pride and satisfaction , and 
( g ) self-monitoring . Individuals ’ simultaneous pursuit
of both performance and mastery goals suggest that
motivation for certain tasks requires both goals , 
referred to as a multiple goal perspective . 
Options to make personal choices must be present
for individuals to formulate performance , mastery , or
combined goals relative to their required ( e . g .  , job
performance ) or desired ( e . g .  , skills acquisition ) performances . Research links autonomy with increased
intrinsic motivation and the ability to infuse cultural
practices with goal decisions . The combination of
choice options with volition ( the degree to which
choices can be made versus imposed ) and internal locus
of control ( the degree to which choices can be self-regulated ) equate with the theory of self-determination . 
Teachers ’ expectations and beliefs are variables that
influence students ’ choices of goals . Furthermore , 
teachers may employ instructional and interaction strategies that increase a particular type of goal . Teachers ’ 
recognitions of students ’ performances give implicit and
explicit notions of valued performances and are most
evident in evaluations . For example , teachers ’ use of frequent grades , public evaluations , and social comparisons
result in students ’ choices of performance goals . 
Teachers ’ uses of rewards influence students ’ intrinsic
and extrinsic motivations and thus elicit either performance or mastery goals . The literature details arguments
for and against rewards . 
Proponents of rewards acknowledge that educators
need to follow up with explanations for reward distributions , especially verbal rewards that include positive
feedback . They posit that doing so increases students ’ 
performances . Antagonists argue that rewards undermine internal motivation , especially for individuals
who do not need them in order to engage in tasks . 
They assert that rewards ( a ) control , not empower
motivation ,  ( b ) require submission to imposed standards , and ( c ) limit goals ’ capabilities . 
Implications for teachers ’ use of instructional
strategies and rewards to improve students ’ motivation
appear in the literature . Overall , academic tasks
impact motivation the most and should differ among
students and empower personal choices relative to
mastery goals . Teachers should help students establish
attainable mastery goals and point out how effort
toward the goals results in fruition . Throughout the
tasks , teachers should avoid and replace physical
rewards with ongoing feedback and opportunities to
improve performances . Evaluations should occur in
private to avoid students ’ total focus on performance
goals . Teachers should also help students establish
positive performance goals and structure social interactions ( e . g .  , cooperative learning ) that allow students
to give and receive constructive feedback throughout
the groups ’ performances . 
—John Palladino
See also attitudes toward work ; Csikszentmihalyi , Mihaly ; 
curriculum , theories of ; esteem needs ; flow theory ; learning
environments ; locus of control ; Maslow , Abraham ; selfactualization ; teacher recruitment and retention
Further Readings and References
Hickey , D .  ( 2003 )  . Engaged participation versus marginal
nonparticipation : A stridently sociocultural approach to
achievement motivation . Elementary School Journal , 
103 ( 4 )  , 401–429
Reeve , J .  , Nix , G .  ,  & Hamm , D .  ( 2003 )  . Testing models of
the experience of self-determination in intrinsic motivation
and the conundrum of choice . Journal of Educational
Psychology , 95 ( 2 )  , 375–392 . 
Thorkildsen , T .  ( 2003 )  . Motivation and the struggle to learn : 
Responding to fractured experiences . Boston : Allyn & 
Bacon . 
Valle , A .  , Cabanach , R .  , Núñez , J .  , González-Pienda , J .  , 
Rodríguez , S .  ,  & Piñeiro , I .  ( 2003 )  . Cognitive , motivational , and volitional dimensions of learning : An empirical
test of a hypothetical model . Research in Higher
Education , 44 ( 5 )  , 557–580 . 
Wizel , B .  ,  & Mercer , C .  ( 2003 )  . Using rewards to teach
students with disabilities : Implications for motivation . 
Remedial and Special Education , 24 ( 2 )  , 88–96 . 
 MULTICULTURALISM
Multiculturalism is a philosophical stance that advocates
for equal opportunity for individuals from diverse cultural backgrounds . As such , multiculturalism affirms
the rights of individuals to the pursuit of personal
676———Multiculturalism
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 676
meaning , equality , social justice , and democratic
participation , regardless of cultural background or
composite cultural makeup . Based upon the great
foundational documents of U . S . democratic government , the Declaration of Independence , the Constitution of the United States , and the Bill of Rights , 
multiculturalism strives to extend the rights portrayed
in these documents to all cultural groups in the United
States . Multiculturalism is sometimes viewed as an
approach to studying culture in an effort to analyze the
effects of various microcultural characteristics upon
access to the normalized rights of middle-class individuals in the United States . 
As such , multiculturalism has implications for leadership , policy , curriculum , and instruction in the formal
educational settings of prekindergarten , elementary , 
secondary schools , and of colleges and universities . 
While diversity-related scholarship has traditionally
focused upon the cultural characteristics of class , race , 
and ethnicity , present-day scholarship includes the
additional microcultures of gender , sexual orientation , 
age , ability and exceptionality , religion , language , and
geography , among others . The preponderance of current research , however , involves the microcultures of
race , ethnicity , gender , language , and class , or some
combination of these factors in support of multiculturalism as a foundational element in multicultural education as a field of study . 
MULTICULTURALISM AND
MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION
AS A FIELD OF STUDY
Scholarly writing on the subject of multiculturalism
falls primarily within the purview of multicultural
education as a field of study . Scholarship in the field
of multicultural education , while integrating tenets of
each , differs from global education and international
education , both of which support their own fields of
study . Most scholarly findings outlined from here
forward refer to multicultural education as a field of
study . 
James A . Banks offers a definition of multicultural
education that promotes a focus on increased equity in
education for all students . As a field of study , multicultural education focuses upon students who are
marginalized because of their specific microcultural
makeup and upon solutions to issues of inequality in
educational settings . Various aspects of this definition
follow . 
FUNDAMENTAL ASSUMPTIONS
OF MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION
Current scholarship identifies fundamental assumptions of multicultural education :  ( a ) cultural differences have strength and value ,  ( b ) expressions of
human rights are valued ,  ( c ) social justice and equality are central to curriculum design and instruction ,  
( d ) a function of schooling is to promote the attitudes
and values associated with the continuance of a democratic society ,  ( e ) a function of educational institutions is to promote the redistribution of power among
diverse groups through its instruction and policies ,  
( f ) educators in their work with families and communities promote supportive environments for multiculturalism , and ( g ) there is a focus upon reducing prejudice
and stereotypes and supporting individuals and groups
in developing positive images of themselves . 
Christine Sleeter and Carl Grant argue for five
approaches to multicultural education with implications
primarily for race , class , and gender :  ( 1 ) teaching the
exceptional and culturally different ,  ( 2 ) promoting
human relations ,  ( 3 ) incorporating single-group studies ,  ( 4 ) instituting multicultural education in all
aspects of schoolwork , and ( 5 ) promoting education
that is multicultural and social reconstructionist . 
Sleeter and Grant promote education that is multicultural and social reconstructionist as having the most
potential for sustained positive change because of its
use of the following practices : replicating democracy , 
analyzing the circumstances of one ’ s own life , developing social action skills , and forming coalitions for
combating oppression . 
MEASURE OF INSTITUTIONAL
COMMITMENT TO MULTICULTURAL
EDUCATION
Scholarship supports the measurement of an institution ’ s commitment to multicultural education by
its adherence to the following characteristics :  ( a ) 
supporting a mission and policy statement affirming
diversity ,  ( b ) accurately replicating the cultural pluralism of the country in its administration , faculty , and
staff ,  ( c ) supporting the disappearance of differences
in achievement levels among students from various
class , gender , and dominant and oppressed microcultures ,  ( d ) incorporating a variety of contributions and
perspectives from many cultural groups into the school
curriculum and teaching methodologies ,  ( e ) celebrating cultural differences rather than relegating them to
Multiculturalism———677
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 677
categories of deficiency ,  ( f ) encouraging students to
incorporate their own cultures and voices in a critique of
school curriculum , culture , and policy ,  ( g ) supporting
faculty as members of a community of practice and
believing that knowledge is socially constructed ,  ( h ) 
valuing parent participation as a context for and a
valid link to student personal and cultural knowledge , 
and ( i ) committing to selection of administration , faculty , and staff who deal with the hard issues of multicultural education and intergroup relations with
professionalism and fairness . 
THE HISTORY OF
MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION
The roots of multicultural education lie in the civil rights
movement of the 1960s and 1970s and in two antecedent
movements , the ethnic studies movement of the late
nineteenth century and after and the intergroup education
movement of the 1930s , 1940s , and 1950s . 
The Ethnic Studies Movement
The early African American ethnic studies movement
dates back to the nineteenth century with the writing and
publication of such works as George Washington
Williams ’ s 1882 History of the Negro Race in America
and W . E . B . Du Bois ’ s 1896 The Suppression of the
African Slave Trade to the United States of America , 
1638–1870 . These works and others were integrated
with a high degree of success into the curriculum of segregated schools and institutions of higher education for
African Americans . Support for this movement came
from Carter G . Woodson , who founded the Association
for the Study of Negro Life and History , now known as
the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life
and History , and who also founded the Associated
Publishers , responsible for publishing many early works
by African American scholars . The influence of the ethnic studies movement continued during the civil rights
era , when African Americans fought with success to
integrate ethnic content into the curriculum of all educational institutions at all grade levels . 
The Intergroup Education Movement
The intercultural or intergroup education movement , hereafter referred to as the intergroup education
movement , is another important antecedent to the
multicultural education movement . Almost defunct by
the time of the civil rights movement , the intergroup
education movement left a lasting legacy of promising
policy and procedural initiatives for public schools . 
The intergroup education movement ’ s roots lie in
conflicts that occurred between ethnic and White
groups during and immediately after World War II as
these groups moved from rural settings to industrial
communities of the North and West for employment . 
This movement recognized the multifaceted nature of
ethnic group conflicts and supported social change
both through community and school efforts . A number
of significant human rights groups particularly concerned about immigrants and others on the margins of
society offered support . 
Major Initiatives of the
Intergroup Education Movement
Having roots in intellectual communities and not
with disenfranchised groups , the intergroup education
movement supported three initiates of historical importance : the Service Bureau for Education in Human
Relations , the Springfield Plan , and the University of
Chicago ’ s Center for Intergroup Education . The
Service Bureau for Education in Human Relations , 
with roots in the intellectual community of Teachers
College , Columbia University , established intercultural
education programs for public schools , including curriculum materials for the study of ethnic groups , reading lists on intercultural education , and professional
development opportunities for teachers . 
The Springfield Plan , of Springfield , Massachusetts , 
in 1939 , was created to ease intergroup tensions , and
supported the belief that all citizens needed fully to
participate in the democratic society or risk limiting
everyone ’ s freedom . Founded by Professor Clyde R . 
Miller of Teachers College , Columbia , and supported
by Edward L . Thorndike and John Granrud , superintendent of schools , the plan included several components : a single-salary schedule for teachers , adult
education promoting strong school ties to community , 
and a teacher selections board composed of administrators and members of the area ’ s three major religious
groups . Eventually failing , two legacies remained : a
joint community and school staff selection policy and
the single-salary schedule . 
The University of Chicago ’ s Center for Intergroup
Education , founded by Hilda Taba in 1948 and operating until 1951 , aided teachers in determining the
human relations needs of their students and touched a
678———Multiculturalism
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 678
wide network of teachers and school systems through
a series of leadership training workshops . 
Linking schools to communities with the purpose
of promoting intergroup understanding , tolerance , and
realizing democratic ideals is a legacy of the intergroup education movement . 
The Civil Rights Movement
The civil rights movement , a direct precursor to the
multicultural education movement , was initiated by
African Americans and heavily supported by individuals from other ethnic and racial groups . The civil rights
movement made pointed demands upon schools , 
colleges , and universities . One of the first responses to
the movement was the inclusion of Black studies as an
add-on to the established curriculum . The Black studies movement was followed by other ethnic studies
courses and programs . 
Since neither Black studies nor ethnic studies
influenced the organizational , policy , and procedural
changes advocated by members of the civil rights
movement , the multiethnic education movement was
initiated . This movement called for systemic and
structural reform of all aspects of educational institutions so that equal educational opportunities could
exist for all students . Reforms called for paradigm
change in policy , teaching strategies , and styles , the
content of the curriculum and the course of study , 
the method of assessment , the languages and dialects
sanctioned , and required teaching materials . 
This movement gave impetus to other marginalized
groups , primarily persons with disabilities and women . 
Capturing the spirit of the 1954 Brown v . Board of
Education and the civil rights movement , people with
disabilities won a significant victory with the passage
of the 1972 PL 94-142 , Education for All Handicapped
Children Act , giving a free public education to all
students with disabilities , providing for objective evaluation , an individualized education program , and education in the least restrictive environment . 
Women , prompted by the spirit and wording of the
civil rights movement , renewed their quest for equal
rights . A victory for this group was the Title IX educational amendment prohibiting sexual discrimination
in all educational programs receiving federal support . 
Women ’ s programs now exist as a norm on campuses
of institutions of higher education , and feminist
scholarship continues to challenge past scholarship in
the areas of literature , history , philosophy , social and
behavioral science , natural and physical sciences , 
teacher education , and the general studies canon . 
As a result , the civil rights movement provided
impetus for new paradigms and epistemological
assumptions in nearly every area of scholarship . Many
disciplines continue to reconceptualize their traditionally based frameworks , concepts , and assumptions . 
SCHOLARSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL
EDUCATION AS A FIELD OF STUDIES
James Banks organizes research in the conceptualization of multicultural education as a field of study into
five dimensions :  ( 1 ) content integration ,  ( 2 ) knowledge construction process ,  ( 3 ) prejudice reduction ,  
( 4 ) equity pedagogy , and ( 5 ) an empowering school
culture and social structure . 
Content Integration
The first dimension , content integration , focuses
upon the inclusion of content from a variety of cultures
into the major concepts and theories of a discipline . 
This dimension also deals with the identification of
components that should be a part of the standard curriculum of a discipline . Content integration research
also includes scholarship about appropriate instructional methodology and arguments outlining where
particular informational aspects of a discipline should
be taught . Research for this dimension has its foundations in two historic movements : the ethnic studies
movement of the early twentieth century that continued on into the civil rights movement and the intergroup education movement , each outlined above . 
Knowledge Construction Process
The knowledge construction process is a second
dimension of multicultural education and focuses
upon the degree to which teachers , in schools , colleges , and universities , assist students in analyzing
how the underlying cultural assumptions , frameworks , and perspectives of a particular discipline contain biases that dictate how knowledge is constructed . 
This dimension challenges the tenets of empirical
research and promotes analyzing the predominant
assumptions of all disciplines through lenses of
accepted social , cultural , and power positions . 
Promoting the stance that all writers are influenced
by cultural assumptions that must be identified , this
Multiculturalism———679
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 679
dimension teaches that all students should identify the
biases of researchers and scholars of a field and make
their own meaning out of the presentation of knowledge . Telling stories about personal experience is one
means of making meaning . 
Scholars in this area generally advocate for two
approaches to curriculum reform , transformational
and social action . Transforming curriculum encourages students to view curriculum content from the
point of view of various ethnic and cultural groups . 
Social action encourages student understanding of
how to engage in action for just solutions . 
Prejudice Reduction
The prejudice reduction dimension focuses on
students ’ racial attitudes and how racial characteristics
can be modified through teaching methods and materials so students are prepared for interactions that are
equal status in quality . The true goal of prejudice reduction scholarship in multicultural education is to establish
how students can best develop values that support
democratic attitudes and behaviors . Showing that young
children are aware of racial differences by the age of 3
and that they have internalized attitudes about race from
the greater society , research indicates also that African
American children both express high self-esteem and
White bias at the same time . Cooperative learning is a
teaching method noted for its ability to promote positive
racial attitudes , cross-racial friendships , and increased
academic achievement among students of color . 
Equity Pedagogy
The dimension of equity pedagogy exists when
teachers modify their instruction in ways that facilitate the academic achievement of students from
diverse racial , cultural , and social class groups . This
includes using a variety of teaching styles that are
consistent with the wide range of learning styles of
various cultural and ethnic groups . Researchers caution against offering only one explanation for multifaceted issues such as poverty , presenting differences
as deficits . 
Empowering School
Culture and Social Structure
The dimension of empowering school culture and
social structure involves an analysis of grouping and
labeling practices , sports participation , inconsistency
in achievement by group , and the interaction of staff
and students across ethnic and racial lines . In addition , 
a school ’ s implementation of basic skills programs
coupled with strong expectations for high achievement in rigorous course work for all students is a
factor . There are arguments for the supportive work of
assertive principals who promote high academic
achievement , positive discipline , and evaluation of
success of basic skills and advanced academic programs . In addition , there is advocacy for staff acceptance of accountability and promotion of high parent
involvement . 
CURRENT INFLUENCES , 
ISSUES , AND TRENDS
Multiculturalism and multicultural education as
conceptualized during the mid-twentieth-century civil
rights movement face significant challenges during
the twenty-first century as various societal issues and
increased research on cultural groups provide potentially unexpected challenges to the movement ’ s initial
agendas . The U . S . social structures promise to
become more complex with increased immigration , 
changing demographics , and globalization . Increased
immigration means increased racial , cultural , ethnic , 
and language challenges for the society and schools . 
Gloria Ladson-Billings points out that considerations
of individual versus group rights could become more
complex when viewed from allegiances formed for
reasons reaching beyond the purview of one nation
and into multinational alliances based , for example , 
on shared languages . 
Increasingly , scholarly studies in the areas of cultural studies and culturally centered teaching methodologies can prove to provide significant information
for multiculturalism and multicultural education . 
Complex cultural identifications , while providing valid
content for research , could also serve to obscure the
focus of all cultural groups on the larger issues of
oppression and disenfranchisement . 
Of specific concern is the issue of assessment and
the current national emphasis on standards . Whether
research focused upon assessment initiatives will continue to conclude that assessment systems are based on
racist frameworks or , instead , conclude that true accountability for learning is the focus remains to be seen . 
Measures of achievement and accountability remain
important in a world that is increasingly global in nature
680———Multiculturalism
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 680
and schools that have the potential of becoming more
and more national in their curricular emphases . 
Previous research and areas of borrowed research
from other disciplines promise to provide informative
heuristics and methodologies for further research . 
Such methodologies as autobiography , historical
ethnographies , narrative inquiry , counter-stories , 
reframing , democratizing , naming , and language
usage , among others , should prove to ferret out greater
understandings . 
Originally used in legal studies analysis to critique
racist social structures , critical race theory ( CRT ) holds
promise as a heuristic that can uncover a variety of
types of oppression . Sleeter and Dolores Delgado
Bernal promote CRT ’ s use ( a ) as a promising reflexive
tool ,  ( b ) as an analytical heuristic of class , corporate
power , and globalization ,  ( c ) as an analytical tool for
looking at empowering pedagogical practices , and ( d ) 
as a tool for a deeper critique of language and literacy . 
While changing social landscapes and additive
promises of research provide increased understanding
of multiculturalism and multicultural education , 
scholars perceive that the key to continuing progress
in fighting oppression will be in how effective the
movement retains its focus on the ideals of liberation
and social justice . 
—Roma B . Angel
See also Afrocentric theory ; Asian Pacific Americans ; Bethune , 
Mary McLeod ; Black education ; critical race theory ; desegregation , of schools ; discrimination ; diversity ; DuBois , W . E . B .  ; 
equality , in schools ; equity and adequacy of funding schools ; 
ethnicity ; ethnocentrism ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; immigration , history and impact in education ; Latinos ; 
Mendez , Felicitas ; minorities , in schools ; Sizemore , Barbara
A .  ; staffing , concepts of ; Woodson , Carter G . 
Further Readings and References
Banks , J . A .  ,  & Banks , C . A . M .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Multicultural
education : Issues and perspectives ( 5th ed .  )  . New York : 
Wiley . 
Gay , G .  ( 2004 )  . Curriculum theory and multicultural education . In J . A . Banks & C . A . M . Banks ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of
research on multicultural education ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 30–49 )  . 
San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Gibson , M .  , Gandara , P .  ,  & Koyama , J .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . School
connections : U . S . Mexican youth , peers , and school
achievement . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Ginwright , S .  ( 2004 )  . Black in school : Afrocentric reform , 
urban youth , and the promise of hip-hop culture . New
York : Teachers College Press . 
Grant , C . A .  ,  & Sleeter , C . E .  ( 1986 )  . Race , class , and gender
in education research : An argument for integrative analysis . 
Review of Educational Research , 56 , 195–211 . 
King , J .  ( 2005 )  . Black education . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Kornhaber , M . L .  ( 2004 )  . Assessment , standards , and equity . 
In J . A . Banks & C . A . M . Banks ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of
research on multicultural education ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 91–109 )  . 
San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Ladson-Billings , G .  ( 2004 )  . New directions in multicultural
education : Complexities , boundaries , and critical race
theory . In J . A . Banks & C . A . M . Banks ( Eds .  )  , Handbook
of research on multicultural education ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 50–
65 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Pedraza , P .  ,  & Rivera , M .  ( 2005 )  . Latino education . Mahwah , 
NJ : Erlbaum . 
Peters-Davis , N .  ,  & Shultz , J .  ( 2005 )  . Challenges of multicultural education . Boulder , CO : Paradigm . 
Phillion , J .  , Fang He , M .  ,  & Connelly , F .  ( 2005 )  . Narrative and
experience in multicultural education . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Sage . 
Shields , C .  ,  & Sayani , A .  ( 2005 )  . Leading in the midst of
diversity : The challenge of our times . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , 
The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 380–
402 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Sleeter , C . D .  ,  & Grant , C . A .  ( 2003 )  . Making choices for multicultural education : Five approaches to race , class , and
gender ( 4th ed .  )  . New York : Wiley . 
Sleeter , C . E .  ,  & Bernal , D . D .  ( 2004 )  . Critical pedagogy , critical race theory , and antiracist education : Implications for
multicultural education . In J . A . Banks & C . A . M . Banks 
( Eds .  )  , Handbook of research on multicultural education 
( 2nd ed .  , pp . 240–258 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Taba , H .  ( 1962 )  . Curriculum development : Theory and practice . New York : Harcourt , Brace & World . 
 MUSEUM EDUCATION
Museum education falls within the context of informal learning that is characterized by its position outside the walls of formal learning typical of schools . 
Originally , the primary role of a museum was to serve
as a repository for the display , housing , and preservation of valued objects and artifacts . Since the 1970s , 
museums have redefined their role to incorporate visitor learning into their mission and support the view
that learning is a lifelong process . Among the proliferation of museums are those with a focus on art , historical
representations , natural history , science and technology , aeronautics , and botany , and some of these have
children as the intended audience . Educational programs led by tour guides and the presence of interactive
and interpretive displays have become commonplace . 
Museum Education———681
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 681
However , rather than having a curriculum with subject
mastery as the goal , museums offer opportunities that
provide for variability and choices resulting in unique
learning experiences for visitors . 
A recent innovation is the virtual museum that allows
the visitor to access electronic representations of
physical museum exhibits . Virtual museums provide
opportunities for individuals who may not be able to
travel to the site where the physical museum is located . 
The audience for a virtual museum is geographically
dispersed and more diverse than the audience at the
typical physical museum . School-based Internet connections allow teachers and students to access virtual
museums originating from sites located around the
world . Examples of virtual museums include those
sponsored by the National Gallery of Art , the Art
Institute of Chicago , Colonial Williamsburg , the
Buffalo Bill Historical Center , and the Lawrence Hall
of Science at Berkeley . A virtual exhibit is comprised
of a collection of digital images organized by a
designer . Considerable variability in content , structure , 
navigation , design , and complexity is represented , 
ranging from a simple collection of images to complex
interactive multimedia presentations . 
Museums are forming partnerships with formal
educational institutions in part to broaden their audiences and to compete for funding . These collaborations have resulted in the offering of pedagogical
expertise from universities and schools to help
develop learning modules , design interactive displays , 
and conduct research related to learning outcomes . 
The research on museum education is sparse and only
has emerged in recent years . An important consideration for researchers interested in museum education is
that each museum represents a unique social culture . 
Given this precept , naturalistic inquiry approaches are
useful in establishing commonalities and variations in
the learning experiences that occur among museums . 
A framework for guiding research on learning in
museums includes three integrating themes : how the
design of the learning environment mediates learning , 
how social interactions are shaped by the exhibits , and
how museum experiences may impact the identity of
visitors . Research related to the first two themes has
provided some insights to learning in museums . 
Orientation devices that focus visitors ’ attention using
video , oral messages , or signals tend to support learning . Interactive displays that engage the visitor were
found to be most effective when designed with structures that support relevant input . The social milieu
of the museum , which includes beliefs of the tour
guides , conversations that occur , and the nature of the
museum space , was found to impact learning as well . 
Museums offer considerable opportunities for learning , and the partnerships between museums and formal
institutions of learning are strengthening the depth of
those opportunities . 
—S . Kim MacGregor
See also affective domain ; affective education ; brain research
and practice ; child development theories ; creativity , 
theories of ; cross-cultural studies ; history , in curriculum ; 
learning environments ; motivation , theories of ; philosophies of education ; problem solving ; social studies
Further Readings and References
Cox-Petersen , A .  , Marsh , D .  , Kisiel , J .  ,  & Melber , L .  ( 2003 )  . 
Investigation of guided school tours , student learning , and
science reform recommendations at a museum of natural
history . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 40 ( 2 )  , 
200–218 . 
Crowley , K .  ,  & Jacobs , M .  ( 2002 )  . In G . Leinhardt , K . 
Crowley ,  & K . Knutson ( Eds .  )  , Learning conversations in
museums . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Dietz , S .  , Besser , H . Borda , A .  ,  & Geber , K .  ( 2004 )  . 
Virtual museum : The next generation . Retrieved from

vm_tng . htm . 
Mulligan , M .  ,  & Brayfield , A .  ( 2004 )  . Museums and childhood : Negotiating organizational lessons . Childhood , 
11 ( 3 )  , 275–282 . 
682———Museum Education
M-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 46 AM Page 682
 A NATION AT RISK
A blue-ribbon commission was appointed by President
Ronald Reagan in 1981 to study the status of K–12 and
higher education in the United States . The commission , formally known as the National Commission on
Excellence in Education , issued its results on April 26 , 
1983 , in a document titled A Nation at Risk . This
report became an impetus for a national school reform
movement . 
The purpose of the commission was to advise and
make recommendations to the president , secretary of
education , educational policymakers , and state boards
of education . The work of the commission focused
on teenage youth in K–12 education and youth who
entered postsecondary education immediately after
graduation from high school . The duties of the commission included reviewing and synthesizing data and
education literature on teaching and learning in K–12
and higher education ; examining , comparing , and
contrasting curricula and the expectations of educational institutions of several advanced countries with
those of the United States ; studying university and
college admissions standards and their impact on high
school curricula and student achievement ; reviewing
educational programs that were recognized for preparing
students with higher-than-average college entrance
examination scores and who had met success in postsecondary education ; reviewing major changes in
American education and society that had significantly
affected educational achievement ; and making recommendations for future practice . Hearings about the
findings were held , and testimony was given by educational scholars and policymakers . 
A Nation at Risk began with a recognition and a
warning that the “ once unchallenged preeminence in
commerce , industry , science , and technological innovation is being overtaken by competitors throughout
the world .  ” The report further stated ,  “ Our nation is
at risk . The educational foundations of our society are
presently being eroded by a rising tide of mediocrity
that threatens our very future as a Nation and a people . 
What was unimaginable a generation ago has begun
to occur—others are matching and surpassing our
educational attainments .  ” 
The commission noted that student test scores were
falling , schools were requiring less rigor ( fewer required
courses in math , science , and advanced placement
classes )  , and the United States fared poorly with other
countries in producing a literate and educated society . 
Underlying the premise of the commission ’ s report was
an implication that the education of U . S . children could
no longer be left solely to state and local governments . 
Rather , based on the commission ’ s findings , it was clear
that the federal government would need to take a more
prominent role in educating America ’ s youth and retaining America ’ s prominence as a world leader in education . President Reagan called for a more vigorous
approach to education that would include school
vouchers , school prayer , and the elimination of the
Department of Education . Reagan ’ s philosophy would
lead to a number of school reform initiatives , increased
spending for education , an increased emphasis on excellence in math and science , and an increased emphasis on
standardized testing in K–12 education . 
The risk , as noted by the Commission , was that not
only were the Japanese , South Koreans , and Germans
receiving government subsidies for development and
683
N
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 683
export and that these developments signified a redistribution of trained capability ; more important , the
commission ’ s findings noted that the risk included
the intellectual , moral , and spiritual strengths of the
American people and American society . The commission went on to state “ Part of what is at risk is the
promise first made on this continent : All , regardless of
race or class or economic status , are entitled to a fair
chance and to the tools for developing their individual
powers of mind and spirit to the utmost .  ” 
The findings of the commission focused on four
areas of the educational process : content , expectations , time , and teaching . Content addressed the
curriculum , which was found to be homogenized , 
diluted , and diffused to the point that it no longer had
a central purpose . In addition , it was found that 25%
of credits earned by students in a high school general
track were in subjects such as physical and health
education , work experience subjects , and remedial
English and math . Expectations addressed the level
of knowledge and abilities and readiness for postsecondary education for graduating seniors . Findings
suggested many students took the maximum number
of electives required , scored below average on college
admission tests , and college admissions policies that
accepted every high school graduate contributed to
risk in this area . Time addressed the number of hours
U . S . students spent in school and on homework and
the amount of time spent developing study skills . 
Findings indicated that the U . S . school calendar year
was 40 days shorter and 2 hours shorter per day than
in England . In addition , a study of the school week
revealed that many students were provided as little as
17 hours of academic instruction per week . Teaching
addressed the shortage of teachers generally as well as
the teacher shortage in key subject matter areas . 
Findings indicated that too many teachers were being
hired from the lower quarter of graduating college
students ; teacher preparation programs lacked rigor , 
with an overemphasis on methods courses at the
expense of subject matter expertise ; and there were
severe shortages of teachers in math , science , foreign
language and special education . 
A key purpose of the National Commission on
Excellence in Education was “ To report and to make
practical recommendations for action to be taken by
educators , public officials , governing boards , parents , 
and others having a virtual interest in American education and a capacity to influence it for the better .  ” At
the conclusion of its work , the commission issued a
set of recommendations , which constituted the “ New
Basics ” as a foundation for success in postsecondary
education and employment and should be considered
the core of the modern curriculum : 
• English should be taught to equip graduates to comprehend , interpret , evaluate , and use what they read . 
• Mathematics in high school should prepare graduates to understand algebra , geometry , and statistics
and to apply concepts in everyday situations . 
• Science in high school should be taught to provide
graduates with an introduction to concepts , laws , and
processes of physical and biological sciences , and
science courses should be updated as needed . 
• Social studies in high school should be designed to
understand the fundamentals of ancient and contemporary issues that have shaped the world and to
understand the fundamentals of economic systems
and how the U . S . economic and political systems
function . 
• Computer science in high school should be taught to
prepare students to understand computer information , use the computer in the study of other “ Basics ,  ” 
and understand other related technologies . 
—Linda C . Tillman
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; at-risk students ; 
cultural politics , war ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; democracy , democratic education and administration ; Department of Education ; economics , theories of ; 
elementary education ; globalism ; literacy , theories of ; management theories ; minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; 
politics , of education ; principalship ; productivity ; rational
organizational theory ; restructuring , of schools ; school
improvement models ; site-based management ; state departments of education ; standardized testing ; systemic reform ; 
underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Bell , T . H .  ( 1988 )  . The thirteenth man : A Reagan cabinet memoir . New York : Free Press . 
Bell , T . H .  ( 1993 )  . Reflections on one decade after “ A Nation
at Risk .  ” Phi Delta Kappan , 74 , 592–597 . 
Brown , K .  ( 2005 )  . Pivotal points : History , development , and
promise of the principalship . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 68–84 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
A Nation at Risk .  ( 1983 )  . Retrieved September 6 , 2005 , from
http :  /  / ed / gov / pubs / NatARisk / index . html
Sizer , T .  ( 2003 )  . Two reports . Educational Week , 22 ( 32 )  , 
24–36 . 
684———A Nation at Risk
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 684
 NATIONAL ASSESSMENT OF
EDUCATIONAL PROGRESS
The National Assessment of Educational Progress 
( NAEP )  , also known as the “ Nation ’ s Report Card ,  ” is
a federally mandated program for assessing student
achievement and progress in American education . The
NAEP assessments cover areas such as reading , mathematics , science , writing , U . S . history , civics , geography , and the arts . The assessments are usually
administered to randomly selected samples of
students in such a way that different students in a
sample typically receive different portions of a test . 
The sampling of students , administration , scoring , and
reporting are done through a number of NAEP contractors , including the Educational Testing Service 
( ETS ) and Westat . The Commissioner of Education
Statistics , as head of the National Center for Educational Statistics ( NCES )  , is charged with the carrying
out of the NAEP project . The National Assessment
Governing Board ( NAGB )  , an independent bipartisan
organization , develops the policy , content frameworks , and test specifications for the NAEP . 
There are three basic components of the NAEP program . The long-term trend NAEP is designed to assess
changes in student achievement in mathematics , reading , and science at ages 9 , 13 , and 17 . The assessment
is based on fixed content standards and administration
procedures that were established from the beginning . 
A second component is the national NAEP , some times
called the “ main NAEP .  ” Unlike the trend assessment , 
the national assessment is grade based , targeting
students at Grades 4 , 8 , and 12 . It also covers more
subject areas , such as U . S . history , civics , and geography , which are tested in different years . More important , the national NAEP is based on the latest content
frameworks and assessment innovations . The third
component , the state NAEP , is designed to assess reading , mathematics , and science in the same year as the
national assessment . It uses the same assessment content and item types as the national assessment . It is
available for students only in Grades 4 and 8 . In addition to these assessments , NAEP also conducts several
special studies , including the ongoing high school
transcript study and the technology-based assessment . 
The original development of the NAEP took place in
the 1960s . It was a single assessment when it became
operational in 1969 . With the release of the A Nation at
Risk report in 1983 , there was a strong sense in the
nation to improve the international competitiveness of
the nation ’ s education system . In 1986 , an unexpected
decline in the nation ’ s reading achievement , the socalled NAEP reading anomaly , further prompted NAEP
to redesign its program . One major result was the separation of the national NAEP from the trend NAEP , 
with the former measuring the achievement of the latest innovations in curriculum and instruction and the
latter yielding results comparable to previous ones . To
meet the special needs of the main assessment , NAEP
developed content frameworks as outlines for what
students should be able to achieve in each subject area . 
The second major redesign took place in the 1990s with
the addition of the state NAEP , partly as a result of the
enhanced accountability at the state level . The new
assessment , originally called the “ trial state assessment ”  ( TSA )  , was first field tested in 1990 in a number
of participating states and became an official component of the NAEP in 1996 . During that time , NAEP also
updated its frameworks for the major subjects and
incorporated more performance-based assessment
items . There was also a major change in score reporting , from the original percentage of items answered
correctly to the report of scale scores for a whole subject
and major content areas , and scores by achievement
levels . More recent changes include the sampling of
students with disabilities and students with limited
English proficiency and the use of accommodations
and modifications during test administration . NAEP
has also made most of its information available online
through its Web site . The No Child Left Behind ( NCLB ) 
Act of 2001 provided the federal mandate for the continuation of all three components of the NAEP . The act
required reading and mathematics to be continued in all
three components of the NAEP program . The inclusion
of additional subject areas in the main NAEP is conditional upon available resources . Participation in state
NAEP reading and mathematics is required of schools
that receive Title I funding . The act also authorized
NAEP to conduct the feasibility of a trial urban district
assessment . The first assessment was given in 2002 for
five urban districts . 
Over the decades , NAEP has become a barometer
of the nation ’ s educational progress by providing
important educational data for the public and policymakers . The success NAEP has enjoyed has also
brought high expectations for the program . Many
people expect NAEP results to be utilized in evaluating
National Assessment of Educational Progress——685
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 685
the effectiveness of various federal programs and at
the state level in validating state assessment programs . 
Some feel that past NAEP reports have not been userfriendly enough and that NAEP reports need to be
customized to different state holders . To meet such
expectations , however , would entail much more effort
from the NAEP staff and its contractors , who have to
meet the new requirements by the NCLB Act to conduct test administration and score reporting at a much
faster pace than previously . A second issue is the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the program . Some
people question the wisdom of having both the longtrend and national assessments in separate operations . 
Others doubt the need for NAEP to expand into its
state assessment . Nevertheless , there seems to be a
consensus that the different components of the program
serve distinct yet important purposes . Some people
suggest merging the trend NAEP with the national
assessment . The differences in content frameworks
and administration procedures seem to make the
merge a challenging task . Attempts at merging the
national assessment with the state component were
first made in 2002 , when the same sampling procedure and test administration procedure were adopted
for the two assessments . Although the new federal
mandate sanctioned the continuation of all three NAEP
components , efforts at streamlining and possibly
merging its operations will most likely continue . 
—Yuankun Yao
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; determinism , 
sociocultural ; Education Commission of the States ; literacy , theories of , measurement , theories of ; performance
assessment ; politics , of education ; psychometrics ; quantitative research methods ; standardized testing ; testing and test
theory development ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Jones , L . V .  ,  & Olkin , I .  ( 2004 )  . The nation ’ s report card : 
Evolution and perspectives . Bloomington , IN : Phi Delta
Kappa Education Foundation . 
National Center for Educational Statistics .  ( 2004 )  . The
nation ’ s report card [ Data file ]  . Retrieved from the
National Center for Educational Statistics Web site ,  
. gov / nationsreportcard / 
Pellegrino , J . W .  , Jones , L . R .  ,  & Mitchell , K . J .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1999 )  . 
Grading the nation ’ s report card : Evaluating NAEP and
transforming the assessment of educational progress . 
Washington , DC : National Academy Press . 
Raju , N . S .  , Pellegrino , J . W .  , Bertenthal , M . W .  ,  & others .  
( Eds .  )  .  ( 2000 )  . Grading the nation ’ s report card : Research
from the evaluation of NAEP . Washington , DC : National
Academy Press . 
Robinson , G .  ,  & Brandon , D .  ( 1994 )  . NAEP test scores : 
Should they be used to compare and rank state educational
quality ? Reston , VA : Educational Research Service . 
Sacks , P .  ( 1999 )  . Standardized minds : The high price of
America ’ s testing culture and what we can do to change it . 
Cambridge , MA : Perseus Books . 
 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
COLORED PEOPLE
The National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People ( NAACP ) is America ’ s most visible
civil rights organization . Founded in 1909 by an interracial group of social activists , intellectuals , and
descendants of abolitionists , the organization has consistently worked to socially and legally transform
America from an exclusive to an inclusive democracy . 
Many of the NAACP founders were twentieth-century
social luminaries , including distinguished scholar
W . E . B . Du Bois , activist and journalist Ida WellsBarnett , social reformers Jane Addams and Mary White
Ovington , noted education professor John Dewey , and
publisher and philanthropist Oswald Garrison Villard . 
The impetus for the organization ’ s founding has
been traced to two events : the establishment of the
Niagara Movement in 1905 and the race riot and
lynching that occurred in the birthplace of Abraham
Lincoln in August of 1908 . The Niagara Movement , 
led by Du Bois , was an exclusively Black organization
determined to secure the full rights of African Americans . 
Viewed by some as too militant , the Niagara Movement did not have the mass appeal necessary to attract
a wide membership . 
The Springfield , Illinois , riots illuminated the
national hypocrisy and deep-seated racial hatred for
African Americans . Though neither the first nor the last
racist-inspired community murder , many felt the incident marred the legacy of Abraham Lincoln . In the spirit
of freedom , the call for the founding of an organization
committed to eradicating racism was issued on February
12 , 1909 , the date of the former president ’ s birthday . 
Niagara Movement members responded to the call and
formed , along with those present , the National Negro
Conference , which eventually became the NAACP . 
The NAACP has consistently challenged social
mandates through legal challenges , grassroots activism , 
686———National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 686
and the collection and dissemination of empirical
evidence of state-sponsored and socially sanctioned
racism and race-based violence . Its antilynching campaign is representative of the NAACP ’ s strategy to
simultaneously illuminate racial hatred while asserting African American humanity . The courageous and
meticulous documentation of the lynching of African
Americans through its organ , The Crisis , and its 1919
publication Thirty Years of Lynching in the United
States ( 1889–1918 ) forced the nation to confront the
physical , social , and psychological violence regularly
inflicted upon African Americans . 
Although considered radical at the beginning of the
twentieth century , the perception of the NAACP has
vacillated throughout its 90-year history . Descriptors
such as moderate , balanced , and progressive have been
used to compare the agenda of the NAACP with other
civil rights organizations . From the early part of the
twentieth century through the civil rights movement
and the Black Power movement , the NAACP ’ s diverse
leadership , its embrace of middle-class values , and its
structured advocacy seemed in contrast to more aggressive civil rights organizations , such as the Universal
Negro Improvement Association ( UNIA )  , the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference ( SCLC )  , the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( SNCC )  , and the
Black Panther Party ( BPP )  . 
The leadership of the NAACP has strongly influenced external perceptions and internal strategies . At
the time of its founding , the Executive Committee
included only one African American male . Du Bois
also served as the association ’ s director of publicity
and research . Its first presidents were White men , and
while progressive for their time , they were more likely
to adopt a gradualist approach to social change . Even
when the leadership mantle shifted to Black men , 
specifically Walter White in 1931 , some contemporaneous African American organizations and leaders criticized the NAACP and its leaders as elitist and out of
touch with the Black masses . Nonetheless , the organization continued to pursue its ultimate goal of racial
equality for minorities . During most of its history , the
NAACP has been the most well-known civil rights
organization . However , a number of prominent African
American leaders such as Marcus Garvey , Martin
Luther King Jr .  , Malcolm X , and others were affiliated
with groups that were viewed as more progressive . 
It can be argued that educational access and
equity has , since the NAACP ’ s founding , been one of
the United State ’ s most pressing civil rights issues . As
early as 1909 , the NAACP ’ s interest in education
was evident when it conducted two investigations
of the educational conditions of African Americans . 
However , the impact of the organization ’ s work to dismantle legally mandated school segregation cannot
be overstated . Led by attorneys Charles Houston and
Thurgood Marshall , the NAACP challenged the constitutionality of a series of state laws that blocked
African American access to public schools and colleges and universities . The NAACP ’ s steady erosion
of the fictive separate-but-equal standard that protected racial segregation began in 1936 when the
NAACP prevailed in University v . Murray and culminated with the landmark Supreme Court decision in
Brown v . Board of Education , Topeka , Kansas ( 1954 )  . 
The carefully constructed strategy to dismantle the
underpinnings of Jim Crow laws through legal challenges eventually led to the reversal of the Plessy v . 
Ferguson ( 1896 ) doctrine and the collapse of de jure
segregation in schools and in all other public facilities . 
In 1957 , the legal branch of the NAACP became a
distinct organization known as the Legal Defense Fund 
( LDF )  . The NAACP continues to be an advocate for
educational access and equity ; however , the judicial
branch no longer serves as its primary site for educational advocacy . Instead , the NAACP sponsors hearings , conducts research , and encourages its members
to work toward solving local and national educational , 
social , political , and economic challenges . 
On the national level , the NAACP is governed by a
64-member board of directors and led by an executive
director . The organization has 2 , 000 adult branches
and 1 , 700 youth and college chapters in seven regions
throughout the United States . Through its various
initiatives , the national office and the branches are
involved in building legal capacity , policy development , civil rights monitoring , economic and political
empowerment , and health advocacy . 
In 2004 , President George W . Bush became the
first president since Herbert Hoover to decline an invitation to speak at the NAACP ’ s annual convention . 
The NAACP Chairman Julian Bond and President and
CEO Kweisi Mfume expressed their deep dismay over
the president ’ s decision and soundly criticized
President Bush and Republican Party policies . In
response to the political lashing hurled by Bond and
others during the convention , the White House called
upon the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS )  , to investigate the NAACP ’ s status as a nonprofit organization . 
NAACP officials refused to comply with a request for
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People———687
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 687
documents from the IRS , citing their criticism of
President Bush did not violate the nonpartisan political posture required of tax-exempt organizations . 
Kweisi Mfume , a former United States congressman , resigned as the NAACP President and CEO in
February 2005 and announced his intention to run for
the United States Senate in 2006 . 
—Melanie Carter
See also affirmative action ; Afrocentric theories ; Bethune , Mary
McLeod ; Black education ; Coppin , Fanny Jackson ; critical
race theory ; Department of Education ; desegregation , of
schools ; diversity ; dropouts ; Du Bois , W . E . B .  ; ethnicity ; law , 
trends in ; Marshall , Thurgood ; minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; Washington , Booker . T ; Woodson , Carter G . 
Further Readings and References
Finch , M .  ( 1981 )  . The NAACP : Its fight for justice . Scarecrow
Press . 
Janken , K . R ( 2002 )  . White : The biography of Walter White , 
Mr . NAACP . New York : New Press . 
Kellog , C .  , F .  ( 1973 )  . NAACP : A history of the National
Association of the Advancement of Colored People . 
Baltimore : John Hopkins University Press . 
Kluger , R .  ( 1977 )  . Simple justice . New York : Random House . 
Tushnet , Mark V .  ( 1987 ) The NAACP ’ s legal strategy against
segregated education , 1925–1950 . Chapel Hill : University
of North Carolina Press . 
 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
PRINCIPALS
Founded in 1921 by a group of principals who sought
to promote their profession and to provide a national
forum for their ideas , the National Association of
Elementary School Principals ( NAESP ) has grown to
become the most powerful voice of pre-K–8 principals across the United States and around the world . 
Since its beginning , NAESP has been dedicated to
ensuring that all children get the best education possible . The association serves the professional interest
of elementary and middle school principals and promotes the highest professional standards . Today , 
NAESP provides a peer network of more than 30 , 000
principals worldwide . 
The mission of NAESP is to lead in the advocacy
and support for elementary and middle-level principals
and other education leaders in their commitment to all
children . 
To complete the mission of NAESP , the association
has developed several key services and programs for
its members . 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
The professional development arm of NAESP is the
NAESP Leadership Academy ( NLA )  . NLA provides
workshops , seminars , and e-learning opportunities for
leadership training . Programs address a wide range of
leadership and management issues . All NLA courses
offer one continuing education or professional development unit ( PDU / CEU ) for each hour of engaged
learning to be presented to state or school districts for
certification or credit . 
NAESP Advocacy Efforts
NAESP provides a strong unified voice for preK–8 principals across the United States and around
the world , with the following programs : 
• NAESP ’ s key contacts . Members volunteer to
develop relationships and maintain open communication with legislators on Capitol Hill . Key contacts
partake in conference calls and have a newsletter to
help them with their efforts . 
• Federal relations coordinators . Each NAESP state
affiliate has a federal relations coordinator to voice
concerns on behalf of principals to legislators . 
• Federal legislative action center . Members can visit
this part of the NAESP Web site to receive alerts and
legislative updates and find information on how to
contact their elected officials . 
• Government relations training and information . Two
conferences during the year provide training and
opportunities to visit Congress . Newsletters and
columns in NAESP publications keep members
informed on a more regular basis . 
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES
NAESP has several other member benefits , including : 
• Legal Benefits Program . The Legal Benefits Program
safeguards members against unexpected expenses
due to legal action that may be directed against them . 
NAESP members are entitled to $1 million worth
of individual professional liability per individual of
damage / settlement costs for eligible civil suit claims , 
688———National Association of Elementary School Principals
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 688
with additional reasonable defense outside the limits
of the policy . An individual also receives reimbursement up to $10 , 000 based on continuous years of
membership ( following a $500 deductible , accruing
at $1 , 000 for each year of continuous membership ) 
for eligible job-protection-related legal claims . 
• Annual convention and exposition . NAESP ’ s premier
professional development and networking opportunity , the convention is attended by more than 5 , 000
education leaders to learn about best practices and
the latest products and services . 
• Principals Advisory Leadership Services ( PALS ) 
Corps . A training and certification program to
develop experienced principals into mentors for principals in training . 
• National Distinguished Principals Program . This
awards program recognizes outstanding elementary
and middle school principals from all 50 states and the
District of Columbia . Private schools , Department of
Defense Dependents ’ Schools , and the U . S . Department
of State Overseas Schools are also recognized . 
• Community and student services . Helps principals
with resources to develop better connections with
their community and recognize and foster student
leaders . 
• The NAESP Web site . Members create their own profiles on the NAESP Web site , where they can search
the publications ’ archives , look for new jobs , download sample forms and letters from fellow principals , 
post a question on the Principals ’ Help Line , order
books or renew membership , and interact with their
colleagues in the forums . 
—Candice Johnson
See also accountability ; authority ; bureaucracy ; career development ; chain of command ; division of labor ; elementary
education ; leadership , theories of ; leadership effectiveness ; 
leadership styles ; management theories ; morality , moral
leadership ; open-door policy ; parental involvement ; principal , assistant ; principalship ; productivity ; school improvement models ; site-based management ; span of control ; 
staffing , concepts of ; total quality management ; underachievers , in schools ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Brown , K .  ( 2005 )  . Pivotal points : History , development , and
promise of the principalship . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The Sage
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 109–141 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
National Association of Elementary School Principals .  ( 2004 )  . 
Leading learning communities : Standards for what principals should know and be able to do . Alexandria , VA : 
Author . 
Protheroe , N .  , Turner , J .  ,  & Vincent , P .  ( 2003 )  . Essentials for
principals : Developing and maintaining high staff morale . 
Alexandria , VA : National Association of Elementary
School Principals and Educational Research Service . 
Quaglia , R . J .  ,  & Quay , S . E .  ( 2003 )  . Changing lives through the
principalship : A reflective guide for school leaders . Alexandria , 
VA : National Association of Elementary School Principals . 
Shellard , E .  ( 2003 )  . Urban principals respond : Building and
maintaining a high-achieving school . Alexandria , VA : 
National Association of Elementary School Principals and
Educational Research Service . 
 NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF SECONDARY SCHOOL
PRINCIPALS
The National Association of Secondary School
Principals ( NASSP )  , a professional organization of
middle school and high school principals , assistant
principals , and aspiring school leaders , was founded in
1916 . NASSP seeks to promote excellence in school
leadership through professional development opportunities , producing relevant research publications , and
advocating on behalf of school leaders . The organization strives to advance middle and high school education by promoting high professional standards , 
focusing attention on school leaders ’ challenges , providing a “ national voice ” for school leaders , building
public confidence in education , strengthening the role
of the principal as instructional leader , and publicizing
the issues and interests of NASSP , which is governed
by an executive director and a board of directors . 
A prime goal of the association is advocacy : bringing the issues of the principalship to federal and state
legislatures and to the news media . NASSP ’ s Office of
Advocacy and Strategic Alliances monitors legislation 
 “ affecting education , communicates with Congressional offices , the U . S . Department of Education , and
actively participates in coalition-building activities . 
Other advocacy activities include affecting public policy by changing attitudes , shaping public debate and
informing public thought through editorials , policy
briefings , and regular interaction with the nation ’ s
news media . The Office of Advocacy and Strategic
Alliances translates complex education issues into
compelling and persuasive arguments that inform the
media , policymakers , and the public . 
The association has three National Task Forces : the
middle school task force , the high school task force , 
National Association of Secondary School Principals———689
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 689
and the principal preparation task force . The task
forces address pertinent issues and topics impacting
leaders of middle level and senior high schools and
the various principal preparation programs . In addition to the task forces , NASSP seeks to make a larger
impact through its Speakers ’ Bureau , which , upon
request , provides presentations by NASSP staff
members . The goal of the Speakers ’ Bureau is to promote and advance the secondary school principalship
and student leadership programs and activities . 
NASSP also works to promote student academic
achievement , character , and leadership development , 
through student leadership programs such as the
National Honor Society , the National Junior Honor
Society , and the National Association of Student
Councils . Furthermore , NASSP sponsors a variety of
scholarship and award programs and publishes an
annual list of approved contests and activities ( the
National Advisory List of Student Contests and
Activities )  . The list provides information to assist
principals , teachers , parents , and students in making
decisions regarding participation in a wide variety of
extracurricular program opportunities :  
. us / scaa / scaa_search . cfm . 
The charitable arm of NASSP is called Together
Reaching Education Excellence ( TREE )  . Its goal is to
increase students ’ access to leadership opportunities and
principals ’ access to professional development opportunities . TREE provides grants and scholarship opportunities to high-poverty schools and the students they serve . 
—Bonnie C . Fusarelli
See also accountability ; athletics in schools ; discipline in
schools ; expulsion , of students ; extracurricular activities ; 
high schools ; junior high schools ; leadership , complex
theory of ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , teacher ; middle schools ; principal , assistant ; principal succession ; principalship ; school plant management ; stewardship ; tracking , 
of students ; vandalism in schools ; violence in schools ; 
women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Bogotch , I .  ( 2005 )  . A history of public school leadership : The
first century , 1837–1942 . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 7–32 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Sergiovanni , T .  ( 2001 )  . The principalship : A reflective practice
perspective . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
National Association of Secondary School Principals .  ( n . d .  )  . 
Available at 
 NATIONAL COUNCIL
FOR THE ACCREDITATION
OF TEACHER EDUCATION
Founded in 1954 , the National Council for the
Accreditation of Teacher Education ( NCATE ) is the
professional accrediting organization for colleges and
universities that prepare teachers and other professional personnel for work in elementary and secondary schools in the United States . NCATE is a
nonprofit , nongovernmental organization , comprised
of more than 30 national education-related associations . The associations appoint representatives to
NCATE ’ s policy boards , which develop NCATE
standards , policies , and procedures . Policy board
membership typically includes representatives from
teacher educators , teachers , state and local policymakers , and professional specialists in P–12 schools . 
NCATE is the education profession ’ s mechanism
to help establish high quality teacher , educational
specialist , and school administrator preparation . The
organization has developed standards for teacher and
administrator education and utilizes a performancebased system of accreditation to conduct reviews of
educational institutions to determine which schools of
education meet those standards . The work of the organization is conducted by the 2 , 000 + educational
professionals who volunteer as policy board members , 
program reviewers , and onsite team members . NCATE
revises its unit accreditation standards every 5 years to
reflect current research and state-of-the-art practice in
the teaching profession . Therefore , once accredited , 
institutions must go through the continuing accreditation process every 5 years . As of 2004 , 575 colleges of
education were accredited by NCATE—a recognition
that indicates that the college of education has met
national professional standards for the preparation of
teachers and other educators and has provided evidence of competent teacher candidate performance . 
Reflecting the national trend of increased demand for
accountability from state governments and the public , 
the number of institutions seeking accreditation and
the number of accredited institutions has risen steadily
since the late 1990s . Despite the fact that a number of
top ranked schools of education decline to be NCATE
accredited and the NCATE process has come in for
criticism while a rival national accrediting organization has been established and recently recognized by
the federal government ( TEAC )  , NCATE standards
690———National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 690
remain dominant in teacher and administrator preparation , influencing teacher preparation in 48 states , the
District of Columbia , and Puerto Rico . One indicator
of the nationalization of the NCATE standards is that
numerous states have reciprocity agreements for educator licensure based on graduation from NCATEaccredited schools . A further indicator is that as of
2004 , 48 state / NCATE partnerships had been established in which the states and NCATE conduct joint or
concurrent reviews of higher education programs in an
attempt to save institutions and states time and money . 
—Bonnie C . Fusarelli
See also accountability ; accreditation ; behaviorism ; culture , 
school ; expectations , teacher and student cultures ; licensure
and certification ; normal schools ; professional learning communities ; schools of education ; state departments of education ; University Council for Educational Administration
Further Readings and References
English , F .  ( 2003 , March )  . Cookie-cutter leaders for cookiecutter schools : The teleology of standardization and the
de-legitimization of the university in educational leadership
preparation . Leadership and Policy in Schools , 2 ( 1 )  , 27–46 . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . Tsar khorosh , boyary polkhi—The ISLLC
standards and the enshrinement of mystical authoritarianism as anti-change doctrine in educational leadership preparation programs . In F . Lunenburg & C . Carr ( Eds .  )  , Shaping
the future : Policy , partnerships , and emerging perspectives 
( pp . 112–133 )  . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Press .  . 
National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education .  
( n . d .  )  , Home page . Available at 
 NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
PROFESSORS OF EDUCATIONAL
ADMINISTRATION
The National Council of Professors of Educational
Administration ( NCPEA ) is the preeminent organization of individual professors dedicated to the effective
preparation and renewal of educational leaders . NCPEA
is committed to the improvement of the practice and
study of educational administration . Established in
1947 , the council continues its commitment to serve
the interests and needs of professors of educational
administration . Members enjoy exceptional opportunities for professional growth and development in a
welcoming , supportive , and collegial environment . 
NCPEA is governed by a 10-member executive board
and an executive director , with the executive office
presently housed at Sam Houston State University . 
The organization sponsors three annual meetings :  
( a ) a summer conference held in different sections of
the United States and Canada ,  ( b ) a midwinter conference in conjunction with the American Association of
School Administrators , and ( c ) an October strategic
planning meeting for the executive board . Members
enjoy both the summer and midwinter conferences as
opportunities to share their research and teaching . 
NCPEA focuses on the following goals and
objectives : 
• Ensure the high-quality professional development of
professors of educational administration . 
• Refine the knowledge bases for preparing practicing
school administrators and professors of educational
administration . 
• Promote the application of theory and research in the
field to the practice of educational administration . 
• Establish and promote a code of ethics for professors
of educational administration . 
• Ensure access and inclusion of underrepresented
groups into the professorate and administration . 
• Serve as an advocate for professors of educational
administration and as an authority on critical issues . 
• Develop the administrative application of technology
in the preparation and renewal of educational
leaders . 
• Establish standards by which educational administration programs become certified , accredited , or
approved . 
PUBLICATIONS
NCPEA publishes annually a Tier I peer-refereed
yearbook designed around the theme of the annual
summer conference . Contributing authors represent
professors and practitioners from the nation ’ s universities and public schools . In addition , NCPEA publishes the Education Leadership Review , a nationally
peer-reviewed journal focusing on the preparation
of school leaders , and it edits and publishes the Educational Administration Directory . The purpose of the
directory is to provide a service to the profession of
educational administration and leadership by providing information that will improve communications
among the universities and faculties of the educational
administration departments throughout the United
States and Canada . 
National Council of Professors of Educational Administration———691
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 691
STATE AFFILIATES
NCPEA state affiliates are separate organizations that
work collaboratively as part of the NCPEA organization to foster the common values and goals of NCPEA . 
State affiliates influence educational policy and provide a forum for the improvement of the practice and
study of educational administration in their states . 
Activities of NCPEA include , but are not limited to , 
providing information and leadership , improving the
preparation of school administrators , encouraging
research and service , promoting high professional standards , focusing attention on educational problems and
opportunities , promoting NCPEA membership , cooperating with other professional organizations interested
in excellence in education , and promoting participation in all activities deemed by the membership to be
in the best interest of NCPEA . 
The primary purposes of collaborating with state
affiliate organizations include ( a ) to positively impact
school leadership policy and practice through the collective influence of over 400 university preparation
programs and over 3 , 500 professors of educational
administration ,  ( b ) to network and share ideas and
provide professional development opportunities , and 
( c ) to keep professors and practitioners informed on
national issues related to the work of the National
Policy Board for Educational Administration ( NPBEA ) 
and the Educational Leadership Constituent Council 
( ELCC )  . 
CREATING THE FUTURE
NCPEA has recently entered into a contractual agreement with Rice University and its Connexions Project
to refine and assemble the knowledge base in educational administration . In combination with powerful
software tools , Connexions fosters the development , 
manipulation , and continuous refinement of educational material by diverse communities of authors
and practitioners . It represents a new paradigm for the
electronic development and delivery of knowledge
content by archiving existing knowledge and continually refining and updating knowledge . Modules of
information with supporting links are developed by a
community of authors from around the world under
an open-content license , translated into several languages , and freely accessible to all in the world . 
A critical aspect of this project is the evaluation of
the quality and usefulness of the materials in improving
the preservice preparation of principals in university
and alternative certification programs as well as inservice preparation for practitioners already in the field . 
—Theodore B . Creighton
See also accreditation ; Interstate Leaders Licensure
Consortium ; knowledge base , of the field ; professional
development ; professional learning communities ; schools
of education ; standard setting ; superintendency ; universities , preparation of educational leaders in ; University
Council for Educational Administration
Further Readings and References
Alford , B .  ( 2005 )  . The National Council of Professors of
Educational Administration : The last thirty years . 
Houston , TX : Sam Houston University Press . 
Creighton , T .  , Busch , S .  , MacNeil , A .  ,  & Waxman , H .  ( 2005 )  . 
Narrowing the disconnect between the knowledge base in
educational administration and the practice of school leadership . NCPEA Education Leadership Review , 6 ( 1 )  , 1–8 . 
 NATIONAL EDUCATION
ASSOCIATION
The nation ’ s largest professional employee organization , the National Education Association ( NEA ) represents 2 . 7 million teachers , administrators , support
personnel , student teachers , and retired educators in elementary , secondary , and higher education . The National
Teachers Association was the starting point for the
NEA . Forty-three educators , representing 12 state associations and the District of Columbia , met on August 26 , 
1857 , in Philadelphia at the suggestion of Daniel B . 
Hagar of the Massachusetts Teachers Association to
form a National Brotherhood of Teachers . Among the
charter members was Robert Campbell , an African
American from Jamaica . The original call aimed at the
improvement of schools ; advancement of teachers professionally , socially , and pedagogically ; and the promotion of public interest in education . 
The American Normal School Association and the
National Association of School Superintendents
joined their ranks in 1870 . The history of the organization falls into several periods . During the Convention
Period ( 1857 to 1892 )  , the NEA had neither national
staff nor permanent headquarters and focused primarily on pedagogy . Teacher welfare issues were left to
local and state affiliates . The well-attended Madison
692———National Education Association
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 692
Convention in 1884 raised the NEA ’ s profile among
educators who were developing a professional identity . While the NEA ’ s endorsement of public education reflected its interest in education for all , the
NEA ’ s attention to minority groups was limited during
the late nineteenth century . Renowned African
American educators , such as Booker T . Washington , 
spoke at several NEA conventions , and the NEA created a short-lived Department of Indian Education in
1899 . During the nineteenth century , esteemed educators as William Torrey Harris and Nicholas Murray
Butler made frequent appearances at NEA conventions . The Committee Period ( 1892–1917 ) marked the
selection of the NEA ’ s first full-time executive secretary , Dr . Irwin Shepherd . In 1918 , the association ’ s
reputation expanded with the issuance of the highly
influential Cardinal Principles of Secondary Education , 
crafted by the NEA Commission on the Reorganization of Secondary Education . The Cardinal Principles
contained the major objectives of education that were
enunciated for decades thereafter and were complemented by the emerging field of educational administration . In 1917 , when Dr . James Crabtree became
executive secretary , the NEA headquarters moved
from Ann Arbor , Michigan , to Washington , D . C .  , and
the NEA set its course on becoming an important
player at the national political level . 
Although women and classroom teachers expanded
their participation in the NEA ( Ella Flagg Young
became the first female NEA president in 1910 , and
Margaret Haley of Chicago proposed the Department
of Classroom Teachers )  , college presidents or professors and secondary school administrators dominated
the NEA during the early twentieth century . Major
restructuring , an increase in the number of associations
affiliated with the NEA , and enrollment drives raised
membership from 8 , 466 in 1917 to 170 , 053 in 1926 . 
This increase marked the start of the “ modern ” NEA . In
1920 , the democratization of the NEA resulted in the
establishment of the Representative Assembly composed of delegates from state and local affiliates who
formulated NEA policies . Expanding teacher membership was a way to enlarge and strengthen the organization in the face of competition from the American
Federation of Teachers ( AFT ) after World War I . 
The power held by the major units of the NEA ( the
board of directors , the executive committee , the board
of trustees , and the representative assembly ) changed
over time as the control of the organization shifted
to members at the classroom level . Constitutional
provisions and by laws as well as the formal and informal
alliances of groups within the organization determined
the relationship between these main units . The executive secretary , elected by the board of trustees until its
dissolution in 1968 , was the glue that held these organizational units together until restructuring begun in the
1960s culminated in a new constitution in 1973 . The
Department of Classroom Teachers had increased its
influence , and a succession of strong NEA presidents
indicated significant changes in the NEA as it redefined
its image as a professional association . Teacher welfare
was defined in professional terms as the NEA challenged its rival , the AFT , for aggressiveness in collective bargaining , a labor union objective . 
The NEA evolved as a federation of educational
units at the national , state , and local levels . Unification
of these three levels did not receive serious consideration until the mid 1940s and was realized in the 1970s
after considerable acrimony . The NEA has been a
canopy for commissions , departments , and committees
such as the Department of Superintendence , the
National Association of Secondary School Principals , 
and the Department of Classroom Teachers , all associated with education , but with different perspectives . 
Some , such as the National Commission on Teacher
Education and Professional Standards , have been intimately associated with NEA policies , but others have
been consultative units . The data collected and reports
issued by the NEA ’ s Research Division , set up in 1922 , 
on topics such as teacher demographics , school facilities , and salaries were widely used even by competing
organizations such as the American Federation of
Teachers ( AFT )  . While the NEA ’ s core principles of
individualism , professionalism , democracy , and universal education showed consistency of purpose , they were
often subject to topical concerns and shifting interpretation . such as the NEA ’ s support of ethnic and racial
minorities , which accelerated after the NEA ’ s merger
with the American Teachers Association ( ATA ) in
1966 . The creation of a Department of Education in
1979 by President Jimmy Carter was a long desired
NEA goal . 
While a possible merger of the AFT and NEA has
surfaced periodically , the NEA and AFT have clashed
on curricular issues , bilingual education , and affirmative action , although there have been successful mergers of NEA and AFT affiliates at the local level . While
the antiunion orientation of the NEA has softened in
recent years at the national level , regional differences
among state and local NEA affiliates remain . In addition , 
National Education Association———693
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 693
the conduct of NEA and AFT affairs ( voting , leadership , term limits , etc .  ) is markedly different . The “ new
unionism ” promulgated by former NEA President
Robert Chase in the 1990s merged traditional unionism with educational reform . An outgrowth of the 
 “ new unionism ” has been a lessening of the antagonistic relationship between teachers and administrators
and an increase in NEA efforts at collaboration in the
transformation and improvement of public schools . 
—Carol F . Karpinski
See also American Federation of Teachers ; Butler , Nicholas
Murray ; career development ; career stages ; collective bargaining ; conflict management ; Department of Education ; 
gender studies , in educational leadership ; Haley , Margaret ; 
Harris , William Torrey ; Picott , J . Rupert ; power ; Trenholm , 
Harper Councill ; unions , of teachers ; Young , Ella Flagg
Further Readings and References
Blount , J . M .  ( 2005 )  . Fit to teach : Same-sex desire , gender , 
and school work in the twentieth century . Albany : SUNY
Press . 
Fenner , M . S .  ( 1945 )  . NEA history : The National Educational
Association : Its development and program . Washington , 
DC : National Education Association . 
Urban , W . J .  ( 2000 )  . Gender , race , and the National Education Association : Professionalism and its limitations . 
New York : RoutledgeFalmer . 
Wesley , E . B .  ( 1957 )  . NEA : The first hundred years . 
New York : Harper . 
West , A . M .  ( 1980 )  . The National Education Association : The
power base for education . New York : Free Press . 
 NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Needs assessment is a term that covers several different types of analyses . It sometimes refers to a process
of discovery , for example , going out and sampling
some facet of public or professional opinion . This is
essentially a perception check of sorts . Some questions might be : 
• Survey teachers and determine what materials they
think they need for teaching reading next year
• Ask parents what electives they would like to see in
the school ’ s curriculum
• Survey principals to determine how they rate the
three different kinds of computers that might be
purchased for the school district
The responses to these questions represent feelings
and perceptions of a designated group of respondents . 
Needs assessment was an activity of discovering the
state of such feelings and perceptions . 
There is another use of the term needs assessment , 
which is quite different . In this approach , the process is
more formal and is based on a discrepancy as opposed to
a discovery model . The idea of a discrepancy requires
beginning with some known facts , such as current
achievement test scores , or frequency list of some kind , 
such as number of library books checked out over a
given time period . This is the current situation , or the 
 “ what is ” benchmark . A second benchmark is required to
be developed . This second indicator is the “ what should
be .  ” The creation of the “ what should be ” often involves
the process of visioning or imagining a changed situation . Once the “ what should be ” is established , then the
analyst proceeds to calculate the difference or the gap
between the two . The discrepancy or gap is the need . A
need is met when the gap is closed or erased . 
Roger Kaufman ’ s 1992 work , Mapping Educational
Success , is seminal in the field . He posits that a gapbased needs assessment approach works on several different levels . The widest arc or level of thinking is
called the megalevel , and it involves thinking about
social goals , social problems , and issues and determining how these matters could be resolved globally . The
gaps are between indicators of social problems ( crime
rate , poverty , etc .  ) and their amelioration . It is necessary to think about this wider arc because schools are
part of the social fabric . They are either solutions to
such problems or they perpetuate them by not addressing them . The macrolevel of needs assessment represents the place where a school system ’ s graduates enter
the larger society . A comparison of the skills , knowledge , and attitudes required of the graduates in order to
live well and resolve societal issues is the locus of
a macrolevel needs assessment . A third level is the
microlevel . This is the juncture where internal to the
school system , an analysis might occur . A comparison
of test scores as students move from elementary to middle school might yield a microlevel gap analysis . 
These three levels of needs assessment activities
occur within a rational planning framework ; that is , 
planning is based on assumptions regarding the stability , efficacy , and logic of the organization itself . As
social service organizations , schools and school systems are expected to be rational , that is , be able to
connect their resources to student learning . Even if
the process is not well understood as to how such
694———Needs Assessment
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 694
connections actually work within schools , the expectation is still dominant in nearly all approaches to
thinking about how schools work or should work . 
A third use of the concept of needs assessment is that
it is connected to vague statements regarding psychological needs . Here , the phrase “ based on student needs ” 
may not refer to specific learning objectives , but to
more global notions of needs for psychological security , 
esteem , recognition , or self-awareness , as in Abraham
Maslow ’ s 1954 idea of a “ hierarchy of needs .  ” This concept of need represents an archetypical psychosocial
condition most often found in statements of philosophy
regarding the need for nurturing and constancy within
schools and classrooms . As such , they are much more
difficult to measure and to use than in a needs assessment centered on specific learning outcomes . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; behavior , student ; 
feedback ; field theory ; forecasting ; Gallup Polls , on public
education ; global cultural politics ; hierarchical developmental models ; individual differences , in children ; innovation , in education ; management theories ; objectivity ; 
path-goal leadership theory ; performance assessment ; planning models ; productivity ; quantitative research methods ; 
rational organizational theory ; resource management ; standard setting ; standardized testing ; systemic reform ; systems
theory / thinking ; total quality management ; value-added
indicators ; values of organizations and leadership
Further Readings and References
Kaufman , R .  ( 1992 )  . Mapping educational success . Newbury
Park , CA : Corwin Press . 
Kaufman , R .  ,  & English , F .  ( 1979 )  . Needs assessment : 
Concept and application . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology . 
Kaufman , R .  , Herman , J .  ,  & Watters , K .  ( 1996 )  . Educational
planning : Strategic , tactical , operational . Lancaster , PA : 
Technomic . 
Kaufman , R .  , Rojas , A .  ,  & Mayer , H .  ( 1993 )  . Needs assessment : A
user ’ s guide . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology . 
Maslow , A .  ( 1987 )  . Motivation and personality . New York : 
Longman .  ( Original work published in 1954 ) 
 NEGLIGENCE
Perhaps the greatest daily challenge facing educators
is how to avoid liability for accidental injuries that
children suffer in schools . For a school system to be
liable for negligence , an injured party must satisfy the
four elements of negligence : duty and the related principle of foreseeability , breach , injury , and causation . 
Absent a legal relationship with another , there is no
legal duty to help a stranger . It is thus important to recognize that an educator who acts within the scope of his
or her duties , whether in school or at a school-related
activity , has a duty to assist all children in a group even
if a teacher does not know a student personally . This
duty , which is based on an educator ’ s legal relationship
with a school board , may not be limited to children ( or
others ) from the building where the teacher works . 
Once a legal relationship is present , an educator has
the duty to anticipate reasonably foreseeable risks and
take steps to try to prevent them from occurring . A flexible concept that varies based on the age and physical
condition of students as well as the degree of danger in
a situation , duty does not expect educators to foresee all
harm that might befall children . Rather , educators are
responsible only for events that can reasonably be
anticipated or of which they are actually aware . 
Two important questions arise when considering
whether an educator has breached a duty . The first
relates to how an educator has performed his or her duty . 
An educator can breach his or her duty in one of two
ways : either by nonfeasance , or not acting when there is
a duty to do so ( such as not breaking up a fight )  , or by
misfeasance , acting incorrectly under the circumstances 
( such as using too much force in breaking up a fight )  . 
The second consideration under breach is the standard of care . In evaluating whether an individual
applied the correct degree of care , the courts have
adopted a reasonableness standard , typically instructing juries to consider educators ’ behavior in light of
the legal fiction known as the “ reasonable person ,  ” 
also known as the “ reasonably prudent person .  ” 
Although the courts have stopped short of creating a
clear hierarchy , based on education and years of experience working with children , a reasonable teacher is
likely to be held to a higher standard of care than a
reasonable person , but not to the same level as a “ reasonable parent .  ” As such , courts have sought to create
a standard to hold educators accountable to perform at
the same level of care as reasonably prudent professionals of similar education and background . 
For an injured party to prevail , the harm must be one
for which compensation can be awarded . If , for example , 
a student slips and falls on water that accumulated
moments earlier at a drinking fountain and the child ’ s
only “ injury ” was a wet pair of pants , then it is highly
unlikely that a claim would proceed . However , if the
Negligence———695
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 695
child broke his leg by falling on water that accumulated
over several hours , then there is a greater likelihood
that this may be an injury for which compensation can
be awarded . 
The final element in establishing liability for negligence is that school personnel must be the legal , or
proximate cause , of the injury resulting from the
breach . In other words , the last person or persons in a
chain of events who could have taken steps to prevent
an injury is typically considered the legal cause . 
Even if an injured party has established that the elements of negligence are present , educators have three
primary defenses available to limit or eliminate liability . The defenses recognize that even though educators
must care for children , they cannot be accountable for
every conceivable harm that befalls students . 
Perhaps the most common defense is governmental or
statutory immunity , which is based on the principle that
the state cannot be liable for the acts of its employees . A
growing number of states have greatly reduced or eliminated the scope of governmental and charitable immunity . 
Contributory and comparative negligence are
premised on a person ’ s having played a part in causing
his or her injury . These defenses , which apply in an
almost equal number of states , produce very different
results . Under contributory negligence , a party whose
actions led to the cause of his or her injury cannot
recover for the harm . However , as this led to
inequitable results , a growing number of states have
adopted comparative negligence , wherein courts direct
juries to apportion fault between the parties . As such , 
an injured party ’ s award may be reduced by the degree
to which he or she played a part in causing the injury . 
Assumption of risk is also based on comparative
fault . This defense can reduce an injured party ’ s
recovery in proportion to the degree to which his or
her culpable conduct contributed to an accident if the
individual voluntarily exposed himself or herself to a
known and appreciated risk of harm . 
—Charles J . Russo
See also accountability ; law ; personnel management ; violence
in schools ; working conditions , in schools
Further Readings and References
Russo , C . J .  ( 2004 )  . Student supervision and risk management . 
School Business Affairs , 70 ( 6 )  , 39–41 . 
Streshly , W . A .  ,  & Frase , L . E .  ( 1992 )  . Avoiding legal hassles . 
Newbury Park , CA : Corwin Press . 
 NEO-NAZISM
Nazism and neo-Nazism can be traced to the regime of
Adolph Hitler , who led the revolution in Europe and
incited World War II . This xenophobic regime was distinguished by racial intolerance , tracing back to the radical chiliasts of late medieval Europe . These Christian
fanatics believed that they were the chosen people of
God to be saved from an impending catastrophe that
would soon end the world . These sects also believed
that a Golden Age on earth would soon begin , without
the outsiders who were perceived as degraded and
unworthy to survive in the new kingdom . These apocalyptic views continued into the early twentieth century , 
when two new factions were identified as Nazis and
fascists , typified by dictatorship , suppression , and
racism . As these new parties in Germany and Italy
regenerated in World War II , they continued to follow
their ancestral roots by anticipating the world ’ s demise , 
which would destroy the infidels , leaving only the fascists and Nazis to rule the new Teutonic civilization . 
Representatives of the Aryan Elect then began a new
era of contemporary traditional socialism that deviated
from the norms of all other nations and cultures . This
new order included effective practices and policies
that divided other national cultures through the use of
psychological estrangement , extremism , pluralism , 
mobilization , and status displacement , leaving the cultic milieu world strangely unified in only one respect : 
The total cultural system was fully separated from the
dominant orthodoxies of the surrounding society . 
Today , schools around the world have become
dangerous places for students . In most nations of the
world , teenagers and children have experienced violence in their schools , including harassment , injury , 
trauma , and death , and educational sites have become
frequent locations for violent events . Many schoolaged children have been harassed in the past three
decades . These harassers are often neo-Nazi extremists who select their victims on the basis of the race , 
religion , color , disability , national origin , or ancestry
of the students . These neo-Nazi groups include skinheads , White supremacists , and the White Aryan
Resistance , a virulent hate group founded by William
L . Pierce , who founded the neo-Nazi National
Alliance in the United States . Members of these militant groups also use school grounds to intentionally
recruit school-aged youths , who are easily persuaded
to join these groups because of social deprivation and
lack of family interpersonal bonds . 
696———Neo-Nazism
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 696
Neo-Nazism continues to flourish in the new
millennium because of overlaps with social class , causing racially bifurcated societies , inequalities between
class and / or race , technological divides , and global
competition , which divide the haves and have-nots of
the world . With the death of Pierce , their leader , neoNazi sects have splintered into underground groups
but will surely reemerge and reconstruct their ranks
and continue their neo-Nazi mission to follow Hitler
and the socialist doctrine as long as inequities exist in
the nations of the world . 
—Carole Funk
See also adolescence ; at-risk students ; authority ; critical race
theory ; dropouts ; eugenics ; fascism and schools ; Holocaust
education ; homophobia ; immigration , history and impact in
education ; minorities , in schools ; peer interaction / friendships ; 
personality ; queer theory ; right-wing politics , advocates , 
impact on education ; school safety ; terrorism ; three-factor
model , five-factor model ; vandalism in schools ; violence in
schools
Further Readings and Resources
Addington , L . A .  ( 2002 )  . The Columbine effect : The impact of
violent school crime on students ’ fear of victimization at
school . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University at
Albany , SUNY . 
Ezekiel , R . S .  ( 1995 )  . The racist mine : Portraits of American
neo-Nazis and Klansmen . New York : Penguin Books . 
Mann , M .  ( 2004 )  . Fascists . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge
University Press . 
 NETWORKING AND
NETWORK THEORY
Networking is a process by which individuals and / or
organizations connect with one another for ideas or
resources toward the achievement of a specific goal . 
Networking most commonly begins when a person with
a need connects with another who has a resource . A network is defined as an interpersonal relationship that links
together people , places , objects , or events . Since networks do not have a boundary , they can add or subtract
members with ease and fluidity . The use of technology as
a medium for communication , such as the Internet , has
greatly expanded opportunities for network analysts . 
Networks consist of informal sources ( comprised
of one ’ s personal network ) as well as formal sources 
( organizations and sources where one would expect to
receive information )  . Both formal and informal sources
of support have a structure and hierarchy to them . 
While the structure and hierarchy of one ’ s informal network can be viewed as a spider web that overlaps and
interacts with other spider webs , a formal network can
be easily envisioned as “ who talks to who to get what ” 
in organizational flow charts . One should envision how
computer networks talk to each other as a way of seeing networking in action . Network analysts differentiate between primary sources , also identified as the 
 “ first-order zone ,  ” consisting of all people connected
directly to a particular individual ; and secondary
sources , those who “ know someone who knows someone ”  ; and into the third , fourth , and zones beyond . 
Networks are very complex . Typical informal networks
consist of several hundred to thousands of people . An
informal network includes one ’ s relatives , colleagues , 
friends , neighbors , coworkers , and acquaintances . 
On an organizational level , networking provides a
structure that maintains the autonomy of individual
organizations yet still makes it possible to have partnerships that provide resources through collaborative
sharing . Networking furnishes a way to accomplish
tasks through informal means . Network analysis provides a way to examine the dynamics of the relationship between an individual and the school organization . 
Networking provides a way to informally share information or communicate throughout an organization , 
such as a school system . It is believed that the informal , open nature of networking may enhance greater
creativity and productivity . 
The hallmarks of networking , such as “ It ’ s not
what you know , but who you know ” and “ It ’ s a small
world ,  ” can be seen in films and in many popular
games such as “ six degrees of separation ” —the idea
that anyone can be reached through fewer than six
people . On a practical level , there are many advantages to networking . Networking allows people and
organizations the ability to maintain a balance
between their independence and their reliance on one
another . The boundaries that separate them are open . 
Members of networks are usually peers of one sort
or another . They are not conferring through a complicated hierarchy as a subordinate , but rather talking to
one friend who knows another friend . The tone of the
interaction is much more comfortable and relaxed . 
Networking promotes horizontal , open communication . This allows for ideas and conversations to traverse
across cultural and organizational barriers . This model
Networking and Network Theory———697
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 697
of communication provides a means to communicate
with people that had previously been separate . Often , 
networks have been formed on the basis of shared
interest and vision , making it ideal for social service
and educational programming . 
Network theory , grounded in mathematics , is a way
of abstracting and explaining interactions in social
networks . It provides concepts for the systematic
analysis of interactional and organizational linkages
between persons , objects , and / or events . Such analysis allows for mapping interactions in ways that
demonstrate they are not random and that uncover patterns and meanings . Network analysts believe the
examination of how an individual is connected into
the larger web of social connections can be used to
determine one ’ s failure or success . 
Social network theory stems from network theory
and is part of the social sciences . It is used to analyze
the interactions among people who comprise a network . Social network theory is often used to identify
how information is transmitted throughout the network , paying particular attention to how it is transmitted through cliques and social groups . 
Computer networks were originally designed to support the exchange of information and ideas for people
that were geographically dispersed , but interested in
common areas . The online community created by the
Internet through the use of e-mail and chat rooms has
resulted in networking opportunities beyond the scope
anyone could possibly have imagined . For network
theory analysts , the Internet allows them to study networking on a very large scale , including all types of
nuances , such as through professional Web sites or a
chat room established for parents of a particular school . 
Effective school leaders understand the power
behind their network . This network consisting of
peers , professional colleagues , employees , parents , 
and students is far-reaching . The ability to transform a
school cannot be accomplished alone . A wise school
leader will use networking to communicate with his or
her constituency toward achievement of the goals of
the school . Good networking enables the school
leader to interact with many populations quickly . 
—Iris M . Saltiel
See also capacity building , of organizations ; communications , 
theories in organizations ; community relations ; conceptual
systems theory and leadership ; hierarchical developmental
models ; leadership , distributed ; qualitative research , history , 
theories , issues ; quantitative research methods ; role theory
Further Readings and References
Kadushin , C .  ( 2000 , May 21–26 )  . A short introduction to
social networks : A non-technical elementary primer . 
Working background paper for the CERPE Workshop . 
Retrieved September 6 , 2005 , from 
. edu / home / perrolle / soc528 / classnotes / kadushin . html
Kilduff , M .  ,  & Tsai , W .  ( 2003 )  . Social networks and organizations . London : Sage . 
Lipnack , J .  ,  & Stamps , J .  ( 1982 )  . The first report and directory
of networking . New York : Doubleday . 
Sidele , C . C .  ,  & Warzynski , C . C .  ( 2003 , September / October )  . A
new mission for business schools : The development of actornetwork leaders . Journal of Education for Business , pp . 40–45 . 
 NEUROSCIENCE
Neuroscience is the study of the human nervous system , 
the brain , and the biological basis of consciousness , 
perception , memory , and learning ( understanding )  . The
brain is a biological structure with 10 to 15 billion differentiated yet functionally connected cells . Brain scientists have learned much about the brain ’ s hardware
but remain as puzzled as ever about how the programs
work that activate it . Basic research in neuroscience
is typically done at the molecular , genetic , or cellular
levels . What happens in education takes place at the
macrolevel . The connections between the two are just
beginning to emerge . 
Much of the early brain-related research was conducted using brain-damaged individuals . Roger Sperry , 
Torsten Wiesel , and David Hubel , for example , won
the Nobel Prize in 1981 for their research on the two
cerebral hemispheres . They demonstrated , using “ splitbrain ” subjects whose corpus callosi had been surgically
severed , that each hemisphere of the brain has specialized functions ( the left , for language and the right , for
nonverbal functions )  . Jeanne Chall and Rita Peterson
have argued that a new conception of the brain emerged
in the 1960s and that four conceptual models explain a
great deal of the current research in neuroscience : 
1 . Fixed circuitry : A set of fixed pathways are present
in the brain before birth that carry messages from
one part of the brain to another . 
2 . Critical periods : Specific periods of time exist in the
development of organisms , including humans , when
they are most receptive to specific kinds of stimuli , 
when both biological factors and environmental
stimulation play a major role in brain development . 
698———Neuroscience
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 698
3 . Plasticity : The brain changes with age and can
recover from injuries , especially with proper stimulation from the environment . Nutrition is an early
determinant of human intellectual development . 
4 . Modularity : Observations of how memory is lost
through injury , alcoholism , or therapy have shown
that there are two kinds of memory , declarative
knowledge ( content and rules ) and procedural
knowledge ( how to perform )  . 
There are four areas of brain research that have
implications for classroom practice . First , the physiology of the brain changes as a result of experience . 
Educators need to know this basic physiology to reflect
its applications in school scheduling and instructional
strategy . Second , IQ is not fixed at birth ; intelligence is
multifaceted , and every brain is different . Learning
opportunities need to be broadly based to meet individual differences . Third , windows of opportunity exist
both in early childhood and adolescence , when abilities
are acquired more easily . Adolescents are still ready
to learn and need the support of their principals and
teachers . Fourth , emotions strongly influence learning . 
Schools need to provide appropriate and enriched environments , high in challenge and low in threat . 
Many neuroscientists and educators caution
against exaggerating the implications of brain-based
research for educational practice . Michael Gazzaniga
deplores the overinterpretation of hemispheric differences by people who have no firsthand knowledge
of neuroscientific research . Some experts posit that
neuroscientific research has little to offer formal education . Others are very skeptical of the growing
mythology of brain-based education . Too little of that
research is actually concerned with the real tasks of
teachers and the realities of schools and classrooms . 
—James W . Keefe
See also brain research and practice ; child development
theories ; cognition , theories of , cognitive styles ; conceptual
systems theory and leadership ; critical thinking ; diversity ; 
instructional interventions ; intelligence ; learning , theories
of ; learning environments ; metacognition ; motivation , 
theories of ; personality ; problem solving ; psychology , 
types of ; psychometrics ; research methods ; testing and test
theory development ; trait theory ; variables
Further Readings and References
Bruer , J . T .  ( 1988 )  . Brain science , brain fiction . Educational
Leadership , 56 ( 3 )  , 14–18 . 
Chall J . S .  ,  & Peterson , R . W .  ( 1986 )  . The influence of neuroscience upon educational practice . In S . L . Friedman , K . A . 
Klivington ,  & R . W . Peterson ( Eds .  )  , The brain , cognition
and education ( pp . 305–314 )  . Orlando , FL : Academic
Press . 
Wolfe , P .  ,  & Brandt , R .  ( 1998 )  . What do we know from brain
research ? Educational Leadership , 56 ( 3 )  , 8–13 . 
 NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND
The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 ( Public Law
107-110 )  , or NCLB , builds upon the 1965 Elementary
and Secondary Education Act by adding additional
specificity and requirements , particularly in the areas
of the standards for accountability systems , including
the definitions of annual yearly progress ( ATP )  , 
expectations for all teachers and paraprofessionals to
be highly qualified by 2005 to 2006 , and unsafe
school choice option . 
According to the U . S . Department of Education 
( USDE )  , the overall purpose of NCLB is to ensure
that all children have the opportunity to obtain a highquality education and reach proficiency on challenging state academic standards and assessments . The
specific goals of the law , as delineated by the Federal
Register issued on December 2 , 2002 , are as follows : 
• By 2013–2014 , all students will reach high standards , at a minimum attaining proficiency or better in
reading / language arts and mathematics . 
• All limited-English-proficient students will become
proficient in English and reach high academic standards , at a minimum attaining proficiency or better in
reading / language arts and mathematics . 
• By 2005–2006 , all students will be taught by highly
qualified teachers . 
• All students will be educated in learning environments
that are safe , drug free , and conducive to learning . 
• All students will graduate from high school . 
• States will identify and submit these performance
targets to the USDE . 
KEY ELEMENTS OF NCLB
NCLB embodies four key principles : stronger
accountability for results ; greater flexibility for states , 
school districts , and schools in the use of federal
funds ; more choices for parents of children from disadvantaged backgrounds ; and an emphasis on teaching methods that have been demonstrated to work . 
No Child Left Behind———699
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 699
The act also places an increased emphasis on reading , 
especially for young children ; enhancing the quality of
our teachers ; and ensuring that all children in American
schools learn English . In keeping with these principles , 
NCLB affects virtually every program authorized under
the Elementary and Secondary Education Act , ranging
from Title I and efforts to improve teacher quality to
initiatives for limited-English-proficient ( LEP ) students
and safe and drug-free schools . 
ACCOUNTABILITY AND ASSESSMENT
Accountability for school improvement is a central
theme of federal and state policies . NCLB sets demanding accountability standards for schools , school
districts , and states , including new state testing requirements designed to improve education . For example , the
law requires that states develop both content standards
in reading and mathematics and tests that are linked to
the standards for Grades 3 through 8 , with science standards and assessment to follow . States must identify
adequate yearly progress ( AYP ) objectives and disaggregate test results for all students and subgroups of
students based on socioeconomic status , race / ethnicity , 
English language proficiency , and disability . Moreover , 
the law mandates that 100% of students must score at
the proficient level on state tests by 2014 . Furthermore , 
NCLB requires states to participate every other year
in the National Assessment of Educational Progress 
( NAEP ) in reading and mathematics . 
NCLB requires the state to implement a single
accountability system to ensure that all students make adequate yearly progress toward meeting the state ’ s student
academic achievement standards . Adequate yearly
progress ( AYP ) must include the following components : 
• A timeline for making AYP that ensures that all
students in all student groups will meet or exceed the
state ’ s proficient level of achievement no later than
2013–2014
• Separate starting points based on 2001–2002 data in
reading / language arts and mathematics for measuring the percentage of students meeting or exceeding
the state ’ s proficient level of academic achievement
• Intermediate goals that increase in equal increments
over the period covered by the timeline , with the first
incremental increase to take effect not later than the
2004–2005 school year . 
• Annual measurable objectives that identify a minimum percentage of students that must meet or
exceed the proficient level of academic achievement
and ensure that all students meet or exceed this level
within the established timeline . 
• Other academic indicators , one of which must be
graduation rate for public high schools and at least
one academic indicator for elementary schools and at
least one academic indicator for middle schools . 
These may include , but are not limited to : 
 grade-to-grade retention rates
 attendance rates
 percentage of students completing gifted and talented , advanced placement , and college preparatory courses
NCLB requires that economically disadvantaged
students , major racial and ethnic groups , students with
disabilities , and students with limited English proficiency be included as student groups for determining
AYP for schools , school districts , and the state . NCLB
requires 95% of each student group participate in the
state ’ s academic assessment in order for a school , 
school district , or the state to make AYP . 
Highly Qualified Teachers
NCLB defines “ highly qualified ”  ( HQ ) differently
based upon whether a teacher is a new teacher or an
existing teacher , and the criteria also are different for
elementary and secondary teachers . The definition of 
 “ new ” is still undecided in terms of the date when this
fully goes into effect . The first step for determining if
a teacher is HQ begins with establishing whether the
teacher has met all three of the following criteria . 
Step I : ALL Teachers
• Bachelor ’ s degree ( or higher ) 
• Full state certification
• Demonstrated competency in assigned teaching field
States must develop a uniform state standard evaluation ( USSE ) 
Step II : Elementary Teachers
New secondary teachers meet the third standard
in Step 1 through passing the appropriate USSE or
700———No Child Left Behind
New Existing
Pass the appropriate Pass the appropriate 
USSE USSE
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 700
demonstrating competency by having an academic
major , graduate degree , or coursework equivalent to
an undergraduate major in the subject area taught . 
For existing secondary teachers , competency may
be demonstrated by passing the appropriate USSE or
by having an academic major , a graduate degree , or
coursework equivalent to an undergraduate major in
the subject area taught . 
Step II : Secondary Teachers
States are in the process of developing a USSE that
can be used to assist existing teachers in demonstrating competency . The USDE has guidelines for the
development of this evaluation , yet this evaluation
does not require approval from the federal government . Currently , a variety of models for USSE are
being discussed . One model being considered combines years of experience , professional development
hours , coursework in the content area or a related area , 
and scores on the appraisal system to create a formula
that would enable teachers to demonstrate competency ( see Figure 1 )  . 
This flowchart has been developed to demonstrate
the requirements for meeting the provisions of NCLB
and the standards to be considered highly qualified . 
All teachers must demonstrate competence in
every subject area they teach . It is anticipated that
once a teacher meets all the standards to be considered
HQ , then he or she would not have to again demonstrate competence unless the teaching assignment
were to change . 
Highly Qualified Paraprofessionals
NCLB requires that paraprofessionals hired after
January 8 , 2002 , and working in a program supported
by Title I , Part A funds , must have a high school
diploma or a General Educational Development 
( GED ) high school equivalency certificate , and meet
one of the following qualifications : 
• Completed at least 2 years of study at an institution
of higher education
• Obtained an associate ’ s ( or higher ) degree
• Met a rigorous standard of quality and can demonstrate through a formal state and local academic
assessment
 knowledge of and the ability to assist in instructing reading , writing , and mathematics
 knowledge of and the ability to assist in instructing reading readiness , writing readiness , and
mathematics readiness , as appropriate
Existing paraprofessionals hired before January 8 , 
2002 , and working in a Title I , Part A program , must
meet one of the three alternatives listed above for qualifying new paraprofessionals by January 8 , 2006 ( see
Figure 2 )  . This flowchart has been developed to demonstrate the requirements for meeting provisions of NCLB
and the standards to be considered highly qualified . 
The qualification requirements for new and existing paraprofessionals do not apply to those whose primary responsibility is to serve as a translator or whose
duties consist solely of conducting parental involvement activities in Title I , Part A programs . Preliminary
guidance from the USDE indicates that these requirements apply on a Title I , Part A schoolwide campus to
any paraprofessional who is providing instruction . 
There has been some discussion at the state level
about creating a statewide assessment that could be used
to assist paraprofessionals in meeting the requirements
of NCLB . Local school districts may create their own
academic assessments to document a paraprofessional ’ s
knowledge and ability as described in the statute . 
UNSAFE SCHOOL CHOICE OPTIONS
Another key component of NCLB is the unsafe school
choice option ,  “ persistently dangerous school .  ” 
According to NCLB , if a school is identified as “ persistently dangerous ,  ” the local education agency must 
( a ) notify parents ,  ( b ) offer students the opportunity
to transfer to another school , and ( c ) develop a corrective action plan . Schools that do not make progress
in making their environments safe for all students
will be identified and held to increasingly more rigorous sanctions designed to bring about meaningful
changes . Finally , the law mandates the fundamental
No Child Left Behind———701
New Existing
Pass the appropriate Pass the appropriate
USSE OR hold an USSE OR hold 
academic major , a an academic major , a 
graduate degree , or graduate degree , or 
coursework equivalent coursework equivalent to 
to an undergraduate an undergraduate major 
major in the courses in the courses taught
taught
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 701
restructuring of any school that fails to improve its
environment over an extended period of time . 
—Fred C . Lunenburg
See also accountability ; at-risk students ; behaviorism ; Black
education ; critical race theory ; Department of Education ; 
economics , theories of ; equality , in schools ; equity and
adequacy of funding schools ; forecasting ; governance ; 
Latinos ; migrant students ; minorities , in schools ; National
Assessment of Educational Progress ; needs assessment ; 
productivity ; promotion , social ; rational organizational
theory ; resiliency ; school improvement models ; standardized testing ; state departments of education ; systemic
reform ; time-on-task ; underachievers , in schools ; valueadded indicators ; values of organizations and leadership ; 
vulnerability thesis , of superintendents
Further Readings and References
Johnson , R .  ,  & Bush , L .  ( 2005 )  . Leading the school through
culturally responsive inquiry . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The
702———No Child Left Behind
Highly Qualified
Bachelor ’ s Degree
Full State Certification
Demonstrates Subject Competency
Elementary Secondary
New Existing New Existing
Pass
ExCET or TExES
Pass
ExCET or TExES
Pass
ExCET or TExES
Pass
ExCET or TExES
Meet USSE Meet USSE
For Academic Subject Taught : 
• Academic Major , OR 
• Graduate Degree , OR 
• Coursework Equivalent to 
an undergraduate major
For Academic Subject Taught : 
• Academic Major , OR 
• Graduate Degree , OR 
• Coursework Equivalent to 
an undergraduate major
Title I , Part A
teachers must be 
 “ Highly Qualified ” 
when hired
All teachers must
be “ Highly Qualified ” 
by the end of School
Year 2005–2006
OR OROR
OR
Figure 1 NCLB Highly Qualified Teachers
SOURCE : No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 ( www . ed . gov / offices / OESE . esca /  )  . 
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 702
SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 269–296 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 .  ( n . d .  )  . Retrieved September
6 , 2005 , from www . ed . gov / offices / OESE . esca / 
Ogawa , R .  ( 2005 )  . Leadership as social construct . In F . English 
( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership 
( pp . 89–108 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 NOMOTHETIC / 
IDIOGRAPHIC DIMENSIONS
The school can be viewed as a social system . A social
system refers to activities and interactions of group
members brought together for a common purpose . 
Nomothetic / Idiographic Dimensions———703
Campus Receives Title I , 
Part A funds ? 
NO YES
Are you a Targeted Assistance
Campus or a Schoolwide Campus ? 
Targeted Assistance campus : 
ONLY a paraprofessional with
instructional duties whose salary
is paid from Title I , Part A funds
is impacted . 
Schoolwide campus : All
paraprofessionals with instructional
duties are impacted without regard
to the source of funds of the
position . 
Met a rigorous standard of quality and can demonstrate , through a
formal academic assessment , knowledge of , and the ability to assist in , 
instructing reading ( or reading readiness )  , writing ( or writing readiness )  , 
and mathematics ( or mathematics readiness )  , as appropriate . 
Completed at least 2 years of study
at an institution of higher education . 
Obtained an associate ’ s 
( or higher ) degree . 
Paraprofessional
Qualifications
Not Applicable
Paraprofessionals hired after January 8 , 2002 , must meet
ONE of these three options when hired . 
Paraprofessionals hired on or before January 8 , 2002 , must
meet ONE of these three options by January 8 , 2006 . 
Figure 2 Title I , Part A , Paraprofessionals Who Have Instructional Duties
SOURCE : No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 ( www . ed . gov / offices / OESE . esca /  )  . 
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 703
Thus , a school district , a school , and a classroom can
all be viewed as social systems . A useful framework
for understanding the administrative process within
social systems is the Getzels-Guba nomothetic / 
idiographic dimensions model ( see Figure 1 )  . 
As shown in Figure 1 , Jacob Getzels and Egon
Guba conceive of the social system as involving two
dimensions that are independent and interactive . First
are institutions with certain roles and expectations that
will fulfill the goals of the system . Second are individuals with certain personalities and need dispositions inhabiting the system whose interactions
comprise observed behavior . Thus , observed behavior
can be understood as a function of these major elements :  ( a ) institution , role , and expectations , which
together constitute the nomothetic , or normative , 
dimension of activity in a social system , and ( b ) individual , personality , and need dispositions , which together
constitute the idiographic , or personal , dimension of
activity in a social system . 
Translated into the school setting , this means that
an organization is designed to serve one of society ’ s
needs to educate . In this organization , there are positions , or roles , such as the roles of the student , teacher , 
principal , superintendent , and the like . For each individual who occupies a given role , there are role expectations . Role expectations represent not only the
duties and actions expected from each role player but
also the expectations concerning the quality of performance . The various roles and role expectations constitute the nomothetic dimension of the social system . 
The idiographic dimension includes individuals
who occupy the roles and their personal needs . 
Schools as social systems must be “ peopled ,  ” and all
kinds of individuals who have their own idiosyncrasies 
 “ people ” them . Thus , individuals chosen to occupy
roles are different from one another in action and reaction , and we can analyze these differences in terms of
personality . Personality is determined in part by needs , 
which predispose a person to behave in a certain way
in a given situation . In other words , the individual who
occupies a given role has needs he or she tries to fulfill . These are personalized needs and may not be associated with the needs of the school system . 
Behavior can be stated in the form of the equation : 
B = f ( R × P ) 
where B is observed behavior , f is function , R is a
given institutional role defined by the expectations
attached to it , and P is the personality of the role
player defined by his or her need dispositions . The
proportion of role and personality factors determining
behavior varies with the specific role and the specific
personality involved . 
It is presumed in the military that behavior is
influenced more by role than by personality , whereas
with the freelance artist , behavior is influenced more
by personality than by role . Many other examples can
illustrate this variation in the influence exerted by role
or personality on behavior . In educational organizations , we could hypothesize that the proportion of
role and personality might be balanced somewhere
between the two . But different educational systems
are characterized by different proportions of role and
personality . 
EXPANDED MODEL : CULTURAL
DIMENSIONS
The developers of this model early recognized its
oversimplification . In focusing on the sociological
dimension with “ role ” as the central concept and on
the psychological dimension with “ personality ” as the
central concept , other dimensions had been omitted , 
thus giving the model a closed systems orientation . To
overcome the deficiency , the basic model was expanded
to describe the classroom as a unique social system . 
According to these social systems theorists , the sociological aspects of an institution are mediated by cultural factors—the ethos , mores , and values—in which
the institution is embedded . The expectations of the
roles must , it seems , be somehow related to the ethos
or cultural values . Similarly , the individual ’ s personality functions in a biological organism with certain
potentialities and abilities , with the need dispositions
704———Nomothetic / Idiographic Dimensions
Social
System
Observed
Behavior
Role
Expectations
NeedDispositions
Role
Personality
Institution
Individual
Idiographic Dimension
Nomothetic Dimension
Figure 1 Nomothetic / Idiographic Model
SOURCE : Getzels , J . W .  ,  & Guba , E . G .  ( 1957 )  . Social behavior
and the administrative process . School Review , 65 , 423–441 . 
Reprinted with permission . 
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 704
of the personality mediated in some way by these
constitutional conditions . 
The model was applied to school administrators . A
second cultural dimension was added to interact with
the psychological aspects of the individual . The composite model of the school as a social system depicts
educational administration as a social process . The
bottom line in their model indicates that the culture , 
ethos , and values held by individuals in schools and
school systems explain much social behavior . The
model also clearly indicates that any social system 
( classroom , school , or school district ) must operate
within a larger environment . The addition of these
dimensions gives Getzels ’ s composite model a more
open systems orientation . 
SOME DERIVATIONS
Getzels ’ s models suggest three sources of potential
conflicts : role conflicts , personality conflicts , and
role-personality conflicts . Role conflicts refer to situations where a role player is required to conform
simultaneously to expectations that are contradictory
or inconsistent . Adjustment to one set of expectations
makes adjustment to the other difficult or impossible . 
For example , a teacher may attempt to be a devoted
mother and simultaneously a successful career woman . 
A university professor may be expected by her department head to emphasize teaching and service to
students and the community , respectively , while the
academic dean expects her to emphasize research and
publication . Role conflicts represent incongruencies in
the nomothetic dimension . 
Personality conflicts occur as a result of opposing
need dispositions within the personality of the individual role players . For example , a teacher may be
expected , as a social norm , to maintain adequate
social distance between herself and the students . 
However , she may feel the need for more extensive
interactions . Personality conflicts represent incongruencies in the idiographic dimension of the social
systems model . 
Role-personality conflicts occur as a result of discrepancies between the institution ’ s role expectations
and the individual ’ s need dispositions . For example , 
suppose an introverted personality type school administrator were placed in the role of superintendent in a
small- to medium-sized school district . The board of
education makes clear its expectation that the newly
appointed administrator maintain high visibility and
extensive contact with the community . The superintendent , however , has a high need for privacy and
anonymity . The superintendent in this school district
would experience a role-personality conflict . Rolepersonality conflicts represent incongruencies between
the nomothetic and the idiographic dimensions of
the social systems model . These are symptomatic of
administrative failure and lead to a loss in individual
and institutional productivity . 
Furthermore , the model suggests three leaderfollowership styles : normative ( nomothetic )  , personal 
( idiographic )  , and transactional . The normative style
emphasizes the fulfillment of institutional role requirements and obligations rather than the personal needs of
individuals . Role definition , authority vested in roles , 
and organizational goal achievement are stressed . The
personal style emphasizes the personal activities and
propensities of individuals . Minimum role definition , 
a diffusion of authority , and efforts to maximize each
individual ’ s meaningful contribution to the organization are stressed . The transactional style represents a
balance of emphasis on the performance of the role
requirements of the organization and the expression of
personal needs of individuals . The school administrator moves alternately toward the normative style or the
personal style depending on the situation . 
GETZELS ’ S LATEST MODEL : 
COMMUNITIES DIMENSION
In the late 1970s , Getzels expanded his social systems
model still further by including a communities dimension . Here , much more is manifested about the
cultural setting of the school as a social system and
extends its usefulness as an open systems model . He
identifies six communities as groups of people conscious of a collective identity through common cognitive and affective norms , values , and patterns of social
relationships . He defines each type of community as
follows : 
• Local community is established in a particular neighborhood or region . Examples include a local neighborhood or school community . 
• Administrative community is established in a specific , politically determined identity . A country , a
city , or a school district are examples . 
• Social community is established in a particular set of
interpersonal relationships not restrained by local or
administrative boundaries . An example would be all
the people in one ’ s community of friends . 
Nomothetic / Idiographic Dimensions———705
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 705
• Instrumental community is established through direct
or indirect activities and interactions with others who
are brought together for a common purpose . Examples
include a professional group , such as teachers or professors who make up an educational community , a
teacher ’ s union , or a philanthropic community . 
• Ethnic community is established through affinity
with a particular national , racial , or socioeconomic
group . Italian , Black , or upper-class communities are
examples . 
• Ideological community is established in a particular
historic , conceptual , or sociopolitical community that
stretches across the local , administrative , social , instrumental , and ethnic communities . Examples include
Christian , scholarly , or communist communities . 
The revised and latest models make much more
explicit the cultural setting of the school as a social
system . The concept of culture , long the mainstay
of anthropology since its beginnings , is not new . 
Recently , the concept or organizational culture has
enjoyed tremendous appeal in both the popular and
professional management literature . 
The Getzels models of the school as a social system are widely treated in introductory textbooks in
educational administration , textbooks that deal specifically with the school principalship , textbooks on
supervision , and references on organizational behavior and theory in educational administration . In addition , the Handbook of Research on Educational
Administration , a project of the American Educational
Research Association , devotes an entire chapter to
Getzels ’ s models in education administration . 
—Fred C . Lunenburg
See also conceptual systems theory and leadership ; feedback ; 
field theory ; frame theory ; functionalist theory ; hierarchy , 
in organizations ; infrastructure , of organizations ; management theories ; networking and network theory ; organizational theories ; peer interaction / friendships ; quantitative
research methods ; role ambiguity ; role conflict ; role theory ; 
social relations , dimensions of ; systems theory / thinking ; 
theory movement , in educational administration ; values of
organizations and leadership
Further Readings and References
Homans , G . C .  ( 1950 )  . The human group . New York : 
Harcourt , Brace ,  & World . 
Getzels , J . W .  ( 1958 )  . Administration as a social process . In
A . W . Halphin ( Ed .  )  , Administrative theory in education 
( pp . 150–165 )  . New York : Macmillan . 
Getzels , J . W .  ( 1978 )  . The communities of education . Teachers
College Record , 79 , 659–682 . 
Getzels , J . W .  ,  & Guba , E . G .  ( 1957 )  . Social behavior and the
administrative process . School Review , 65 , 423–441 . 
Getzels , J . W .  , Lipham , J . M .  ,  & Campbell , R . F .  ( 1968 )  . 
Administration as a social process . New York : Harper & 
Row . 
Getzels , J . W .  ,  & Thelen , H . A .  ( 1960 )  . The classroom as
a social system . In N . B . Henry ( Ed .  )  , The dynamics of
instructional groups ( pp . 53–83 )  . Chicago : University of
Chicago Press . 
Lipham , J . M .  ( 1988 )  . Getzels ’ s models in educational administration . In N . J . Boyan ( Ed .  )  , Handbook of research on
educational administration ( pp . 171–184 )  . New York : 
Longman . 
 NORMAL SCHOOLS
Horace Mann founded the first public normal school in
1839 in Lexington , Massachusetts , and many states
quickly followed his example . Normal schools were
founded to increase the quality of teaching because an
educated citizenry was essential to the new republic . 
The need for teachers grew rapidly with the common
school movement ; by 1875 , over 100 normal schools
enrolled more than 23 , 000 students , and by 1900 over
300 normal schools enrolled 70 , 000 students . The
majority of students were women . Initially , the normal
school education was relatively brief , lasting 1 year , 
although many students left after a few weeks to take
teaching positions . Each region of the country embraced
the normal school mission ; however , the organization , 
requirements , curriculum , and administration of normal
schools varied by region , state , and school . As normal
schools grew in size and stature , they began to focus
less on teacher training and more on academic preparation , while lengthening the required course of study . As
the schools ’ curricula diversified and programs became
prolonged , they began to evolve into state teachers colleges after 1900 . This evolution quickened throughout
the 1920s and 1930s , creating the obsolescence of normal schools by 1940 . 
Three women enrolled in the first normal school in
1839 , and women were an overwhelming majority of
normal school students throughout the schools ’ existence , because the majority of teachers were women . 
By 1900 , more than half of all women pursuing postsecondary education did so at normal schools . One
reason for the popularity of normal schools was free
tuition in many states , sometimes offered in exchange
706———Normal Schools
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 706
for teaching in common schools after graduation . 
Women from farm and other working-class families , 
as well as immigrants , were drawn to normal schools , 
because they were vehicles of upward mobility and
because women were encouraged to teach after finishing common school and before marrying . 
Originally , normal schools emphasized basic
academic knowledge , pedagogy , management of schools , 
and practical experience in model schools . Normal
schools ran these model schools to give teacher candidates opportunities to apply their skills . Administration
of normal schools varied ; they were organized , funded , 
and operated from the state , county , and city level . 
Faculty and administrators were often universityeducated former teachers and principals . 
In the eastern normal schools , admission requirements and the program length gradually increased ; by
1860 , 2-year programs were common , and by 1900 , a
high school diploma began to be required for admission . Both of these changes encouraged a growing
focus on academic preparation at the expense of teacher
training . In western states , the focus on teacher training
quickly began to shift to academic preparation because
of the lack of postsecondary educational institutions
and local pressure to expand educational opportunities . 
The growing emphasis on academic preparation in
normal schools and local desire for more diversified
curricular offerings resulted in the evolution of normal
schools into state teachers colleges . Following World
War I , as the number of college students grew , normal
schools declined , replaced by the public 4-year city
and state college systems . By 1940 , normal schools
were obsolete . 
—Mary Beth Walpole
See also discrimination ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; Haley , Margaret ; schools of education ; sexism ( glass
ceiling )  ; unions , of teachers ; women in educational leadership ; Young , Ella Flagg
Further Readings and References
Altenbaugh , R . J .  ,  & Underwood , K .  ( 1990 )  . The evolution of
normal schools . In J . I . Goodlad , R . Soder ,  & K . A . Sirotnik 
( Eds .  )  , Places where teachers are taught . San Francisco : 
Jossey-Bass . 
Blount , J . M .  ( 2005 )  . Fit to teach : Same-sex desire , gender , and
school work in the twentieth century . Albany : SUNY Press . 
Harper , C . A .  ( 1939 )  . A century of public teacher education . 
Washington , DC : National Education Association of the
United States . 
Normal Schools———707
N-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 707
 OBJECTIVITY
Objectivity is the idea that there is “ out there ” a reality
apart from the human mind capable of perceiving
it . Objectivity thus assumes a real truth , and it also
assumes that seekers of that truth must adopt a posture
of detachment , not letting their own values intrude in the
quest . Being objective is seen as the only way to discover how things really are and how things really work . 
Researchers keep their own values and expectations out
of the quest both by determining to do so and by adhering to methods of investigation that prevent human
contamination of the findings . Objectivity plays out in
research in the belief that stating the theory to be tested
and gathering evidence to test it must be separate and
independent processes . In this view , a subjective theory
will be tested against facts that have been gathered and
analyzed according to methods that are not subjective . 
In school administration , objectivity characterized the 
 “ theory movement ” or the “ behavioral science era ” that
ran from the mid-1940s to the mid-1980s . In this era , 
scholars hoped to apply the methods of the social sciences
to the study of school administration . They hoped thereby
to do away with prescriptions for administration based on
folklore and anecdotes from administrators ’ experiences
and replace them with scientific certainty based on studies done by theorists and researchers . Current discussions
of best practices for preparing administrators have connotations of objectivity , as do invocations of the need to
improve administrator decision making , since these discussions imply that there are decisions that are better than
others by some objective standard . 
One attack on the notion of objective inquiry
comes from those who point out that all observation is
theory laden . That is , nobody merely gathers and
analyzes facts without bringing theory and perspective to the task . For example , the radiologist attends to
different aspects of an X-ray than the layperson whose
vision is equally acute , precisely because of being
guided by theory . In fact , a radiologist who sees something very unexpected in an X-ray may decide that the
X-ray is flawed , so that theory is used to test the validity of evidence instead of evidence being used to test
the validity of the theory . Related to this is a second
attack from Yvonna S . Lincoln and Egon G . Guba , 
who wrote in 2000 that even adhering to specific
methods of inquiry requires numerous subjective
judgment calls and following of values : for example , 
choice of a problem to study , choice of theoretical
framework , choice of how to operationalize variables , 
choice of data-gathering and analytic methods . A third
attack on objectivity particularly as applied to human
enterprises like educational administration is that
there is no objective organizational reality for human
beings , that our view of our organization is largely a
matter of our own interpretation : One member ’ s inspiring
leader is another ’ s demagogue ; one worker ’ s moralebuilding session is another ’ s manipulative pep rally ; a
system of rewards that one person finds clarifying and
helpful seems stifling to another . Finally , a fourth
attack argues that administration is inseparable from
valuing , that it is inherently linked to meeting goals
and that goals arise from value systems . Thus , removing questions of value from the inquiry is not only
fruitless but also inappropriate . 
On the other hand , the enterprise of science , a
human activity that has been extraordinarily successful
at solving problems , presents itself as different from
709
O
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 709
artistic creativity , different from religious faith , and
different from political ideology ; in fact as somehow
attending to evidence more objectively than those enterprises . If education in general and educational administration in particular is to benefit from the insights and
approaches of science , how should it proceed ? There
are two approaches : cultivating certain habits of mind
in individual researchers and cultivating certain norms
in the community . Though these habits and norms are
not expected to make the education researcher perfectly
objective , the Committee on Scientific Principles in
Education Research ( CSPER ) argued in 2002 that they
should yield better knowledge of education . The habit
of mind of the individual researcher is to strive for freedom from personal or cultural bias or partiality and to
work consciously to report findings independent of the
meaning they have for him or her . 
Critics of objectivity have raised strong arguments
about the extent to which anyone can maintain such a
stance , arguing that one cannot step outside oneself . 
But those who believe that science still has credibility
lacking in other approaches to human problem solving
offer community norms as an alternative or at least
a supplement to habits of mind . Community norms
begin with a culture of inquiry , constructive critique , 
and willingness to engage intellectually with other perspectives . The notion of community norms substitutes
intersubjectivity for objectivity , that is , it emphasizes
not whether the individual researcher is objective , nor
the method by which a study is conducted , but how
much merit a community of trained colleagues finds in
an interpretation . Thus , the merit of operationalizing
variables , for example , is not that this gives researchers
an unbiased view of reality but that it opens their
research to public scrutiny and debate about the merits
of their choices . The CSPER recommended in 2002
six important community norms :  ( 1 ) investigating
claims that are testable or refutable by means of evidence ,  ( 2 ) linking investigations to an overarching
theory or conceptual framework ,  ( 3 ) using multiple
methods to investigate various aspects of the topic ,  ( 4 ) 
providing logical reasoning connecting evidence to
theory that is coherent , shareable , and persuasive to the
skeptical reader ,  ( 5 ) checking and validating findings
from individual studies to see if they apply to broader
populations and / or settings , and ( 6 ) persuading a group
of researchers to bring the current state of the art to
bear on judging the merits of a study ’ s findings . 
—Gary Ivory
See also constructivism ; empiricism ; operational definitions ; 
Popper , Karl ; positivism , postpositivism ; qualitative
research , history , theories , issues ; quantitative research
methods ; research methods ; subjectivism , in theory ; theory
movement , in educational administration ; variables
Further Readings and References
Committee on Scientific Principles for Education Research .  
( 2002 )  . Scientific research in education . Washington , DC : 
National Academy Press . 
Hoy , W . K .  ( 1996 )  . Science and theory in the practice of
educational administration : A pragmatic perspective . 
Educational Administration Quarterly , 32 , 366–378 . 
Lincoln , Y . S .  ,  & Guba , E . G .  ( 2000 )  . Paradigmatic controversies , contradictions , and emerging confluences . In N . K . 
Denzin & Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of qualitative
research ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 163–188 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Quine , W . V . O .  ( 1995 )  . From stimulus to science . Cambridge , 
MA : Harvard University Press . 
 OFFICE OF ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITY
Part of President Lyndon Johnson ’ s War on Poverty , the
Office of Economic Opportunity ( OEO ) was created by
the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 ( EOA )  . A controversial umbrella program that administered many
antipoverty programs , including education programs , 
the OEO was abolished in 1974 during the administration of President Gerald Ford ; however , many of its
programs continue to serve persons with low incomes . 
The EOA created and funded community action
agencies ( CAAs )  , which administered OEO programs at
the local level . CAAs were required to include residents
with low incomes in planning and administration of
OEO programs . OEO-administered education-related
programs included the Job Corps , Head Start , Adult
Basic Education , and VISTA ( Volunteers in Service to
America )  . Other OEO programs included funding for
senior centers , congregate meal sites , family planning , 
and civil legal aid for persons with low incomes . 
The first director of the OEO was Sargent Shriver , 
who served from 1964 to 1969 . The OEO ’ s antipoverty
work earned it many enemies , including California
Governor Ronald Reagan , who objected to OEO-funded
advocacy on behalf of migrant farm workers . The OEO
also earned enemies among urban politicians who
resented increased federal influence in traditionally
710———Office of Economic Opportunity
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 710
local antipoverty programs . The Vietnam War also
diverted money and attention from the OEO ’ s work . 
During the administration of President Richard
Nixon , who promised during the 1968 campaign to
limit the OEO ’ s authority , several OEO programs were
transferred to other agencies , such as the Department of
Health , Education and Welfare . Later in his administration , President Nixon sought to eliminate funding for
CAAs and other OEO programs , resulting in litigation
forcing the administration to spend money Congress
had appropriated . 
The Community Services Administration ( CSA ) 
replaced the OEO in 1974 . In 1981 , during the first year
of President Reagan ’ s administration , the EOA was
repealed , replaced by a system of block grants , and the
CSA was dissolved . The OEO ’ s legacy continues , however . CAAs continue to provide assistance and advocacy
to persons with low incomes , and many OEO programs , 
such as Head Start , the Job Corps , and legal aid , are still
in existence . Furthermore , many prominent political
leaders served in the OEO . Donald Rumsfeld , defense
secretary under President George W . Bush , was the first
director of the OEO under President Nixon . Other OEO
alumni include Vice President Dick Cheney , Bill
Bradley , former U . S . senator from New Jersey , Frank
Carlucci , defense secretary under President Reagan , 
Christine Todd Whitman , former governor of New
Jersey , and U . S . representative Jim Leach of Iowa . 
—Thomas A . Mayes
See also achievement gap , of students ; affirmative action ; at-risk
students ; Black education ; children and families in America ; 
civil rights movement ; communities , types , building of ; 
compensatory education ; cultural capital ; desegregation , 
of schools ; discrimination ; diversity ; economics , theories of ; 
empowerment ; multiculturalism ; politics , of education 
Further Readings and References
Andrew , J . A .  ( 1998 )  . Lyndon Johnson and the great society . 
Chicago : Ivan R . Dee . 
Mann , J .  ( 2003 , November )  . Young Rumsfeld . Atlantic
Monthly , 89–101 . 
 OPEN SYSTEMS THEORY
Open systems theory refers to the concept that organizations are strongly influenced by their environment . The
environment consists of other organizations that exert
various forces of an economic , political , or social nature . 
The environment also provides key resources that sustain
the organization and lead to change and survival . Open
systems theory was developed after World War II in
reaction to earlier theories of organizations , such as
the human relations perspective of Elton Mayo and the
administrative theories of Henri Fayol , which treated the
organization largely as a self-contained entity . 
Virtually all modern theories of organization utilize
the open systems perspective . As a result , open systems theories come in many flavors . For example , 
contingency theorists argue that organizations are
organized in ways that best fit the environment in
which they are embedded . Institutional theorists see
organizations as a means by which the societal values
and beliefs are embedded in organizational structure
and expressed in organizational change . Resource
dependency theorists see the organization as adapting
to the environment as dictated by its resource
providers . Although there is a great variety in the perspectives provided by open systems theories , they
share the perspective that an organization ’ s survival is
dependent upon its relationship with the environment . 
Open systems theory has profoundly altered how
we understand schools as organizations and the
demands placed upon educational leaders . Treating
schools as if they are independent of their environment would lead to wide misperceptions of the driving
factors behind organizational change . Contemporary
studies of accountability movements , teacher professionalization , and instructional leadership all benefit
from a strongly open systems approach to understanding environmental demands and the resulting adaptation in school policy and its implementation , or lack
thereof . Indeed , today scholars are rightfully dubious
of work that fails to consider the rich context in which
schools develop . 
—Michael N . Bastedo
See also adaptiveness of organizations ; bureaucracy ; chaos
theory ; collaboration theory ; conceptual systems theory
and leadership ; contingency theories ; organizational
theories ; organizations , types of , typologies ; rational organizational theory
Further Readings and References
McLaughlin , M . W .  ,  & Talbert , J . E .  ( 2001 )  . Schoolteaching in
context . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Open Systems Theory———711
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 711
Pfeffer , J .  ,  & Salancik , G . R .  ( 2003 )  . The external control of
organizations : A resource dependence perspective . 
Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press .  ( Original work
published 1978 ) 
Scott , W . R .  ( 2002 )  . Organizations : Rational , natural , and
open systems . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
 OPEN-DOOR POLICY
An open-door policy permits open access and communication to take place from the bottom of the organization to its top . Communication between supervisor
and subordinate receives increased attention . It
implies that the supervisors are reachable and that
organizational structures and policy have made it possible for each worker to reach them . In hierarchical
organizations , access was only to the immediate supervisor , but open-door policy offers a means of access
beyond the immediate overseer . 
Open-door policies provide structures for regular
updates on whether specific tasks are accomplished or
neglected , encourage regular staff meetings , and promote trust as management deals with office politics
or other difficult problems . Simply listening is not
enough ; the supervisor should be willing to consider
various options , present a climate of mutual support in
trying to achieve the ultimate objective , and promote
a cooperative work atmosphere . If action is never
taken , the policy is perceived as disingenuous and
workers will not make an effort . 
A study identifying principal behaviors that contribute
to a positive school climate found that having an opendoor policy was essential . The principal ’ s communication
behaviors that teachers described as supportive were
active listening , encouragement , clear expectations , and
an open-door policy . Teachers appreciated knowing that
they could go to the principal with their concerns . Having
access to the principal encouraged informal channels of
communication and made the principal available to provide individual professional development . 
Research on teacher attrition revealed that one of the
most frequently mentioned reasons new teachers leave
their school or the profession is the quality of support
from the principal . A survey of new teachers identified
the most prevalent need as emotional support . These
teachers indicated that having an open-door policy was
one way the principal provided that support . Job satisfaction was positively affected when the principal was
accessible , available , and willing to listen . 
Some issues associated with implementing an opendoor policy may provoke resentment of administrators
who are bypassed when a subordinate skips immediate
supervisors and approaches higher-level administration . On the other hand , subordinates may be reluctant
to approach the supervisor for fear of looking inadequate . An additional problem with open-door policy is
that supervisor accessibility may create conditions for
constant staff interruptions and unintentional sabotaging of the supervisor ’ s own work . The issue then is providing a little more structure for communication without
creating barriers or diminishing access . 
Structures for getting valuable contributions from
workers require an open-door environment with easy
and reliable methods for input , access , and results . 
Administrators are more available to subordinates
when they are out of their offices , observing the operation of the organization , holding regular weekly
meetings , and conducting daily “ huddles .  ” Huddles are
quick stand-up meetings used for questions , information sharing , and follow-up on urgent issues . Furthermore , 
it is important to meet often with fellow supervisors to
make sure that all are sending consistent messages on
key issues and policies . 
—Bobbie J . Greenlee
See also administration , theories of ; chain of command ; chief
academic officer ; communications , theories of , in organizations ; consideration , caring ; esprit ( school climate )  ; ethos , 
of organizations ; feedback ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , theories of ; leadership effectiveness ; morale ; motivation , theories of ; networking and network theory ; rational
organizational theory
Further Readings and References
Lunenberg , F . C .  ,  & Ornstein , A . C .  ( 2000 )  . Educational
administration : Concepts and practices ( 3rd ed .  )  . Belmont , 
CA : Wadsworth / Thomson . 
Richards , J .  ( 2004 )  . What new teachers value most in principals . Principal , 83 ( 3 )  , 42–44 . 
Sparks , R .  ( 2003 )  . How well is your “ open door ” policy working ? Creating Quality , 12 , 10 . Retrieved July 21 , 2004 , 
from 
door_policy . asp . 
 OPERATIONAL DEFINITIONS
An operational definition articulates the operations , 
processes , or actions of a concept that are necessary to
712———Open-Door Policy
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 712
identify examples of it . As a starting point , a construct
or variable may be defined with a dictionary-type constitutive definition in which the term is defined in relationship to other concepts . From this , more extensive
definitions can be generated , including those of the
operational , descriptive , programmatic , and normative
types . While the notion of operational definitions
emerged from the field of physical science , it became
clear that operational definitions could enhance
inquiry in all fields . 
The goal of an operational definition is to provide
a framework for the development and selection of
instruments to measure a particular concept or variable . For example , creativity might be defined constitutively as a fluent , vivid imagination , which can be
used in accomplishing tasks . An operational definition
of creativity might be “ as measured by how original a
picture and how many elaborations an individual can
create on a picture completion task .  ” The operational
definition presents a concrete description of the operations of which creativity is comprised , thus providing
information for selecting or designing an instrument
to measure it . 
Alternative ways of constructing operational definitions for different types of concepts have been identified , and include those based on the manipulation , the
dynamic properties , or the static properties of a concept . For a definition based on manipulation , it is necessary to identify the operations that the researcher
must perform to cause the desired phenomena to occur . 
An example might be the set of procedures to be
implemented for establishing online collaboration
among a group of students . These might include the
presentation of a problem to be solved by the group , 
guidelines for roles that individuals in the group
should assume , and the required task activities . For an
operational definition based on the dynamic properties
of a concept , which are typically represented by behaviors , the researcher identifies the observable properties
of that concept . An operational definition of collaboration might include group behaviors such as asking
questions of each other , providing alternative solutions
for a problem , and praising the suggestions made by
group members . These behaviors are observable , and a
tally of their frequency can be made . An operational
definition based on static properties of a concept utilizes self-reports of an internal state . For example , an
operational definition of self-efficacy might include an
individual ’ s sense of ability to master challenges and
achieve goals . An instrument that contained items that
embodied the definitions then could be utilized to
determine the presence of the state . 
A review of educational research textbooks reveals
that most contain a section on the importance of defining concepts and their related variables with operational definitions . Proponents of logical positivism
espouse the importance of operational definitions and
the associated assumption that complex concepts can
be reduced to an operator , an operation , and an observation . Operational definitions may be considered an
attempt to establish current understandings of concepts
that are acceptable to a particular research community . 
An operational definition helps to tie down the meaning
of a term within the context of a specific system . It is
considered successful if the understanding and use of
the definition is consistent among a specific set of individuals who may be working with the practical meaning
of the term . In this regard , it reduces ambiguity about
the concept and enhances its communicability . When a
concept is described to include the way it is measured , 
it allows others to be able to measure the same thing in
the same way , thus allowing for replication . 
Even so , operational definitions are currently a
highly contested notion in social science and educational research . Some argue that operationalism has the
disadvantage of producing many different definitions of
what is purported to be the same thing . Another concern about operational definitions is that when a concept is defined as the way in which it is measured , a
definition that is trite is generated and doesn ’ t account
for the richness of the theoretical construct . Also , others
have noted that when issues of validity and reliability
are considered for the instrument used to measure the
construct , a conflation between the meaning of the construct and the instrument may result . Ultimately , one is
not interested in the specific operationalisms but in the
constructs they represent . 
Postmodern relativism and skepticism have contributed to the notion that definitions are neither necessary nor possible to articulate . The difficulties inherent
in a community where definitions are not considered a
rigorous component of the research process are
revealed when the literature in various areas is examined . A review of research on the topics of school
improvement and educational leadership reveals a literature that might be considered vast and inconsistent . 
For example , the variation of definitions of educational
leadership and some of the issues related to contextualizing those definitions have been discussed . 
Several studies producing operational measures of
Operational Definitions———713
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 713
school effectiveness have not enabled educators to
implement more effective schools . Researchers are at
cross-purposes with one another in that there is either a
lack of definitions or the type of definition that is used
is not clarified by the researcher . In the education arena , 
there is a strong press for accountability , making it necessary to assess outcomes . This requires generating
clear definitions of constructs so that they can be appropriately assessed . Perhaps an answer is to determine the
type of definition that is compatible with the research
methodology utilized and that best represents the construct that we seek to assess . A programmatic definition
may be utilized for evaluation research , a descriptive or
narrative definition for qualitative research , and an
operational definition for quantitative research that
requires assessment that produces a numerical value . 
There is little doubt that the debate will continue over
the role of definitions and in particular of the place of
operational definitions in educational research . 
—S . Kim MacGregor
See also accountability ; bureaucracy ; leadership , taskoriented ; logic , history and use of in educational leadership ; 
management by objectives ; management theories ; measurement , theories of ; performance evaluation systems ; PERT 
( Performance Evaluation and Review Technique )  ; Planning , Programming , Budgeting System ; productivity
Further Readings and References
Bickhard , M . H .  ( 2001 )  . The tragedy of operationalism . 
Theory and Psychology , 11 ( 1 )  , 35–44 . 
Gall , M .  , Gall , J .  ,  & Borg , W .  ( 2003 )  . Educational research : 
An introduction ( 7th ed .  )  . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Grace , R . C .  ( 2001 )  . The pragmatics of operationism : A reply . 
Theory and Psychology , 11 ( 1 )  , 67–74 . 
Sager , J . C .  ,  & L ’ Homme , M . -C .  ( 1994 )  . A model for the
definition of concepts : Rules for analytical definitions in
terminological databases . Terminology , 1 ( 2 )  , 351–374 . 
Thomas , J . Y .  ( 2001 )  . The public school superintendency in the
twenty-first century : The quest to define effective leadership 
( Report No . 55 )  . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University .  
( ERIC Document Reproduction Service No . ED 460219 ) 
 ORGANIZATIONAL DESIGN
Broadly defined , an organization consists of two or
more people who cooperate with each other to pursue
a shared goal , create a product , or perform a service . At
the basic level , organizations exist to perform tasks , 
produce outputs , and / or generate and disseminate
information . Educational institutions ( e . g .  , elementary
schools , secondary schools , and postsecondary institutions )  , which are also organizations , exist to perform a
variety of functions such as preparing a knowledgeable
cadre of individuals to work in a global economy as
well as helping citizens live in a democratic society . 
The degree to which educational leaders utilize organizational design techniques that incorporate researchbased information may help educational leaders to
systematically plan and strategically coordinate different levels within the educational institution to produce
positive outcomes for all stakeholders involved in the
American educational enterprise . 
An organizational design can be generally defined
as a complex plan and set of approaches , strategies , and
techniques used to develop human and technological
systems , processes , and structures within an organization that interact and collaborate to produce desired
objectives . Jay Galbraith , a leading organizational
design theorist , noted that organizational design can be
viewed as a series of choices made by management , 
involving five interrelated policy decisions :  ( 1 ) strategy , 
which is the organization ’ s statement of goals and
objectives for existence ,  ( 2 ) structure , which refers to
the type and functions of the decision-making system in
the organization and the outcomes of various decisions
regarding the size and complexity in the organization ,  
( 3 ) processes , which relates to the implementation of
organizational decisions pertaining to how management and development tasks are achieved ,  ( 4 ) rewards , 
which is the organization ’ s systematic attempt to link
appropriate standards of performance to relevant incentives and emoluments for achieving stated goals , and 
( 5 ) people , which refers to the guidelines and procedures that dictate acceptable performance standards
and operational rules for the individuals who cooperate
to complete organizational goals . 
Henry Mintzberg , another leading organizational
design theorist , also acknowledged that organizational
design decisions result in one of five basic organizational configurations :  ( 1 ) simple structure , which
refers to an organization that does not have a specified
structure of work processes and procedures to guide
the production of work outputs or the delivery of services ,  ( 2 ) machine bureaucracy , an organization with
a formal and detailed system defining relevant and
appropriate organizational communications and organizational behaviors that are needed to produce desired
organizational goals ,  ( 3 ) professional bureaucracy , 
714———Organizational Design
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 714
which can be characterized by organizations such as
schools and universities that are based on a series of
separate , yet interrelated , departments , structures , and
work processes partitioned in distinct units managed
by persons with professional expertise based on similar educational credentials and / or relevant experiences ,  ( 4 ) divisionalized form , which is based on the
idea that certain units or departments should be managed , grouped , and organized on the basis of a shared
output goal , and ( 5 ) adhocracy , which refers to an
organization that can successfully incorporate the
ideas , inputs , and inventions of several individuals
into an integrated unit designed to solve new problems
and create innovations for a variety of processes , 
products , and procedures . 
Utilizing the work of Galbraith and Mintzberg as
well as other organizational design scholars , the concept of organizational design can be best understood by
focusing on the issues and concerns that all organizations must consider as they design or restructure their
organization :  ( a ) mission statement ,  ( b ) division of
labor ,  ( c ) hierarchy of authority ,  ( d ) integration , and ( e ) 
regulation . The degree to which each of these factors is
understood and linked to the other through a purposeful
articulation of techniques , individuals , and resources
may determine the success or failure of an organization . 
An organization ’ s mission statement is the document that specifies the plans , goals , and objectives
of the organization . Thus , an organization ’ s mission
statement outlines the values of the organization as
well as directs the organization ’ s operations while
focusing on the purposes of the organization and its
intended outcomes . In light of the importance of the
mission statement , this document should be examined
on a consistent basis to ensure that relevant and
intended goals are being pursued and achieved . Also , 
research should be conducted at the organizational
level to provide evidence on the extent to which
shared goals are being achieved and processes are
performing optimally . 
When designing or redesigning an organization , it is
also important to consider the most effective way to
assign people to various tasks based on their expertise
and interests . This organizational design task usually
involves separating various job functions among different people within the organization who are trained
to perform those functions . If tasks , individuals , and
responsibilities are divided into smaller units or departments by level of expertise , organizations are more
likely to experience greater levels of effectiveness and
productivity , provided that the division of labor
decision stems from and supports the overall mission , 
values , and goals of the organization . Another design
element , which also pertains to the most effective way
to divide the labor among individuals within an organization , involves determining how the levels of management will be structured . This set of complex issues
requires organizational designers to contemplate and
resolve such issues as how many individuals should one
person supervise , whether the organization will have a
centralized or decentralized decision-making system , 
and the nature , type , and degree of employee empowerment within the organization . For example , in educational institutions , authority is usually given to a
senior-level administrator who has extensive knowledge of the typical issues encountered in the unit or
department and is therefore responsible for coordinating the work to be performed by members of a team , 
committee , or group of faculty members within a
department or division . Statutory requirements as well
as certification and accreditation requirements by various regulatory agencies also help to inform the management configuration in educational institutions . 
Integration involves creating systems and procedures that consist of many levels and conditions to produce a product , perform a service , and / or accomplish
the goals of the organization . In educational institutions , this organizational design issue involves creating
linkages between units and departments that interact
with students , parents , school personnel , and other
groups in the external environment to produce a variety of outcomes for students , the educational institution , as well as society . Regulation , another important
organizational design concept , involves developing
systems to ensure that the entire organization is working toward the purposes , goals , and objectives as stated
in the mission statement . Thus , in organizational
design terms , it involves the creation of assessment
procedures , promotion and reward systems , as well as
professional development initiatives that work in concert to support the aims of the organization . 
—Lamont A . Flowers
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; boundaries of systems ; chain of command ; conceptual systems
theory and leadership ; conflict management ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; frame theory ; governance ; 
infrastructure , of organizations ; leadership , distributed ; 
management theories ; organizational theories ; organizations , types of , typologies ; role theory ; table of organization
Organizational Design———715
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 715
Further Readings and References
Clark , P .  ( 1975 )  . Organizational design : A review of key problems . Administration & Society , 7 , 213–256 . 
Galbraith , J . R .  ( 1977 )  . Organization design . Reading , MA : 
Addison-Wesley . 
Galbraith , J . R .  ( 2002 )  . Designing organizations : An executive
guide to strategy , structure , and process . San Francisco : 
Jossey-Bass . 
Mintzberg , H .  ( 1983 )  . Structure in fives : Designing effective
organizations . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Perrow , C .  ( 1986 )  . Complex organizations : A critical essay 
( 3rd ed .  )  . New York : McGraw-Hill . 
 ORGANIZATIONAL MEMORY
Despite the fact that memory or remembering remains a
core component of organizational learning theory , the
understanding of the concept is limited . Organizational
memory is generally agreed to consist of both mental ( i . e .  , 
data , information , and knowledge ) and structural artifacts 
( i . e .  , roles , architectures , and operating procedures ) within
an organization . Furthermore , organizational memory is
considered important in that it allows organizations to
draw upon events from the past to influence present decision-making structures . Focus on the organization ’ s ability
to learn and subsequently remember what it has learned
suggests the ability for organizations to transcend the fragile limitations of individual knowledge structures . 
This conception suggests three constraints in the
consideration of organizational memory : the locus of
organizational information acquisition , the processes
by which information is acquired , stored , and
retrieved , and the utility of memory to organizational
outcomes and performance . 
ACQUISITION
Information about problems encountered , solutions
identified , and decisions determined forms the core of
any organization ’ s memory . Several types of information are acquired within this process of development . 
First , a stimulus must be apparent . The identification
of the stimulus might be considered a “ felt difficulty ,  ” 
a “ problem ,  ” or an “ ecological change .  ” In any episode , 
the origin of the stimulus is an important aspect of the
memory dilemma . Without adequate identification of
the stimulus , future efforts to replicate the learning
cycle are thwarted as similar issues may well be
ignored . Second , the organization ’ s response , including
data collected , information gathered , and knowledge
gained , concerning the stimuli must also be identified . 
Third , the outcomes of the responses must be examined and explored for future use and potential application across the organizational setting . 
RETENTION
For memory to be useful to an organization , it must be
retained . For the memory to be truly organizational , 
it must be stored in a variety of locations within the
organizational structure . Such knowledge may be
stored as “ brains or paper ” —that is , either within individuals and organizational cultural patterns , values , 
and beliefs or within the technologies of an organization ’ s written policies , files , and records . 
When knowledge is stored within the brains of an
organization , it is housed as language based on shared , 
communal experience . As the belief structures of
members shift to include shared norms and values , patterns of retention increase throughout the organization . 
Conversely , knowledge may be more officially retained
as recorded data , policy , or documents . Administrative
structures also serve as a mechanism for preserving knowledge as they formalize new practices into
organizational commonplaces . As formalization of
new knowledge occurs , retention is enhanced through
the transformation of prior practice . 
RETRIEVAL
When members of an organization seek to use knowledge they have previously stored in its collective
archives , several responses are possible . First , 
retrieval may be automatic ; that is , members of
the organization may be able to draw effortlessly on
knowledge because it has been archived within new
policy structures , commonly understood practices , or
clearly defined procedural behaviors . Automatic
retrieval results from a change in schema toward the
problem presented ; that is , it no longer appears unique
to the collective organization and has become recognizable , given information from past situations . In situations where automatic retrieval functions at high
levels , organizations are said to have “ learned ” or
developed the capacity to respond in an “ adaptive ” 
manner to ecological change . Memory can be thought
of as robust when automatic retrieval occurs . 
However , the potential exists for an organization to
disregard the need to create lasting structures in which
716———Organizational Memory
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 716
to house the information learned . Knowledge may
well have been obtained and applied to a past problem
situation , yet members may fail to see the utility of the
knowledge for other situations or neglect to develop
the necessary organizational structures to draw upon
the new learning . The context of the organization ’ s prior
history may discourage cultural change , or members
may lack skills necessary to create archives adequate
to foster changed decision-making processes . In either
case , it is difficult to argue that the organizational
memory was sufficiently robust to transmit new learning beyond a single case application . In contexts where
memory is thin , the potential to draw upon those
learnings in future situations is compromised . 
—Sharon D . Kruse
See also bureaucracy ; communications , theories in organizations ; compliance theory ; conceptual systems theory and
leadership ; control , managerial ; differentiation of stimuli ; 
infrastructure , of organizations ; management theories ; 
rational organizational theory ; values of organizations and
leadership
Further Readings and References
Anand , V .  ,  & Manz , C .  ( 1998 )  . An organizational memory
approach to information management . Academy of
Management Review , 23 ( 4 ) 796–809 . 
Deal , T .  ,  & Peterson . K .  ( 1998 )  . Shaping school culture . San
Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Johnson , J .  ,  & Paper , D .  ( 1998 )  . An exploration of empowerment and organizational memory . Journal of Managerial
Issues , 10 ( 4 )  , 503–519 . 
Markus , M . L .  ( 2001 )  . Toward a theory of knowledge reuse . 
Journal of Management Information Systems , 18 ( 1 ) 
57–93 . 
Weick , K .  ( 2000 )  . Making sense of the organization . Boston : 
Blackwell . 
 ORGANIZATIONAL THEORIES
There has been a plethora of organizational theories
during the past century . Bureaucracy , an organizational theory that emerged in the early twentieth century , has been the basic infrastructure of schools in the
industrial world . Bureaucracy is ill suited to the demands
of our postindustrial demographically diverse information society . In a period of increasing demands
for accountability , demographic changes in school
population , and economic crisis , most schools are
being forced to examine their fundamental structural
assumptions . Bureaucratic characteristics not only are
being viewed as less than useful but also are considered to be harmful . Some of these negative features of
bureaucracy include the following : 
• Division of labor and specialization . A high degree
of division of labor can reduce staff initiative . As
jobs become narrower in scope and well defined
by procedures , individuals sacrifice autonomy and
independence . Although specialization can lead to
increased productivity and efficiency , it can also
create conflict between specialized units , to the
detriment of the overall goals of the school . For
example , specialization may impede communication
between units . Moreover , overspecialization may
result in boredom and routine for some staff , which
can lead to dissatisfaction , absenteeism , and
turnover . 
• Reliance on rules and procedures . Max Weber
claimed that use of formal rules and procedures was
adopted to help remove the uncertainty in attempting
to coordinate a variety of activities in an organization . Reliance on rules can lead to the inability
to cope with unique cases that do not conform to
normal circumstances . In addition , the emphasis on
rules and procedures can produce excessive red tape . 
The use of rules and procedures is only a limited
strategy in trying to achieve coordinated actions . 
Other strategies may be required . But bureaucracy ’ s
approach is to create new rules to cover emerging situations and new contingencies . And once established , it is difficult to remove ineffectual rules or
procedures in a bureaucracy . 
• Emphasis on hierarchy of authority . The functional
attributes of a hierarchy are that it maintains an authority relationship , coordinates activities and personnel , 
and serves as the formal system of communication . In
theory , the hierarchy has both a downward and upward
communication flow . In practice , it usually has only a
downward emphasis . Thus , upward communication is
impeded , and there is no formal recognition of horizontal communication . This stifles individual initiative and participation in decision making . 
• Lifelong careers and evaluation . Weber ’ s bureaucratic model stresses lifelong careers and evaluations
based on merit . Because competence can be difficult
to measure in bureaucratic jobs and because a high
degree of specialization enables most employees to
master their jobs quickly , there is a tendency to base
promotions and salary increments more on seniority
and loyalty than on actual skill and performance . 
Thus , the idea of having the most competent people
Organizational Theories———717
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 717
in positions within the organization is not fully realized . Loyalty is obtained , but this loyalty is toward
the protection of one ’ s position , not to the effectiveness of the organization . 
• Impersonality . The impersonal nature of bureaucracy
is probably its most serious shortcoming . Recent critics of bureaucracy attack it as emphasizing rigid , 
control-oriented structures over people found to be
incompatible with professional learning communities . 
The renowned organization theorist Warren Bennis
represents one of the extreme critics of bureaucratic
structuring in organizations . In 1966 , he forecasted
the demise of bureaucracy . In a more recent book , 
Managing the Dream , he exposes the hidden obstacles
in our organizations—and in society at large—that conspire against good leadership . According to Bennis in
2000 , within any organization an entrenched bureaucracy with a commitment to the status quo undermines
the unwary leader . This creates an unconscious conspiracy in contemporary society , one that prevents
leaders from taking charge and making changes . 
In recent years , popular writers have expressed
increasing dissatisfaction with bureaucratic structures . 
This is reflected in the phenomenal appeal of numerous best-selling books such as In Search of Excellence , 
The Fifth Discipline , Schools That Learn , and
Principle-Centered Leadership . The basic theme permeating these books is that there are viable alternatives
to the bureaucratic model . There is a strong implication that warm , nurturing , caring , trusting , challenging
organizations produce high productivity in people . 
What appears to be emerging to replace bureaucracy is a heterarchical model of organization capable
of performing collective activities toward the achievement of school goals . Leadership in these heterarchical organizations will need to be considerably
different . In particular , significant changes are envisioned in the leader . Leaders will lead from the center
rather than from the top . The major focus of leadership will be in supporting teacher success in the classroom . Change management will be an integral part of
the role of the leader . The leader will provide intellectual leadership to support teachers ’ change efforts . 
The leader will manage a school culture that supports
a professional learning community focused on learning for all . Whatever their title or formal role definition , it is clear that leaders continue to be best
positioned to help guide faculty toward new forms of
organizational structure . Emergent organizational
theories in this tradition include System 4 , site-based
management , transformational leadership , synergistic
leadership theory , and total quality management . 
SYSTEM 4
Rensis Likert argued in 1961 , 1967 , 1979 , and 1987
that the bureaucratic approach to leadership fails to
consider the human side of organizations . His work
focused less on the rational and mechanistic aspects
of organizational structure and more on its social and
psychological components . 
After studying many organizations , including
schools , Likert found that there was a significant relationship between organizational structure and effectiveness . Organizations that hewed to the bureaucratic
model tended to be less effective , whereas effective
organizations emphasized incorporating individuals
and groups into the system as an integral part of leading . Likert developed eight dimensions or processes for
use in comparing organizations : leadership processes , 
motivational processes , communication processes , 
interaction processes , decision processes , goal-setting
processes , control processes , and performance goals . 
Using these eight dimensions , Likert observed four
design approaches that incorporate these dimensions . 
At one extreme , Likert identified a form of organization he called System 1 . In many ways a System 1
design is similar to the ideal bureaucracy . In sharp
contrast , he describes a humanistic , interactive , grouporiented design , which he called System 4 . Intermediate
designs , Systems 2 and 3 , are variants of the two
extremes , which have received little attention . 
A System 4 structure is viewed as the ideal state
toward which leaders should try to move their organizations . Trust and confidence in the leader are extremely
high among System 4 members . A variety of economic , ego , and social factors are used as incentives in
motivating participants . Communication flows freely
in all directions—upward , downward , and horizontally . Decision making occurs throughout the organization and involves all members equally . Cooperative
teamwork is encouraged in setting goals , and members
are expected to engage in self-control and group control . Leaders actively see high-performance goals and
are committed to professional development . 
SITE-BASED MANAGEMENT
The general public ’ s dissatisfaction with bureaucracy
has moved some to support site-based management
718———Organizational Theories
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 718 
( SBM ) as a solution to the educational quality control
problem . Related to this are widespread efforts to
decentralize many large school systems , like the
Chicago Public Schools , as a possible answer to their
perceived administrative failings . 
The rationale advanced for both decentralization
and SBM is to improve performance by making those
closest to the delivery of services—teachers and
principals—more responsible for the results of their
school ’ s operations . This change involves shifting
the initiative from school boards , superintendents , and
central office staff to individual school sites . The
thinking is that if teachers had the authority to make
decisions at the building level , without being subject
to the school system ’ s bureaucracy , much better
progress could be made . Furthermore , the authority to
run schools should be shared with parents in order to
establish a coordinated home-school effort . 
Site-based management is what management
experts refer to when they recommend breaking large
businesses into smaller units to improve productivity . 
And an examination of some programs touted under
the SBM banner suggests that the process parallels
older models of parent-teacher-administrator collaboration that effective schools and school districts have
practiced for years . 
TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP
Transformational leadership focuses on leaders who
have exceptional impact on their organizations . These
individuals may be called transformational leaders . 
This view of leadership is extremely rare . Although
the number of leaders involved is minimal , the impact
these leaders have on their institutions is significant . 
James MacGregor Burns ’ s 1978 prize-winning
book , Leadership , first drew widespread attention to
the concept of transformational leadership . Burns
claimed that transformational leadership represents
the transcendence of self-interest by both leader and
led . Later , in his examination of the concept of transformational leadership , Bernard Bass identified and
explored two types of leadership in 1985 and 1997 : 
transactional and transformational . Transactional
leaders determine what subordinates need to do to
achieve their own and organizational objectives , classify those requirements , help subordinates become
confident that they can reach their objectives by
expending the necessary efforts , and reward them
according to their accomplishments . Transformational
leaders , in contrast , motivate their subordinates to do
more than they originally expected to do . They
accomplish this in three ways :  ( 1 ) by raising followers ’ levels of consciousness about the importance and
value of designated outcomes and about ways of
reaching them ,  ( 2 ) by getting followers to transcend
their own self-interest for the sake of the team , organization , or larger polity , and ( 3 ) by raising followers ’ 
need levels to the higher-order needs , such as selfactualization , or by expanding their portfolio of needs . 
The most fully developed model of transformational leadership in schools was provided by Kenneth
Leithwood in 1994—identifying important factors
that constitute transformational and transactional leadership : building school vision , establishing school
goals , providing intellectual stimulation , offering
individualized support , modeling best practices and
important organizational values , demonstrating highperformance expectations , creating a productive
school culture , and developing structures to foster
participation in school decisions . 
SYNERGISTIC LEADERSHIP THEORY
Modernist theories of organization were traditionally
dominated by masculine incorporation , and lacked
feminine presence in development and language . The
synergistic leadership theory ( SLT ) developed by
Beverly Irby and colleagues in 2002 seeks to explicate
the need for a postmodernist leadership theory by providing an alternative to , and not a replacement for , traditional theories . The SLT includes issues concerning
diversity and the inclusion of the female voice in the
theory . In a tetrahedron model , the theory uses four
factors :  ( 1 ) attitudes , beliefs , and values ,  ( 2 ) leadership
behavior ,  ( 3 ) external forces , and ( 4 ) organizational
structure to demonstrate aspects not only of leadership
but its effects on various institutions and positions . 
In short , the synergistic leadership theory provides
a framework for describing interactions and dynamic
tensions among attitudes , beliefs , and values ; leadership behaviors ; external forces ; and organizational
structure . As a result , a leader can analyze and describe
particular interactions that may account for tension , 
conflict , or harmony at specific points in time or over
time . If it is discovered that tension exists between
even two of the factors , then the effectiveness of the
leader or the school itself can be negatively impacted . 
Not only is the SLT beneficial in determining fit while
a leader is employed in a school district , but also it can
Organizational Theories———719
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 719
be of assistance in job selection . Moreover , the SLT
can serve to build an understanding of the environment
to aid in decisions made by the leader . And SLT fosters
a reflective practice approach , as it encourages the
leader to engage in self-assessment . 
TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT
The Japanese transformed their economy and industry
through a visionary management technique called
total quality management ( TQM )  . School leaders are
finding that TQM principles can provide the formula
for improving America ’ s schools . 
TQM , the latest business concept to reach the
schools , is a systematic approach to education reform
based on the philosophy of W . Edwards Deming . 
Deming ’ s work , including Out of the Crisis in 1988 , is
not merely about productivity and quality control ; it is
a broad vision on the nature of organizations and how
organizations should be changed . 
Deming ’ s philosophy provides a framework that
can integrate many positive developments in education , such as team teaching , site-based management , 
cooperative learning , and outcomes-based education . 
Deming ’ s 14 principles are based on the assumptions
that people want to do their best and that it is the
leader ’ s job to enable them to do so by constantly
improving the system in which they work . The framework for transforming an organization is outlined in
the following fourteen points : create constancy of purpose for improvement of product and service ; adopt
the new philosophy ; cease dependence on inspection
to achieve quality ; end the practice of awarding business on the basis of price alone ; improve constantly
and forever every activity in the organization , to
improve quality and productivity ; institute training on
the job , institute leadership ; drive out fear ; break down
barriers among staff areas ; eliminate slogans , exhortations , and targets that demand zero defects and new
levels of productivity ; eliminate numerical quotas for
the staff and goals for management ; remove barriers
that rob people of pride in their work ; remove barriers
that rob people in leadership of their right to pride in
their work ; institute a vigorous program of education
and retraining for everyone ; and put everyone in the
organization to work to accomplish the transformation . 
—Fred C . Lunenburg
See also bureaucracy ; Burns , James MacGregor ; capacity building , 
of organizations ; communications , theories in organizations ; 
conceptual systems theory and leadership ; contingency
theories ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; 
Deming , W . Edwards ; disequilibrium , theories of ; ethos , of
organizations ; frame theory ; hierarchical developmental
models ; hierarchy , in organizations ; infrastructure , of organizations ; leadership , distributed ; management theories ; networking and network theory ; open systems theory ; organizational
memory ; organizations , types of , typologies ; path-goal leadership theory ; productivity ; satisficing theory ; stewardship ; 
total quality management ; Weber , Max
Further Readings and References
Bass , B . M .  ( 1997 )  . A new paradigm of leadership : An inquiry
into transformational leadership . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Bennis , W . G .  ( 2000 )  . Managing the dream : Reflections on
leadership and change . Cambridge , MA : Perseus . 
Burns , J .  ( 1978 )  . Leadership . New York : Harper & Row . 
Deming , W . E .  ( 1988 )  . Out of the crisis . Cambridge : 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press . 
Irby , B . J .  , Brown , G .  , Duffy , J . A .  ,  & Trautman , D .  ( 2002 )  . 
The synergistic leadership theory . Journal of Educational
Administration , 40 , 304–322 . 
Leithwood , K . A .  ( 1994 )  . Leadership for school restructuring . 
Educational Administration Quarterly , 30 ( 4 )  , 498–518 . 
Likert , R .  ( 1987 )  . New patterns of management . New York : 
Garland . 
Lunenburg , F . C .  ,  & Irby , B . J .  ( 2005 )  . The principalship : 
Vision to action . Belmont , CA : Wadsworth / Thomson . 
Lunenburg , F . C .  ,  & Ornstein , A . O .  ( 2004 )  . Educational
administration : Concepts and practices ( 4th ed .  )  . Belmont , 
CA : Wadsworth / Thomson . 
Weber , M .  ( 1947 )  . The theory of social and economic organization ( T . Parsons , Trans .  )  . New York : Oxford University
Press . 
 ORGANIZATIONS , 
TYPES OF , TYPOLOGIES
Formal organizations dominate modern social life . 
Understanding the types of organizations influencing modern processes can improve researchers ’ and
leaders ’ understanding of organized group behavior , 
social and political processes , as well as productivity
and group decision making . 
First , two types of formal organizations—political
and religious—have existed for thousands of years . 
Governmental regimes like those of ancient Egypt 
( dating to around 1800–1300 BC ) were highly organized and systematic in running state matters , taxation , 
justice , defense , and international issues . Long-lasting
720———Organizations , Types of , Typologies
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 720
religious organizations , like the Roman Catholic
Church ( especially after the fourth century AD ) also
show the early development of highly organized structures . In fact , both these examples have also been classified as bureaucratic organizations , organizations
with tightly coupled formal structures , diversified
labor ( bureaus )  , and clear lines of authority . 
In the late 1800s , increased social diversification
linked to the industrial revolution led to an increase in
number and type of organizations . This has been called
the “ Great Transformation ” of the West . It brought a
decline of institutions based on the family as the central
element of social organization . After this period , economic and voluntary organizations proliferated in size , 
form , structure , and purpose and therefore in type . 
One way of typing the emerging organizations of
this time period was to link typing to the shift from
Gemeinschaft to Gesellschaft , and the move from
mechanical solidarity to organic solidarity , or more
simply , a shift from family and homogenous-member
organizations structured around member similarities , to
organizations based on highly specialized divisions of
labor and more complex structures and economically
driven goals . With industrialization , the number and
types of organizations based on an economic diversified structure increased . For example , transportation
improvements—from shipping and canals ( before the
mid-1800s ) to trains ( mid- to late 1800s ) to trucks and
roads ( early to middle 1900s ) —brought new largescale national and multinational transportation organizations . Furthermore , public ownership organizations 
( financial and stock systems ) increased the size and
types of economic organizations by increasing the flow
of cash available for such organizing . 
One way to classify this proliferation of organization is by the organization ’ s social functions . These
organizations may be linked to large-scale social
institutions like economics , family services , religious , 
political , legal , and educational organization , as well
as emerging functional sectors like recreational or
medical organizations . 
In addition to function , organizations can also be
typed by structure . This can be as simple as large and
small , national or multinational , or tightly or loosely
coupled . Organizations founded around similar times
often have similar structures . As such , as a corollary , 
organizations can be classified by their founding periods . Furthermore , studies of populations of organizations have also shown that often organizations founded
at the same period have similar resources to create
their organization . Thus , grouping structure , function , 
resources , and environments , some organizational
researchers classify organizations by their niche . Such
classification refers to organizations operating as rational , natural , and open systems organizations
More recently , organizations have been typed in
reference to their climate or cultures , the populations
or groups they serve , the underlying technology they
use , their internal development or life cycle , as well as
other internal or environmental factors . 
As new organizations emerge to provide structured
responses to social challenges , issues of meaning and
valuation , and to new technological developments and
resource issues , new typologies will continue to be
developed . As organizational sociologists and psychologists continue to try to understand the rich ways in
which organizations influence modern life , new forms
of analysis and classification will develop . As this generative field of study continues to inform educational
leadership , it will provide innovative , creative , and
empirical scholarship that will enrich educational leadership research and practice . 
—Duane M . Covrig
See also bureaucracy ; conceptual systems theory and leadership ; frame theory ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , 
theories of ; management theories ; networking and network
theory ; open systems theory ; organizational theories ; productivity ; rational organizational theory ; resource management ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles
Further Readings and References
Ashkanasy , N . M .  , Wilderom , C .  ,  & Peterson , M . F .  ( 2000 )  . 
Handbook of organizational culture & climate . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Bolman , L . G .  ,  & Deal , T . E .  ( 2003 )  . Reframing organizations : 
Artistry , choice , and leadership ( 3rd ed .  )  . San Francisco : 
Jossey-Bass . 
Scott , W . R .  ( 1998 )  . Organizations : Rational , natural and open
systems ( 4th ed .  )  . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
 OSSORIO , PETER G . 
Peter G . Ossorio ( 1926– ) had a major impact on the
conceptualization of psychology and its relationship
to other disciplines and to tasks in the real world . He
found himself profoundly dissatisfied with the ways
in which psychology and philosophy described and
Ossorio , Peter G . ———721
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 721
explained human behavior . During 1963 and 1964 , he
achieved insights into an alternative formulation that
did not succumb to the temptations of reductionism
and determinism . 
The first presentation of the fundamental concepts
of persons and their behavior , language , the real
world , and some of the conceptual tools for their rigorous representation was in 1965 with Persons . These
conceptual distinctions and their elaborations have
made it possible for significant advances in organizational analysis and leadership development that are
directly relevant to persons engaged in educational
leadership . Subsequently , he elaborated on the major
components of his conceptualization of psychology
and their implications in a 1971 monograph ,  “ What
Actually Happens .  ” In 1979 , the Society for Descriptive Psychology held its first annual meeting in
Boulder , Colorado , to further the dissemination of his
conceptual , therapeutic , and practical advances . While
the core group for the society was clinical psychologists , it attracted computer scientists , linguists , NASA
scientists , educational psychologists , management
consultants , and theologians . Since 1979 , he has developed the insight that it is possible to codify the logic of
giving and evaluating descriptions and dynamic explanations of behavior via maxims that derived not from
forces , urges , or desires but from the person ’ s position
in his or her world , culminating in Ossorio ’ s comprehensive theoretical statement in 2005 , The Behavior of
Persons . For example , one of the most reliable findings
of studies of organizational roles is that a person ’ s perspective changes as a function of changes in role , such
as that occurring when a teacher becomes a principal
or a principal becomes a superintendent . Such changes
in one ’ s position in the educational social system provide both new opportunities and new constraints . 
Ossorio was born in Los Angeles , California , on
May 4 , 1926 , the youngest of six children . He earned
his BA and PhD degrees from UCLA and joined the
psychology faculty of the University of Colorado 
( where he served until his retirement in 1991 ) and
continues an active role as professor emeritus and
clinical supervisor . During his tenure at Colorado , he
directed more than 50 dissertations because of his
theoretical creativity and his willingness to engage
students on topics of their choice . He was highly sought
out for supervision because he was recognized as a
master therapist and diagnostician . A selective listing of his influences include ( a ) the practice of
psychotherapy ,  ( b ) multicultural studies ,  ( c ) educational
practices in the teaching of moral competency ,  
( d ) effective programs for educating at-risk students , 
and ( e ) creating an alternative technology for computer-assisted information searches . He continues to
be active intellectually , and his current work may be
described as developing descriptive metaphysics , 
which he believes will change how we think about and
conduct both philosophy and science . 
—Keith E . Davis
See also behaviorism ; problem solving ; psychology , types of ; 
role ambiguity ; role model ; role theory ; self-actualization ; 
systems theory / thinking
Further Readings and References
Ossorio , P . G .  ( 1966 )  . Persons ( Report No . 3 )  . Boulder , CO : 
Linguistic Research Institute . 
Ossorio , P . G .  ( 1971 )  .  “ What actually happens ”  ( Report No . 
17 )  . Boulder , CO : Linguistic Research Institute . 
Ossorio , P . G .  ( 2005 )  . The behavior of persons . Ann Arbor , 
MI : Descriptive Psychology Press . 
 OUTPUTS , OF SYSTEMS
A system can be defined as a grouping of parts that
operate together for a common purpose . Systems may
have inputs , processors , and outputs . Outputs can be
thought of as a tangible product and as an information
source that may inform the system of its operation . 
The input into a system plus the value added creates
the system ’ s output . 
A closed system is one characterized by outputs
that have little or no influence on the inputs ; they give
little or no feedback to the system . A closed system is
usually not responsive to its own performance . An
open system uses results from past actions and outputs
as feedback to the processor , which is then used to
control future action or modify the system . Figure 1
illustrates these concepts . 
GOVERNMENTAL OUTPUTS
Governmental outputs are simply the things that the
policy process produces , such as laws , regulations , 
rules , and the effort that governments expend to
address problems . Statute and case law are policy outputs of government . Rules and regulations are also an
important output of government . 
722———Outputs , of Systems
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 722
EDUCATIONAL OUTPUTS
Educational systems deal with social action , economic
concerns , the moral well-being of students , scientific
and technological knowledge , aesthetic and political
awareness . The outputs that should be produced
include students who can perform on specified quality
levels , who have gained knowledge , skills , and productive dispositions , and are progressing toward
becoming socially competent individuals . 
Historically , educational analysts have focused on
inputs such as the condition of schools , certification of
teachers and administrators , class size , social and economic backgrounds of students , and the most noted of
all—standardized testing . Standardized tests continue
to be an important output measure of individual
schools and school systems . Schools are examined , 
graded , and even restructured based on the students ’ 
yearly standardized testing scores . 
With the heavy burden on educational resources
and emergence of other effective programs such as
home schooling and distance learning programs , a
system shift can be seen . These new programs ignore
the traditional inputs of education and concentrate on
the outputs of learning . Many universities are accepting these alternative approaches to education and
basing entrance requirements on the output and
achievement of the individual student , without regard
to the formal inputs or processors of the traditional
educational system . 
In higher education , there has also been a shift of
emphasis from inputs to outputs . The colleges and universities that offer educational administrator preparation programs have usually accepted any candidate who
meets the minimal entrance requirements of the program , with very little regard to whether the intention
was to complete the degree to work in that field or for
the purpose of merely obtaining a pay increase . Current
university programs are now creating databases to track
the outputs of students who have completed the program to determine the extent to which the degree
helped students to obtain administrative positions . 
—Edward Brown and Janine Brouillette
See also bureaucracy ; capacity building , of organizations ; economics , theories of ; hierarchical developmental models ; 
management information systems ; management theories ; 
measurement , theories of ; networking and network theory ; 
organizations , types of , typologies ; productivity ; resource
management ; school improvement models ; strategic planning ; theory movement , in educational administration
Further Readings and References
Banathy , B . H .  ( 1991 )  . Systems design of education : A journey
to create the future . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational
Technology . 
Forrester , J . W .  ( 1968 )  . Principles of systems . Cambridge : 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press . 
Montello , P . A .  ,  & Wimberly , C . A .  ( 1975 )  . Management
systems in education : A systems approach to educational
decision making . Lincoln , NE : Professional Educators . 
Outputs , of Systems———723
Inputs Outputs Inputs Outputs
Feedback
Open System Closed System
ProcessorProcessor
Figure 1 Idealized General System
SOURCE : Author . 
O-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 723
 PARADIGM
The term paradigm , as used in science and the social
sciences , can be traced to a historian of science , 
Thomas Kuhn , who in 1962 wrote The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions . Kuhn employed the idea of paradigm change to explain major epochs throughout the
progression of science . He reasoned that the history of
science could best be interpreted as a succession of scientific revolutions . An interpretation of paradigm shifts
or revolutions replaced for Kuhn the commonly held
conception of a linear progression toward one explanation or universal truth . The impact of The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions has affected many disciplines of
study and as a result has been applied and examined in
many fields . Although the impact has been substantial , 
the notions of scientific progress espoused by Kuhn
have been challenged , and his ideas have not been
accepted universally ; notable here is philosopher of
science Karl Popper and his notion of falsifiability . 
Popper argued that the process of falsification was the
primary impetus behind progression in science rather
than paradigm shifts . 
Kuhn explained the progression of a particular field . 
When new challenges or anomalies accumulate to a
level that impedes further progress , a crisis emerges . 
The crisis is diffused when those in the field consensually agree to a new paradigm or world perspective from
which to view the field and address previously unexamined issues . A new paradigm , mindset , or perspective is thus adopted to explain more accurately those
anomalies that gave rise to a new paradigm . Kuhn fully
elaborates on this process in his writing on the definition and explanation of the “ transition phase .  ” The
notion of paradigms and the theory behind it have been
used to explain the progression of many disciplines . 
More specifically , paradigm shifts have been used to
describe major philosophical , theoretical , or practical
changes in mindset or general thought patterns . In
science , for example , the transitional phase between a
heliocentric paradigm and the geocentric paradigm is
one application of a paradigm shift . Each new paradigm is said to be incommensurable with the previous , 
thus making the old no longer applicable to the new sets
of questions those within a field seek to answer . 
Paradigm shifts have been debated in educational
administration , with much of the focus being on whether
fundamental assumptions have changed or the manifestations of the assumptions have changed . Kuhn ’ s theory
has been misused or misinterpreted within many disciplines as well . One misuse of paradigms and paradigm
shifts is associated with claims to relativism . Some
claim that since the field of science is subject to paradigm shifts and such shifts can occur with relative frequency , a prior system of belief or a new , emergent
system of belief is as good as any other system . Such a
view holds that all systems are different but of equal
value . However , Kuhn explicitly opposed such a notion
of relativism and contended that each emergent paradigm that comes to replace a previous system is inherently better than the one replaced . The new paradigm is
not only different but also better , as it ( should ) adequately explain the anomalies that necessitated the rise
of the new system . In terms of educational qualitative
or quantitative research , one adopting a relativist stance
would argue that both are of equal value , that one is no
better than the other , and in this way the field of
research has not necessarily progressed . 
725
P
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 725
Another misuse of paradigm shifts comes from
those who seek to quickly replace old paradigms or
propose a vast number of paradigm shifts within a
field or discipline . Such actions within a field , due to
the cross-disciplinary influence of Kuhn , have often
used the term paradigm in order to render scientific
standing among other disciplines . Recognition based
on scientific relevancy is often characteristic of relatively new fields or subfields of study . Kuhn ’ s original
notion of paradigm shifts comes from the concept that
the transitional phase of a paradigm shift can take
years , often ending only when those who refuse to
adopt and accept the new paradigm leave the field . 
Such a process would not produce a significant number
of paradigm changes because a transition in this sense
is not a rapid process . Furthermore , Kuhn ’ s theory
is based on voluntary consensus within a field ; all
members within a disciplinary community must
accept the new paradigm and acknowledge the passing of the prior belief or thought system . Those who
find others ’ way of thinking incommensurable with
their own will assume they are working within a different paradigm but in reality may just be thinking differently within the same paradigm . Paul Feyerabend
and Imre Lakatos , critics of Kuhn ’ s idea of scientific
change , have applied it to historical cases where a
paradigm shift did occur and have found that it is
inadequate to account for the change in scientific
thinking . Nonetheless , Kuhn ’ s concept of a paradigm
as a dominant frame of how things are viewed remains
firmly fixed in ideas about how science works , even
as notions of how such frames are changed remains
contested . 
—Kristina A . Hesbol
See also critical thinking ; dialectical inquiry ; knowledge base , 
of the field ; Kuhn , Thomas ; management theories ; philosophies of education ; Popper , Karl ; qualitative research , 
history , theories , issues ; quantitative research methods ; 
research methods
Further Readings and References
Feyerabend , P .  ( 1993 )  . Against method . London : Verso . 
Kuhn , T .  ( 1996 )  . The structure of scientific revolutions . 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press .  ( Original work
published 1962 ) 
Lakatos , I .  ( 1999 )  . The methodology of scientific research programmes . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . 
Popper , K .  ( 1979 )  . Objective knowledge : An evolutionary
approach . Oxford : Clarendon Press . 
 PARENT TEACHER ASSOCIATION
The National Parent Teacher Association ( PTA ) is
the largest child advocacy organization in the United
States , with over 6 million members . There are organizations in all 50 states , the District of Columbia , 
U . S . Virgin Islands , and in the Department of Defense
schools in Europe and the Pacific . 
The organization was founded in 1897 in Washington , 
D . C .  , as the National Congress of Mothers by Alice
McLellan Birney and Phoebe Apperson Hearst . At the
time of its founding , women did not have the vote , but
these two women felt that there is no stronger bond than
that between mother and child . Therefore , the founders
believed that it was up to mothers of the United States to
eliminate the threats that endangered children . In its
initial meetings , more than 2 , 000 people responded—all
with a commitment to children . Problems were identified
and strategies devised to resolve them . 
The mission of the PTA is to
• Support and speak on behalf of children and youth in
the schools , in the community , and before governmental bodies and other organizations that make
decisions affecting children
• Assist parents in developing the skills they need to
raise and protect their children
• Encourage parent and public involvement in the
public schools of the United States
Some of the programs that have evolved from that
original group of members include the creation of
kindergarten classes , child labor laws , a public health
service , hot lunch programs , a juvenile justice system , 
and mandatory immunization . 
By 1922 ,  “ A PTA in Every School ” became the
nationwide goal . Parenting skills were a particular
concern and the focus of many local and national conferences . Founder Birney appealed to society as a
whole to make education a top priority . But in many
states , segregated schools were legally sanctioned . To
address those students ’ special needs , Selena Sloan
Butler , with the help of the National PTA , founded the
National Congress of Colored Parents and Teachers in
1926 . When the two national organizations formally
merged in 1970 , so did their identical mission to
improve the lives of children . 
As conditions changed , so did PTA ’ s programs . 
The age of the automobile brought new concerns about
child safety . In the 1930s , National PTA responded
726———Parent Teacher Association
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 726
with a safety education program for schoolchildren
that continues today . 
In the 1940s , World War II spearheaded the organization ’ s resolve to find a new and better way to
resolve conflicts before they erupted into violence and
destruction . National PTA was one of the first organizations to support the fledgling United Nations . 
During the 1950s , one of the most high-profile projects in PTA history was the organization ’ s participation in the field testing of the Salk polio vaccine and
eventually securing the polio vaccination for all schoolchildren . It was also during this time that the PTA
began to recognize America ’ s affinity for prescription
and over-the-counter medications , and called for a
national conference to address narcotics and drug
addiction in youth . 
Smoking and drug abuse became increasingly
common in American culture during the 1960s , and the
PTA called for schools to focus on the risks involved
with abuse and also created public service messages to
educate parents and the general public about the dangers of addiction . During the 1970s , violence on television spurred the PTA to action regarding the effects
of such programming on children . Today , critical viewing skills workshops are held around the country . The
alarming rise in sexually transmitted diseases and the
advent of AIDS found the PTA advocating comprehensive information about the diseases be made available at school and at home in the 1980s . 
In the 1990s , the population of the United States was
becoming increasingly diverse . Opportunity abounded
for those with the education and training to take advantage of it , but for those with few skills , the gap grew
greater than ever . Educational reform became the paramount term in American education , and the National
PTA became even more actively engaged in the belief
that parents needed to have a say in the education of
U . S . children . 
In 1994 , the PTA ’ s advocacy skills culminated in the
Goals 2000 Educate America legislation that , among
many reforms , called for local school districts to make
parents equal partners on issues affecting their
children ’ s education
In 2000 , National PTA published the book Building
Successful Partnerships : A Guide to Parent and Family
Involvement Programs . In January of that year , the
organization provided field-tested strategies for developing successful parent involvement programs . 
Many local schools have determined that they do
not want national affiliation with the PTA . Therefore , 
they opt simply to have a local Parent Teacher
Organization ( PTO )  . 
—Carol Engler
See also Black education ; boards of education ; children and
families in America ; community relations ; democracy , democratic education and administration ; determinism , sociocultural ; elections , of school boards , bond issues ; Gallup Polls , 
on public education ; governance ; Latinos ; management
theories ; minorities , in schools ; open-door policy ; parental
involvement ; school improvement models ; school safety ; 
school size ; schooling effects ; site-based management ; social
capital ; social relations , dimensions of ; special education ; 
standardized testing ; television , impact on students ; violence
in schools ; voucher plans ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Chadwick , K .  ( 2004 )  . Improving schools through community
engagement . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Gaitan , C .  ( 2004 )  . Involving Latino families in schools . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Gold , E .  , Simon , E .  ,  & Brown , C .  ( 2005 )  . A new conception
of parent engagement : Community organizing for school
reform . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 237–268 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Kochan , F .  ,  & Reed , C .  ( 2005 )  . Collaborative leadership , community building , and democracy in public education . In
F . English ( Ed .  ) The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 68–84 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
McEwan , E .  ( 2004 )  . How to deal with parents who are angry , 
troubled , afraid or just plain crazy . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Corwin Press . 
Sexton , R .  ( 2004 )  . Mobilizing citizens for better schools . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Wasik , B .  ( 2004 )  . Handbook of family literacy . Mahwah , NJ : 
Erlbaum . 
 PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT
Parental involvement in K–12 schooling has been
linked to the social , emotional , and academic achievement of students . Researchers , policymakers , and district and school site personnel note that these links are
particularly important in large urban districts . Research
on parental involvement indicates that parental
involvement can significantly enhance the school
climate and is a critical aspect of effective schooling . 
The importance of parental involvement is not unique
to any one type of school district or any particular
race / ethnicity ; however , recent literature on parental
Parental Involvement———727
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 727
involvement has primarily focused on urban schools
that serve large numbers of minority and low-income
children . 
The Yale Child Study Center Comer School Development Program ( SDP ) includes a comprehensive
parental involvement component . Developed by
James Comer , MD , in 1968 , the model has been operationalized in over 700 schools in the United States and
abroad , and is a child-centered , data-driven , wholeschool change process . The perspective of the home is
valued in the Comer Model ; school-parent miscommunication and conflict is reduced and parent-child relationships are enhanced . In 1995 , Ramirez-Smith & 
Lofland conducted a study of the Comer model in a
Virginia elementary school and found that the principles of the model were instrumental in stopping a cycle
of failure at the school . The school had experienced
chronic problems with poor student achievement , low
teacher morale , and uninvolved parents . Significant
increases in student test scores , overall student
achievement , and an increase in the number of parents
who volunteered at the school and attended school
function were realized after implementation of the
Comer model . School personnel concentrated on
identifying and understanding reasons for low levels
of parental involvement rather than concentrating on
comparing the levels of parent involvement to other
schools . The result was better communication
between the home and the school and increases in
students ’ motivation to succeed . 
Two other parental involvement initiatives have
become prominent in the literature on schools , communities , and families : Joyce Epstein ’ s model for
community / school / parental involvement and the 2000
National Education Goals , a national policy initiative
on education . Epstein ’ s model consists of six types
of parental involvement : parenting , communicating , 
volunteering , learning at home , decision making , and
collaborating with community . In Epstein ’ s model , 
parental involvement occurs on a continuum ranging
from high to low levels , with the level of involvement
being dependent on the perceptions of parents and
school personnel regarding the importance of involvement . Parental involvement is at the optimum level when
the resources of the parents , community , and the school
are integrated in a total effort centered on the child . 
The eighth goal of Goals 2000 specifically targets
parents . The specific conceptualization , design , implementation , and evaluation of parental involvement
models rests with the individual state departments of
education . Thus , levels of parental involvement may
vary from state to state . 
Traditional definitions of parental involvement
may be insufficient to make any significant impact on
policies and practices in urban schools that serve large
numbers of poor and minority students . In addition , 
social and economic changes may leave parents of
poor and minority children with limited access to
schools compared to middle-class and affluent
parents . Schools Reaching Out , a national project of
the Institute for Responsive Education , has adopted
definitions of parental involvement that ( a ) broaden
the term parent to recognize that families may include
grandparents , sisters , brothers , aunts , uncles , and legal
guardians who are charged with caring for the child
and who may act as parents ,  ( b ) include community
and social service agencies that provide services for
children , and particularly those that service urban
children and their families ,  ( c ) move beyond using
the school site as the only meeting place for parent
conferences / interaction ,  ( d ) consider more innovative
methods for communicating with “ hard to reach
parents ,  ”  ( e ) include agendas and priorities of families , 
and ( f ) replace deficit theorizing about urban parents
and their children with definitions that emphasize
family values , cultural differences as strengths , and
parents ’ desires to become active participants in their
children ’ s education . 
A common theme in microlevel models of parental
involvement is an attempt to link parental involvement to
school reform . Models such as the Comer model and
Epstein ’ s model for school and family connections are
similar and have three common themes :  ( 1 ) providing
success for children ( all children can achieve academic
success regardless of cultural , social , and economic differences )  ,  ( b ) serving the whole child ( the emotional , 
physical , and academic growth of children are linked and
are a primary focus at home and at the school site )  , and 
( c ) sharing responsibility ( the responsibility for the
social , emotional , physical , and academic development
of children is shared among the family , school , and social
and community organizations )  . 
Current discussions and research on parental
involvement are often situated within the context of
school reform . One of the more widely used reform
approaches is site-based management—a collaborative governance model that can include parents as
members of the school site governing body . Although
site-based management remains a popular choice in
school reform efforts in many urban school districts , 
728———Parental Involvement
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 728
researchers have found that there is limited evidence
to suggest that such initiatives actually contribute to
increased levels of parental involvement . 
—Linda C . Tillman
See also achievement tests ; Black education ; boards of education ; children and families in America ; collaboration
theory ; community relations ; democracy , democratic education and administration ; determinism , sociocultural ; elections , of school boards , bond issues ; Gallup Polls , on public
education ; governance ; Latinos ; management theories ; 
minorities , in schools ; open-door policy ; Parent Teacher
Association ; school improvement models ; school safety ; 
school size ; schooling effects ; site-based management ; 
social capital ; social relations , dimensions of ; special education ; standardized testing ; television , impact on students ; 
violence in schools ; voucher plans ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Brown , F .  ,  & Hunter , R .  ( 1998 )  . School-based management : 
Involving parents in shared decision making . Urban
Education , 33 ( 1 )  , 95–122 . 
Davies , D .  ( 1991 )  . Schools reaching out : Family , school , and
community partnerships for student success . Phi Delta
Kappan , 376–382 . 
Epstein , J .  ( 1995 )  . School / family / community partnerships : 
Caring for the children we share . Phi Delta Kappan , 701–712 . 
Fine , M .  ( 1993 )  .  [ Ap ] parent involvement : Reflections on
parents , power , and urban public schools . Teachers College
Record , 94 ( 4 )  . 
Haynes , N .  ( 1998 )  . Guest editor ’ s introduction : Overview of the
Comer School Development Program . Journal of Education
for Students Placed at Risk ,  ( 3 ) 1 , 3–9 . 
King , S .  ,  & Goodwin , A .  ( 2002 )  . Culturally responsive
parental involvement : Concrete understandings and basic
strategies . Washington , DC : American Association of
Colleges for Teacher Education . 
Lipman , P .  ( 2002 )  . Chicago school policy and the politics of
race : Toward a discourse of equity and justice . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association , New Orleans , LA . 
Norwood , P .  , Atkinson , S .  , Tellez , K .  ,  & Carr Saldaña , D .  
( 1997 )  . Contextualizing parent education in urban schools : 
The impact on minority parents and students . Urban
Education , 32 ( 3 )  , 411–432 . 
Patrikakou , E .  ,  & Weissberg , R .  ( 1999 )  . The seven P ’ s of
school-family partnerships . Education Week , 18 . 
Ramirez-Smith , C .  ,  & Lofland , G .  ( 1995 )  . Stopping the cycle of
failure : The Comer Model . Educational Leadership , 14–17 . 
Tillman , L . C .  ( 2003 )  . African American parental involvement
in urban school reform : Implications for leadership . In
R . Hunter & F . Brown ( Eds .  )  , Challenges of urban education
and the efficacy of school reform ( pp . 295–312 )  . Oxford , 
UK : Elsevier Press . 
Tillman , L .  ( 2004 )  . African American parental involvement in
a post-Brown era : Facilitating the academic achievement
of African American students . Journal of School Public
Relations ,  ( 25 ) 2 , 161–176 . 
 PARKER , FRANCIS W . 
Francis W . Parker ( 1837–1902 ) was born in Bedford , 
New Hampshire , in the fall of 1837 . When he was 16 , 
he became a country schoolmaster in New Hampshire . 
During the Civil War , Parker served with the Union
Army and attained the rank of colonel . It was because
of his rank that Parker continued to be called Colonel . 
After the war , Parker returned to teaching . He became
head of a normal school in Dayton , Ohio . During this
time Parker began to read the works of Horace Mann
and other educational theorists . 
Parker inherited a small legacy from his aunt , which
allowed him to study abroad , where he became familiar with the work of Johann Pestalozzi and Friedrich
Froebel . Parker left the United States to spend two and
one half years traveling in Europe . Parker attended
lectures at the University of King William in Berlin , 
through Holland , Switzerland , Italy , France , and
Germany . He observed the leading pedagogical innovations of this time . He was especially interested in the
work and theories of Johann Herbart . His experiences
abroad inspired Parker to encourage similar practices
and to reshape American schools . Progressive education
in America can be traced to Francis W . Parker . He
shared the beliefs of Pestalozzi and Froebel that learning
should come from the interests and needs of the child
and that the most appropriate curriculum was activity
based and one that encouraged children to express
themselves freely and creatively . 
In 1875 , Parker served for 5 years as superintendent
of schools in Quincy , Massachusetts . His efforts in the
schools drew national attention . He began what came
to be known as the Quincy Movement . It emphasized
elements of the progressive education such as group
activities , informal methods of instruction , science
education , and the elimination of rigid discipline . 
Children began learning simple words and sentences , 
rather than learning the alphabet by rote . Magazines , 
newspapers , and teacher-developed materials replaced
the texts . Arithmetic was taught inductively with
objects instead of rules . Geography was introduced by
trips around the local countryside . To improve manual
Parker , Francis W . ———729
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 729
dexterity and individual creativity , drawing was added
to the lessons . Teachers stressed observing , describing , and understanding . Parker ’ s program was an
immediate success and attracted national attention as
the Quincy System . Unfortunately , there were complaints that the fundamentals were being ignored . An
inspector from the Massachusetts State Board of
Education conducted an independent survey and
found that Quincy ’ s students excelled at reading , writing , and spelling and were fourth in their county in
arithmetic . Some of the critics believed the survey was
biased and unfair . 
From 1880 until 1883 , Parker was a supervisor of
schools in Boston . He extended the progressive education practices he introduced in Quincy . He was principal of the Cook County Normal School in Chicago
from 1883 until 1899 . In 1883 , he published Talks on
Teaching , and in 1894 , Talks on Pedagogics . He was
founder and principal of the Chicago Institute from
1899 until 1901 . It was during this time that Parker
formulated his educational theories . His school was a
model of progressive education and teacher training . 
Parker had two goals : move the child to the center of
the education process and relate the subjects of the
curriculum in such a way as to enhance their meaning
for the student . Parker worked to organize schools as
democratic communities . The role of the teacher was
to start where the students were and gradually lead
them into the various fields of knowledge . Art was an
important part of the curriculum , as were nature studies , field trips , and social activities . He moved away
from teaching discrete subjects . The curriculum
attempted to integrate subjects in a way that made it
more meaningful to the learner . Parker ’ s pioneering
work led to improvements in curricula and teacher
training . The Chicago Institute later became part of
the school of education of the University of Chicago . 
—Carolyn Sayers Russell
See also Chicago school reform ; communities , types , building
of ; constructivism ; critical theory ; democracy , democratic
education and administration ; Dewey , John ; innovation , in
education ; instructional interventions ; philosophies of
education ; social studies ; supervision ; Woodson , Carter G .  ; 
Young , Ella Flagg
Further Readings and References
Gutek , G .  ( 2001 )  . Historical and philosophical foundations
of education : Selected readings . Upper Saddle River , NJ : 
Prentice Hall . 
Smith , L .  ,  & Smith , J .  ( 1994 )  . Lives in education : A narrative
of people and ideas . New York : St . Martin ’ s Press . 
Webb , L .  , Metha , A .  ,  & Jordan , K .  ( 2003 )  . Foundations of
American education .  ( 4th ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : 
Prentice Hall . 
 PARTNERSHIPS , INTERAGENCY
Interagency partnerships refers to formal relationships in which two or more agencies that provide
individuals with educational , social , health , or other
human services agree to work together to serve their
clients . Such partnerships have increased over the past
two decades as educational , health , and human service
needs have expanded throughout our society and
societies around the globe . 
HISTORICAL AND
SOCIETAL PERSPECTIVES
The familial and societal structures of the twenty-first
century are much less cohesive and connected than
those of past centuries . Families are separated by space , 
and in the United States , over 50% end in divorce . Small
towns and city neighborhoods in which neighbors
were familiar with one another , often attending religious services together , and sometimes even belonging
to social groups formed around ethnic and cultural
similarities , have been replaced by suburban , sometimes gated communities , and inner cities in which
violence and crime keep people inside their homes and
apartments . Families that do exist are primarily
nuclear , with very little support available from
extended family members . Most parents work , meaning that children are either home alone before or after
school or in care provided by private providers . 
In addition , the expansion of educational accountability mandates focused on student performance on
standardized tests has resulted in increased concern
about the growing gap between minority and poor
children and their more affluent counterparts . Along
with this concern has come a growing recognition
of the impact of poverty on learning and the need to
ensure that all children have the physical , social , and
educational support they need to succeed in school . 
These factors have resulted in an increased need for
educational , mental health , medical , and human services
for large percentages of children and their families . The
added costs of providing such services have risen steadily
730———Partnerships , Interagency
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 730
over the last few decades , causing local , state , federal , 
and privately funded agencies to seek new avenues to
deliver services in the most economical way possible . 
Creating interagency partnerships is one strategy that is
being used to achieve this goal . 
Interagency partnerships involve networking services
in simple or comprehensive systems to attempt to
ensure that client needs are met in ways that are convenient and cost effective . Although such partnerships
have been on the rise in the past two decades , they are
grounded in notions developed by such educators as
John Dewey and Jane Addams , who stressed making
connections with the community and the schools . The
current movement was begun in the early 1980s . 
CURRENT STATUS
Some partnerships have been mandated by states . 
Florida was one of the first states to mandate interagency
cooperation . Since then , other states such as California
and Missouri have instituted similar initiatives . Often
state funding is linked to agencies having to work
together . In these situations , funds are shared in some
manner , and guidelines or regulations for the partnership
are usually also mandated . 
Other partnerships are voluntary relationships in
which two or more agencies freely enter into collaborative arrangement to better serve their clients . Groups
involved in these partnerships are varied . In addition
to school , health , and human service providers , partners often include those involved in the criminal justice systems , faculty from universities and colleges , 
members of religious groups , and formal or informal
advocacy groups . 
Partnerships can be anywhere on a continuum
from simple to complex . At the simplest level , agencies
may enter into partnerships that are focused on a single task , such as having a health agency unite with a
school system to inoculate children against a particular
disease . A more complex type of partnership is formed
when agencies join together to deliver services to
clients on a joint basis , sharing information but not
space or personnel . For example , a mental health clinic
might join in partnership with a school system to provide free or low-cost services for students , families , or
employees using an agreed upon referral system and
criteria in which the school refers students to the clinic . 
At the furthest end of the continuum , agencies
provide integrated services , where they may share
space , information , personnel , and / or clients as a unified
whole . These partnerships , when operated in conjunction with schools , are often referred to as full-service
and / or community schools . These schools often extend
the school day to include before- and after-school programs for children and parents . Collaboration is at the
heart of service delivery , and the client is the focus of
the agency providers . The focus of these integrated services is to provide support that will ultimately enhance
student learning and success . 
There are also national coalitions and networks that
have created partnerships to provide support for student
learning . Among the most well known is the Coalition
for Community Schools , which includes service learning as a part of its mission . This coalition seeks to
connect schools and communities so that not only are
student needs met , but students also go out into the community to serve . Community schools are generally found
in neighborhoods with high percentages of poverty . They
stress prevention , systems change , and networking . They
are viewed as avenues for rebuilding a sense of community and ensuring that students and their families have the
support they need to succeed . 
BARRIERS TO SUCCESS
Forming interagency partnerships is difficult , as these
agencies often have conflicting rules and regulations
concerning issues such as confidentiality and criteria
for providing services . They often have differing governing boards as well . Creating successful partnerships requires extensive planning and a willingness to
collaborate to overcome barriers that impede cooperative efforts . They take time to create , as partners must
develop mutual trust and confidence in one another . 
Another difficulty in building interagency partnership is the negative attitudes that clients and service
providers may hold . Often previous failures leave
people and agencies feeling hopeless . People involved
in interagency partnerships must deal with these attitudes and strive to create a sense of hope and optimism . 
Funding is also sometimes a problem , and although
some states provide some funding , many schools
depend on outside donors to aid them in implementing their models . Thus , when the funding stops , programs sometimes stop as well . However , many of the
national models attempt to teach schools and communities to build coalitions of financial support to ensure
that funding will be available to sustain their efforts . 
Some systems and states have met with resistance
from political groups who see such partnerships as
Partnerships , Interagency———731
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 731
infringing on the family and on privacy . Although these
groups have sometimes been very vocal , the development of interagency partnerships to meet student and
family needs continues to grow , not only in the United
States , but in many other countries of the world . 
Although there is some resistance to the concept of
interagency partnerships , there does seem to be a
movement toward ensuring that services to families and
students are integrated rather than fragmented . The needs
in urban and impoverished schools are great , and interagency partnerships appear to be gaining in acceptance . 
—Frances K . Kochan
See also adaptiveness of organizations ; Addams , Jane ; at-risk
students ; Black education ; boundaries of systems ; capacity
building , of organizations ; Chicago school reform ; collaboration , theories of ; conceptual systems theory ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; Dewey , John ; diversity ; 
economics , theories of ; finance , of public schools ; governance ; management theories ; matrix organization ( the 
 “ adhocracy ”  )  ; networking and network theory ; organizational theories ; politics , of education ; systemic reform
Further Readings and References
Chen , J .  , Horsch , P .  , DeMoss , K .  ,  & Wagner , S .  ( 2003 )  . 
Effective partnering for school change . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Corrigan , D .  ( 2000 )  . The changing role of schools and higher
education institutions with respect to community-based
interagency collaboration and interprofessional partnerships . Peabody Journal of Education , 75 ( 3 )  , 176–196 . 
Dryfoos , J .  ( 2002 )  . PARTNERING—Full-service community
schools : Creating new institutions . Phi Delta Kappan , 
83 ( 15 )  , 393–395 . 
Houck , J .  , Cohn , K .  ,  & Cohn , C .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Partnering to
lead educational renewal . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Quellete , P .  , Briscoe , R .  ,  & Tyson , C .  ( 2004 )  . Parent-school
and community partnerships in children ’ s mental health : 
Networking challenges , dilemmas , and solutions . Journal
of Child & Family Studies , 13 ( 3 )  , 295–297 . 
Sailor , W .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2002 )  . Whole-school success and inclusive
education . New York : Teachers College Press . 
 PATH-GOAL LEADERSHIP THEORY
Although first published by Martin G . Evans in 1970 , 
Robert J . House is credited most often for his work
on the path-goal theory of leadership . In 1971 , Evans
published A Path-Goal Theory of Leader Effectiveness , which House updated in 1996 . Path-goal theory
states that the leadership behaviors of formally
appointed superiors directly affect their subordinates
and that subordinate performance , motivation , and
satisfaction can be increased by subordinates ’ belief in
their own capabilities , by clarifying paths toward
attainment , by offering rewards for achieving goals , by
removing obstacles , and by increasing opportunities
essential for personal satisfaction . The basic premise , 
then , is that a leader ’ s effectiveness is directly tied to
the ability and willingness of that leader to ensure a
satisfying work environment that provides rewards for
achieving goals that are clearly stated . An ambiguous
work environment increases stress , thus decreasing
satisfaction and productivity . In 1974 , House and R . R . 
Mitchell refined the idea of subordinate satisfaction
by stating that the gratification produced by the work
must either be immediate or clearly shown to be crucial to future satisfaction . Tying satisfaction directly
to performance and increasing coaching , guidance , 
and other support can also increase motivation , thereby
increasing productivity . 
Based in expectancy theory , path-goal theory suggests that leaders who successfully implement appropriate leadership styles can influence the motivation of
their employees . Key to path-goal theory is leadership
that focuses on elements that are missing from a subordinate ’ s work environment . Four types of leadership
behaviors clarify the path-goal journey and enable subordinate satisfaction : 
1 . Directive leadership behavior : sets clear objectives
and rules for subordinates ; expectations and directions are well defined
2 . Supportive leader behavior : caters to the needs and
desires of subordinates in order to reduce stress and
frustration in the work environment
3 . Participative leader behavior : encourages subordinate participation in decision making by consulting
with subordinates as well as sharing information
4 . Achievement-oriented leader behavior : aimed at
individuals with a highly internal locus of control
who are motivated by their own personal accomplishments ; leaders set challenging goals and
encourage high performance while showing confidence in their subordinates ’ abilities
After many empirical studies had been completed , 
House realized that path-goal leader behaviors needed
to be expanded . In his latest review , he outlines nine
leadership behaviors . In addition to supportive leader
732———Path-Goal Leadership Theory
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 732
behavior and achievement-oriented leader behavior , 
the seven additional categories include the following : 
1 . Path-goal clarifying behaviors
a . Clarify performance goals
b . Clarify the means to achieving the goal
c . Clarify standards of judging performance
d . Clarify expectations of others in the organization
e . Clear rewards for performance
2 . Work facilitation : clears obstacles for subordinates , 
allowing them to focus on their work goals
3 . Interaction facilitation : collaboratively removes
obstacles that prevent interaction , including dispute
resolution , facilitation of communication , and listening to all voices
4 . Group-oriented decision processes : focus on decisions that affect group dynamics and production and
on increasing acceptance of such decisions . 
5 . Representation and networking : address the need of
leaders to network and actively represent the function of the work unit ; by effectively networking , a
leader establishes the legitimacy of the work unit
6 . Value-based leader behavior : helps establish extraordinary follower commitment by appealing to values
and sentiments held dear by subordinates ; such
behavior may only be expressed adequately when an
ideological goal exists
7 . Shared leadership : functions best in an interdependent environment , where sharing responsibility for
leadership theoretically increases unit cohesiveness
and thus performance
In addition to leadership behaviors , path-goal
theory acknowledges a subordinate ’ s own characteristics as the key to success . For example , an employee
with a great need for affiliation may do best with a
supportive leadership style , while employees who
gain more satisfaction from figuring things out for
themselves might do better with a leader who exhibits
achievement-oriented leadership . 
Finally , path-goal theory says that subordinate
satisfaction , along with leadership behavior , is tied to
task characteristics—the work environment . If , for
instance , the nature of a task is very clear and repetitive , then directive leadership may not be as effective
as it can be viewed as redundant . Or if an environment
is team oriented and social interaction is high , a supportive style of leadership may not be effective . The
work environment is important to consider when
determining leadership styles . 
When examining appropriate leadership styles from
a path-goal perspective , a leader must first try and
discern the needs of subordinates . In deciding upon a
style that will meet these needs , a leader must look at
both the characteristics of individual subordinates as
well as the task environment . It is the interaction of
these factors that shows what is missing from the
work environment , and a good leader adds the missing
pieces rather than focusing on what employees
already have . If all of the necessary motivational factors are addressed , motivation , employee satisfaction , 
and productivity then can be maximized . 
Criticisms of path-goal theory focus primarily on its
complexity , incomplete support by research studies , 
failure to address fully links between leadership and
motivation , and the possibility of creating dependent
subordinates . Yet this approach to leadership provides
leaders with key understandings about work environments , subordinate needs , and potential relations
between leadership styles and productivity . 
—Sonia Schaible-Brandon and Rodney Muth
See also administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; goals , goal setting ; leadership , complex theory of ; leadership , discretionary 
( and power )  ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , participatory ; 
leadership , situational ; leadership , task-oriented ; management theories ; motivation , theories of ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
House , R .  ( 1971 )  . A path-goal theory of leader effectiveness . 
Administrative Science Leadership Review , 16 , 321–339 . 
House , R .  ( 1996 )  . Path-goal theory of leadership : Lessons , 
legacy , and a reformulated theory . Leadership Quarterly , 
7 ( 3 )  , 324–352 . 
House , R .  ,  & Mitchell , R .  ( 1974 )  . Path-goal leadership . 
Journal of Contemporary Business , 3 , 81–97 . 
Northouse , P .  ( 2004 )  . Leadership : Theory and practice ( 3rd ed .  )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 PATRI , ANGELO
Angelo Patri ( 1876–1965 ) was the first Italian immigrant to become a New York City public school principal . His tenure in inner-city schools stretched from
1908 to 1944—5 years as principal at an elementary
school in the Bronx and 31 years as principal at Bronx
Junior High School . 
Patri , Angelo———733
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 733
At Teachers College , Columbia University , Patri
was introduced to the ideas of John Dewey , specifically the essay Ethical Principles . From then on , 
his teaching and leadership reflected the ideals of
American progressivism—that is , he fought to release
schools from the grip of tradition , rules , records , and
endless routine . He combined contemporary ideas
on community-parent involvement with a desire to
improve schools at the school site level . 
In his day , principals and supervisors would inspect , 
and unless the class was taught in a specific way—
according to “ the method ,  ” the teacher would be criticized . As a principal , Patri opposed the uniformity of
instruction : student drawings were all alike , as were
their compositions—all with the same topic and the
same number of paragraphs . All the subjects—the
three Rs—were aligned and sequenced , formalized
and logical . The regular , fixed school curriculum
never stayed with a beautiful idea long enough to have
it become part of the children ’ s lives . Patri sought to
vitalize the curriculum by means of firsthand experiences or to push the classroom out into the world . 
Patri was aware of the serious problems in the
inner-city communities : horrific living conditions
inside the tenement buildings , abject poverty of the
families and children , lack of jobs , truancy , gang violence in the neighborhood , convoluted feeder patterns
and school boundaries , and little parental involvement . He saw the need for both the school and the
community to work together , for if only one addressed
a problem , it could not be solved . 
He created a parent-community association to give
parents a stake in their children ’ s school . Perhaps the
most significant parent-teacher committee in the association was one that investigated cases of parental
neglect , cases of need , and cases of truancy . It was
called the Relief Committee , and its mandate ranged
from providing parents with information on hygiene , 
clothes , medicine , groceries , and money ( in the form
of loans ) to looking for jobs . The Relief Committee
joined up with a local branch of the settlement house—
the emerging social center for schools during the first
two decades of the twentieth century . 
To many parents throughout the country , Patri was
a familiar figure during the first half of the twentieth
century . He wrote magazine articles and newspaper
advice columns . In his syndicated column ,  “ Our
Children ,  ” he popularized John Dewey ’ s progressive
educational principles on teaching , discipline , and
social life . Patri also authored a number of books
on raising children and adolescents , including Your
Children in Wartime ( 1943 ) and How to Help Your
Child Grow Up : Suggestions for Guiding Children
From Birth Through Adolescence ( 1948 )  . 
—Ira Bogotch
See also children and families in America ; Dewey , John ; 
discipline in schools ; elementary education ; immigration , 
history and impact in education ; principalship
Further Readings and References
Berger , M .  ( 1980 )  . The settlement , the immigrant and the
public school . New York : Arno Press .  ( Original work
published 1956 ) 
Bogotch , I .  ( 2005 )  . A history of public school leadership : The
first century , 1837–1942 . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 7–33 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Patri , A .  ( 1917 )  . A schoolmaster of the great city . New York : 
Macmillan . 
 PEACE EDUCATION
Because the purpose of peace education is to bring an
end to violence in the schools , in 1969 Johan Galtung
suggested a definition of peace as the dearth of
violence . Although this appears to be simplistic , in
moving toward true peace education he rejects the
traditional notion of violence that only considers
intentional physical or psychological harm . Instead , 
Galtung includes circumstances of violence that
include when human beings are being influenced
physically and psychologically to not be able to realize their potential . Thus , even poverty because of its
deprivation is a form of violence . 
Peace education has become an especially important topic for schools , because everywhere we look , 
in the media—newspapers , magazines , television , 
movies—in our homes and in our schools we are
reminded that we live in a violent world . Research
indicates that peer violence is stable through development . In fact , children who display violent behaviors
in the early grades are more likely to be involved in
criminal behavior as they become older . Therefore , it
is clearly important for educators to be aware of these
direct and indirect kinds of violence that begin in the
elementary schools and often escalate into even more
severe violence in high schools . 
Most of the efforts to create safe schools are focused
on peacekeeping , peacemaking and peacebuilding
734———Peace Education
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 734
strategies . In fact , it is estimated that 10% of U . S . 
schools have programs that emphasize peaceful solutions to disputes . Peacekeeping violence prevention
efforts attempt to avoid violent behavior from occurring , terminate involvement in violence , and reduce the
occurrence of violent behaviors in school . The most
common strategy for safety at school is the designing
of a school-based violence prevention plan . 
Peacemaking approaches to school violence train
children to resolve conflicts constructively through
the use of conflict resolution programs , teaching mediation , empathy , and alternative dispute resolution
methods . Adults who emphasize peacemaking
approaches emphasize communication , negotiation , 
and mediation skills . They work at promoting
resiliency in youth . 
Peacebuilding approaches to lessening school violence recognize that children must be taught to become
more peaceful . As noted by Ian Harris in 2000 , there
are four components in a peacebuilding approach to
preventing school violence : 
1 . Addressing the sources of violence
2 . Filling young people ’ s heads with images of peace to
make peace attractive to them
3 . Helping young people recover from violence
4 . Constructing a peaceable school climate
Peace educators teach cultural diversity , with a
goal of creating the conditions of positive peace in
children ’ s minds . They draw upon the critical theory
and liberation theologies of bell hooks , Paulo Friere , 
and Henry Giroux . 
An example of a peace program is the Peace Education Foundation ( PEF )  , which is a nonprofit organization established in 1980 . Its mission is to educate
children and adults in the dynamics of conflict and to
promote peacemaking skills in homes , schools , and
communities throughout the world . PEF provides
educational materials , training , and programming that
encourages making nonviolent conflict resolution a
lifestyle . C . Diekmann wrote in 2004 that significant
research themes on which PEF is based include
• Violence prevention
• Multicomponent approach ( multimodal , structured
social skills training programs ) 
• Social development ( focuses on what can be done to
facilitate healthy social development ) 
• Resiliency ( the ability to bounce back from life ’ s
stresses ) 
• Teaching methodology ( based on social learning
theory as developed by Bandura ) 
• Process goals and progress feedback
• Developmentally appropriate approach , multilesson
and multiyear model ( begin young and continue over
many years ) 
• School climate
• Effective schools and student achievement
The PEF model integrates a wide range of social
competency concepts that include community building , developmentally appropriate rules , understanding
conflict , perception and diversity , anger management
and other emotions , and effective communication . 
Preventing school violence through a peace
approach includes establishing a shared vision among
the whole faculty , staff , students , parents , and the
larger community . These community representatives
should also include local law enforcement and juvenile justice personnel . Training must be provided to all
stakeholders in peer mediation , conflict resolution , 
anger management , or whatever skill the peace program emphasizes . Research suggests that appropriate
implementation of peace education programs has a
positive impact on the school as a whole . 
—Sandra Harris
See also at-risk students ; bullying ; character education ; 
classroom management ; conflict management ; critical race
theory ; cultural politics , wars ; curriculum , theories of ; discipline in schools ; diversity ; early childhood education ; gender
studies , in educational leadership ; grades , of students ; homophobia ; mainstreaming and inclusion ; multiculturalism ; 
school safety ; vandalism in schools ; violence in schools
Further Readings and References
Beaudoin , M .  ,  & Taylor , M .  ( 2004 )  . Creating a positive school
culture . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Diekmann , C .  ( 2004 )  . Research-based effectiveness of the
Peace Education Foundation Model . Retrieved August 15 , 
2004 , from . 
Galtung , J .  ( 1969 )  . Violence , peace , and peace research . 
Journal of Peace Research , 167–191 . 
Harris , I .  ( 2000 )  . Peace-building responses to school violence . 
NASSP Bulletin , 84 ( 614 )  , 5–24 . 
Williams , K .  ( 2001 , April )  . Does increasing awareness of putdowns actually reduce violence ? An analysis of two rural
elementary schools . Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the American Education Research Association , Seattle , 
WA . 
Williams , K .  ( 2003 )  . The PEACE approach to violence prevention : A guide for administrators and teachers . Lanham , 
MD : Scarecrow Education . 
Peace Education———735
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 735
 PEER INTERACTION / FRIENDSHIPS
In an effort to effectively understand children and
their development , researchers and psychologists have
dedicated tremendous energy toward the study of peer
relationships . Friendships are vital to children because
they serve as emotional resources for having fun and
adapting to stress , expand cognitive resources for
problem solving , provide the context for developing
social skills , and are the forerunner of all other relationships . During the typical school day , children ’ s
peers and friends often become their only sources
of companionship , security , and stability . Friends provide one another with recreation , advice , trust , encouragement , support , and other important needs . 
Unfortunately , some children have great difficulty
developing positive relationships with others . These
children lack the social skills that others are developing
and fail to have their affective needs fulfilled . This
impairs the children ’ s emotional well-being , their selfefficacy , their interrelations with others , and their ability to focus in the classroom . The social and behavioral
problems that emerge seem to further the cycle of rejections and make it even more difficult for children to
escape from their poor status among peers . In an effort
to provide interventions for students who struggle with
peer relationships , researchers have developed a method
for defining sociometric status among peers . Peer nominations provide a calculated method of determining
the degree to which students are “ liked ” or “ disliked ” 
by others in their peer group . 
Generally , children are classified according to a
sociometric category that their nominations elicit . 
Popular children are seen as being well liked or “ cool ,  ” 
and they are seldom disliked . These children are usually
easy to spot within a social setting because they show
higher levels of sociability , greater cognitive skills , and
low levels of aggression . Generally , popular children
attract attention because they are seen as being “ fun .  ” 
Approximately 15% of children are labeled as popular . 
Controversial children are those who are “ liked ” by
some and “ disliked ” by others . These students often get
attention in the classroom from either acting like a class
clown or from bullying behavior . They generally have
a crowd of followers that find them entertaining or idolizing , but they also have a number of enemies who see
them as absurd or mean . Neglected children are those
who go unnoticed within the classroom . They are neither well liked nor disliked . Teachers often see these
students as “ perfect angels ” because they are often shy
and polite within the structured classroom . In reality , 
these students are often at risk for depression or other
maladies because they seldom have the opportunity to
engage with others . 
The category that has received the most attention
from educators and researchers are students who are
rejected by their peers . These children frequently have
a high number of “ liked least ” nominations and almost
no “ liked most ” nominations . Generally , about 15% of
elementary school children are classified as being
strongly disliked or rejected by their peers . Research
has proven that these students are at the greatest risk
for demonstrating disruptive behaviors , loneliness , 
academic failure , anxiety , and lower self-esteem . 
Understanding and identifying peer relationship
problems is important because they are often a symptom of and a precursor to a variety of psychological
and social difficulties . By learning to identify those
children who are rejected by their peers or who struggle socially , educators and other adults will be better
able to provide measures that will help them to interact effectively with peers and address the root of the
child ’ s peer relationship problems . 
—Lauren M . Likosar and Bonnie C . Fusarelli
See also adolescence ; affective domain ; Asian Pacific
Americans ; at-risk students ; Black education ; bullying ; 
children and families in America ; consideration , caring ; 
critical race theory ; cross-cultural studies ; democracy , 
democratic education and administration ; desegregation , of
schools ; discrimination ; dropouts ; drug education ; elementary education ; emotional disturbance ; esteem needs ; 
grades , of students ; Head Start ; high schools ; homophobia ; 
humanistic education ; individual differences , in children ; 
learning , theories of ; learning environments ; mainstreaming and inclusion ; middle schools ; motivation , theories of ; 
personality ; pregnancy , of students ; school safety ; schooling effects ; sexuality , theories of ; social studies ; special
education ; suicide , in schools ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Connolly , P .  ( 2004 )  . Boys and schooling in the early years . 
New York : Routledge . 
Hay , D .  , Payne , A .  ,  & Chadwick , A .  ( 2004 )  . Peer relations in
childhood . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 
45 ( 1 )  , 84–108 . 
Lloyd , G .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Problem girls . New York : Routledge . 
Milner , M .  ( 2005 )  . Freaks , geeks and cool kids . New York : 
Routledge . 
Rasmusson , M .  ( 2005 )  . Becoming subjects : Sexualities and
secondary schooling . New York : Routledge . 
736———Peer Interaction / Friendships
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 736
Reifel , S .  ,  & Brown , M .  ( 2004 )  . Social contexts of early
education , and reconceptualizing play . St . Louis , MO : 
Elsevier . 
Smyth , J .  ,  & Hattam , R .  ( 2004 )  .  “ Dropping out ,  ” drifting off , 
being excluded : Becoming somebody without school . 
New York : Peter Lang . 
 PEIRCE , CYRUS
In 1839 , Horace Mann hired Cyrus Peirce to be the first
principal of the Lexington Normal School in
Lexington , Massachusetts . Mann turned to his longtime supporter and principal of the Nantucket High
School after being rebuffed by five other prominent
educators—each of whom had religious backgrounds . 
Peirce agreed to become not only the principal but
also the sole lecturer and director of the model school , 
as well as perform the duties of janitor . His views on
teaching and leadership reflected the same values held
by Horace Mann with respect to the need for a professional school to train better teachers . 
Cyrus Peirce ( 1790–1860 ) kept a reflective journal
of his first years , 1839 to 1841 , at the Lexington
Normal School . He also corresponded with prominent
educators , including Henry Barnard of Connecticut . 
His journal entries describe a man willing to fully commit himself to what he called “ the Experiment ,  ” noting
that he would prefer death to the experiment ’ s failure . 
In fact , it is clear that both mentally and physically , 
the work affected his health . Not a sanguine or patient
person to begin with , Peirce ’ s journal is an honest and
troubled account of the daily demands of school leadership . His workday combined teaching and teacher
training , from early morning to late in the afternoon . 
He rose before dawn to set the fires going in the castiron stoves in his little school building , and in winter
he arose at intervals all night to keep the stoves going . 
He sat late over his desk , writing down the events of
the day and the progress of the great experiment . 
Of the young women ( numbering from 7 to 21 during the first 2 years )  , Peirce noted both their talent and
lack of knowledge . He felt that they came to the
Normal School to acquire knowledge rather than learn
how to teach . The students were neither good readers
nor good spellers , nor did they know much arithmetic
and grammar . Still , it was Peirce ’ s goal to educate
them into becoming better teachers . At the same time , 
he was keenly aware that knowledge alone did not
necessarily make for an excellent teacher . 
As a teacher , he too experimented , varying his own
classroom approaches . His views were that of an
enlightened educator . He came to realize that studying
in a few areas for a greater length of time was better
than the time spent on too many subjects , and that
teaching using fear of corporal punishment was ineffective . And so , in spite his ill health , Peirce continued
his work in Lexington until 1842 and then led a second Normal School in West Newton until 1849 . 
—Ira Bogotch
See also administration , theories of ; leadership , theories of ; normal schools ; principalship ; schools of education ; supervision
Further Readings and References
Bogotch , I .  ( 2005 )  . A history of public school leadership : The
first century , 1837–1942 . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 7–33 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Cremin , L .  ( 1969 )  . American education : Its men , ideas and
institutions . New York : Arno Press .  ( Original title The first
state normal school in America : The journals of Cyrus
Peirce and Mary Swift [ 1926 ]  , Cambridge , MA : Harvard
University Press ) 
Norton , A .  ( 1926 )  . Introduction to The first state normal
school in America : The journals of Cyrus Peirce and Mary
Swift . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . 
 PERCEPTUAL CONTROL THEORY
Perceptual control theory ( PCT ) is a systems model
for the regulation of actions based on negative feedback loops as used in engineering control theory
developed by William T . Powers . The PCT model of
behavior is a radical departure from previous theories
about why the observed behavior of an individual
occurs . The process of perception plays a central role
in this theory . 
Perceptual processes in PCT can be thought of , in
some respects , as being the process that monitors the
signals being generated about controlled variables . 
Most controlled variables reside in the environment , 
that is , events in the environment that are important to
an individual , but some reside within the organism , 
that is , biological variables such as hunger and cognitive variables such as self-image . One is not aware of
all perceptual processes as they take place , nor even
most of them . Awareness is usually present only when
Perceptual Control Theory———737
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 737
control of a variable is being organized , when there is
a disturbance of a controlled variable that requires a
choice between response programs or after a programmed response fails to produce congruence between
the reference value for a controlled variable and the
perception of that controlled variable . In most cases , a
disturbance of a controlled variable automatically initiates a previously developed and successful programmed response and does not require conscious
awareness . Perception in the PCT model is hierarchical and includes 11 levels of perception ( see Figure 1 )  . 
Higher levels in the hierarchy set reference values for
lower levels in the hierarchy . With each step up the
hierarchy , the processing time for perceptual input
slows down , so that processing at the highest level in
the hierarchy proceeds at the slowest rate . 
The top three levels are of most immediate interest
in this discussion . It is at the systems level that reference
values are set , not to be confused with personal values
or standards that come from the principles level . 
Reference values can also be thought of as goals or
wants . Reference values may be established in several
ways . Reference values may have a biological basis , as
in the case of physical needs ; a social basis , as in the
case of beliefs ; and a personal basis , as in personal preferences . At the principles level , standards are developed to detect discrepancies between perceptual
signals originating from controlled variables and the
reference value or values related to a controlled variable . At the program level there is a repertoire of neurologically programmed actions that are available to
reduce or eliminate any perceived discrepancy ( error
signal )  . Actions , according to PCT , are not responses
caused by environmental stimuli but are caused by an
individual ’ s intent to reduce an error signal and thereby
achieve congruence between a goal or reference value
and the perception of some related controlled variable . 
In other words , the actions have a purpose , and the
purpose behind the actions resides not in the environment but within the individual . Purpose in PCT becomes
an important causal variable in human behavior or
actions . 
McClelland ’ s PCT conceptualization of social
environments , like schools , suggests that classrooms
are social designations , which refer to commonly
shared social environments in our society . Within
these shared social environments , coordinated social
activities like teaching take place that require collective control of the activities . For effective and efficient
collective control of teaching activities , it is necessary
that all individuals sharing the environment accept similar reference values ( goals and rules ) and standards . 
In educational environments , this generally means
that students accept the goals and rules ( reference values ) and standards of the key players ( i . e .  , administrators , teachers , and support staff ) in the educational
environment . 
An approach to socializing students based on PCT
is the responsible thinking process ( RTP ) developed
by Ed Ford . RTP is a program that facilitates collective control of instructional activities through helping
students to accept and adopt the reference values
and standards of school personnel . It is important that
students perceive the school and classroom as having
a positive climate and want to be there . Facilitating a
desire in students to be in school is important , because
the RTP program does not employ any contrived
extrinsic rewards for school attendance or classroom
738———Perceptual Control Theory
↓ 11 . Systems Level : Be a responsible person ← |  
| 
↓ 10 . Principles Level : Meet commitments ← |  
| 
↓ 9 . Program Level : Drive to Bill ’ s & return video ← |  
| 
↓ 8 . Sequence Level : Starting the car ← |  
| 
↓ 7 . Category Level : Motor skills ← |  
| 
↓ 6 . Relationship Level : Driving ← |  
| 
↓ 5 . Events Level : Steering car ← |  
| 
↓ 4 . Transition Level : Turning wheel to right ← |  
| 
↓ 3 . Configuration Level : Fingers around wheel ← |  
| 
↓ 2 . Sensation Level : Gripping ← |  
| 
↓ 1 . Intensity Level : Muscle tension in fingers ← |  
| 
↓ |  
| 
Effect on Environment | 
↓ |  
| 
Analysis of Effect | 
↓ |  
| 
Sensory Feedback | 
Figure 1 Perceptual Hierarchy and Feedback Loop
Based on the 11-Level PCT Model
SOURCE : Center , D . B .  ( 1999 )  . Strategies for Social and
Emotional Behavior : A Teacher ’ s Guide . Norcross , GA : XanEdu , 
Inc . Reprinted with permission . 
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 738
participation . The reason for this appears to be related to
the concept of cognitive dissonance . Studies on cognitive dissonance indicate that if people are asked to take a
position contrary to their usual attitude about something , 
there is a greater likelihood that they will identify with
the contrary position if they have not received an extrinsic reward for doing so . Thus , when given an extrinsic
reward for complying with the goals and standards of a
teacher , the effect will only be temporary for most
students . When students do not receive an extrinsic
reward for compliance , an error signal is generated by
the perceived discrepancy between their actions and
their goals . One potential outcome of this is to reduce
the discrepancy or error signal by adopting the goals and
standards of the teacher , that is , incorporating them into
one ’ s self identity . In short , PCT and RTP probably view
extrinsic reward as a disturbance for a teacher ’ s controlled variable , student socialization . 
—David Center
See also behaviorism ; classroom management ; cognitive dissonance ; critical thinking ; discipline in schools ; expectations , teacher and student cultures ; feedback ; group
dynamics ; learning environments ; metacognition ; motivation , theories of ; perceptual psychology ; persuasion ; psychology , types of ; social context ; values education
Further Readings and References
Center , D .  ( 1999 )  . Perceptual control theory : An alternative
perspective . In Strategies for social and emotional behavior : A teacher ’ s guide . Norcross , GA : XanEdu . 
Ford , E .  ( 1997 )  . Discipline for home and school : Book one 
( 2nd ed .  )  . Scottsdale , AZ : Brandt . 
McClelland , K .  ( 1994 )  . Perceptual control and social power . 
Sociological Perspectives , 37 ( 4 )  , 461–496 . 
Powers , W .  ( 1973 )  . Behavior : The control of perception . 
New York : Aldine . 
Powers , W .  ( 1998 )  . Making sense of behavior : The meaning of
control . New Canaan , CT : Benchmark . 
Taylor , L .  ( 2004 )  . Introducing cognitive development . 
New York : Routledge . 
 PERCEPTUAL PSYCHOLOGY
Perceptual psychology is the study of the process by
which sensations are interpreted through the lens of
knowledge and understanding to become meaningful experiences . Perceptual psychology aims to cognize how one attaches and derives meaningful symbols
from the simple electrical impulses that provide awareness , for example , of light , dark , and color in our visual
systems . From a perceptual viewpoint , behaviors are
considered manifestations of underlying beliefs . 
Perceptual organization is the task performed by the
perceptual system to determine what visual and other
sensory stimuli are compatible in forming a representation of an object . 
Modern perceptual psychology is a conglomeration
of three main approaches , computational , constructivist , 
and ecological , each intended to understand human
perception . The computational approach attempts to
determine the calculations that machines would necessarily perform while solving perceptual problems . 
The understanding of these machine computations
facilitates the explanation of complex processes within
the nervous systems of humans and other animals and
how these computations allow the transformation of
raw sensory stimulation into a representation of a living
world . 
On the other hand , the constructivist approach argues
that perceptual systems build a representation of reality
from fragments of sensory information . Constructivist psychologists are particularly interested in situations where the identical physical stimuli give rise to
different perceptions in different people . For example , 
an optical illusion for one culture may not prove effective in another culture if the two have not had similar
lifeworld experience with the objects presented in the
illusion . Its emphasis is that perception is strongly
influenced by expectations and inferences based on
past experience and prior knowledge . 
Third and opposite , the ecological approach claims
that most perceptual experience is due directly to the
wealth of information contained in the array of stimuli
presented in an environment . According to this approach , 
the primary goal of perception is to support actions , 
such as walking , grabbing , or flying a plane , by focusing on those parts of the environmental stimulus array
that are most pertinent to performing those actions . 
Therefore , psychologists in this field would be little
interested in a person ’ s interpretation of a setting but
greatly interested in how that person would use visual
information gleaned from the environment . 
Perceptual organization itself has two basic
principles : figure-ground processing and perceptual
grouping . In accordance with figure-ground processing , perception is not only an active process but is also
a categorizing one . People usually organize sensory
stimulation into one perceptual category or another but
Perceptual Psychology———739
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 739
rarely into two categories or something in between . 
Perceptual grouping , originated from Gestalt psychology ( Gestalten , German for organized wholes )  , refers
to the human visual ability to extract significant
relationships from lower-level primitive image features
without any knowledge of the pictorial content and to
group them to obtain meaningful higher-level structure . It asserts that people perceive sight and sound as
organized wholes , as opposed to just a sum of individual sensations . Perceptual grouping describes how perceptual systems organize a stimulus array of raw
sensations into a world of shapes and objects . Certain
inherent parts of the stimulus environment lead people
to group them together more or less automatically . 
—Eunyoung Kim
See also brain research and practice ; cognition , theories of ; 
cognitive dissonance ; cognitive styles ; conceptual systems
theory and leadership ; creativity , theories of ; critical thinking ; differentiation of stimuli ; individual differences , in
children ; intelligence ; learning , theories of ; multiculturalism ; neuroscience ; personality ; psychology , types of
Further Readings and References
Lee , S .  ( 2005 )  . Encyclopedia of school psychology . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Smilkstein , R .  ( 2003 )  . We ’ re born to learn . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
Sylwester , R .  ( 2004 )  . How to explain a brain . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
 PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
Performance assessment is the formal and informal
judgments of how well people complete observable
tasks . The two most common uses of the term performance assessment in education relate to student
achievement and employees , such as teachers , completing the functions of their jobs . 
The first use the assessment serves is what has
been called the American meritocracy , which is a way
of determining who gets America ’ s material rewards . 
Intelligence tests , and also education itself , can ’ t be
counted on to find every form of merit . They don ’ t
find wisdom , originality , humor , toughness , empathy , 
common sense , independence , or determination—let
alone moral value . Student performance assessment is
not presently able to provide opportunity on the basis
of the various forms of merit that a true meritocracy
should have , but it can measure some preestablished
academic criteria . One important caution that has
been noted by some is that we need to be aware of the
impact and limitations of what criteria are used . In this
regard , no amount of subsequent manipulation can
eliminate all the initial biases that are imposed upon
policy and program decisions in the selection of a specific model as a guide to analyze performance . 
There have been some improvements in measuring certain identified academic standards , which some
argue have a relationship with future potential to succeed within the present university system and at some
jobs . This is criterion—rather than norm-referenced—
assessment , which measures how well individuals
perform in relation to a group of individuals . It should
be noted that there is a difference between norms and
standards . That is , norms change , standards do not—
standards are fixed . Standards promote mixed ability
grouping . Norms tend to promote segregation of students
by ability . 
It is believed that good classroom assessment can
improve student achievement . Alan Glatthorn indicated that assessment-driven instruction entirely
focused upon performance assessment , from planning
to execution . However , he cautioned that performance
assessments can have problems . It is important to
identify the tasks to be assessed—namely , the standards that are established before teaching begins . 
The second use of the term performance assessment
deals with employee evaluation , most often teachers . 
Teacher evaluation takes many forms . 
The system used to assess teaching performance is
important . One confusing aspect of employee performance appraisal is the distinction that is made
between formative evaluation and summative evaluation . Formative evaluation occurs when the main purpose is to help an individual improve performance—
put another way , it forms a better employee . Summative
evaluation , on the other hand , results in a summation
or final report as its main purpose and is used to make
a personnel decision ( such as the nonrenewal of an
employee ’ s contract or a promotion )  . 
The distinction is blurred at least in part by the
requirement in most states that in order to nonrenew
a teacher ’ s contract , the summative evaluation must
include at least documentation of formative evaluation . Employees enjoy certain types of legislative
protection within the performance appraisal process . 
These legal issues are one of several reasons that can
740———Performance Assessment
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 740
be offered for paying more attention to the psychometric properties of performance assessments ( such as
reliability and validity )  . 
Most personnel texts recognize the importance of
reliability and validity . While reliability deals with the
various types of consistency that may or may not be in
a process , the various types of validity deal with how
well the performance appraisal process performs relative to the intended purpose of the procedure . The two
most salient types of validity are content and construct . 
Content validity , which is analytically determined , basically examines the process to see whether it evaluates all
that it purports to and only that which it purports to evaluate . In other words , content validity evaluates whether
there is anything deficient , or is being missed ( e . g .  , if
creativity was important , is that part of what is being
assessed ?  )  , or whether there is anything contaminating
the assessment ( e . g .  , if classroom order were one aspect
of the process , that should not influence other aspects of
the assessment )  , or whether there is anything extra being
assessed that should not be ( e . g .  , if personal appearance
was not important to a particular school , then that would
not need to be part of the assessment )  . Construct validity , on the other hand , is more complex and involves
multiple approaches attempting to support the process in
terms of whether constructs ( such as leadership or
empathy ) are accurately measured . 
In conclusion , performance assessment in education has become an issue with very high stakes while
the field is struggling with the reliability and validity
of both student and employee assessments . 
—A . William Place
See also achievement tests ; halo effect ; job descriptions ; management by objectives ; merit pay ; No Child Left Behind ; 
performance evaluation systems ; portfolios ; standardized
testing ; supervision ; testing and test theory development ; 
walk-throughs , of classrooms
Further Readings and References
Alexander , P .  ( 2004 )  . Rethinking schooling as academic
development . Mid-Western Educational Researcher , 17 ( 1 )  , 
15–20 . 
Downey , C .  , Steffy , B .  , English , F .  , Frase , L .  ,  & Poston , W .  
( 2005 )  . The three-minute classroom walk-through : 
Changing school supervisory practice one teacher at a
time . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Frase , L .  ( 2005 )  . Refocusing the purposes of teacher supervision . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 430–462 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Sage . 
Glatthorn , A .  , with Bragaw , D .  , Dawkins , K .  ,  & Parker , J .  
( 1998 )  . Performance assessment and standards-based
curricula : The achievement cycle . Larchmont , NY : Eye on
Education . 
McNergney , R .  , Imig , S .  ,  & Pearlman , M .  ( 2003 )  . Teacher
evaluation . In J . Guthrie ( Ed .  )  , Encyclopedia of education 
( Vol . 7 , 2nd ed .  , pp . 2453–2461 )  . New York : Macmillan . 
Young , I .  ,  & Castetter , W .  ( 2004 )  . The human resource function in educational administration ( 8th ed .  )  . Upper Saddle
River , NJ : Pearson Prentice Hall . 
 PERFORMANCE 
EVALUATION SYSTEMS
Performance evaluation systems are managerial tools
designed to facilitate an organization in accomplishing certain strategic goals in the human resource
area . Within the public school setting , performance
appraisal systems encompass and expand traditional
employee assessment tasks through a systematic plan
of execution design to accomplish specific goals . 
Underlying the emergence and adoption of performance appraisal systems by public school districts are
certain societal events . 
Most notably among these societal events is the
recent focus on accountability with respect to academic performance of students as measured by state proficiency tests . In the past , formal accountability measures
were almost nonexistent relative to student performance . Today , accountability measures of student performance are disaggregated according to school
districts , building levels , as well as classroom settings , 
and this information is reported in the popular press
and on the World Wide Web . 
Accompanying the accountability movement and
influencing the adoptions of performance evaluation
systems on the part of school districts is the emergence and saturation of employee unions within the
public school setting . Employee appraisal , once an
exclusive managerial task , has become a bilateral concern involving unions as well as school administrators . To accommodate the concerns of both parties , 
performance evaluation systems are more viable than
the traditional appraisal process used by most public
school districts in the past . 
Indeed , in the past , employee appraisals were viewed
as an event as opposed to a performance evaluation
process . As an event , performance appraisals were
conducted on a particular day , based on a single job
Performance Evaluation Systems———741
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 741
observation , void of defined goals , and lacked any
formal follow-up in most instances . As a result , an
employee could fair well or not so well depending on
the day chosen for the appraisal . 
In contrast to the traditional methods of performance appraisal , performance evaluation systems fill
many voids . Structurally , performance evaluation systems impose a formal structure for the employee evaluation process involving input from administrators as
well as employees . At minimum , this structure of performance evaluation systems involves a preassessment
conference , an on-job observation ( s )  , as well as an
assessment of appropriate information , and a postconference debriefing . 
Goals of the preassessment conference are to
outline organizational expectations relative to purpose , to
describe the manner in which the evaluation process will
be conducted , to present the employee with appraisal
instruments , and to discuss employee concerns . Each
of these topics is a necessary part of an effective
performance evaluation system , and each deserves further consideration . For example , with respect to the
purpose of the appraisal , as fundamental as this may
seem , the purpose is often overlooked or unknown by
the participants . 
The purpose of a performance evaluation system
can vary in some important ways , and these ways of
variation are often mutually exclusive . Purposes of a
performance evaluation system could be to assess if a
particular employee should be retained by a school district , to determine among employees those most entitled to awards , merit increases , promotions , or special
training , or to identify particular skill enhancement
areas for making individuals better employees . Based
on these separate purposes that a performance evaluation system can fulfill , different referent standards are
utilized by effective performance evaluation systems . 
The referent standards appropriate for a performance evaluation system designed to determine if the
services of an employee should be retained is a criteria reference system . A criteria reference system is
designed to determine if employees achieve a satisfactory performance relative to certain preestablished
standards . When employees achieve an acceptable
level of performance relative to preestablished standards , they are retained , and when they fail to achieve
an acceptable level of performance on preestablished
standards , they are released . 
In contrast to a criteria referenced system is a norm
referenced system . A norm referenced performance
evaluation system compares the job performance of an
employee to the job performance of all other employees
to yield a rank ordering of employees without any reference to an external standard ( criteria referenced system )  . 
Norm referenced performance evaluation systems
provide data necessary for distinguishing among those
entitled to awards , merit increases , promotions , or
special training . 
Still different are self-referenced performance
evaluation systems . Self-referenced performance
evaluation systems assess the performance of any
given employee on all dimensions of job performance
performed and provide information about relative
levels of performance on each dimension . A measure
of relative levels for performance across job dimensions is necessary to identify areas either for remedial
work or for work enhancement of employees . 
Accompanying each of these referent sources 
( criteria , norm , or self )  , varying according to purported purpose , is specific performance assessment
techniques that form the foundation of any performance evaluation system . Largely grouped , these
techniques are rating procedures , ranking methods , 
and subjective techniques . Several variations exist for
operationalizing performance evaluation systems
according to each family of techniques . 
Rating procedures used in performance evaluation
systems can be differentiated relative to how anchor
points are determined for criteria reference scales . 
Anchor points relative to specific criteria can be numerically determined ( e . g .  , 1–5 )  , verbally determined ( e . g .  , 
never-always )  , or behaviorally determined . Behaviorally anchored rating scales ( BARS ) have produced
an entire body of literature and have been found to be
by far the most superior rating technique for evaluating
employees , because these types of scales exhibit actual
levels of job performance for specific levels . 
Ranking procedures used to form the foundation
for a performance evaluation system range from very
simple to very complex . Simple derivations of ranking
techniques involve sorting employees in ascending ( or
descending ) order relative to performance , while more
complicated derivations involve a paired comparison , 
where each employee is compared individually to all
other employees . The choice between ranking techniques for use in a performance evaluation system
depends largely on the number of employees to be
evaluated . 
Performance evaluation systems relying on selfreference techniques designed to improve the performance of individual employees draw from several subjective techniques . Most common among the traditional
742———Performance Evaluation Systems
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 742
techniques for self-referent comparison is management by objectives ( MBO )  , and achieving recent
popularity are portfolio assessments . As compared to
either rating or ranking techniques , performance evaluation systems using self-referent comparisons afford
employees the greatest input within a performance
evaluation system . 
Finally , performance evaluation systems differ in
significant ways when compared to traditional performance appraisal processes . Current performance
evaluation systems , as enacted by progressive public
school districts , focus specifically on purpose , a referent group , and a defined evaluation technique . By so
focusing , those human resource goals are much more
likely to be accomplished . 
—I . Phillip Young
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; administration , 
theories of ; attitudes toward work ; behaviorism ; bureaucracy ; classroom management ; clinical supervision ; differentiated staffing ; esteem needs ; flow theory ; halo effect ; human
resource development ; Interstate School Leaders Licensure
Consortium ; management by objectives ; management theories ; 
measurement , theories of ; mentoring ; merit pay ; performance assessment ; personnel management ; salary and salary
models ; self-actualization ; staffing , concepts of ; standardized testing ; supervision ; work task measurement
Further Readings and References
Alexander , B .  , Anderson , G .  ,  & Gallegos , B .  ( 2004 )  . 
Performance theories in education : Power , pedagogy , and
the politics of identity . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Conley , S .  ,  & Bacharach , S .  ( 1992 )  . Performance appraisal in
education : A strategic consideration . In L . Frase ( Ed .  )  , 
Teacher compensation and motivation ( pp . 261–273 )  . 
Lancaster , PA : Technomic . 
Haas , E .  ,  & Poynor , L .  ( 2005 )  . Issues of teaching and learning . 
In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of leadership 
( pp . 483–505 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Heneman , H .  ,  & Judge , T .  ( 2002 )  . Staffing organizations 
( 4th ed .  )  . Middleton WI : Mendota House . 
Peterman , F .  ( 2005 )  . Designing performance assessment systems for urban teacher preparation . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Young , I . P .  ,  & Castetter , W .  ( 2004 )  . The human resource function in educational administration ( 8th ed .  )  . Columbus , 
OH : Merrill Prentice Hall
 PERSONALITY
The psychological construct of personality affects education in a variety of significant ways , including student
achievement and performance , faculty performance , 
and educational leadership styles and capabilities . 
Understanding the rudiments of personality disorders , 
and the inventories and profiles used to define them , 
provides educational leaders with the knowledge to
better understand why people behave as they do . From
this knowledge , one can better develop and manage
successful programs and interventions for students
exhibiting a variety of needs and learning preferences . 
PERSONALITY
The many existing theories of personality differ in
causal explanations , description of behaviors , and perspective ( differences vs . commonalities )  . Despite the
number and variety of theories , some commonalities
emerge : stages of development , temperament or genetic
predisposition , impact and types of learning , motivational effects , impact of emotions on thinking and
behavior , and a focus on conscious and unconscious
processes . Many theorists describe personality in terms
of individual differences . They focus on types and categories of people and behavior , for example , introversion
versus extroversion , auditory versus visual learner , selffocus versus altruism . Other theories focus on the commonalities in people . The question is , What do people
with this certain type of behavior have in common ? 
These common characteristics may then be used as a
basis for developing profiles of individuals suited for
certain tasks ( e . g .  , jobs , careers , relationships )  . Regardless of perspective , personality theorists focus on the
psychological structure of the individual and attempt to
explain human behavior from that perspective . 
The large number of personality theories are
typically organized in textbooks into major categories
based on similarities in the theories . Common groupings include the following . 
Behavioral and Social Learning Theories
Theories in this group tend to explain behavior 
( personality ) in terms of reaction to external stimuli
and events . John Watson is credited with beginning
this school of thought . He believed that behavior
was not related to the mind or human consciousness ; 
rather , behavior was the result of reflexes and conditioning . B . F . Skinner carried Watson ’ s work further
and developed the principle of operant conditioning . 
In addition to responding to their environment , people 
 “ operate ” on their environment as well as produce certain consequences . Operant conditioning is the situation
Personality———743
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 743
where when a response is no longer followed by a
consequence ( it is not reinforced )  , it will cease to
occur . Related to this is the social learning theory
developed by Albert Bandura ( who also may be categorized as a cognitive social learning theorist )  . He
suggested that memory and feelings operate in conjunction with environmental influences . If one displays an incompatible behavior , the original behavior
ceases to be displayed . 
Many of the concepts and terminology used in understanding and describing student learning and behavior
are derived from behaviorism . Classroom management
of students is often described and developed based on
behavior principles such as successive approximation 
( reward successive steps to the final desired behavior )  , 
continuous reinforcement ( promote new behavior by
rewarding every small step toward it )  , negative reinforcement ( to increase a desired behavior , arrange / allow
escape from a mild aversive situation by behaving
appropriately )  , modeling ( observe a significant person
demonstrating the desired positive behavior )  , and cueing ( to remember to act at a specific time in response to
an arranged cue , rather than after the fact )  . 
Biological
The biological approach to personality includes
investigations of the impact of genetics , evolution , 
neuropsychology , and other biological functions and
processes ( e . g .  , hormones , neurotransmitters ) that
influence personality . It is not a cohesive approach ; 
rather , it is an amalgam of investigations attempting to
relate biological processes to personality . Evolutionary
psychologists ( sometimes referred to as sociobiologists ) think that psychological adaptations are not
qualitatively different from physical adaptations in
evolution . Examples of some aspects of human psychology that are studied from this perspective include
intellectual capacity , language , emotions , and sexual
behaviors . 
The biological basis of behavior is supported by
scientists ’ ability to reproduce behaviors in successive generations of organisms ( e . g .  , herding behavior
of border collies ) and to identify species-specific
behaviors . A brain injury can produce dramatic
changes in one ’ s behavior and personality . Behaviors
associated with certain mental illnesses tend to run in
families . Some behaviors have an evolutionary history
that exists across species . Chimpanzees and humans
share traits such as cooperation , altruism , and nurturing . 
Researchers in behavioral genetics have made claims
for behaviors , including aggression , impulsivity , and
nurturing . 
Special educators have long acknowledged the
biological basis of many learning and behavior differences in students . Students with learning disabilities
are sometimes referred to as “ hard wired ” differently
from those without such difficulties . Many children
diagnosed as having attention-deficit / hyperactivity
disorder ( ADHD ) respond favorably to stimulant medications ( Adderol , Ritalin , Cylert )  , suggesting a neurochemical basis for the condition . The preliminary
returns of the massive Human Genome Project are providing chromosomal maps of components of human
personality . Future research in the area of the biological bases of personality will undoubtedly shed more
light on the relationship of biology and personality . 
Cognitive
Cognitive approaches to personality emphasize
the mind and its relationship to behavior . These
approaches describe how cognitive processes influence learning , how normal maturation produces
increasingly sophisticated thinking , and how people
organize things they learn . It also emphasizes that new
information is most easily acquired when people can
associate it with things they have previously learned
and that people control their own learning . 
Educators are most familiar with the work of
Jean Piaget , who spent a lifetime delving into the basic
question of How does knowledge develop and grow ? 
Cognitive development is described in terms of changes
in a child ’ s cognitive structures , abilities , and processes . 
Cognitive performance is directly associated with the
cognitive developmental stage they are in . The four
major stages are ( 1 ) sensorimotor ( birth to 2 years ) —
children “ think ” with their hands , ears , eyes , nose , 
mouth ;  ( 2 ) preoperational ( 2 to 6 / 7 years ) —egocentric
thinking and behavior , mental imagery developing , language developing ;  ( 3 ) concrete ( 6 / 7 to 11 / 12 years ) —
decentering occurs , logical and organized thought
processes emerge ; and ( 4 ) formal ( 11 / 12 years to
adult ) —development of abstract , theoretical thinking . 
Cognitive change takes place through equilibration
encompassing assimilation ( transform information to fit
existing schemes ) and accommodation ( adapt schemes
to include incoming information )  . 
Educators have used Piaget ’ s work to develop guiding principles of practice . These include the provision
744———Personality
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 744
of an active , discovery-oriented classroom environment , inclusion of peer teaching and interactional activities , and instructional strategies to make children aware
of conflicts and inconsistencies in their thinking ( e . g .  , 
Socratic dialogue )  . Specific instructional techniques
derived from this theoretical approach include anchored
instruction , authentic learning , scaffolding , modeling , 
and coaching . 
Humanistic and Existential
The humanistic and existential theorists focus on
the uniqueness of humanity . This school of thought
emerged as a backlash to behaviorism , trait , and psychodynamic theories in the 1950s . The free will of
people is emphasized . Humanistic theorists focus on the
subjective experiences of individuals and their positive
drive toward self-fulfillment . Personality is understood
and described in the present (  “ here and now ”  ) rather
than in the past , with an emphasis on personal responsibility . Hallmarks include a focus on conscious experiences and a belief in the value of phenomenology . 
Notable humanistic psychologists include Alfred
Adler , Abraham Maslow , and Carl Rogers . Adler , a former student and colleague of Sigmund Freud , developed
his theory of individual psychology , with a primary
motivating force being the human need to strive for perfection . Secondarily was his idea of social interest , that
is , caring for family , society , humanity , and all of life . 
Maslow is best known for establishing his theory of
the hierarchy of needs . He believed that people are
basically trustworthy and capable of self-governance . 
He categorized basic types of human needs as being
physiological , safety , love , and esteem . Satisfying these
needs is seen as healthy . 
Carl Rogers is often thought of as the founder
of humanistic psychology . Humanists view people as
basically good or healthy and positive mental health
as a normal progression of life . Personality problems
are distortions of the human drive to self-actualization . This is very similar to Adler ’ s “ striving for perfection ” motivator . Rogers developed the concept of
positive regard ( love , acceptance , affection , attention , 
nurturance ) as a human value . Achieving this positive
regard under certain conditions came to be known as
conditional positive regard and is seen as the cause of
many self-esteem issues in humans . 
Educators have seen the influence of humanistic
theories of personality in the proliferation of character
education programs available in schools . Counseling
techniques and practices common in schools have
also been developed ( e . g .  , the practice of unconditional acceptance ) from a humanistic perspective . 
Psychoanalytic
Theories in this group usually focus first on the
work of Sigmund Freud . His psychosexual stage
development theory highlighted the power of the conscious and unconscious processes that influence emotions and behavior . The goal of therapy is to make the
unconscious conscious . The interaction of the three
constructs of the id ( instincts and wishes )  , ego ( reality
mediator )  , and the superego ( conscience ) determine
one ’ s personality . The id operates on the pleasure
principle and the ego on the reality principle . The
superego is an internalization of both warnings ( conscience ) and the ego ideal ( positive models )  . 
Other notable theorists in this group include Anna
Freud ( Sigmund Freud ’ s daughter )  , Erik Erikson , 
and Carl Jung . Erikson disagreed with Freud over the
influence of instinctual drives : his psychosocial stage
theory emphasized the influence of society on the ego
and how individuals adapt to different social demands . 
Jung developed what is described as a transpersonal
perspective , focusing on symbolism and the collective
unconscious . 
Trait
Trait theories emphasize a temporally stable
description of one ’ s behavior , rather than a causal
explanation . Traits are those cross-situational characteristics of a person that are related to thoughts , 
feelings , and behaviors , and they tend to fall along a
continuum in terms of intensity of expression . For
example , a person characterized as an extrovert is likely
to be talkative and enjoy the company of others . Several
of the major trait theorists include Gordon Allport , 
Raymond Cattell , Hans Eysenck , Lewis Goldberg , and
John Holland . 
Allport described three types of traits that vary in
degree of expression : cardinal ( around which people
organize their life—e . g .  , greed , kindness )  , central 
( major characteristics )  , and secondary ( enduring qualities that don ’ t explain general behavior )  . 
Cattell used factor analytic techniques to describe 16
primary personality factors and 5 secondary factors . 
From this theory , he developed the 16-Personality Factor
Questionnaire . 
Personality———745
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 745
Eysenck developed a hierarchical model of personality that links types , traits , and behaviors . The two
primary dimensions include scales labeled introversion-extroversion and neuroticism-stability . He also
examined the relationship of human biological processes to behavior and personality . 
Goldberg built his work on the theory of Cattell , 
and developed a five-dimension personality model . The
so-called big five are ( 1 ) extroversion ( assertive vs . 
shy , quiet , reserved )  ,  ( 2 ) agreeableness ( sympathetic vs . 
cold , argumentative )  ,  ( 3 ) conscientiousness ( organized , 
responsible vs . careless , irresponsible )  ,  ( 4 ) emotional
stability ( calm , content vs . anxious , temperamental )  , 
and ( 5 ) intellect ( creative , open minded vs . simple , 
unintelligent )  . 
Holland developed a six-type model often used in
career counseling . The types are ( 1 ) realistic ( physical , 
hands on )  ,  ( 2 ) investigative ( scientific , technical )  ,  ( 3 ) 
artistic ( writing , painting )  ,  ( 4 ) social ( supporting , helping )  ,  ( 5 ) enterprising ( organizing , motivating )  , and ( 6 ) 
conventional ( clerical , detail oriented )  . 
PERSONALITY DISORDERS
A personality disorder is a psychological construct characterized by a pervasive pattern of behavior that is abnormal with respect to mood , thought , relationships , and / or
impulse control . Individuals with a personality disorder
experience tremendous difficulty in interactions with
others . They tend to be somewhat inflexible and constricted in their range of adaptable behaviors to normal
life situations . In addition , they are typically unaware
of the impact their behavior has on others , thinking that
their behavior ( s ) is justified and appropriate . 
Personality disorders are often recognizable in
adolescence and tend to manifest themselves throughout adulthood . Clinicians often report similar behaviors in children ; however , the construct of conduct
disorder is used to describe this constellation of
behaviors in children . Regardless of one ’ s theoretical
orientation to personality , the holy grail of terminology is found in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders ( 4th ed .  )  ( DSM-IV )  , published by
the American Psychiatric Association . Personality disorder is described in the manual as a lasting pattern of
behavior that is pervasive and inflexible , remains stable over time , and results in impairment . Ten distinct
personality disorders are described in the DSM-IV . 
The personality disorders and their characteristic
features are summarized below : 
Antisocial Personality Disorder
These individuals tend to disregard social rules , may
be deceitful ( lying )  , impulsive , irritable , or aggressive , 
demonstrate a disregard for the safety of self or others , 
are irresponsible at work and / or financially , and / or
demonstrate a lack of remorse for having mistreated
others . 
Avoidant Personality Disorder
These individuals tend to display social inhibition
and feelings of inadequacy . They may avoid occupations involving significant personal interactions , demonstrate an inordinate need to be liked , have difficulty
forming intimate relationships for fear of being shamed , 
are preoccupied with fears of rejection in social situations or feelings of inadequacy , view self as inferior to
others , and are afraid of appropriate risk-taking due to a
fear of being embarrassed . 
Borderline Personality Disorder
These individuals have persistent relationship
difficulties and marked impulsivity related to efforts
to avoid real or imagined abandonment , unstable and
intense interpersonal relationships alternating
between idealization and devaluation , impulsivity in
two or more areas that are considered self-damaging 
( such as spending , sex , substance abuse , reckless driving )  , a marked reactivity of mood lasting a few hours
or a few days , chronic feelings of “ emptiness ,  ” difficulty controlling anger , and / or stress-related paranoid
ideation or severe dissociative symptoms . 
Dependent Personality Disorder
These individuals demonstrate an excessive need
to be taken care of that is manifested by submissive
and clinging behavior . They often require excessive
reassurance from others , have difficulty expressing
disagreements , initiating projects , or doing things on
their own , feel helpless when alone , and / or immediately seek a relationship when one ends . 
Histrionic Personality Disorder
These individuals display excessive emotionality
and attention seeking behavior . They may be uncomfortable not being the center of attention , may be inappropriately seductive , display rapidly but shallow
746———Personality
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 746
emotions , use physical appearance to draw attention
to self , are prone to self-dramatization , and / or may consider relationships to be more intimate than they are . 
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
These individuals exhibit a pattern of grandiosity , 
need for admiration , and exhibit a lack of empathy . They
may exaggerate achievements and talents , are preoccupied with fantasies of success , power , beauty , and brilliance , believe that they are unique , require excessive
admiration , operate with a sense of entitlement , are
exploitive of others , demonstrate a lack of empathy , 
believe that others are envious of them , and / or may
demonstrate arrogant behaviors or attitudes . 
Obsessive-Compulsive
Personality Disorder
These individuals have a preoccupation with orderliness , perfectionism , and interpersonal control at the
expense of flexibility , openness , and efficiency . They
may be preoccupied with details , rules , lists , order , 
and organization to the extent that the major focus of
the activity is lost , overconscientious and inflexible
about matters of morality , ethics , and values , and / or
reluctant to delegate tasks or work with others unless
things are done exactly their way . 
Paranoid Personality Disorder
These individuals demonstrate a pervasive distrust
and suspiciousness of others such that their motives
are interpreted as malevolent . They may be suspicious
that others are exploiting them , doubt the trustworthiness of others , read hidden demeaning meanings into
benign remarks or events , bear grudges , are quick to
react angrily , and / or may demonstrate recurrent suspicions , without justification , regarding fidelity of their
sexual partner . 
Schizoid Personality Disorder
These individuals exhibit a detachment from social
relationships and a restricted range of expression of
emotions in interpersonal settings . They neither desire
nor enjoy close relationships , prefer solitary activities , 
have little interest in sexual experiences with another , 
take pleasure in few activities , and / or may show emotional coldness , detachment , or flattened affectivity . 
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
These individuals experience acute discomfort
or reduced capacity for close relationships as well as
demonstrate cognitive or perceptual distortions and
eccentricities of behavior . 
PERSONALITY INVENTORIES
AND PROFILES
Personality inventories are standardized instruments
that may be administered individually or in a group
setting . Many may be computer scored . The scores are
compared with norms for each of the categories on the
instrument : some measure one factor , such as depression , while others measure a number of personality
traits at the same time . There are literally hundreds
of inventories and profiles available to clinicians and
others trained to interpret the results accurately . The
reader is referred to the Fifteenth Mental Measurements
Yearbook published by the Buros Institute ( also available online ) for descriptions and reviews of all inventories and profiles . 
Some of the more commonly used inventories that
educators may encounter include the following . 
NEO Personality Inventory
Revised ( NEO-PI-R ) 
This inventory is based on the five-factor ( neuroticism , extraversion , openness to experience , agreeableness , conscientiousness ) model of personality , and
provides a general description of personality . 
Cattell ’ s 16 Personal
Factor Questionnaire ( 16 PF 5th ed .  ) 
This inventory has been used for over 40 years by
clinicians for treatment planning , marriage counseling , and vocational guidance . Global factors addressed
are labeled extraversion , anxiety , tough-mindedness , 
independence , and self-control . 
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory 2nd ed .  ( MMPI-2 ) 
This inventory was developed in the 1930s for
adults but has been used extensively with adolescents . 
The MMPI-2 does not have adolescent norms ; therefore , the user is directed to the MMPI-A normed on an
Personality———747
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 747
adolescent population . The MMPI-2 contains 10
clinical scales describing the symptoms of a variety of
personality-disorder-related behaviors . 
California Personality Inventory ( CPI ) 
This inventory was derived from the MMPI . It
yields scales on a number of factors , including dominance , self-acceptance , self-control , socialization , and
achievement . 
Myers Briggs Type Indicator ( MBTI ) 
This inventory is based on the psychological types
described by Carl Jung . The essence of the theory
is that variation in behavior is orderly and consistent , 
being due to basic differences in the way individuals
prefer to use their perception and judgment . The 16
different personality types result from the interactions
among the preferences . 
Eysenck Personality Inventory ( EPI ) 
This inventory is based on Eysenck ’ s factor
analysis of personality that places people on a pair of
independent continua ( extraversion-introversion and
neuroticism-stability )  . He believed that personality
factors were genetically influenced . 
—George W . Griffin
See also at-risk students ; attitudes ; behaviorism ; Binet , Alfred ; 
bullying ; Burt , Cyril ; Cattell , Raymond ; cognition , theories
of ; counseling ; cultural capital ; dogmatism and scales of
Rokeach ; dropouts ; egocentrism , theories of ; emotional
disturbance ; esteem needs ; flow theory ; Freud , Sigmund ; 
humanistic education ; individual differences , in children ; 
intelligence ; Jung , Carl ; learning , theories of ; Maslow , 
Abraham ; mental illness , in adults and children ; multiculturalism ; Piaget , Jean ; psychology , types of ; Rogers , Carl ; 
self-actualization ; sexuality , theories of ; Skinner , B . F .  ; 
Spearman , Charles ; standardized testing ; subjectivism , in
theory ; Thorndike , Edward ; trait theory ; Wolf , Montrose
Further Readings and References
American Psychiatric Association .  ( 1994 )  . Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders ( 4th ed .  )  . 
Washington , DC : American Psychiatric Association . 
Bettis , P .  ,  & Adams , N .  ( 2005 )  . Geographies of girlhood . 
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Costa , P .  ,  & Widiger , T .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2001 )  . Personality disorders
and the five-factor model of personality ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . 
Carson , R .  , Butcher , J .  ,  & Mineka , S .  ( 2000 )  . Abnormal psychology and modern life ( 11th ed .  )  . New York : Allyn & 
Bacon . 
Freidman , H .  ,  & Schustak , M .  ( 2003 )  . Personality : Classic
theories and modern research ( 2nd ed .  )  . Boston : Allyn & 
Bacon . 
Frick , W .  ( 1991 )  . Personality theories . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Hambleton , R .  , Merenda , P .  ,  & Spielberger , C .  ( 2005 )  . 
Adapting educational and psychological tests for crosscultural assessment . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Kline , T .  ( 2005 )  . Psychological testing : A practical approach
to design and evaluation . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Lapsley , D .  ,  & Narvaez , D .  ( 2004 )  . Moral development , self , 
and identity . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Milton , J .  ( 2002 )  . The road to Malpsychia : Humanistic
psychology and our discontents . San Francisco : Encounter
Books . 
Paul , A .  ( 2004 )  . The cult of personality : How personality tests
are leading us to miseducate our children , mismanage our
companies , and misunderstand ourselves . New York : Free
Press . 
Plake , B .  , Impara , J .  ,  & Spies , R .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2003 )  . Fifteenth
mental measurements yearbook . Lincoln : University of
Nebraska Press . 
Wood , J .  , Nezworski , M .  , Lilienfeld , S .  ,  & Garb , H .  ( 2003 )  . 
What ’ s wrong with the Rorschach ? San Francisco : JosseyBass . 
 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT
The personnel management process consists of the
following steps :  ( a ) recruitment ,  ( b ) selection ,  ( c ) staff
development , and ( d ) performance appraisal . Figure 1
illustrates these steps . The figure also indicates that all
of these various activities are affected by legislative
constraints and union demands
RECRUITMENT
Recruitment is the process of attracting a pool of qualified applicants to replenish or expand a school ’ s
human resources . To effectively recruit applicants , 
leaders must ( a ) have a thorough analysis of job
requirements ,  ( b ) know the legal constraints that
influence recruiting efforts , and ( c ) cultivate the
sources of potential employees . To recruit appropriate
748———Personnel Management
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 748
personnel to fill vacant positions , the leader must
know in detail what tasks are to be performed and the
personal characteristics necessary to perform the
tasks . These determinations are derived through job
analysis . The information obtained through job analysis is used in most subsequent personnel decisions , 
such as selection , staff development , and performance
appraisal . But its most immediate use is to prepare job
descriptions and job specifications . 
The job description is a written statement of the
duties and responsibilities , relationships , and results
expected of the job incumbent . It generally includes
job title , the person to whom the job incumbent
reports , and a statement of the job goal . The job specification , also based on job analysis , specifies the minimum acceptable qualification that an incumbent must
possess to perform the job successfully . It identifies
the degree of education required , the desirable amount
of previous experience , and the skills , abilities , and
physical requirements needed to do the job effectively . 
Every leader is affected to some extent by federal
laws governing the recruitment and selection of employees . The laws governing equal employment opportunity 
( EEO ) have had an especially long history in the
United States ; the laws prohibit employment decisions based on race , color , religion , sex , national
origin , age , or disability . This legal environment has
increased the need for high-caliber leaders who can
deal with the complex legal requirements in personnel
management . 
School districts have a number of sources available
for obtaining personnel . The first place that most leaders
look when attempting to fill a position is within the
school district . Policies for promotion from within are
widely used , because they tend to increase employee
morale and motivation while reducing recruitment
costs . 
External sources of potential employees are used
when specialized skills , such as those of teachers , counselors , social workers , and computer programmers , are
required . Some of the most frequently used external
sources include college and university placement
offices , state employment services , private employment
agencies , newspaper and radio advertisements , professional journals , employee referrals , and professional
meetings and conventions . 
School districts that are committed to equal employment opportunities and affirmative action programs
typically take additional steps to ensure that available
positions are provided the broadest possible publicity , 
for example :  ( a ) advertising in publications designed
specifically for minority candidates ,  ( b ) contacting
colleges and universities that specialize in educating
women or minorities ,  ( c ) contacting employment agencies that specialize in placing women and minority candidates , and ( d ) contacting neighborhood groups or
national organizations , such as the Urban League or the
National Organization for Women , to reach minorities
and women . These organizations , and groups like them , 
have newsletters or other media for contacting minority
and female prospects . 
SELECTION
Once applicants have been recruited , the next step is
selection—the process of determining which candidates best meet the job specifications . Steps in a typical selection process include ( a ) preliminary screening
of credentials ,  ( b ) preliminary interview ,  ( c ) testing ,  ( d ) 
reference checks ,  ( e ) in-depth interview ,  ( f ) physical
examination , and ( g ) hiring decision . 
The actual selection process will vary with school
districts and between hierarchical levels in the same
school district . For instance , the in-depth interview for
classified staff may be quite perfunctory ; instead , 
heavy emphasis may be placed on the preliminary
screening interview or on performance tests . In selecting
Personnel Management———749
Performance
appraisal
Staff
development
Selection
Recruitment
Figure 1 Personnel Management Process
SOURCE : Author . 
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 749
certificated personnel , like teachers , the interview may
be extensive—sometimes lasting 1 hour or more—
and there may be little or no formal testing . Instead of
completing an application blank , the candidate for a
certificated position may submit a letter of application
and / or a resume . Some school districts omit the
physical examination . 
STAFF DEVELOPMENT
Schools recruit and select people who match their job
specifications as closely as possible , but the match is seldom perfect . Usually staff at all levels—maintenance , 
service , clerical , and professional—need to be taught
how to apply their abilities to the requirements of the
specific job . This instruction , which teaches new
employees the skills they need , is known as training . 
Development usually refers to teaching experienced
professionals how to maintain and even improve those
skills . 
The training and development of faculty and staff
is essentially a four-step process :  ( 1 ) assessing needs ,  
( 2 ) setting objectives ,  ( 3 ) selecting methods , and 
( 4 ) evaluating the program . 
PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL
After employees have been recruited , selected , and
trained , the next step in the personnel management
process is performance appraisal—the process of
evaluating the contribution employees have made
toward attaining the school ’ s goals . There are several
reasons to evaluate employee performance . First , 
the school needs evidence to justify the selection techniques used in hiring personnel . Second , performance
appraisal provides input for determining both individual and organizational staff development needs and
later gauges whether these have been effective . Third , 
it serves as the basis for making decisions about salary
and merit increases , promotions , transfers , or terminations . Finally , it is used as a means of communicating
to employees how they are performing and suggesting needed changes in behavior , attitudes , skills , or
knowledge . 
—Fred C . Lunenburg
See also affirmative action ; American Federation of Teachers ; 
bureaucracy ; career stages ; chief academic officer ; contracts , with teacher unions ; differentiated staffing ; discrimination ; division of labor ; evaluation ; fringe benefits ; 
governance ; human capital ; human resource development ; 
internships ; involvement , in organizations ; just cause ; 
licensure and certification ; line and staff concept ; management by objectives ; management information systems ; 
management theories ; mentoring ; merit pay ; morale ; 
National Education Association ; organizational theories ; 
performance assessment ; performance evaluation systems ; 
planning models ; politics , of education ; principalship ; productivity ; recruitment , of school administrators ; resource
management ; role ambiguity ; role conflict ; role theory ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; scalar principle ; sexism ( glass ceiling )  ; staffing , concepts of ; superintendency ; 
supervision ; table of organization ; total quality management ; working conditions , in schools ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
DeMitchell , T .  ( 2005 )  . Unions , collective bargaining , and the
challenge of leading . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 538–549 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Fyack , C .  ( 2004 )  . Hiring sourcebook : A collection of practical
samples . Alexandria , VA : Society for Human Resource
Management . 
Ivancevich , J .  ( 2003 )  . Human resource management ( 8th ed .  )  . 
New York : McGraw-Hill . 
U . S . Department of Labor , Bureau of Labor Statistics .  ( 2005 )  . 
Employment and earnings . Washington , DC : Government
Printing Office . 
Walsh , D .  ( 2003 )  . Employment law for human resource practice . Mason , OH : Thomson / South-Western West . 
Webb , L .  ,  & Norton , M .  ( 2003 )  . Human resources administration : Personnel issues and needs in education ( 4th ed .  )  . 
Upper Saddle River , NJ : Merrill / Prentice Hall . 
Young , I . P .  ,  & Castetter , W . B .  ( 2004 )  . The human resource
function ( 8th ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Merrill / Prentice
Hall . 
 PERSUASION
Persuasion is a form of social influence that is based on
communication . Persuasion occurs when one person
intends to and is successful at using communication to
affect another person . Persuasive communications can
target another ’ s attitudes , beliefs , or behaviors . The
focus of persuasion theory and research has been on
attitudes : many techniques are actually derived from
specific attitude change theories . Attitudes , a central
concept in social psychology , are evaluative judgments about an object , person , or issue . Attitudes can
be favorable or unfavorable , can vary in strength , and
can but do not necessarily include affective , cognitive , 
750———Persuasion
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 750
and behavioral responses . Current research demonstrates that under certain circumstances , attitudes are
predictors of behavior . 
Attitudes , though formed by beliefs , are not the
same as beliefs . Attitudes are based on judgments ; 
beliefs , be they factual or stereotypical , are information
based . Some attitudes are easily changed , while others
are more enduring . Attitudes , which are central to
human life , help make the social world more predictable , help determine one ’ s behavior , help process
information , and even help to define who we are . 
Knowing what function an attitude serves in any given
situation is a key factor in designing persuasive appeals . 
Attitude change is more likely to occur when the persuasive appeal targets the function served by the existing attitude . The mechanisms behind attitude formation
and attitude change are thought to be the same . 
Two competing dual-processing theories , the elaboration-likelihood model and the heuristic-systematic
model , postulate differing mechanisms for attitude
change . One mechanism is based on effortless processing of information , and the other is based on
effortful processing of information . 
The effortless processing or “ peripheral processing ” is a form of persuasion widely used by the media . 
Peripheral processing is based on associations between
the positions being advanced and the objects or people
to which a person is attracted . Central-route processing , a more effortful type of processing , involves thinking about or elaborating on significant issues . For
central-route processing to result in attitude change , 
the persuasive arguments must be compelling but not
too complex . Factors affecting recipient motivation to
process information and the strength of the argument
include a match between the persuasive argument and
the function that the preexisting attitude serves , the
number of arguments contained in the persuasive message , the relevance of the message to the recipient , and
the level of recipient need to think about the message . 
The effortless processing mechanism is based on
heuristics ,  “ simple rules of inference ,  ” such as “ experts
are correct ,  ” and occurs whenever the heuristic cue is
present . Systematic processing occurs when the
heuristic cue is not present or when message recipients
do not have enough confidence in their attitudinal
judgments . Its mechanisms are thought to be similar to
those used in central-route processing . 
The dual-processing models account for the fact
that people are sometimes responsive to well-organized
persuasive appeals , whereas at other times they are
influenced by seemingly extraneous factors . Using persuasion to affect attitude formation and effect change
can be a complex undertaking , and educational leaders
can expect to benefit by becoming skilled in the use of
persuasive communication . As a form of influence , persuasion implies that the person being persuaded has
some element of freedom . In the absence of freedom , 
interpersonal transactions may become coercive . As
schools move away from autocratic leadership , influence—not control—becomes the basis for leading
others . 
—Jami Finn and Rodney Muth
See also attitudes ; attitudes toward work ; behaviorism ; communications , theories in organizations ; conditioning theory ; 
decision making ; expert power ; heuristics ; leadership , 
theories of ; management theories ; mentoring ; motivation , 
theories of ; tutoring
Further Readings and References
Bohner , G .  ,  & Wanke , M .  ( 2002 )  . Attitudes and attitude
change . New York : Psychology Press . 
Devadoss , M .  ,  & Muth , R .  ( 1984 )  . Power , involvement , and
organizational effectiveness in higher education . Higher
Education , 13 , 379–391 . 
O ’ Keeffe , D .  ( 2002 )  . Persuasion theory and research 
( 2nd ed .  )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 PERT ( PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION AND
REVIEW TECHNIQUE ) 
PERT ( performance evaluation and review technique ) 
is a large project management tool . Developed by the
U . S . Navy in 1958 to manage the Polaris Fleet Ballistic
Missile Program , PERT provides a visual representation of tasks , both sequential and parallel , that are
needed to complete a complex project . For example , 
educational leaders have found PERT to be very effective at meeting deadlines for curricular implementations and avoiding cost overruns on building projects . 
This management tool addresses time , events , costs , 
and people-power needs in unique projects , although
it can be used in twice-run projects . Unlike bar charts , 
PERT can predict how long completion of tasks will
take as well as the entire project . The strength of
PERT lies in its visual representation of interdependencies and uncertainties . The resulting diagram
PERT ( Performance Evaluation and Review Technique ) ———751
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 751
allows those involved within the project to see how
their work impacts others . Identification of timelines
and critical path activities avoids the confusion that
can impact completion . 
PERT evolves in three stages : planning , establishing
time and sequence of events , and diagramming . The first
step in a PERT diagram ( or network ) is the statement of
the project objective . The written objective is specific
and contains all necessary specifications . A list of
needed tasks is the next stage . From these tasks , events
evolve . These events are sequenced and time allotments
allocated . The next step is the diagram . 
The PERT diagram , usually drawn on paper , is
constructed of ellipses ( bubbles ) that march from left
to right . Each ellipse is an event , which is a specific
instant of time . The event itself does not consume
time , but rather marks the start ( S ) or completion 
( C ) of a physical or mental task . In most networks , the
start of one event is the completion of the event before
it . An arrow connects events and represents the work
required to complete a task . An activity cannot start
until the previous event and all events before that have
been completed . Ellipses are numbered by 10s so that
unforeseen events or forgotten events can be inserted
without redrawing the entire network . 
A milestone in the PERT network is represented by a
triangle . Each milestone symbolizes a key critical event
that must be completed on time to avoid project delays . 
Timelines on PERT can be done in a variety of
different ways . One example is that each event can
have three time values : the optimistic time , most
likely time , and a pessimistic time . Time is expressed
in weeks or fractions of weeks and is written on the
arrow lines within the network in this sequence : optimistic time ( to )  , most likely time ( mlt )  , and pessimistic time ( tp )  . To calculate the expected time ( te ) 
an activity will take , the three times figures are added
together and divided by 3 . To know how much time a
milestone will take , one adds up the te ’ s on the longest
line leading to that event . 
Determining the critical path , the longest path in the
project , reveals the total calendar time for the project . 
The amount of time that a noncritical path activity
can be delayed without delaying the project is referred
to as slack time . Slack time can be positive or negative . Project crashing accelerates the project by adding
required resources to decrease the time for activities
in the critical path . 
To maintain the logic of the network , dummy activities can be inserted . An example of a dummy activity
is an inspector looking at wiring . Although central to
the project , the inspection requires no time or work . Time
estimates for such dummy activities are represented by
0-0-0 on the activity line . 
The most widespread continuing use of PERT
in education occurs within the area of school plant
management and promoting bond issues to facilitate
school construction . 
—JoAnn Franklin Klinker
See also economics , theories of ; elections , of school boards , 
bond issues ; finance , of public schools ; matrix organization 
( the “ adhocracy ”  )  ; planning models ; resource management ; 
strategic planning ; time management
Further Readings and References
Evarts , H .  ( 1964 )  . Introduction to PERT . Boston : Allyn & 
Bacon . 
Lackney , J .  ( 2005 )  . New approaches to school design . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 506–537 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Latterner , C .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1967 )  . A programmed introduction to
PERT . New York : John Wiley & Sons . 
 PHILOSOPHIES OF EDUCATION
Teaching and learning are guided by a variety of
beliefs and principles that direct the practice of
administrators and faculty responsible for these educational activities . These beliefs and principles make
up a philosophy of education that can be used to guide
decision making and practice . These philosophies
are widely discussed and debated , subsequently giving rise to several schools of thought regarding how
institutions of learning should be structured and organized and what teaching and learning look like within
these institutions . 
Six commonly debated philosophies include essentialism , behaviorism , perennialism , humanism , existentialism , progressivism , and social reconstructionism . 
This list is neither exhaustive nor agreed upon that all
schools of thought should , in fact , be included . Each
school of thought does provide a unique perspective
on educational practices and will , therefore , be treated
as distinctive and legitimate . Depending on the philosophy to which one subscribes , the structure and
organization of the instructional environment and the
activities that take place within that structure will
752———Philosophies of Education
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 752
range from one end of the educational spectrum to the
other . An awareness and understanding of the philosophical underpinnings of each are essential to understanding and identifying the structures , organization , 
and activities that characterize learning environments
based on each of the six philosophies . The order in
which each is discussed ranges from conservative to
liberal perspectives on education . 
ESSENTIALISM
Essentialism is the most commonly applied philosophy
in the American system of public education . Often
referred to as the “ back to the basics ” approach , essentialism focuses on what some educators consider as
the essential elements of academic knowledge and
character development . Originating in the late 1800s , 
essentialism ’ s rise in popularity paralleled America ’ s
influx of immigration in the late 1800s and around the
turn of the century . Losing favor briefly in the midtwentieth century with the adoption of more liberal
educational philosophies , the essentialist movement
was revived in the late 1950s and 1960s with the space
race and the launching of Sputnik as a way to address
students ’ needs for stronger math and science skills . 
This revival was again supported and promoted by the
President ’ s Commission on Excellence in Education
through their 1983 report , A Nation at Risk . 
Essentialist philosophy promotes cultural literacy , 
the traditional moral values , and the knowledge that
students need to become productive American citizens . 
American virtues espoused by the philosophy of essentialism include respect for authority , perseverance , 
fidelity to duty , consideration for others , and practicality . Essentialism does not view schools as vehicles for
societal change . It is important to note that essentialists
believe that science and scientific experimentation provide insight into and understanding about the world . 
Essentialism therefore emphasizes natural sciences
rather than nonscientific disciplines such as religion or
philosophy . The nonscientific curriculum is often
viewed as offering frills and has little , if any , place in
the essentialist curriculum . 
Building- and district-level administrators subscribing to essentialist thought will often promote and
support basic and fundamental academic skills , 
including math , science , history , foreign language , 
and literature . A specific body of knowledge and basic
techniques and skills are identified as the basis for a
schoolwide curriculum that is academically rigorous
and focused on mastery learning . This focus subsequently requires more core course requirements , a
longer school day , a longer academic year , and more
challenging texts . Instruction that takes place in the
classroom is teacher directed and evaluated through the
use of standardized test scores . Teachers and administrators work together to identify what is important for
students to learn , both intellectually and culturally , 
and to ensure that students graduate as disciplined , 
practical , and capable American citizens . 
BEHAVIORISM
In the ongoing debate over nature versus nurture , 
nurture prevails from the perspective of a behaviorist . 
According to behaviorist philosophy , knowledge and
understanding of reality are learned , and therefore the
only true reality is that which can be observed and
experienced . In addition , learning is the result of our
actions and reactions to internal and / or external stimuli . 
Humans are simply the product of their environment . 
The source of behavior results from external factors
and variables rather than internal ones . Thus , learning
results from stimulation by and observation of external phenomena . Through repetition and experimentation , students learn about the physical world and
human nature . A school based on the behaviorist philosophy would typically structure the curriculum in
such a way that students would have multiple opportunities to experience and interact with the content to
be learned . Teachers and administrators must be
aware of the external stimuli and variables inherent in
a school that might impact or factor into how and what
students are learning in that environment . 
PERENNIALISM
Perennialists believe that certain ideas and truths are
as relevant today as they were hundreds of years ago
when these ideas were first discussed and debated . 
They believe that these “ perennial ” or everlasting
ideas and truths should be the focus of classroom
instruction . Based on the philosophy and teachings of
Plato , Aristotle , St . Thomas Aquinas , and later , Robert
Hutchins and Mortimer Adler , perennialism addresses
these ideas and truths through the study of the humanities and the ongoing development of students ’ capacity to reason . 
Similar to essentialism , perennialism addresses the
need for students to develop intellectual powers and
Philosophies of Education———753
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 753
moral qualities . Student interests and experiences have
little place in the curriculum , since the primary focus
of this philosophy is to develop reasoning skills in the
context of timeless truths about the universe and the
human condition . As such , there is little flexibility in
the curriculum , and therefore curricular electives are
discouraged . Unlike essentialism , perennialism is universal in its focus and not tied exclusively to American
traditions , ideals , and values . Philosophy as a course
is an important part of the perennialist curriculum , 
and serves to help students understand the timeless
and universal qualities of certain forms of knowledge . 
While the perennialist philosophy does recognize the
importance of scientific inquiry as a means of developing analytical , flexible , and imaginative reasoning
and thinking skills , this school of thought does not
emphasize that scientific information or skills that
may soon be obsolete have a place in the curriculum . 
In other words , while it may be of value to study
research methodology , it is not as important for
students to memorize scientific facts that may change
at any given time . Classroom time is to be spent
addressing concepts and how these concepts are
meaningful to the students ’ world . Use of textbooks
and lectures has minimal importance , while coaching and Socratic seminars comprise a significant
amount of class time to engage students in meaningful dialogue to develop a broader and deeper base of
understanding . 
Adler ’ s Paideia Program , an educational program
based on perennialism , promotes a single curriculum
for all students , regardless of backgrounds , abilities , 
or interests , and offers little flexibility in the curriculum because of his belief that vocational or elective
courses detract from the focus of developing rational
and intellectual powers and critical thinking skills . 
The core should be truth , knowledge , problem solving , and critical thinking . Goals and expectations are
established for all students , followed by supervised
practice of the knowledge and skills taught . Without
curricular electives , scheduling of courses in a school
based upon a perennialist philosophy can be a daunting task . In addition , the inclusion of didactic classes , 
coaching labs , and seminars , which are common
components of a perennialist school , can add to the
challenge of scheduling . However , a school that can
overcome these minor challenges can provide
teachers and administrators a structured environment
in which they can assist students in seeing the proverbial trees through the forest . 
HUMANISM
Based on the writings of Jean-Jacques Rousseau , 
humanism is founded on the belief that humans are
essentially good and that they possess the capacity for
free will . Maslow ’ s hierarchy of needs , addressed in
educational psychology courses across the country , 
emerges out of the humanist philosophy and states that
once all the basic human needs are met , one can maximize the use of his or her talents and abilities . With
self-actualization as the ultimate goal of the humanist
philosophy , students are encouraged to develop as
persons and to become self-directed thinkers and
learners . 
Teachers and administrators who subscribe to a
humanistic philosophy do not dwell on specific curricular requirements but are more inclined to focus on the
development of close and meaningful relationships with
students . While educators might be viewed as experts
and “ fonts of knowledge ” in their respective disciplines , 
these humanistic educators attempt to create a learning
environment where students are less dependent on them
and instead develop into independent thinkers and learners . What to learn is less important that how to learn . 
These students adopt a positive view of learning and are
encouraged to go on to use their own abilities and talents
to the fullest extent possible . 
EXISTENTIALISM
Based on the writings of Søren Kierkegaard and JeanPaul Sartre , existentialism focuses on the individual
and individualized meaning and action . Existentialist
curriculum rejects more traditional schools of thought , 
notably the essentialist philosophy , in favor of student
choice in course selection and an exploration of the
students ’ thoughts , feelings , and actions in their search
of their own “ essence .  ” Rather than focusing on more
objective subject matter , an existentialist curriculum is
more self-directed and self-paced , and places a heavier
emphasis on creativity and imagination . Students are
encouraged and supported in their efforts to find meaning and to develop values on their own and in the context of courses they want to take . 
While existentialism is not commonly used as the
basis for the structure and organization of most
American public schools , certain elements of this
philosophy are occasionally integrated into other
philosophical approaches . The role of the educator is
to create a learning environment where students are
exposed to a variety of paths or options from which to
754———Philosophies of Education
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 754
choose . Existentialism offers a holistic approach to
teaching and learning that gives students a wide variety
of choices to help explore and develop their own creativity and self-expression . Most of these options are in
the humanities , as it is typically considered less “ objective ” than the sciences . From these choices , students are
encouraged to create meaning as to how the content
applies to their own lives . 
PROGRESSIVISM
At the very root of progressivism is John Dewey ’ s philosophy of change , reconstruction of experience , and
preparation for the future . According to Dewey , textbooks cannot replace the social interactions that lead to
learning and the making of meaning . Knowledge is
gained through students ’ application of prior experience to new problems . Progressivism respects individuality , science , and change and connects each of these
with American freedom and democracy . Dewey
believed that in order to be a nation of democratic , 
freethinking citizens , Americans must retain their individuality while embracing change . As we alter or
change our relationship with our environment , we are
changed by the experience . 
The progressivist philosophy encouraged schools
to broaden the curriculum to make learning more relevant to the needs and interests of students . While this
approach was widely accepted in the 1920s , it lost
support with the launch of Sputnik in 1957 and the
move to a more essentialist approach , which emphasized a more traditional , skills-based curriculum that
was less interested in the unique and specific needs
and interests of individual students . 
A school built upon a progressivist philosophy is
child centered . Students ’ experiences , interests , and
abilities are the center of the curriculum . Teachers and
administrators create and maintain an environment
that students learn by doing and are in constant interaction with one another , with nature , and with society . 
Cooperation and tolerance of diverse perspectives are
promoted , and learning often takes place in the context of interdisciplinary projects and units . Because of
the progressivist emphasis on and respect for progress
and change , natural and social science comprise an
important part of the curriculum . Similar to perennialism , problem solving and critical thinking are promoted and encouraged , and accomplishments by
women and other minorities are included . The curriculum is designed to take the whole child into
account , providing a choice of opportunities for
students to discover truth and gain knowledge through
active lessons and activities . Progressivists believe
that education is an active , ongoing process and that
learning takes place not only in the school but also in
the home and workplace . Therefore , learning should
be interesting and useful and something that all
students should know how to do . 
Creating such an engaging and motivating learning
environment has significant implications for the building- and district-level administrator . Educators must
be aware that promoting and maintaining a progressivist school can be a challenge in a nation that currently embraces a more essentialist philosophy and
minimizes the individual interests and experiences of
students . 
SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTIONISM
Social reconstructionism , also known as pragmatism , 
focuses on those societal issues that affect students ’ 
lives and how students can be active in creating a
better world for themselves . The goal of this philosophy is social reform . Students are encouraged to be
involved in the identification of solutions to societal
problems . Since the school is at the center of the community where these students live , it is the role of the
school to be the vehicle for the changes students deem
to be necessary . The curriculum is designed to make
students aware of their responsibility to self , others , 
and society and to view education as the vehicle for
societal change . 
While social reconstructionism focuses on issues
and problems students currently face , it can use a more
traditional curriculum to analyze and address these
issues and problems . History courses can be used to
help students understand context ; English courses can
help to expose students to writing about the problems ; 
and math and science courses can provide tools necessary to scientifically analyze the problems in order to
propose a solution . Educators have the responsibility
of confronting students with and introducing students
to social problems and issues and subsequently organizing the curriculum around these problems and
issues . Teachers and administrators should , however , 
be aware that more empirical methods of evaluation of
student achievement in a social reconstructionist
school could be difficult to employ , as these methods
often do not directly relate to the knowledge and skills
being learned in this setting . 
Philosophies of Education———755
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 755
SUMMARY
While some of the six schools of thought discussed are
in direct opposition to one another , other schools can
coexist and even enhance one another . The school to
which each educator subscribes may be based on the
type of school he or she attended , the influence of a
mentor , or the result of personal experience as an educator . Regardless of the philosophy held by any individual , educators must be aware of their own philosophy , 
the essential elements of those philosophies held by
others with whom they may work , and how each of
these philosophies can directly and uniquely impact
the structure , organization , and activities related to the
teaching and learning that he or she is responsible for . 
—Robert L . Sanders
See also aesthetics , in education ; Aristotle ; arts education ; 
behaviorism ; Catholic education ; character education ; constructivism ; cultural politics , wars ; democracy , democratic
education and administration ; Dewey , John ; dialectical
inquiry ; empiricism ; ethics ; existentialism ; fascism and
schools ; fundamentalism ; idealism , as philosophy in education ; knowledge base , of the field ; Kuhn , Thomas ; Loyola , 
Ignatius ; Marx , Karl ; Maslow , Abraham ; multiculturalism ; 
objectivity ; Piaget , Jean ; Plato ; positivism , postpositivism ; 
pragmatism and progressivism ; postmodernism ; research
methods ; right-wing politics , advocates , impact on education ; Skinner , B . F .  ; Spencer , Herbert ; subjectivism , in
theory ; values pluralism , in schools
Further Readings and References
Adler , M .  ( 1982 )  . The Paideia proposal : An educational
manifesto . New York : Macmillan . 
Dewey , J .  ( 1964 )  . John Dewey on education : Selected
writings . New York : Modern Library . 
Gingell , J .  ,  & Winch , C .  ( 2004 )  . Philosophy of education
policy . New York : Routledge . 
Henry , N . B .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1942 )  . Philosophies of education : The
forty-first yearbook of the Society for the Study of Education , 
Part I . Bloomington , IL : Public School Publishing . 
Martusewicz , R .  ( 2001 )  . Seeking passage : Post-structuralism , 
pedagogy , ethics . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Morrow , R .  ,  & Alberto Torres , C .  ( 2002 )  . Reading Freire and
Habermas : Critical pedagogy and transformative social
change . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Reese , W .  ( 2001 )  . The origins of progressive education . 
History of Education Quarterly , 41 ( 1 )  , 1–24 . 
Sartre , J .  ( 1957 )  . Existentialism and human emotions . 
New York : Philosophical Library . 
Shaw , L .  ( 2004 )  . Humanistic and social aspects of teaching . 
Retrieved July 27 , 2004 , from LShaw / 
f95syll / 954index . htm . 
Turner , R .  ( 2001 )  . Existentialism . Retrieved May 3 , 2003 , 
from . 
White , D .  ( 2001 )  . Freedom and responsibility : Existentialism , 
gifted students , and philosophy . Gifted Child Today , 24 ( 2 )  , 
48–53 , 65 . 
Whittlesey , L .  ( 2004 )  . Educational philosophies . Retrieved
July 27 , 2004 , from 
Philosophies /  . 
 PHYSICAL EDUCATION
Physical education covers a broad field of professionals
and scholarly areas . The name of physical education is
fast disappearing in higher education language and has
been replaced by a variety of names underlying the
nature of the discipline , that is , the science of human
movement . It studies the biological , mechanical , and
sociopsychological dimensions of human movement
and its enhancement from birth to death . In American
schools , physical education is still a well-recognized
name , while its content has been changed from the
teaching of athletic skills and physical training to teaching of developmentally appropriate movements and
sport and recreational activity skills to promote the
health and overall well-being of students . 
CHANGING PHILOSOPHY
OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION
Contrary to the Puritan philosophy , early physical
education in colonial America was strongly influenced by muscular Christianity that believed physical
fitness and athleticism can facilitate the achievement
of moral , religious , and mental growth . It provided
confirmation that physical training and competition
were desirable activities for boys and young men . 
During the first half of the twentieth century , physical
education revolved around the philosophy of “ education through the physical ,  ” with a root in progressive
education theory . This “ new ” physical education
stressed a child-centered curriculum that encouraged
natural play and promoted a body-mind link . Human
movement philosophy was introduced to America in
the 1950s from England . It was quickly integrated into
physical education programs in America since it was
believed to be scientifically superior to the “ education
through the physical ” philosophy . Human-movementbased curriculum promotes the development of full
potential for movement in humans through body
756———Physical Education
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 756
awareness , space awareness , and development of
movements and sport skills . Humanistic physical education was the next phase , which was fueled in part by
the turmoil in collegiate and professional sports in the
1960s and 1970s . The humanistic approach was characterized by emphasizing cooperation and personal
development , promoting enjoyment of sport activities , 
and criticizing the abuse of athletes . Since the 1950s , 
America has been a nation is facing a dramatic increase
in the prevalence of chronic diseases ( i . e .  , cancers and
cardiovascular diseases ) that are believed to be caused
by an unhealthy lifestyle . As a result , a wellness movement has taken a center role in physical education . It
focuses on promoting an active lifestyle for everyone in
America , which has shown to prevent diseases and
increase longevity . With a lack of physical activity as
one of the leading indicators of national health in
Healthy People 2010 , physical education as a profession and discipline will play a crucial role in the
enhancement of the well-being in America for decades
to come . 
ORIGIN AND FORMATION OF
PHYSICAL EDUCATION IN AMERICAN
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
Physical education was introduced to America in the
form of “ medical gymnastics ” from Europe in the late
eighteenth century with two dominant systems : Swiss
and German . It was a very stringent and vigorous
form of physical training for the purpose of restoration of health and / or development of the body . It was
different from today ’ s Olympic gymnastics . Two primary goals of early physical education programs were
to provide physical training to schoolboys and collegeage men and to train “ gymnastic teachers .  ” Training of
physical education teachers took place in private normal schools in the 1880s and 1890s , mostly through
summer programs . The 4-year teacher preparation
programs did not start until the turn of the twentieth
century . The first five universities were Harvard
University , Oberlin College , Stanford University , the
University of California , and the University of
Nebraska . Teachers College of Columbia University
awarded the first master ’ s degree in physical education in 1910 and started the first doctoral program in
physical education in 1924 . In less than 7 years , the
Normal College of the American Gymnastic Union , 
Wellesley College , the University of Southern
California , and the University of Oregon also started
offering graduate coursework in physical education . 
Today , most states have their own certification program
for physical education teachers in public schools . The
American Alliance for Health , Physical Education , 
Recreation and Dance ( AAHPERD ) is the leading
organization of professionals in physical education
and other related areas and is responsible for providing leadership in guiding the profession . 
CHANGING FOCI OF
PHYSICAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS
American physical education has evolved over four
periods that shaped the profession and discipline . The
first generation ( 1885–1920 ) of physical educators , 
mostly trained in medicine and biological sciences , created a teacher training curriculum with heavy emphasis
on the science of physical training ( i . e .  , anatomy , physiology , and physics ) and less on sports skill instruction . 
Physical education was first included as part of the curriculum in elite schools of higher learning such as
Harvard . 
The second generation ( 1920–1945 ) of physical
education programs was developed under the new philosophy of “ education through the physical ” rather
than “ education of the physical .  ” This was also the
period when physical education was widely adopted
into the curricula in American schools and universities . 
The profession of physical education was created as a
result . With increasing demands for teachers , physical
education departments were created in all major state
and private universities . The focus of the curricula was
heavily on pedagogy ( educational theory of instruction
and coaching ) and preparation of coaches for athletic
sports . This was also the era of gender-separated physical
education programs . Most university faculty members
were considered generalists who instructed a variety of
courses but without expectation for engaging in
research . The exception was the faculty with special
training in exercise physiology and measurement . The
first scholarly journal for physical education professionals , Research Quarterly , was published in 1930 . 
The third generation ( 1945–1985 ) of physical education programs was characterized by the striving to
establish an academic discipline , like more traditional
disciplines such as art , science , and engineering . This
was a response to the calling to revamp the profession
to meet the expectations of traditional academic disciplines . Through most of this period , the physical
education faculty in major universities focused their
Physical Education———757
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 757
efforts on identification and organization of a unique 
 “ body of knowledge ” for the discipline in order to justify the need of its existence . The result was the formation of subdisciplines in physical education based
on traditional academic disciplines in the 1960s and
1970s . The first nonteacher preparation specialties
were exercise physiology , motor learning and control , 
pedagogy , sport sociology , and sport psychology at
the graduate level and sport science at the undergraduate level . A major milestone in establishing its
credential as a scientific discipline came as exercise
physiology researchers developed affiliations with
researchers in medicine by forming the American
College of Sports Medicine in the early 1950s . This
period was also accompanied by continued growth of
physical education teacher preparation programs at
undergraduate and graduate levels that usually reside
in colleges or schools of education . 
As the discipline of physical education matured , 
the fourth generation ( 1985–2005 ) of physical education programs was born . This was accompanied by
increased recognition by peers from traditional academic disciplines . Today , many physical education faculty members serve as college deans or associate deans . 
Most physical education programs have changed their
name from physical education to names reflecting the
changing nature of the curricula and research programs
of their departments . The most commonly used names
are kinesiology , exercise science , human performance , 
and sport science . Researchers in exercise physiology , 
biomechanics , motor learning and control , and motor
development have become highly competitive and successful in securing external grants to fund their research
programs , although physical education teacher preparation programs are still the main resource of revenue
generation for physical education departments in most
universities . Specializations in undergraduate and graduate programs have created new career opportunities
for graduates of physical education programs . Many
students study physical education while they prepare
their entrance to medical school , nursing programs , and
physical or occupational therapy . 
CURRENT TRENDS AND ISSUES
The prevalence of overweight American children has
tripled over the past 30 years . More recent data show
that about one third of American school-age children
had body weights that are considered to be unhealthy . 
Meanwhile , physical education programs in public
schools ( K–12 ) are declining . A recent study suggested that such declining rates ranged from 50% in
elementary to 50% in Grade 12 when physical education requirements by grade were analyzed . Physical
education is only offered daily in 8% of elementary
schools in the United States and even less frequently in
middle and high schools , although it is a required
subject in all states . Physical education is the area with
lowest funding and often the first to be cut during a
budgetary crisis . 
Today , physical education in higher education is
not only a profession ( teaching ) but also a scientific
discipline ( research )  . It has moved from its single role
as a cradle for preparing physical educators to a more
diverse role . This change is well reflected from its
program design . Physical education departments in
the United States now have both the teacher preparation program and the research-oriented program . Most
of them have masters ’ programs and some have doctoral programs . 
Faculties in the departments of physical education
have become more and more focused on scholarly
study . A group of scientific and scholarly disciplines , 
such as exercise physiology , biomechanics , and motor
learning and control , have been created and further
developed in the past four decades . For example , exercise physiologists in physical education have extended
their research from the traditional cardiovascular and
metabolic exercise physiology to exercise biochemistry to broaden their research scope . Exercise physiology is now the largest subdiscipline of physical
education . Similar to exercise physiologists , biomechanists study questions that are also topically diverse . 
Today , biomechanists continue to apply quantitative
and qualitative approaches to seek the optimal movement patterns ( e . g .  , locomotion and throwing movements ) that are accompanied with the lowest energy
costs , most effective outcome , and minimal injury
risks . In addition , they are now also concerned with
issues such as maintaining sufficient bone mineral
density in space and on earth . Scholars in the field of
motor learning and control are traditionally interested
in understanding how movement skills are learned and
controlled in healthy and young adults . Today , they
have extended their research interests to investigating
behavioral characteristics and mechanisms associated
with aging processes and neurological diseases and
injuries such as stroke and Parkinson ’ s disease . 
New research indicates that physical activity and
exercise are essential components in helping to reduce
758———Physical Education
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 758
risk factors related to various diseases , including
diabetes , neurological disorders , osteoporosis , and
cancer . School physical education is facing the challenge to modify its skill-based instruction to a wellness- and fitness-oriented curriculum that can provide
students with lifetime skills to live an active lifestyle . 
There is no doubt that physical education departments
will play an important role in dealing with these critical public health issues in the twenty-first century . 
—Wanxiang Yao and Zenong Yin
See also adolescence ; adult education ; ageism ; athletics in
schools ; at-risk students ; behaviorism ; brain research and
practice ; children and families in America ; curriculum , 
theories of ; elementary education ; extracurricular activities ; 
gender studies , in educational leadership ; high schools ; 
individual differences , in children ; learning environments ; 
mainstreaming and inclusion ; mental illness , in adults and
children ; peace education ; resiliency ; self-actualization ; 
sexuality , theories of ; special education ; suicide , in schools
Further Readings and References
Burgenson , C .  , Wechsler , H .  , Brener , N .  , Young , J .  , and Spain , 
C .  ( 2001 )  . Physical education and activity : Results from
the school health policies and programs study ( SHPPS ) 
2000 . Journal of School Health , 71 ( 7 )  , 279–293 . 
Dunn , J .  ( 2001 )  . Honoring the past—Embracing the future . 
Quest , 53 , 495–506 . 
Green , K .  ,  & Hardman , K .  ( 2005 )  . Physical education : 
Essential issues . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Hall , S .  ( 2003 )  . Basic biomechanics ( 4th ed .  )  . New York : 
McGraw-Hill . 
Pangrazi , R .  ( 2003 )  . Physical education K–12 :  “ All for one and
one for all .  ” Quest , 55 , 105–107 . 
Pellegrini , A .  ( 2005 )  . Recess : Its role in education and development . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Siedentop , D .  ( 2004 )  . Introduction to physical education , 
fitness , and sport . New York : McGraw-Hill . 
 PIAGET , JEAN
Jean Piaget ( 1896–1980 )  , whose work in cognitive
and developmental psychology caused many significant changes in elementary education , was one of the
most influential psychologists of the twentieth century . 
He proposed that the cognitive development of children
occurred in sequential developmental stages called the
sensorimotor , preoperational , concrete operational , and
formal operational . Each stage represented a specific
type of cognitive functioning that was caused by the
individual ’ s level of biological maturation . Piaget
believed that all individuals pass through these stages , 
and within each stage organize the information that
they learn into stage-specific structures called schemes . 
Piaget theorized that as individuals matured and their
environment changed , they would adapt to the changes
either by assimilating the changes into their current
schemes or by accommodating the changes by reorganizing their schemes . The function of assimilation and
accommodation is to maintain a balance , through the
process of equilibration , between one ’ s scheme and
changes within the environment . 
Piaget significantly influenced elementary education with the idea that individuals construct their own
understanding of reality . His understanding that individuals are active learners who modify and transform
information through their engagement with that
knowledge provides the foundation for the pervasive
constructivist movement in contemporary education . 
In Piagetian theory , children are not passive recipients
of information but active participants in the learning
process who construct their own meaning . 
Piaget influenced elementary education in a number
of ways . First , the children ’ s stage of development
limits what they can learn . For instance , children cannot solve an abstract problem until the last stage , formal operational , that begins around the age of 11 . 
Second , what children learn in later stages is affected
by what they learned and the cognitive structures that
they developed in the earlier stages . Therefore , opportunities must be provided that facilitate the full cognitive development of the child in each stage . Third , the
important part of a child ’ s learning is the child ’ s ability to apply or transfer what was already learned to the
new information . Fourth , children cannot apply what
they learned in a previous stage until they have developed the physical brain structures that will allow the
next level of learning to take place . Finally , requiring
students to learn information that is beyond their stage
of cognitive development is a futile learning experience . For instance , no amount of practice in learning
algebra will help middle school students who are not in
the formal operational stage . 
Research has established the limitations of
Piagetian theory . Various researchers have challenged
the existence of four separate stages of thinking even
though many agree that children do pass through the
changes in cognition identified by Piaget . Also , research
does not support various aspects of Piagetian theory
such as the developmental constraints on learning while
Piaget , Jean———759
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 759
in the concrete-operational stage . Also , Piagetian
theory does not explain how very young children can
perform highly complex tasks in certain areas . However , neo-Piagetian theories have combined Piaget ’ s
ideas with new information about cognitive development to better understand how children think and construct knowledge . 
—Raymond A . Horn Jr . 
See also behaviorism ; child development theories ; cognition , 
theories of ; creativity , theories of ; curriculum , theories of ; 
early childhood education ; egocentrism , theories of ; giftedness , gifted education ; individual differences , in children ; 
intelligence ; learning , theories of ; Mensa ; metacognition ; 
motivation , theories of ; personality ; philosophies of education ; psychology , types of ; psychometrics ; research methods ; sexuality , theories of ; special education ; subjectivism , 
in theory
Further Readings and References
Peterson , R .  ,  & Felton-Collins , V .  ( 1986 )  . The Piaget handbook for teachers and parents . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Piaget , J .  ( 1958 )  . Logic and psychology . New York : Basic
Books . 
Piaget , J .  ( 1973 )  . To understand is to invent : The future of
education . New York : Grossman . 
Piaget , J .  ,  & Inhelder , B .  ( 1969 )  . The psychology of the child . 
New York : Basic Books . 
 PICOTT , J . RUPERT
Executive secretary of the Virginia Teachers
Association , vice president of the National Education
Association ( NEA )  , president of the American
Teachers Association , John Rupert Picott ( 1910–
1989 ) worked to develop a proficient teacher corps
and to correct the educational , social , and political
inequities faced by African Americans . Distinguished
by his activism in education and politics , Picott was a
teacher , principal , and association leader who labored
in a state with a wide variation in race relations . In
1941 , Picott helped to establish a local chapter of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People during its salary equalization campaign in
Virginia and elsewhere . Dismissed as principal in
retaliation for successful litigation for equal salaries
for African American teachers , Picott became in 1944
the first full-time executive secretary of the Virginia
Teachers Association ( VTA )  , a Black teacher ’ s association . He shaped its agenda to reflect the legal , political , 
educational , and social challenges of a segregated
society . Picott was editor of the association ’ s publication , wrote a regular column on the Virginia General
Assembly , encouraged teacher professional growth and
involvement in legislative matters and in voting registration campaigns . At its peak , the VTA had a membership
of 10 , 000 . By 1949 , Picott was one of the main insurgents to demand equal standing for African American
educators in the powerful NEA , in which African
Americans had only marginal participation . His remarks
and activities in the 1950s and 1960s at NEA conventions helped to promote social justice as NEA policy . 
As an NEA delegate , Picott challenged the leadership and membership of the NEA to make equity a
reality for African American educators . He also
actively sought the NEA ’ s assistance in crises such as
the closing of public schools in Prince Edward County
in 1959 . Picott and VTA members were involved with
the placement of dismissed Black teachers , the education of youngsters in “ training centers ” established by
the Prince Edward County Christian Association , and
the recruitment of teachers for the Prince Edward
County Free Schools . Picott was a skillful communicator who understood the tensions and the perspective
of multiple participants in a race conscious society . He
developed a network of allies through the National
Council of State Teachers Associations ( NCOSTA ) —
an organization he directed until the 1960s—which
strengthened the bonds between the Black teacher
associations and the American Teachers Association 
( ATA ) and which funneled money to the NAACP to
assist teachers unfairly dismissed . He was executive
director of the Association for the Study of Negro Life
and History ( ASNLH )  , edited the Negro History
Bulletin , and authored several books on Black education . Picott is credited with making Black History
Week a month-long celebration that is widely
observed in schools throughout the country . In challenging the Jim Crow laws in Virginia , Picott led a
successful campaign to desegregate the Mosque , a
Richmond theater , and secured better working conditions for African Americans in the Virginia State
Department of Education . Picott regretted the fact that
as integration progressed , African American educators
did not achieve a full measure of leadership roles in
many newly merged teacher associations . 
—Carol F . Karpinski
760———Picott , J . Rupert
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 760
See also American Federation of Teachers ; Bethune , Mary
McLeod ; Black education ; civil rights movement ; Clark , 
Septima ; desegregation , of schools ; discrimination ; Du Bois , 
W . E . B .  ; leadership , teacher ; minorities , in schools ; National
Educational Association ; Sanchez , George ; unions , of
teachers ; Washington , Booker T .  ; Woodson , Carter G . 
Further Readings and References
Kluger , R .  ( 1975 )  . Simple justice . New York : Vintage . 
Picott , J .  ( 1975 )  . History of the Virginia Teachers Association . 
Washington , DC : National Education Association . 
Talbot , A .  ( 1981 )  . History of the Virginia Teachers Association , 
1940–1965 ( Doctoral dissertation , College of William and
Mary , 1981 )  . 
 PLANNING , PROGRAMMING , 
BUDGETING SYSTEM
Planning , Programming , Budgeting System ( PPBS ) 
is an integrated decision-making approach in which
scarce resources are allocated based on established
objectives and the best alternative methods for achieving those objectives . 
PPBS had its beginning in the early 1960s . 
Economists , first in the RAND Corporation and then
in the Department of Defense , did much to develop
the basic concepts of PPBS . President Lyndon B . 
Johnson sent White House Executive Order ( Bulletin
66–33 ) in October of 1965 to heads of federal executive departments and directed that an integrated PPBS
be installed in all federal executive departments and
establishments . In 1967 , Johnson made the concept of
PPBS an integral part of his budget message . 
With the spotlight on PPBS at the national level , 
hundreds of articles , papers , and books appeared in
the 1960s . PPBS gained attention for use in school
budgeting following the interest generated at the federal level . By the early 1970s , PPBS was appearing in
the literature related to educational organizations ; 
some version of it had been adopted by many states
and began to extend into local school districts . 
In 1972 , Joseph H . McGivney and Robert E . Hedges
identified the essential features of PPBS as need , a goal
stated as objective and alternatives and objectives , determining alternative methods , and evaluation . 
First , planning is identifying the need , setting goals , 
determining objectives , and developing alternatives to
the goals and objectives . Not all needs are easy to measure , which makes this particular element more challenging than it might seem initially . Next is a goal stated
as objective . Third , in PPBS it is important to identify
several objectives for each goal . Doing so provides the
decision makers with choices of what to pursue . 
Element two , programming , is the process of examining various trade-offs , analyzing each alternative
method , and making comparisons between and among
the alternative methods regarding which is best . 
The third element , budgeting , involves the legal
and financial means for allocating resources . The
school budget is sometimes called the fiscal translation of the educational program . This should not be a
short-term endeavor but a multiyear ( 2 or more ) commitment by the organization . Budgeting is a complex
process that includes preparation , presentation , adoption , execution , and appraisal , resulting in a budget
document . 
Finally , though this element , evaluation , does not
appear in the title of the PPBS process , it is important
for quality implementation . Evaluation goes with all
steps in the process and should be done continuously . 
Though the label PPBS is not often heard much
anymore , the basic elements of it still exist in school
budgeting processes . Similar procedures can still be
found but may be identified as cost-effective analysis
or program evaluation . No matter the name , school
districts continue to link the educational objectives of
the organization with the resources available , organized in such a way that the objectives are most likely
to be achieved for the fewest resources possible , that
is , planning , programming , and budgeting . 
—Anita Pankake
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; budgeting ; 
cost-benefit analysis ; decision making ; finance , of public
schools ; management by objectives ; management theories ; 
planning models ; productivity ; resource management ; 
strategic planning ; taxes , to support education
Further Readings and References
Knezevich , S .  ( 1973 )  . Program budgeting ( PPBS )  : A resource
allocation decision system for education . Berkeley , CA : 
McCutchan . 
McGivney , J .  ,  & Hedges , R .  ( 1972 )  . An introduction to PPBS . 
Columbus , OH : Charles E . Merrill . 
Poston , W .  ( 2005 )  . Finance , planning , and budgeting . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 550–570 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Planning , Programming , Budgeting System———761
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 761
 PLANNING MODELS
Planning is a future-oriented and hierarchical discipline that encompasses various models , each prescribing
approaches for actions that will bring about change . By
definition , it can be thought of as an attempt to change
the future by current and ongoing action . All planning is
dedicated to changing some future—either in the very
short term or over some longer period , perhaps decades . 
Its hierarchical structure is composed of several layers
of alternative choices as to how to proceed in an attempt
to create change . The first of these layers addresses
broad questions relative to how one approaches the
processes of planning and change . This is essentially a
set of philosophies of planning . Within these philosophies there exists a second layer of the hierarchy , the
distinct models of planning that have been proposed by
various authors as a defined formula or set of activities
and approaches—the “ how to ” of planning . Finally , 
there are planning tools , dedicated approaches or algorithms for dealing with specific problem types . These
tools can cross models and even philosophies . Their
popularity enters , fades , and reemerges over time . Planned
Program Budgeting , the Program Evaluation and Review
Technique , Cohort Analysis , and Delphi methodologies
are typical examples . 
Unfortunately , the literature has been confounded in
the use of the term models and has been indiscriminate
in describing both the philosophies and the specific
approaches to planning as planning models . In addition , authors generally do not distinguish the specific
approaches they advocate as being only one of a very
large set of approaches to planning , for example , strategic planning is often viewed as the quintessential planning model rather than only one among alternatives . 
Planning has been consistently recognized as a key
administrative function since Henry Fayol first enumerated those functions in 1916 ; today it lies at the heart of
the school improvement process . As conditions require
that an organization change , most have several classic
means by which to generate that change , their improvement repertoire ( textbook and personnel selection )  . As
Figure 1 illustrates , planning is not the only means by
which improvement can occur . 
However , planning is an essential process component for most of the large-scale organizational
change / improvement that occurs in education , especially when no adequately defined process has been
previously created in the organization for managing
that change ( see item d . of Figure 1 )  . 
Organizational improvement has been seen to be
comprised of three stages , labeled by Kurt Lewin in
1951 as “ unfreezing ,  ”  “ moving ,  ” and “ refreezing ” and
by David Clark , Linda Lotto , and Terry Astuto later as 
 “ adoption ,  ”  “ implementation ,  ” and “ institutionalization .  ” Planning must address all three phases ; many of
the criticisms of the effectiveness of educational planning can be traced to a failure to address one or both
of the latter stages . 
Although many variations exist , the planning
philosophies noted above have been classified into
four relatively distinct types :  ( a ) the comprehensiverational philosophy ,  ( b ) the bounded ( limited ) rational
philosophy ,  ( c ) the incremental philosophy , and ( d ) 
the developmental or adaptive philosophy . Figure 2
presents an illustration of these philosophies and
mixed scanning , arranged according to the extent that
they specify precise goals and the general comprehensiveness used in generating different potential solutions to the planning problem . While theoretical , this
arrangement makes clear the relationship of the
theories of planning . 
Amitai Etzioni also presented a process known as
mixed scanning , a combination of bounded rationalism and incrementalism , which was , for a time , considered to be a philosophy but which is now generally
thought of as a component of the more specific models . Mixed scanning was an attempt to capitalize on
the strengths of both the rational and incremental
models while diminishing their individual weaknesses . A mixed scanning model calls for planners to
determine key areas where comprehensive rational
planning might be warranted or necessary while relegating all other areas to more incremental planning
approaches . This offers the advantage of allowing
key resources and efforts to be concentrated into a few
areas rather than across the full spectrum of organizational goals . 
The two rational approaches have now merged to a
point where references to rationalism usually pertain
to the bounded approach . Comprehensive rationalism
is generally traced to military planning during World
War II and the writings of Herbert Simon . In models
reflecting a rational perspective , goals and alternative
means to achieve those goals are clearly defined . A
rational , often quantitative , decision-making approach
is used to determine the optimum alternative from the
set of possible alternatives . An early example within
this philosophy was provided by Roger Kaufman in
his problem-solving process model . 
762———Planning Models
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 762
Over the past two decades , one particular set of
models in the comprehensive-rational philosophy
has become predominant in educational planning , the
strategic planning models . Although minor variations
exist among these models , they generally call for an
extensive environmental scan to assess the opportunities and threats arising from such sources as policy , 
law , public opinion , and financing . Strategic planning
models then call for a similarly comprehensive analysis of the organization ’ s strengths and weaknesses visà-vis these threats and the organization ’ s mission and
goals . Once these have been determined , the school or
district devises an extended list of strategies that
might enable it to reach its goals and uses a deliberate , 
rational process to select the most appropriate strategies from this list . Finally , these models call for the
development of action and evaluation plans that specify which tasks must be accomplished , the timelines
for task initiation and completion , the responsible
party or parties , and the process , criteria , and timelines for evaluating the implementation of the plan
and an evaluation of the organization ’ s success in
attaining its goals . 
Despite its widespread and often mandated use , 
the comprehensive-rational planning models have frequently been criticized for some of their inherent
assumptions . Even its early proponent , Herbert Simon , 
recognized these concerns , noting that the extensive
environmental and organizational scanning , the search
for the full range of alternative solutions , and the need
for rigorous evaluation of these solutions represent
virtually impossible demands on administrators ’  ( and
other stakeholders ’  ) time . Second , as many of the
problems faced by schools are “ fuzzy problems ,  ” 
it is often impossible to forecast the consequences of
adopting a given alternative or combination of alternatives . Finally , Simon questioned individuals ’ ability to
be as fully “ rational ” as the model requires , noting that
background , psychological factors , problem presentation and interpretation , and social factors all compromise truly rational decisions . This led James March
and Herbert Simon to propose what is known as
Planning Models———763
Changed
Organization
Guided
Change
Unguided
Change
An Organization ’ s Improvement Repertoire
Typical Forces for Change
Societal
Expectations 
& Demands
Best
Practice
Internal
Policy
Agreements
External
policy
Mandate
Internal Analysis
Decision by Responsible Agents
Existing Institutionalized Process
Developmental : 
When No Defined or Institutionalized Process Exists
Possible Responses to Change Forces
Unaware , Uncaring Neglect Leading to an Unshaped Future
a . 
b . 
c . 
d . 
e . 
Figure 1 An Organization ’ s Repertoire for Managing the Need for Altered Futures
SOURCE : Modified from Beach , R . H .  ,  & McInerney , W . D . Educational planning models and school district practice ; originally
published in Planning and Changing , 17 ( 3 )  , 184 . Reprinted with permission of Planning and Changing . 
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 763
bounded ( limited ) rationality , in which these limitations
are recognized and “ satisficing ,  ” or the acceptance of a
feasible alternative is deemed workable rather than a
search for the “ the optimal alternative .  ” 
The third planning philosophy , incrementalism , is
based on the recognition of these limitations as well . 
It was used in practice long before Charles Lindblom
described this incremental model as successive limited
comparisons . This model accepts the inherent complexity and difficulties of comprehensive-rational models
and circumvents them by limiting planning decisions to
a series of successive comparisons that build on past and
current achievements to move the organization ahead in
small , incremental steps . Because goals are approached
slowly and with small advances , they are viewed as
relatively flexible , changing over time , perhaps before
being accomplished . The planner focuses much more on 
 “ the possible ” than on “ the ideal ,  ” more on “ next ” than
on “ the ultimate goal .  ” Incremental planning calls for
organizations and their members to move only marginally beyond their comfort zone , causing far less resistance to change than most comprehensive-rational
planning models . Although relatively simple and not
highly demanding of resources ( e . g .  , time , financial , and
human )  , incremental planning is subject to the criticism
that it progresses very slowly , may readily become disjointed , and may not be able to maintain a tight focus on
the organization ’ s goals , which shift over time . 
The fourth planning philosophy is far less goal based
and is referred to in a variety of ways , for example , 
goal-free planning , adaptive planning , or developmental planning . This is the most recent of the philosophies
to be given attention in the professional literature , 
emerging in the late 1960s ; however , several of its themes
arose very early as concerns were voiced regarding
the other three approaches . 
Primary among its themes was the need for widespread , meaningful participation in , and commitment
to , the planning process . All three of the other philosophies were originally formulated around the concept of
a manager or professional planner doing the majority
of data gathering , analysis , and decision making . 
Unfortunately , this led to low commitment among
organizational members and other stakeholders , leading to resistance to change during the implementation
and institutionalization phases , often to the downfall of
the process . Later versions of strategic planning models recognized this weakness and constructed elaborate
mechanisms for wide-scale stakeholder involvement in
the process but often in less than meaningful ways . 
In a developmental planning model , however , participation occurs in vastly different ways than in the other
models . In these models , the administrator / planner
works directly with the members and stakeholders of the
organization to discern their values and vision for the
organization . The administrator / planner then ascertains
the common elements of these values and visions ; these
become the platform for determining the directional , 
rather than a goal-specific , plan . Obviously , these values
and visions are closely linked to the organization ’ s culture
in pursuit of the common vision . This gives individuals
a great deal of freedom to operate within a common
framework , reducing resistance to change . 
Naturally , a developmental planning model also
invokes a tension between freedom and constraint , 
for boundaries are relatively nebulous and task and
process issues often become enmeshed . One classic
purpose of developmental planning is to enhance and
guide the professional development of the organization ’ s personnel as they undertake activities that are
not only crucial to moving the organization toward
its agreed upon direction , but which will also create a
greater understanding of the organization , its problem-solving processes , and the employee ’ s role within
those processes and within the organization as a
whole . This process of “ double-loop ” learning leads
the organization to become what Peter Senge terms “ a
learning organization ,  ” with the goal being not only
the successful accomplishment of the organization ’ s
current improvement effort but the further capacitation
764———Planning Models
Comprehensive Rationality
Bounded Rationality
Mixed
Scanning
Incrementalism
Goal-free / Adaptive
Degree of Goal Specification
Degree of Comprehensiveness in
Generating Problem Solution Alternatives
Figure 2 Philosophical Domains of Educational
Planning
SOURCE : Adapted from Beach , R .  ,  & Lindahl , R .  ( 2004 )  . 
Identifying the knowledge base for school improvement . 
Planning and Changing , 35 ( 1–2 )  , 1–31 . 
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 764
of the organization and its members to engage successfully in future improvement efforts . It is important to
recognize that models under this philosophy are not
truly goal free ; rather , goals are given less prominence
and considered after other concerns have been
addressed . 
Modern planning theory tends to employ an eclectic combination of these four philosophies rather
than rely on one specific construct . For example , schools
contemplating adoption of a particular established
reform model , for example ,  “ Accelerated Learning ” or 
 “ The Modern Red Schoolhouse ,  ” might benefit from
use of a mixed-scanning approach that focuses on like
alternatives . School districts contemplating the change
to a charter or magnet school format might benefit
more from the broader scan of opportunities and alternatives available through a comprehensive rational
model . Incremental planning serves many school districts well in the annual budgeting process , as it greatly
reduces the time and energy required for planning in
environments where resources are limited and fairly
constant . When properly implemented , a developmental model allows schools to improve on a continuous
basis when their external and internal environments are
not subjected to a turbulent environment . 
Also , because so many variables have been found
to have profound effects on the change process , for
example , leadership , staff stability , staff development , 
organizational support for change , institutional
history , organizational culture , clarity and agreement
on organizational goals , and the demographic characteristics of organizational members , each organization ’ s readiness and capacity for change is unique , and
varies across time . Consequently , the selection of the
most appropriate planning model varies from organization to organization , task to task , and across time . 
As with so many aspects of educational leadership
and administration , planning is as much art and craft
as a science . 
—Robert H . Beach and Ronald A . Lindahl
See also accountability ; chaos theory ; conceptual systems
theory and leadership ; Delphi Technique ; economics , 
theories of ; goals , goal setting ; governance ; group dynamics ; human capital ; leadership , theories of ; management by
objectives ; management information systems ; management
theories ; measurement , theories of ; needs assessment ; networking and network theory ; open systems theory ; organizational theories ; paradigm ; PERT ( Performance
Evaluation and Review Technique )  ; Planning , Programming , 
Budgeting System ; research methods ; satisficing theory ; 
school improvement models ; Simon , Herbert ; strategic planning ; structural equation modeling ; systemic reform ; systems
theory / thinking ; values of organizations and leadership
Further Readings and References
Beach , R .  ,  & Lindahl , R .  ( 2004 )  . A critical review of strategic
planning : Is it a panacea for public education ? Journal of
School Leadership , 14 , 211–234 . 
Beach , R .  ,  & Lindahl , R .  ( 2004 )  . Identifying the knowledge
base for school improvement . Planning and Changing , 
35 ( 1 & 2 )  , 1–31 . 
Beach R .  ,  & McInerney , W .  ( 1986 )  . Educational planning
models and school district practice . Planning and Changing , 17 ( 3 )  , 180–191 . 
Clark , D .  , Lotto , L .  ,  & Astuto , T .  ( 1989 )  . Effective schools and
school improvement : A comparative analysis of two lines
of inquiry . In J . L . Burdin ( Ed .  )  , School leadership : A contemporary reader ( pp . 159–186 )  . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . 
Etzioni , A .  ( 1967 )  . Mixed-scanning : A “ third ” approach to
decision-making . Public Administration Review , 27 , 
418–424 . 
Faludi , A .  ( 1973 )  . A reader in planning theory . Oxford : 
Pergamon Press . 
Fayol , H .  ( 1949 )  . General and industrial administration . 
New York : Pitman [ Administration industrielle et generale 
( 1916 )  ]  . 
Kaufman , R .  , Herman , J .  ,  & Watters , K .  ( 1996 )  . Educational
planning : Strategic , tactical , operational . Lancaster , PA : 
Technomic . 
Lewin , K .  ( 1951 )  . Field theory in social science . New York : 
Harper & Row . 
Lindblom , C .  ( 1959 )  . The science of “ muddling through .  ” 
Public Administration Review , 19 , 79–99 . 
March , J .  ,  & Simon , H .  ( 1959 )  . Organizations . New York : 
John Wiley & Sons . 
Senge , P .  ( 1990 )  . The fifth discipline . New York : Doubleday . 
Simon , H .  ( 1955 )  . A behavioral model of rational choice . 
Quarterly Journal of Economics , 69 , 99–118 . 
Simon , H .  ( 1957 )  . Administrative behavior ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
New York : Free Press . 
Simon , H .  ( 1982 )  . Models of bounded rationality . Cambridge : 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press . 
 PLATO
Plato ( 427 BC–347 BC ) was the second in the line of great
philosophers who emerged from the ancient Greek
city-state of Athens . He was a student of Socrates and
founder of the Academy , which counted Aristotle as a
student , among many others . A soldier and aspiring
politician in his early life , most of the details of his life
have been gleaned from letters attributed to him . These
Plato———765
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 765
letters have come under fire from several historians as
not written by Plato himself . Despite these criticisms , it
is clear Plato was not an insulated scholar but a worldly
soldier , traveler , and at times diplomat . 
Plato fought in the Peloponnesian War from 409 BC
to the end in 404 BC . The war pitted Athens against the
Greek city-state of Sparta . When Sparta won the war , 
Plato became involved in the Thirty Tyrants of Athens , 
a government set up in part by the victorious Spartans . 
His role in the government is not clear ; however , the
violence employed by the oligarchy caused Plato to
leave its service . When democracy was restored in
Athens in 403 BC , Plato once again delved into politics . 
It was sometime prior to this that Plato became a
devoted student of Socrates . 
Plato quickly became disgusted with the machinations of Athenian politics , and the execution of his
mentor Socrates was the final straw . Plato left politics
completely and also left Athens . During his wide travels , he met with many other scholars , including the
mathematician Pythagoras . The mathematician apparently had a large influence on Plato , as he embraced
mathematics as the most perfect science . The next era
of Plato ’ s life is not completely known , but apparently
he entered military service again on behalf of Athens
in another war . It was during this military service that
he started work on his Dialogues . 
Plato ’ s fame emerges from his Academy he
founded in Athens circa 387 BC . The stated goal of the
Academy was to prepare young men to be great statesmen . Given the proper values at the Academy , Plato
was convinced that these young men would improve
Athens . Enlightened political leadership remained
Plato ’ s focus for his remaining years . 
The philosophy that emerges from Plato ’ s works is
not easily stated . Plato wrote 30 dialogues where
characters discuss various topics . Unlike many of his
contemporaries , Plato chose the dialogue format over
treatises . The characters in the dialogues exchange
views , but Plato himself never asserts a direct point of
view in the works . The characters are historic , and
Socrates remains the protagonist throughout most of
them . However , Plato ’ s overall philosophical discussions are not systematic in the way of some later philosophers and must be constructed from the dialogues ’ 
diverse prose . Plato often criticizes the point he seems
to be advocating in the same work , adding to the difficulty of pinning his views down . 
Plato ’ s dialogues are most often divided into three
periods , early , late , and middle . The early dialogues
are thought to accurately represent the views of
Socrates , and give the basis of the Socratic method of
teaching . Socrates taught by asking constant , probing
questions while maintaining no obvious stance and
giving no answers . The questioner creates dilemmas
that require students to think and rethink their positions until they arrive at the truth . This new kind of
sophistry sought not to teach students rhetoric and
argument skills to gain victory in debate but to arrive
at the truth . The Socratic method is widely advocated
in many educational settings today , perhaps most predominately in American law schools . 
The middle dialogues contain Plato ’ s masterpiece , 
The Republic . Here a sharp change is manifested
in the personality of Plato ’ s Socrates . Socrates is no
longer the mere questioner , seemingly unable to provide any positive answers . Instead , Socrates becomes
a proactive participant in the debates , defending his
theories with zeal . Socrates ’ s conversations were limited to philosophical and ethical debates in the early
dialogues , but in the middle dialogues he addresses
numerous areas of inquiry . Plato ’ s Socrates evolves
from a man who is wisest of all because he admits to
having no knowledge in the early dialogues to one
who suggests that humans may achieve infallible
knowledge . 
The theory of forms or ideas that emerges from
the middle dialogues is the central , definitive aspect of
Platonism . The theory of forms or ideas espouses
that one can only see a shadow of any one thing ’ s true
form in the material world . The form is the ideal or
perfection of the item , while things in the material
world are representations of the form . For example , 
Plato describes the form of a bed in The Republic , and
anything that has the properties of a bed is truly defined
by the form bed . Therefore , for any set of items that
shares some property , there is a form that gives a true
description of the item . True knowledge comes from
recognition of the forms and comparing items in the
material realm to those forms . 
Throughout the dialogues , Plato progresses
through sets of proofs . A proof is a set of agreed facts , 
often deduced from previously agreed to facts or
conclusions . Logical progression from proofs leads in
turn to gaining the truth . However , Plato turns from
the Socratic method of the earlier dialogues to a more
direct or didactic style often labeled the “ dialectic ” in
the middle dialogues . 
Plato seems to reconsider his theory of forms in
the late dialogues . In Parmenides he provides an
766———Plato
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 766
apparently fatal argument against his theory in an
exchange that has become known as the Third Man
Argument . This argument states that items in the
process of participation , wherein they take on characters of the forms , fall prey to an infinite loop : if certain
male things are male by virtue of taking on the form of
male , then the form of male and these male things
must create a new form ( Male 2 )  . However , if the new
form ( Male 2 ) is male , then it and all things male must
participate in a third form ( Male 3 )  , and so on . 
There is considerable debate as to whether Plato
believed the Third Man Argument refuted his theory
of forms . His later works do make it clear that he no
longer believed that it was necessary for statesmen and
politicians to grasp such abstract concepts for effective governance . In Plato ’ s last , unfinished dialogue , 
Laws , the forms are not present at all . Plato returned
to his original questions of practical good governance . 
No longer was perfection the goal , but practical meaningful knowledge that would increase the happiness of
the citizenry . 
—Keith Pogue
See also aesthetics , in education ; Aristotle ; arts education ; 
Catholic education ; character education ; Christian
Coalition ; curriculum , theories of ; ethics ; existentialism ; 
fascism and schools ; fundamentalism ; idealism , as philosophy in education ; knowledge base , of the field ; Loyola , 
Ignatius ; philosophies of education ; positivism , postpositivism ; right-wing politics , advocates , impact on education
Further Readings and References
Biffle , C .  ( 2000 )  . A guided tour of five works by Plato ( 3rd ed .  ) 
Mountain View , CA : Mayfield . 
Brickhouse , T .  ,  & Smith , N .  ( 2000 )  . The philosophy of
Socrates . Boulder , CO : Westview . 
Cooper , J .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1995 ) Plato : Complete works . Indianapolis , 
IN : Hackett . 
Irwin , T .  ( 1995 )  . Plato ’ s ethics . New York : Oxford University Press . 
Strauss , L .  ( 2001 )  . On Plato ’ s symposium ( S . Benardete , Ed .  ) 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
 PLUTARCH
The Greek Maestrius Plutarcus ( circa 45–125 AD )  , 
known to history as Plutarch , is primarily recognized
as the great biographer of antiquity for his seminal
work , Parallel Lives , a compendium of biographies
of famous Greek and Roman military and political
figures . A leading thinker in the Roman Empire ’ s
golden age , Plutarch was born in the Greek town of
Chaeronea , studied philosophy at Athens , traveled to
Alexandria and various parts of Italy , and lived for a
significant time in Rome . For many years Plutarch
served as one of the two priests at the temple of
Apollo at Delphi . As a lecturer and teacher of philosophy , he achieved considerable repute . By his writings
and lectures , he became a celebrity in the Roman
Empire , yet he continued to reside in Greece and
actively participated in local affairs , even serving as
mayor into the early part of Emperor Hadrian ’ s reign . 
In Parallel Lives ( written between 100 and 125 AD ) 
Plutarch paired equivalent famous Greek and Roman
political and military figures in philosophical biographies . Plutarch developed a pattern to the biographies : 
the subject ’ s family , education , entry into public life , 
career high points , a change in fortune or attitude , and
final years and death . Then a short essay of comparison follows most of the pairs of lives . Among the
48 lives are the pairs Alexander the Great / Julius
Caesar and Demosthenes / Cicero , and figures such as
Caius Gracchus , Pericles , and Pompey . 
Throughout Parallel Lives , Plutarch delivers
insightful observations on human nature illustrated
by his subjects , so it is difficult to classify the Lives as
history , biography , or philosophy . Plutarch believes
history to be a theater of morals , in which great individuals rise and fall by their strengths and weaknesses ; 
thus , he was more concerned with examining the
character of great men than with writing a chronicle of
great historical events . Because he views history not as
a set of vast and mechanistic processes but as a forum
within which to study the natures of particularly great
men and the influences these natures exerted over
events , the chosen lives tend to be anecdotal and to
focus on revealing stories . He believed incidents to
demonstrate the character of his subjects were far more
interesting than their great battles or political struggles . 
During Plutarch ’ s life , guests from throughout the
empire congregated for serious conversation at his
country estate . Many of these dialogues were recorded
and published , and the 78 essays and other works that
have survived are now known collectively as the
Moralia ( Essays on Moral Issues )  , which deals with a
variety of themes but is strongly centered on virtue , conduct , and ethics , the ruling passion of Plutarch ’ s life . 
Readers have appreciated Plutarch for his practical
wisdom . C . S . Lewis has stated that Plutarch laid the
foundation for the heroic ideal of the Elizabethan Age . 
Plutarch———767
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 767
Characters from several of Shakespeare ’ s plays have
their foundation from Plutarch ’ s Lives , including
Marc Antony , Julius Caesar , Brutus , and Coriolanus . 
Scholars in the field of educational leadership can utilize Plutarch ’ s works as the first theory of leadership : 
trait theory . From antiquity and Plutarch we have suggested characteristics of the heroic or noble leader . 
Are the leaders of antiquity comparable to or different
from the leaders of modern times ? Plutarch provides
insight from which to begin the discussion . 
—JoAnn Danelo Barbour
See also character education ; charisma , of leaders ; ethics ; 
great man theory ; leadership , theories of ; morality , moral
leadership ; trait theory
Further Readings and References
Lamberton , R .  ( 2001 )  . Plutarch . New Haven , CT : Yale
University Press . 
Plutarch .  ( 1991 )  . Plutarch ’ s lives ( The Harvard Classics , C . 
Eliot , Ed .  )  . Danbury , CT : Grolier Enterprises . 
Whittemore , R .  ( 1988 )  . Pure lives : The early biographers . 
Baltimore : Johns Hopkins Press . 
 POLICY ADVOCACY
An area of increasing interest for school-based administrators and educational leadership faculty charged
with preparing educational leaders is policy advocacy . 
Policy advocacy involves actively promoting a stance
on an issue and implies there is a shared responsibility
among educators , legislators , and other stakeholders to
create , implement , and assess outcomes from policies . 
As educational policies seem to shift from local and
state-driven initiatives to federal initiatives , the notion
of educators ’ involvement in policy advocacy has perhaps become more difficult to achieve yet is arguably
more essential for the welfare of public education . 
Traditionally , personnel in K–12 schools and higher
education institutions have not had a voice in policy
formation and instead have generally only implemented
policies . When stakeholders are not included in policy
development , the policies developed are often fragmented and ineffective . Even though legislators and
other policymakers may be responsible for creating
large-scale educational policies , when educators engage
in policy advocacy , their involvement may offer greater
sensitivity to educational needs . 
Most policies affecting schools are developed
using a traditional model of policy creation . The traditional model uses a top-down process in which policies are determined by experts and bureaucrats , 
generally without the input of those who will implement the policies . Policies are typically formed once a
problem has been identified , encouraging a passive
approach to policy formation . Although expert opinion is sometimes sought to help determine potential
policy solutions , school board members , legislators , 
and other policymakers , particularly at the local and
state level , tend to be understaffed and working under
tight deadlines ; consequently , little attention is given
to prospective policies unless they become highly
politicized . Many policies are created at these levels
as a reaction to a situation rather than as a proactive
approach to addressing areas of concern . 
There is controversy over the degree of involvement educators should have in policy advocacy activities . Those arguing against policy advocacy describe
the increasingly demanding roles of school administrators and other educators , leaving little time for policy advocacy activities . Others suggest educators may
be too focused on their own needs to clearly understand the larger policy issues . 
There is some support and legitimacy for the
involvement of educators in policy advocacy . Recently
adopted educational leadership standards suggest that
administrators should be more involved in influencing
educational policies . Standards-based expectations for
administrators now include collaborating with others , 
complying with increasingly complex state and
national reform legislation , and assuming additional
roles while responding to community demands . 
Although administrators are busy , policy advocacy
should be considered an area of priority . Otherwise , 
educators will continue to have little voice in the policies created for them to implement . 
Administrators can become involved in policy
advocacy by learning the process of policy making , 
building relationships with policymakers and other
educators , conducting policy research , and sharing the
results of this research with policymakers . To be effective policy advocates , educational leaders need to work
collaboratively across institutional lines and positions
to create a team approach to providing assistance and
expertise to policymakers faced with creating policies . 
Educators play a key role as participants in the policy
process by offering potential solutions and providing
information to help policymakers and other stakeholders
768———Policy Advocacy
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 768
understand the unintended consequences policies may
inflict on teachers , students , and communities . 
When engaging in policy advocacy , it is important
for educators to be mindful of the policymaker ’ s
schedule and other competing demands . The development of a strategic plan for maximizing the contact
time with the policymaker may be key to the effectiveness of advocacy opportunities . Educators should
be cordial , concise , and considerate . After an initial
greeting , the policy advocate should begin by stating
the reasons for the meeting , express areas of agreement or concern , and provide the policymaker with a
well-developed but brief overview of the situation
under consideration . A mixture of factual information
about the situation as well as anecdotal examples tends
to provide the most likelihood for convincing the policymaker to consider the advocate ’ s point of view . It is
important to remember that policymakers are not the 
 “ enemy ” of educators but are either elected by or responsible to many stakeholders . Educators can provide
important information to help policymakers better
understand educational issues , particularly the unintended consequences of some policy decisions . 
Individually , educators generally have the greatest
impact as policy advocates at the local level , where it
may be easier to form relationships and gain access
with decision makers such as school board members , 
although individuals can also be effective with other
policymakers . Elected officials at the state level generally have offices at the local level . Effective policy
advocates will take time to meet with these policymakers at their local office as well as at the state
capitol . It helps to know the chief aides and office personnel in both the local and state-level offices . These
staffers function as gatekeepers for the policymaker
and will either help you gain access or prevent you
from doing so . It is important to develop relationships
with staffers and policymakers prior to your need to
ask for support on an issue . These relationships take
time to develop but are usually worth the time and
energy required because of your increased access to
the policymaker . 
When policymakers are elected officials , voter reactions and perceptions may influence the policymaker ’ s
willingness to take a stand on some issues . However , 
educators vote too , and it may help to gently remind
these policymakers that you will vote based on their
actions and statements or lack of action . This approach
is especially effective when groups of educators work
together advocating for educational policies . 
Coalitions of educators such as the National
Association of Secondary School Principals ( NASSP ) 
and the American Association of School Administrators ( AASA ) have been successful in gaining access to
and providing influential information for policymakers
at the state and federal levels . Policy advocacy can be a
frustrating and time-consuming process , so joining
with other educators to collect and analyze data and
prepare it for effective presentation to policymakers can
be a more effective use of one ’ s time and energy . In
addition , the presence of a coalition or network helps to
demonstrate that there is a critical mass of stakeholders
involved , often persuading the policymaker of the importance of attention to the issue being addressed . 
The process of policy advocacy becomes more complex as policymakers represent greater numbers of
people and interests . However , by forming helpful
relationships before there is an urgent situation , it may
be possible to regularly provide information that will
help influence policymakers at all levels . It is important to remember that policymakers are people too . 
Policymakers want to be treated with respect , be communicated with regularly—not just when there is a
problem—and be provided with positive feedback
rather than only the negative feedback they are more
likely to receive . Educators can be effective policy
advocates , but it takes time , energy , and the willingness to become actively engaged in and well informed
about issues and prospective policies . 
—Cynthia J . Reed
See also accountability ; authority ; Black education ; boards of
education ; bureaucracy ; Chicago school reform ; consolidation , of school districts ; critical race theory ; cultural politics , wars ; decision making ; democracy , democratic
education and administration ; desegregation , of schools ; 
discrimination ; equality , in schools ; equity and adequacy of
funding schools ; ethics ; expert power ; forecasting ; fundamentalism ; Gallup Polls , on public education ; governance ; 
international education ; knowledge base , of the field ; law ; 
leadership , theories of ; literacy , theories of ; minorities , in
schools ; multiculturalism ; persuasion ; politics , of education ; power ; restructuring , of schools ; school districts , 
history and development ; state departments of education ; 
Supreme Court , United States , key cases in education law
Further Readings and References
Davies , B .  , Evans , J .  ,  & Fitz , J .  ( 2005 )  . Education policy and
social reproduction . New York : Routledge . 
Heck , R .  ( 2004 )  . Studying educational and social policy . 
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Policy Advocacy———769
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 769
Malen , B .  ( 2005 )  . Educational leaders as policy analysts . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 191–215 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Olssen , M .  , Codd , J .  ,  & O ’ Neill , A .  ( 2004 )  . Education policy : 
Globalization , citizenship and democracy . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Sage . 
Spring , J .  ( 2005 )  . Political agendas for education . Mahwah , 
NJ : Erlbaum . 
Stein , S .  ( 2004 )  . The culture of education policy . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
 POLICY MAKING , VALUES OF
Policies , laws , rules , and regulations are pervasive and
ubiquitous in public education . Policies frame responsibilities and rights , articulate procedures and process , 
and state what is important to be pursued by the organization . They seek to impose certainty and uniformity in
the behaviors of the organization ’ s actors , and they allocate scarce resources . They endeavor to solve problems
the public needs to have resolved . If a problem arises , a
policy is devised to solve it . If educators respond differently to similar situations , a policy is developed to bring
consistency into the organization . Policies are enacted to
achieve certain desired outcomes . 
Policies can have profound influence . For example , 
school leaders need not look far beyond their desk
to find policies that define what shall be taught , how
it shall be taught , and who shall teach it . A school ’ s
curriculum and instruction are currently shaped by
high-stakes accountability policies . The federal government through No Child Left Behind legislation
defines alternative placements and practices for
students in schools that fail to meet Adequate Yearly
Progress goals . Special education , bilingual education , English-only instruction , random drug testing of
students , and reduced recess time are all examples of
policies that impact the public schools and those charged
with their management and leadership . The seeming
omnipresence of policies , especially those that are
done to schools , underscores the importance of thoroughly understanding the policy process . 
A policy is a set of values issued with authority and
expressed in written form or words . It is authoritative
when there is sufficient power to induce a shift in
behavior toward achieving specified values . In short , 
policy is the embodiment of a particular value that
government deems is in the best interest of the public . 
But what values are pursued through the political
process of policy making and by whom ? Various issue
partisans who gather around a particular problem or
preferred solution alternative , knowledge brokers with
their retinue of researchers , constituencies , and the
media all exert pressure on public officials to identify
specific problems and propose possible solutions . Likewise , the same groups will react against proposed
problems and solutions that run counter to their cherished values . These groups bring their favored values
and definitions of those values to the political process , 
where they often collide or resonate with one another
and with the values of the public officials . 
For policymakers , the constant dilemma is how
to choose among the competing values to ascertain
which will be pursued in any given policy . One must
ask , What values are fundamental to the policymaking process , or in this case , the educational policymaking process ? In 1986 , James Guthrie and Rodney
Reed identified three deeply held values that are inextricably linked to educational policy—equality , efficiency , and liberty . Other scholars posit four dominant
values in education—equity , efficiency , choice , and
quality . Still others have identified five values that
have been historically prominent in policy making in
general and in education specifically—liberty , equality , efficiency , fraternity , and economic growth . 
A comparison of these three value sets shows an
overlap of values . Choice is just another name for liberty . Equity and equality are similar . Efficiency is the
same in both sets . The major differences are quality , 
fraternity , and economic growth . 
Equity , efficiency , and choice are recurring values . 
Quality subsumes economic growth because an education cannot be a quality education if it does not adequately prepare students to be productive in society . 
Currently , the term excellence is used to describe
quality . Fraternity is an important value but it appears
to be restricted to curricular issues or it rose in support
of other values touted as American or in response to
ideas considered un-American . 
The following values appear dominant in educational
policy making : equity , efficiency , choice , and excellence . 
New values may also emerge as new sets of problems
are identified . There appears to be evidence that a new
fundamental value , security , has been pushed onto the
public agenda . Legislatures and Congress have passed
laws aimed at making our schools safe by creating
rings of protection around the school . School districts
have passed regulations regarding gang attire , 
installed metal detectors , randomly tested students for
drug use , and touted the impact that school uniforms
770———Policy Making , Values Of
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 770
have on reducing violence . The courts have shown an
increased willingness , especially in the area of search
and seizure , to support those actions aimed at providing greater security for the schools . 
EQUITY , EFFICIENCY , CHOICE , 
EXCELLENCE , AND SECURITY
A public policy that values equity means that there
are inequities in the distribution of or access to public
resources that can be redressed through the redistributive power of government . Policies serving equity issues
measure the gap between the expected norms of social
life and its actual attainments . It looks to what levels of
needs exist that will provide adequate resources . Its precept is fairness , not sameness . A review of a few policies
that stress equity will help in defining this value . 
Public Law 94-142 and the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA )  , recently reauthorized in 2004 , were written to ensure that students
with identified disabilities are not denied access to
education . Once their access to an important governmental service , education , was assured , these laws
looked to the adequacy of the education the students
would receive . To receive the exact same education as
their nonhandicapped peers would not be fair . In order
for handicapped students to enjoy the benefits derived
from governmental service , these students may need
additional resources , such as specially trained teachers
and support services . 
Similar to the needs of handicapped students are the
needs of the limited and non-English-speaking
students . In the seminal court case in this area , the U . S . 
Supreme Court in Lau v . Nichols ( 1974 ) stated that
Chinese-speaking students were denied a meaningful
opportunity at an education in the San Francisco
Unified School District , despite receiving the same
instruction as their English-speaking counterparts . 
Equal treatment turned out to be unequal—the
Chinese-speaking students needed more instruction . 
Other examples of equity issues in education include
desegregation , with its drive for equal access for minority students , Head Start programs , and school funding
lawsuits in which the plaintiffs claim that a state ’ s
method of funding its schools is not equitable because
of the great disparity in revenues generated from school
district to school district throughout the state . 
Efficiency is getting the most out of a given input . 
It is the greatest benefit for the least cost . Efficiency is
an instrumental value ; it is a comparative idea that
allows for the judging of the merit of doing things in
different ways . Efficiency reduces waste and duplication . It husbands resources so that they may be spent
on desired items . 
Educational policies that are directed at achieving
efficiency often involve ratios such as California ’ s
law regarding the highest number of administrators to
teachers a school district may have without incurring
a penalty . Efficiency dominated educational values
from the 1920s to around the 1950s . It is still a potent
force , as witnessed by Massachusetts Proposition
2-1 / 2 and California ’ s Proposition 13 , which slashed
revenue for public schools in both states in a “ starve
the beast ” type of approach to reducing the costs of
public education . 
Choice as a fundamental value appears to be writ
large in the public educational agenda setting stage . 
Charter schools and vouchers are just two of the most
recognizable policy efforts . Both policies embrace
the concept of giving choice to parents “ to direct the
upbringing of the children ” by allowing options to
attending public schools . Other related policies that
embody choice include home schooling , tuition tax
credits , and intra- and interdistrict choice programs . 
Excellence is the fourth fundamental value . An
example of excellence as a value in educational policy
making is found in America ’ s response to Sputnik . 
America was no longer considered the best country
technologically and scientifically in the world . 
Consequently , the nation geared up for a push to
increase and strengthen the math and science curricula . 
The federal government , in pursuit of this goal called 
 “ excellence ,  ” at that time provided large amounts of
money . More recently , the application of this value
has been seen in the so-called first wave of reform of
the early 1980s prompted by the 1983 report A Nation
at Risk . This reform effort focused on increasing standards for high school graduation , the institution of
minimal standards , and tighter controls on who enters
the profession of teaching . The push for high-stakes
testing , such as tying graduation to passing a statemandated test , is the most recent example of a policy
that seeks excellence as its core value . 
The last and emerging fundamental value is security . Schools long considered safe havens for students
have been the target for many policies that seek security . The installation of magnetometers , the resurgence
of strip searches for drugs and weapons , zero tolerance
policies , and the unprecedented collaboration of the
Secret Service and the U . S . Department of Education
Policy Making , Values Of———771
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 771
point to a new fundamental value—security . When
New England superintendents were asked if security
is a fundamental value on par with other fundamental
values , 88 . 7% agreed or strongly agreed . 
Finally , it is worthwhile to note that although
these currently represent core educational values , 
history suggests that all five are not equally pervasive . It
is possible to argue that certain values dominated particular time periods . For instance the case could be made
that equity was the major value pursued during the civil
rights era ; indeed , several major education policies ( e . g .  , 
IDEA ) were introduced during or shortly following this
time period . The 1980s were witness to a burgeoning
standards movement—a time when excellence was on
the minds of education policymakers . Soon after , the
1990s brought school choice to the fore—charter
schools , voucher initiatives , and tuition tax credit policies were popularly enacted . The present decade has
made efficiency a top priority—witness the No Child
Left Behind Act and other increased accountability of
investments in our schools . And , of course , the
Columbine High School massacre and the September
11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks have heightened sensitivity to
security in our schools over the past two decades . 
SUMMARY
Educational leaders are policy consumers and
policymakers . The more informed they are about the
process , the more effective they are at implementing
and developing policy . An understanding of the fundamental values that influence and drive policy formation helps provide the leader with a rubric for
understanding policy . 
—Casey D . Cobb and Todd A . DeMitchell
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; Asian
Pacific Americans ; authority ; Black education ; boards of
education ; conflict management ; critical race theory ; crosscultural studies ; cultural politics , wars ; decision making ; 
Department of Education ; desegregation , of schools ; diversity ; economics , theories of ; equality , in schools ; equity and
adequacy of funding schools ; ethics ; finance , of public
schools ; forecasting ; Gallup Polls , on education ; governance ; international education ; knowledge base , of the
field ; Latinos ; management theories ; market theory of
schooling ; minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; No
Child Left Behind ; organizational theories ; parental
involvement ; philosophies , of education ; politics , of education ; power ; privatization ; productivity ; right-wing politics , 
advocates , impact on education ; rural education ; satisficing
theory ; school safety ; schooling effects ; social capital ; 
Supreme Court , United States , key cases in education law ; 
terrorism ; values of organizations and leadership ; values
pluralism , in schools ; violence in schools
Further Readings and References
Cooper , B .  , Fusarelli , L .  ,  & Randall , E .  ( 2004 )  . Better policies , 
better schools : Theories and applications . Boston : Pearson . 
Davies , B .  , Evans , J .  ,  & Fitz , J .  ( 2005 )  . Education policy and
social reproduction . New York : Routledge . 
DeMitchell , T .  ,  & Cobb , C .  ( 2003 )  . Policy responses to violence in our schools : An exploration of security as a fundamental value . Brigham Young University Education and
Law Journal 2 , 459–484 . 
Guthrie , J .  ,  & Reed , R .  ( 1986 )  . Educational administration
and policy : Effective leadership for American education . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Heck , R .  ( 2004 )  . Studying educational and social policy . 
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Lau v . Nichols , 414 U . S . 563 ( 1974 )  . 
Sirotnik , K .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Holding accountability accountable : What ought to matter in public education . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Spring , J .  ( 2005 )  . Political agendas for education . Mahwah , 
NJ : Erlbaum . 
 POLITICS , OF EDUCATION
As a field of study , politics of education is more
appropriately thought of as a subfield of education , 
rather than of political science . Incorporating frameworks and research methodologies from fields such
as sociology , history , law , and public and educational
administration , as well as political science , politics
of education is multidisciplinary and tends to be more
applied and practice-oriented than political science . 
Politics of education has made substantial contributions to educational administration by providing an
alternative lens for viewing the role of the administrator , other than the traditional view of administration as
planning , organizing , and managing . The traditional
view was that educational administrators acted outside or above the political arena , a view that hampered
their effectiveness . By encouraging administrators to
view themselves as political leaders , politics of education has given them tools for being more effective in the
educational world as it really is . Through studies of
educational policy , politics of education has contributed
the means for both politicians and educators to anticipate , evaluate , and improve the effects of educational
772———Politics , of Education
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 772
policies . Policy analysis , a subarea that includes program evaluation research , has made contributions to
research methodology . 
Scholars first took interest in the politics of education in the late 1950s and 1960s when the federal government began playing a larger role in schools via
the National Defense Education Act of 1958 and the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 . 
Conflict and political dissent were beginning to
appear more frequently in schools , and school leaders
were increasingly less successful in maintaining their
politically neutral posture . Interest in the study of the
politics of education also coincided with the
post–World War II trends in educational administration scholarship , which were built around the theories
and methods of the various social sciences . Thomas
H . Eliot is frequently credited with being the first to
conceptualize a politics of education . The Politics
of Education Association was formed in 1969 as a special interest group within the American Educational
Research Association ( AERA )  . In 1996 , AERA created a division of Educational Policy and Politics . 
In 1977 , Jay D . Scribner and Richard M . Englert
articulated a definition of politics that is widely used in
this field—interactions that affect the “ authoritative
allocation ” of principles . They noted that the definition
rests on assumptions that in a pluralist society , there
are conflicting values and scarce resources . Politics is
the means for making decisions that are accepted by
all . The processes leading to those decisions involve
attempts at influence by competing interests . Scholarship in the field of politics of education investigates
questions about political structures , political behavior , 
policy , social values , international comparisons , and
inequality and social justice . Studies often pursue
more than one type of question , for example , an international comparison study could investigate questions
of political structures and political behavior . 
POLITICS OF EDUCATION : 
KINDS OF QUESTIONS INVESTIGATED
Political Structures
Questions about political structures center on how
governance of education is set up at the local , state , 
and federal levels . Included are legal and organizational analyses of governance structures and procedures ; studies of the relationships among the local , 
state , and federal levels ; and research on elections . For
example , federalism is a term that defines the shared
responsibilities of the federal and state governments
in the American system . How that federalism works is
an area of study . Another area that has received much
attention is the local school board : how it should be
structured , how it should operate , whether it should be
elected or appointed , and whether it should be fiscally
dependent on local government or fiscally independent . An example is Michael W . Kirst ’ s work on mayoral takeovers of urban school districts . How schools
should coordinate with other community agencies that
serve children and families is also a topic in the political structures cluster . 
Political Behavior
Power is an organizing concept in studies that examines influence on and control of education decisions . 
Decentralization and community control of schools are
important topics . Studies of community power structures produced community types that predicted who
would wield the most influence over decisions about a
community ’ s schools . Studies of policy-making
processes examine how decisions are made and what
policies result from those decisions . Interest groups , 
bargaining , and voting are examples of political behavior . Paul E . Peterson ’ s study of the politics of the
Chicago public schools was an important contribution
to the literature on political bargaining in education . 
Policy Analysis
Policy analysis involves questions about the formulation , implementation , and effects of educational
policies . Some areas of policy for study have been
schools of choice , testing and accountability systems , 
and educational finance . 
Catherine Marshall , Douglas Mitchell , and
Frederick Wirt studied six states and developed a cultural framework for examining the origins of state
education policy . The influential STAR study in
Tennessee resulted in published articles about effects
of class size on student learning , as well as on the politics of reducing class size in the public schools . 
International Comparisons
Comparative and international education is a separate subfield of education ; however , many comparative studies analyze political issues . Michael Crossley
Politics , of Education———773
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 773
and Keith Watson have written a history and critique
of comparative and international education . Comparative education tends to be more academic , while international education is more oriented toward support
of policy decisions . Crossley and Watson criticize the
American-European conceptual frameworks that have
predominated in the field , the prevalence of statistical
comparisons that ignore cultural contexts , the nationstate as the unit of analysis , and the political motivations behind some of the research , which is often done
on a consulting basis . Their view is that the strengths
of this field include that it is multidisciplinary , it has
traditionally recognized the importance of global
forces on education , and it has examined the dilemmas of cross-cultural transfer of educational programs
and structures . They call for more collaborative work
between the researchers with comparative and international orientations , more cultural sensitivity through
participatory research with practitioners , and more
use of multiple frames of analysis , from global to
microethnographic . 
Schools and Democratic Values
To what extent do schools behave as democracies in
the process of educating children ? Some researchers do
not attempt to be value neutral . They have a value position and use it to formulate the research questions and to
view the data . For example , Jeannie Oakes and her colleagues studied middle school reform in 16 schools , using
in-depth qualitative case studies . Their a priori assumption was that good reform advances civic virtue . They
viewed the process of reform as key to accomplishing
change that serves the common good . They looked for
evidence of commitment to student learning , inclusion of
diverse learners , development of caring communities , and
democratic participation of stakeholders . 
Critical Studies
Scholars in politics of education have always been
interested in questions of who influences decisions
and who benefits from those decisions . For most of
these scholars , whether or not education is democratic
and expands opportunities for students is a researchable question . But critical theorists assume that
schools and government are social institutions that by
their nature reproduce the inequities in society . Their
research sets out to show how those inequities are
institutionalized in schools and what needs to be
changed . For example , Wanda S . Pillow wrote about
the education of pregnant and parenting teens from a
feminist and race critical point of view . 
THEORIES IN POLITICS OF EDUCATION
Systems Theory
David Easton formulated an application of systems
theory to political science in the mid-1960s . Frederick
M . Wirt and Michael W . Kirst built on Easton ’ s theory
when they conceptualized education as a system for
the allocation of values . Values are expressed in material things , such as teacher salaries , but also in symbolic things , such as which holidays will be celebrated . 
A system exists in an environment . The environment
in which schools exist produces demands on the
system . For example , a community or state requires
an educated workforce . The environment also provides
resources , such as tax revenues . Demands and
resources are inputs to the system . The system converts
some of these inputs into policy . Policies have outcomes , for example , students who have learned mathematics to a certain level . These outcomes produce
feedback into the system . For example , the business
community or the state legislature may be dissatisfied
with the level of student achievement , and put pressure
on the school system to improve it . The policy environment also changes . For example , public opinion
about federal involvement in school curriculum and
student testing has changed enormously in the last 30
years . In systems theory , the continued legitimacy and
survival of the political system depends on support , 
which is the willingness of people to accept the policy
decisions made by the system . 
Rational Choice Theory
Rational choice theory assumes that all political
actors have preferences , and that they make decisions
by rationally calculating which choice will maximize
their preferences at the lowest cost . Branches of rational choice theory include game theory , bargaining and
coalition theory , and the median voter theory . Tyll van
Geel outlined some ways that rational choice theories
might help school administrators better understand
how to produce cooperation and predict election outcomes , for example . Market theory , a branch of rational choice theory , is the basis for advocacy of
privatization of schools and school services , as well as
774———Politics , of Education
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 774
for school vouchers and charter schools . The famous
pro-voucher argument made by John E . Chubb and
Terry M . Moe relies on rational choice theory . Their
analysis showed that the competition of the free market would lead to schools that are free of bureaucratic
constraints and thus better able to educate students . 
Power and Conflict
Frances C . Fowler is an example of an author who
bases her view of politics of education on theories of
power and conflict . In this view , educational policies
are the result of conflict that stems from people having
different values with respect to education and different
stakes in policy decisions . For example , conservative
Christians may have different values than other groups
when it comes to the curriculum . Teachers may have a
different stake than parents do in the way a school budget is formulated . People also have different amounts
of power . School administrators have power over certain decisions , but others in the community may have
power over the school administrators . Political actors 
( either individuals or groups ) seek to increase their
power so that they may have more influence over policy decisions . Conflict is resolved through negotiation , 
bargaining , and compromise , or by coercion . 
Critical Race Theory
Gloria Ladson-Billings and William F . Tate IV explicated a critical race theory ( CRT ) of education . Among
those who have expanded and used CRT as an analytic
tool are Jessica T . DeCuir and Adrienne D . Dixson , who
used CRT to analyze the experiences of African
American students in an elite White prep school . The
elements of CRT they used include ( a ) counter-storytelling , that is , the stories of racially marginalized
students that critique or cast doubt on the dominant discourse ;  ( b ) the inevitability and permanence of racism ;  
( c ) Whiteness as property , which among other things
results in a suppression of Black cultural expression ;  
( d ) interest convergence , which means that civil rights
gains by minorities occur only to the extent that they
also benefit White people ; and ( e ) critique of liberalism , 
that is , exposing the myth of color blindness . 
Theories of the State
What Carlos Alberto Torres called “ theories of the
state ” and James G . Cibulka called “ political ideology ” 
has been used to explain trends in educational policy . 
This kind of analysis holds that policy reflects the
underlying philosophical view of the dominant group of
policymakers . The liberal view is based on the value of
the individual , equal opportunity , and individual rights . 
It is an optimistic view of government , holding that government can improve both individual lives and society . 
The welfare state is a product of the liberal view . The
liberal view is compatible with capitalism , but in the
welfare state , government acts to regulate the free market in order to make competition fairer and guarantees
every citizen a minimum level of health , education , 
housing , and nutrition . The programs in the United
States of the Great Society in the 1960s , such as Head
Start and Title I , are examples of the liberal policy trend . 
The conservative view is based on different ideas of
both government and individuals . The role of government in regulating the free market is minimal , while its
major role is to constrain the antisocial and immoral
impulses of individual citizens . Government is not
effective in changing inequalities in society . What conservatives call traditional values , that is , belief in nation , 
family , duty , authority , standards , traditionalism , selfinterest , competitive individualism , and antistatism , and
for many , in God , ground their view of the governmental role in education . Believing strongly in capitalism , 
conservatives work to reduce the size of government , 
with more services provided by the profit sector . They
oppose both organized labor and governmental bureaucracy . The movement toward school choice is an important example of the influence of the conservative view . 
The radical , or neo-Marxist , view is based on the
assumption that all of the social institutions of society , 
including government and education , work to reproduce racial , class , and gender inequalities . In that sense , 
everything is political . Those in power control knowledge ; thus there is no such thing as unbiased expertise . 
Government is the arena for power struggles based on
gender , class , and ethnicity . Capitalism is a cause of
societal ills . Michael W . Apple and his colleagues
exemplify this view . 
An understanding of these theories of the state , or
political philosophies , is useful in understanding the
origins of policies and policy debates . James Cibulka
used this analysis to understand the increasingly partisan nature of educational policy making and the
heightened role of ideological interest groups in the
United States in the 1990s . 
—Carla Edlefson
Politics , of Education———775
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 775
See also Afrocentric theories ; authority ; Bell , Ted ; boards of
education ; charter schools ; Chicago school reform ; choice , 
of schools ; Christian Coalition ; civil rights movement ; 
collective bargaining ; communities , types , building of ; 
community relations ; conceptual systems theory and leadership ; consolidation , of school districts ; cost-benefit
analyses ; Council of Chief State School Officers ; Council
of the Great City Schools ; creationism ; critical race theory ; 
critical theory ; cross-cultural studies ; cultural politics , 
wars ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; decision
making ; democracy , democratic education and administration ; Department of Education ; Education Commission of
the States ; elections , of school boards , bond issues ; equality , in schools ; equity and adequacy of funding schools ; 
evaluation ; fascism and schools ; finance , of public schools ; 
global cultural politics ; globalism ; governance ; Latinos ; 
liberalism ; Machiavelli , Niccolò ; market theory of schooling ; minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; No Child Left
Behind ; open systems theory ; policy advocacy ; power ; 
principal-agent theory ; reform , of schools ; standard setting ; 
system theory / thinking ; unions , of teachers ; voucher plans ; 
World Bank , influence on education
Further Readings and References
Apple , M .  , Aasen , P .  , Cho , M .  , Gardin , L .  , Oliver , A .  , Sung , Y .  , 
et al .  ( 2003 )  . The state and the politics of knowledge . 
New York : RoutledgeFalmer . 
Chubb , J .  ,  & Moe , T .  ( 1990 )  . Politics , markets , and America ’ s
schools . Washington , DC : Brookings Institution . 
Cibulka , J .  ( 1999 )  . Ideological lenses for interpreting political
and economic changes affecting schooling . In J . Murphy & 
K . S . Louis ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of research on educational
administration ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 163–182 )  . San Francisco : 
Jossey-Bass . 
Crossley , M .  ,  & Watson , K .  ( 2003 )  . Comparative and international research in education : Globalisation , context and
difference . London : RoutledgeFalmer . 
DeCuir , J .  ,  & Dixson , A .  ( 2004 )  .  “ So when it comes out , they
aren ’ t that surprised that it is there ”  : Using critical race
theory as a tool of analysis of race and racism in education . 
Educational Researcher , 33 ( 5 )  , 26–31 . 
Eliot , T .  ( 1959 )  . Toward an understanding of public school politics . American Political Science Review , 53 , 1032–1051 . 
Fowler , F .  ( 2004 )  . Policy studies for educational leaders : An
introduction .  ( 2nd ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : 
Pearson / Merrill / Prentice Hall . 
Kirst , M .  ( 2003 )  . Mayoral influence , new regimes , and public
school governance . In W . L . Boyd & D . Miretzky ( Eds .  )  , 
American educational governance on trial : Change and
challenges ( pp . 196–218 .  ) Chicago : University of Chicago
Press . 
Ladson-Billings , G .  ,  & Tate W .  , IV .  ( 1995 )  . Toward a critical race
theory of education . Teachers College Record , 97 , 47–68 . 
Marshall , C .  , Mitchell , D .  ,  & Wirt , F .  ( 1989 )  . Culture and education policy in the American states . New York : Falmer . 
Oakes , J .  , Hunter Quartz , K .  , Ryan , S .  ,  & Lipton , M .  ( 2000 )  . 
Becoming good American schools : The struggle for civic
virtue in school reform . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Peterson , P .  ( 1976 )  . School politics Chicago style . Chicago : 
University of Chicago Press . 
Pillow , W .  ( 2004 )  . Unfit subjects : Educational policy and the
teen mother . New York : RoutledgeFalmer . 
Scribner , J .  ,  & Englert , R .  ( 1977 )  . The politics of education : An
introduction . In J . D . Scribner ( Ed .  )  , The politics of education ( pp . 1–29 )  . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Torres , C .  ( 1995 )  . State and education revisited : Why educational researchers should think politically about education . 
In M . W . Apple ( Ed .  )  , Review of research in education 
( pp . 255–331 )  . Washington , DC : American Educational
Research Association . 
Van Geel , T .  ( 1995 )  . The preparation of educational leaders
and rational choice theory . In R . Donmoyer , M . Imber ,  & 
J . Scheurich ( Eds .  )  , The knowledge base in educational
administration : Multiple perspectives . Albany : State
University of New York . 
Wirt , F .  ,  & Kirst , M .  ( 2001 )  . The political dynamics of
American education ( 2nd ed .  )  . Richmond , CA : McCutchan . 
 POPPER , KARL
Karl Popper ( 1902–1994 )  , along with Thomas
Kuhn , was one of the most influential philosophers of
the twentieth century . Popper was initially trained as a
schoolteacher ( mathematics and physics ) but eventually earned a PhD from the University of Vienna in
1928 . Popper left his native Austria in 1937 under the
threat of Nazi anti-Semitism and relocated to the
University of Canterbury in New Zealand . Eventually , 
Popper joined the London School of Economics , where
he served as professor of the philosophy of science
until his retirement . While a positivist , Popper saw
himself as a critical rationalist and philosophically tied
to the work of Kant . For educators and educational
leaders particularly , Popper ’ s work relates to research
methodology , empirically based best practices , leadership theory , and the ongoing process of change . 
In his work , Popper provided a means of demarcation between those theories that were scientific and
those that were unscientific . He felt that creativity and
imagination were the foundation of scientific theory
development and rejected induction as the basis of
theory development . Popper felt that while observational and experimental data could be employed
to evaluate theories , they cannot form theoretical
foundations . 
776———Popper , Karl
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 776
For Popper , falsification was the ultimate criterion
by which any theory could be identified as scientific . 
His position was that theories could not be verified but
simply tentatively refuted via corroboration of data . 
Those theories that are compatible with data or that
have been modified to accommodate the available data
are unscientific in nature . Only those that could be
falsified were to be considered scientific . 
Popper contended that subject matter was irrelevant and argued for the approach of active problem
solving in science . He was a serious critic of those who
employed the “ sociology of knowledge ” to further a
given ideology . For him , only the problems to be
solved and the individual ’ s desire to solve them should
be the primary focus of professional activity . His position was that the problem-solving process formed a
feedback loop in which the initial problem was
addressed by a trial solution . The effect of the trial
solution to the problem was then examined via an error
elimination process . The resulting situation following
the error elimination process became a new problem to
address . This process described by Popper forms the
basis for Deming ’ s Plan-Do-Study-Adjust Cycle . For
Popper , philosophy was active engagement with profound problems rather than a semantic discourse . 
Popper ’ s work also addresses change and the
change process . In regard to this issue , he adopted
an evolutionary view . As with his problem-solving
process , Popper felt that change occurred via a process
of successive adjustments based upon feedback . He
contended that tradition , culture , and history all play a
significant role in the change process and that no
person is capable of initiating or developing anything
independent of the work or influence of others . Popper
also felt that the extensive , subtle relationships of each
individual influenced his or her personal actions and
that no plan was sufficiently encompassing to allow
for the actions of each individual within a system . 
Therefore , the complex issues , institutions , and organizations of our society re-created or re-formed themselves carte blanche but could be gradually changed
over time and in stages as knowledge progresses . It is
within this framework that Popper argues for creativity
and intuition over science to provide the foundation of
meaningful , significant change . 
Popper considered himself to be pragmatic in his
approach to philosophy and practice , and that rational , 
critical pragmatism was the ultimate means by which
one could operate . He opposed conventionalism and
relativism in philosophy , science , and society . Popper
supported the concept of an ongoing discourse
between individuals rooted in the contention that all
persons are infinitely ignorant and that we differ only
in the nature of our limited personal knowledge . 
—J . M . Blackbourn , Don Schillinger , and Dennis Rader
See also Aristotle ; critical theory ; determinism , sociocultural ; 
hypotheses , in research ; idealism , as philosophy in education ; Kuhn , Thomas ; objectivity ; open systems theory ; 
organizational theories ; philosophies of education ; Plato ; 
pragmatism and progressivism ; research methods
Further Readings and References
Popper , K .  ( 1959 )  . The logic of scientific discovery . London : 
Hutchinson . 
Popper , K .  ( 1961 )  . The poverty of historicism . New York : 
Harper & Row . 
Popper , K .  ( 1965 )  . Conjectures and refutations : The growth of
scientific knowledge . New York : Harper & Row . 
Popper , K .  ( 1979 )  . Objective knowledge : An evolutionary
approach . Oxford : Clarendon Press . 
Popper , K .  ( 1982 )  . The open universe : An argument for
indeterminism . Totowa , NJ : Rowman & Littlefield . 
Popper , K .  ( 1994 )  . The myth of the framework : In defense of
science and rationality . London : Routledge . 
 PORTFOLIOS
Portfolio use has become standard practice in many
educational institutions , although exact parameters
vary widely . Depending on the nature of the portfolio , 
whether it is for self-assessment , professional assessment , measuring growth , or displaying best accomplishments or even interests , defining what should
comprise a portfolio is debatable and often difficult . 
The use of portfolios in education has become more
widespread recently , increasingly used as a means of
authentic assessment of students . Technological advances
have ushered in e-portfolios , electronic portfolios
presented online , enhancing the efficiency and ease of
completing and reviewing portfolio products while
substantially decreasing the need for hard copies in
traditional binders . Maintaining work samples or portfolio artifacts thus has become much simpler , as have
revisions to work included . Teachers and students can
access a single copy of an artifact in order to exchange
feedback easily to enhance student growth . Portfolios
even have become a valued tool in the accreditation
process for teacher education , for example , with the
Portfolios———777
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 777
National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher
Education ( NCATE )  , wherein programs need accurate
assessments of student and instructor performance . 
These factors have played a major role in the increasing popularity of portfolio usage in educational
administration . 
Two basic categories of portfolios exist , an allinclusive portfolio and a selection portfolio . The first
includes records containing all of the work that a
student has completed in a course or program . 
Portfolios in this category often are used to document
and archive work that a student or professional has
accomplished . It serves as a record of events , a history
of what the student in a class or program has done . 
The second is a more discriminating selection of
work used to demonstrate achievement or proficiency . 
This portfolio represents efforts toward a goal set by
the student , the teacher , or both . Artifacts displayed in
this type of portfolio normally are carefully selected
to address a specific set of criteria . Sometimes the
student is solely responsible for choosing the products
to be included , and sometimes the instructor decides . 
Often the decision is made with some level of collaboration between the student and teacher . The main difference between an all-inclusive and a selection
portfolio is that the author of the selection portfolio
chooses work samples to achieve a particular goal . 
Selection portfolios can also be divided into two
subcategories : selections that showcase the author ’ s
best work and selections used to assess the author ’ s
growth and development within a program , often then
to facilitate further student learning . Examples of
portfolios that could showcase best work include ( a ) 
an artist ’ s portfolio in which an artist might want to
sell representative pieces or ( b ) portfolios used by job
applicants to demonstrate proficiency in certain jobspecific areas . When showcasing work , the goal of the
portfolio often is economic advancement . 
If the portfolio is used to assesses student performance , several other factors must be considered . The
author must know the goal of the portfolio in order to
select appropriate material , and self-assessment may
require a different selection from teacher assessment . 
Both of these may differ from a portfolio for which
the goal is professional assessment , as in the case of
teacher education programs . 
By naming the purpose of the portfolio , NCATE is
then able to assess whether or not the use of these
tools by a program or a college accomplishes the purpose
of assessment as NCATE has defined it . In addition , 
the faculty and programs are enabled to determine
appropriate products when preparing portfolios for
NCATE review . 
Assessment of students using portfolios allows
teachers to enhance student learning in a manner not
seen with more superficial assessment tools . Students
may be asked to use the portfolio process to selfassess or to provide a selection of work that allows
an instructor to appraise course or program outcomes . 
Clearly , portfolios may be used for both . 
One method that enhances student learning and
assessment is the use of reflections . A reflection allows
a student an opportunity , often through reflective writing , to tie together concepts learned in a course or program . Initially , students may have difficulty crafting
reflections with any depth . The process requires them
to analyze themselves , which can be a difficult task , 
particularly if they have never been exposed to selfanalysis or if the level of their writing skills is wanting . 
As with other tasks , however , students can become
more proficient in these types of analyses , especially
when teachers act as coaches or guides through the
reflective portfolio journey . 
One advantage of the reflection process is that
teachers and faculty can achieve a more in-depth understanding of issues involved . They can begin to gauge
the extent to which students comprehend materials or
competencies to which courses are geared . In addition , 
by examining groups of portfolios , instructors can
begin to examine the comprehension of students related
to completing certain expectations , raising issues about
program coherence . For example , if many students
within a cohort do not display the depth of learning
desired by an instructor in a specific area , it may indicate that a particular area or standard needs clarification , restructuring , or greater emphasis . A major benefit
of this tool is that , by analysis of learning outcomes , 
assessment occurs for the teacher as well as the learner . 
When using portfolios to enhance student learning , 
teachers and students begin to work more interactively , in a partnership that focuses on learning . 
Participants often collaborate on selections placed in
the portfolio , along with offering insight on what else
might be included to best represent the knowledge
acquired by a student throughout a course or program
of study . This collaboration can also extend to student
peers . Often , more advanced students can offer
insights about the construction of portfolios and what
they learned during the course of their own journeys . 
Newer students can offer fresh perspectives and
778———Portfolios
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 778
provide reasons for older students sharing and expanding their own knowledge bases . Cohorts of students
can grow together and learn with and support one
another throughout their course or program . Academic
and social integration have been linked not only to
increased student productivity but to student retention
and success as well . 
There are five stages in electronic portfolio development . The first is developing the context and goals . 
Key to this process is defining the purpose of the work
and the audience to which it is delivered . If the portfolio is used for student assessment , that needs to be
addressed from the beginning . As with any other portfolio process , if this is to be used for student selfassessment where the audience is the author , the
layout may be much different than if the instructor is
doing the assessment . In any case , accessibility is key
to effective presentation . 
In the second stage of electronic portfolio development , the working portfolio , this is a clearinghouse , a
place in which all products are stored as possible
artifacts for portfolio insertion . This is a stage of exploration , where a student searches for means to exemplify the standards set in the initial phase . Often at the
beginning of the process , a student is not yet able to
connect the standards and the products . As a student
becomes more comfortable with collecting and organizing products , the ability to be discerning grows . 
The third phase of development , the reflective portfolio , is key if the portfolio is to add to student learning . One method used for reflection is the What ? So
what ? Now what ? philosophy . A written summation
of the product is added to the portfolio to show which
standard is being exemplified , thus answering What ? 
The learning that leads to the understanding of the
standard shows the So what ?  : when students can begin
to define their learning and measure it against the
goals of their portfolios , their learning becomes more
owned and authentic . By expressing this learning in
writing , students can document the extent to which
learning has actually occurred . To answer the Now
what ? question , a student can discuss future implications and what could be added to improve , replace , or
correct an artifact . The ability to understand these
implications shows depth of understanding critical to
authentic learning . 
Once completing the reflection phase , in the fourth
phase , connections , the work is organized and evidenced electronically . Citations and supporting documentation can be linked directly to pertinent portfolio
artifacts . Students can begin to examine the portfolio
for continuity and cohesion . Even where the goal of
the portfolio is teacher assessment of student growth , 
during this stage of portfolio development a portfolio
developer is encouraged to self-assess and to seek
guidance from instructors in constructing the best possible products for presentation . 
Finally , the portfolio is ready for the last phase of
electronic production , the presentation portfolio . This
is the student ’ s final compilation of work , artifacts , 
and evidence to demonstrate the learning that occurred
within the course or program . The portfolio is at its
most a cohesive stage : it represents the processes as
much as the learning and presents a clear and definite
picture of a student ’ s learning journey . 
In addition to the added value of student learning , 
working collaboratively also allows instructors to use
the information from portfolios to determine where
their courses or programs are strong and where they
may need some attention . Instructors might even use
their own work within the course or program to build a
portfolio for use by students as well as themselves . This
type of portfolio may ease student fears about producing a large document as well as offer ideas on beginning the portfolio process . Not only can this provide
students with an example of expectations , but it allows
instructors to begin conversations on any difficulties
that students may have with portfolio construction . In
addition , the process of constructing a portfolio gives
instructors unique perspectives on the work given to
students as well as helping faculty gauge the difficulty
and time necessary for effective portfolio development . 
While compiling a course portfolio is beneficial for
instructors and students within a given course , it is
beneficial as well for departments and institutions . 
Portfolios also can be used to display scholarship within
a course by providing evidence of how its use can
enhance student learning . Also , many accreditation
boards and state program evaluators permit portfolio
records to meet requirements for compliance with
standards for obtaining or maintaining accreditation . 
In addition , a course portfolio can be useful to an
instructor ’ s colleagues who may be interested in starting similar projects . It can offer ideas to other faculty
or departments . Even when not following preconceived processes , using course portfolios can provide
invaluable insights to fellow teachers . Finally , course
portfolios can provide documentation of scholarly
work , providing an organized and efficient means to
increase publications while supplying building blocks
Portfolios———779
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 779
for other professionals . In this way , portfolios become
excellent professional development tools . 
Student learning is the ultimate benefit of portfolio
use . Through more improved courses and instruction , 
along with individual student assessment , learning is
enhanced . Portfolios and the collaborative environment
often associated with portfolio-based assessments can
provide strong opportunities for teachers to improve
their craft while at the same time ensuring that optimal
student learning occurs . As with any assessment tool , 
portfolios are used because of their perceived benefits . 
In addition to the foregoing , portfolios can benefit
instructors in a number of ways . Perhaps the most
important benefit for instructors of portfolio programs
is the insight and direction gained to improve instruction in a course or program . Improving courses and programs should increase student learning . Also , portfolio
use helps identify student weaknesses , facilitating targeted interventions when necessary . 
One of the major problems involved in the use of a
portfolio program is the lack of planning and definition
involved in setting a goal for the portfolio . A good
portfolio program involves considerable planning on
the front end . Critical to creating a successful portfolio
program is that users must define the purpose of the
portfolio . Failure to do so often results in a haphazard
compilation of student work that can be meaningless . 
Another problem with portfolios is the difficulty
in scoring . The use of vague rubrics can cause this
process to be more subjective than preferred . When
requirements for scoring are not specified , validity
and reliability of portfolio use are immediately called
into question . Vague rubrics are subject to differing
interpretations among instructors and students and can
undermine expectations . In addition , interrater reliability can become an issue when two or more teachers
grade on a rubric that is not well defined . 
Recognizing requirements and possible problems
with the use of portfolios can help departments and
faculties optimize their use of authentic assessment . 
Properly constructed portfolio guidelines with valid
and reliable rubrics offer means to measure student
progress and performance to a depth usually not available with traditional assessments such as standardized
tests and infrequent field observations . Given the technological advances that now facilitate the development of more efficient portfolios , many educators are
turning to portfolios to obtain a more accurate picture
of their students ’ accomplishments , the impact of their
courses , and the coherence of their programs . 
Targeting issues in instruction and assessment
enhances both faculty and student learning , optimizing
the process of education and learning . 
—Sonia Schaible-Brandon and Rodney Muth
See also accountability ; accreditation ; behaviorism ; constructivism ; critical thinking ; curriculum , theories of ; individual
differences , in children ; instructional interventions ; literacy , theories of ; measurement , theories of ; National
Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education ; problem solving ; professional development ; psychology , types
of ; psychometrics ; student teaching
Further Readings and References
Barrett , H .  ( 2001 )  . Electronic portfolios . In Educational
Technology . Denver , CO : ABC-CLIO . Retrieved April 3 , 2004 , 
from . 
Campbell , D .  , Melenyzer , B .  , Nettles , D .  ,  & Wyman , R .  
( 2000 )  . Portfolio and performance assessment in teacher
education . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Cole , D .  , Ryan , C .  , Kick , F .  ,  & Mathies , B .  ( 2000 )  . Portfolios
across the curriculum and beyond . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Corwin Press . 
Huba , M .  ,  & Freed , J .  ( 2000 )  . Learner-centered assessment
on college campuses : Shifting the focus from teaching to
learning . Needham Heights , MA : Allyn & Bacon . 
Jones , M .  ,  & Shelton , M .  ( 2005 )  . Developing your portfolio : 
Enhancing your learning and showing your stuff . 
New York : Routledge . 
Muth , R .  ( 2000 )  . Toward a learning-oriented instructional
paradigm : Implications for practice . In P . Jenlink & T . 
Kowalski ( Eds .  )  , Marching into a new millennium : Challenges to educational leadership ( pp . 82–103 )  . Lanham , 
MD : Scarecrow Press . 
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education .  
( 2002 )  . Professional standards for the accreditation of
schools , colleges , and departments of teacher education . 
Washington , DC : Author . 
Tinto , V .  ( 2000 )  . Linking learning and leaving : Exploring the
role of the college classroom in student departure . In
J . Braxton ( Ed .  )  , Reworking the student departure puzzle 
( pp . 81–94 )  . Nashville , TN : Vanderbilt University . 
 POSITIVISM , POSTPOSITIVISM
Positivism describes a set of assumptions about
knowledge and knowledge acquisition characterized
generally as follows :  ( a ) only those phenomena that
are observable can be counted as knowledge ;  ( b ) facts
and values are distinct ; scientific investigators must
put aside values and inquire objectively ;  ( c ) hypotheses
780———Positivism , Postpositivism
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 780
are derived deductively from scientific theories to be
tested empirically . Theory and observation are distinct ; 
theory comes out of the investigator ’ s imagination ; 
hypotheses are deduced from the theory and then tested
by observation . Justifying a theory means showing that
it has more and better observations confirming than disconfirming it ;  ( d ) knowledge is developed inductively
through generalizing from the accumulation of verified
facts ;  ( e ) the methods of the natural sciences are appropriate for research on social phenomena ;  ( f ) the purpose
of natural and social sciences are the same , that is , to
offer causal explanations of events ; and ( g ) the higher
the level to which a theory can be abstracted ( the more
context-free it is )  , the better it is ( e . g .  , a theory of
administration in general would be preferable to a
theory of just educational administration )  . 
Postpostivism has two meanings : the first describes
a modified positivism that expresses skepticism about
the strength of positivism ’ s claims while still accepting
the notion of an objective reality and / or using scientific
knowledge to approach understanding of reality . For
example , Karl Popper ’ s argument that fallacies in the
logic of induction prohibit us from confirming
hypotheses , that instead we can only refute them , has
been described as a kind of postpositivism . A second
meaning of postpositivism is any position that has
rejected positivism , including subjectivism , relativism , 
interpretivism , criticalism , and postmodernism . 
In 1994 , Egon G . Guba and Yvonna S . Lincoln
described the differences between positivism and
postpositivism-as-modified-positivism . Table 1 is
based largely on their explanation . 
The theory movement in administration , from
about 1945 onward , exemplified aspects of positivism and postpositivism-as-modified-positivism . 
The theory movement sought the identification and
articulation of core theoretical assumptions , the use of
operational definitions and value-free methodology , 
the establishment of correctness of administrative
decision making as a matter of fact to be validated by
evidence of effectiveness , and the development of
context-free , lawlike generalizations . In educational
administration , some scholars attempted to describe
educational administration as just one subset of administration in general . They then emphasized the discovery of lawlike principles for administration in general
that by deduction would apply to educational administration . Preparation programs tended to devalue
practitioners ’ knowledge of administration in favor of
knowledge derived from theory and research . 
Opponents of such views have criticized positivist
approaches to educational administration and leadership
on four grounds :  ( 1 ) for assuming that theory and observation can be separated ; critics argue that on the contrary
we use theoretical vocabulary to report our observations , 
and that in fact we trust our observations because of
theoretical assumptions we have already made ;  ( 2 ) for
overemphasizing the value of operational definitions ; 
critics argue both that the choice to use any particular
operational definition is either theory laden or subjective
Positivism , Postpositivism———781
Table 1 Differences of Emphasis Between Positivism and Postpositivism-as-Modified-Positivism
Positivism
Empirical knowledge claims are justified
when they are shown to be based on the firm
foundation of evidence acquired solely through
empirical observation . 
Assumes an objective external reality upon
which inquiry can converge . 
Assumes the investigator can determine “ how
things really are ” and “ how things really work .  ” 
Assumes knowledge is gained through
experimental / manipulative methodology to
verify hypotheses . 
Postpositivism-as-Modified-Positivism
Empirical observation is neither a strictly necessary nor a sufficient
criterion for knowledge claims . The findings of a scientific community
are probably true . 
Assumes an objective reality that can be apprehended only imperfectly
and probabilistically . 
Assumes it is possible to approximate ( but never fully know ) reality . 
Doubts that theory can be confirmed through verification of
hypotheses , but believes theories can be disconfirmed through
falsification of hypotheses . Those theories never successfully
disconfirmed have credibility . 
SOURCE : Adapted from Guba , E .  ,  & Lincoln , Y .  ( 1994 )  . Competing paradigms in qualitative research . In N . K . Denzin & 
Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of qualitative research .  ( pp . 105–117 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 781
and arbitrary , and that focusing on operational definitions
is too narrowing , when what investigators need to concern themselves with in validating any theory is a network of hypotheses ;  ( 3 ) for wanting to overgeneralize
from organizations in general to educational organizations ; critics argue that the goals of education are so different from the goals of other organizations , and differ so
much from one educational organization to another , that
it is unhelpful to try to generalize beyond education
to administration in general ; and , related to criticism 3 ,  
( 4 ) for suggesting that researchers exclude values from
discussion of educational leadership and administration ; 
critics argue that on the contrary , values inhere in any
theory , and education is particularly value laden . The fact
that values cannot be validated empirically is not an argument for excluding values from administrative theory but
an argument against restricting scholarship to empirical
approaches . 
On the other hand , defenders of scientific
approaches to the study of educational leadership and
administration argue that it is a mistake to equate positivism ( and even modified versions of it ) with science , 
that we can recognize the flaws of such approaches to
knowledge and yet still accept and make the most of
science in studying educational administration , just
with a broadened view of science . As Colin W . Evers
and Gabriele Lakomski described it , this broadened
view of science would include naturalism and
the extraempirical virtues of a theory . In this view of
science , one would prefer a particular theory to
others , not merely because it had more observations
confirming it ( or fewer observations disconfirming
it )  , but because either it was better at helping us solve
problems or it had characteristics that scientists in
general tend to favor in theories . Among these characteristics are conservatism , modesty , simplicity , 
generality , and refutability . The broadened view values science for having been extraordinarily successful in solving problems . Even in the social realm , 
science has produced predictions that have better than
chance odds of coming true . This is true of science
despite the clear inadequacies of positivism ’ s
descriptions of it . 
—Gary Ivory
See also administration , theories of ; authority ; critical theory ; 
knowledge base , of the field ; Kuhn , Thomas ; leadership , 
theories of ; management theories ; organizational theories ; 
philosophies of education ; Popper , Karl ; postmodernism ; 
research methods
Further Readings and References
Chapman , J .  , Sackney , L .  ,  & Aspin , D .  ( 1999 )  . Internationalization in educational administration : Policy and practice , 
theory and research . In J . Murphy & K . Louis ( Eds .  )  , 
Handbook of research on educational administration ( 2nd
ed .  , pp . 73–98 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Culbertson , J .  ( 1988 )  . A century ’ s quest for a knowledge base . 
In N . Boyan ( Ed .  )  , Handbook of research on educational
administration ( pp . 3–26 )  . New York : Longman . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . The postmodern challenge to the theory
and practice of educational administration . Springfield , 
IL : Charles C Thomas . 
Evers , C .  ,  & Lakomski , G .  ( 1991 )  . Knowing educational
administration : Contemporary methodological controversies in educational administration research . New York : 
Pergamon Press . 
Guba , E .  ,  & Lincoln , Y .  ( 1994 )  . Competing paradigms in qualitative research . In N . K . Denzin & Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds .  )  , 
Handbook of qualitative research .  ( pp . 105–117 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Ritchie , J .  ,  & Lewis , J .  ( 2003 )  . Qualitative research practice : 
A guide for social science students and researchers . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Young , M .  ,  & Lopez , G .  ( 2005 )  . The nature of inquiry in educational leadership . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 337–361 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 POSTMODERNISM
Postmodernism is neither a philosophy nor a unified
perspective or doctrine . Rather , it is a loosely assembled collage of voices , ideas , and techniques of criticism that are juxtaposed against the long-established
traditions of inquiry , especially in the empirical sciences . 
However , postmodernism is not antiscientific . Rather , a
postmodernist perspective calls into question the privileged position that posits science is the only method of
knowing that has value in the world . 
Modernity is generally associated with the Age of
Enlightenment beginning with the works of René
Descartes ( 1596–1650 ) and later thinkers such as
Immanuel Kant , Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , and
François Voltaire and the assumption that reason could
solve most of the world ’ s problems . Postmodernists
point out that modernists have not solved the problems
of poverty and war . The last century is testimony to the
irrationality of the rational mind at work with the devastation of two world wars and the Holocaust . 
Postmodernists also question the basic idea of
progress , that is , the assumption that the future will
782———Postmodernism
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 782
always be better than the past . Most of all , postmodernism challenges any assertion that there are universal
laws , whether they are divine or imposed by the rules
of science . Such laws or rules are called metanarratives , meaning that they are proffered as globally valid
for all times , places , and people . Philosophies , religions , 
and political perspectives that serve up all-embracing
viewpoints are examples of metanarratives . 
Postmodernism relies heavily on knowledge of language and culture , especially the analysis of written
texts . Indeed , much of postmodern criticism is literary
or textual criticism based on the practice of close
reading . A practice such as deconstruction is an examination of texts for antinomies , contradictions , silences , 
and hidden hierarchies in them . 
The implication of postmodernism for educational
leadership is that the position taken by postmodernists
undermines the very idea of a stable knowledge base
upon which a leadership practice can be established . 
Any knowledge base is an example of a conceit , an
assumption that is untenable linguistically and logically . Stability can only be maintained by the exercise
of raw political power of the state . 
The primary evil for educational leadership is that
of certainty , which is offered context free and is based
on privileged versions of truth . Postmodernism challenges the “ one right way ” of thinking about things , 
especially so-called best practices of anything proffered outside of localism and the primacy of context
and culture . The postmodern outlook on such things
has been called by some critics a kind of epistemological anarchism . Postmodernism is therefore profoundly antiauthoritarian , whether dogma has been
embraced as scientific method or as received truth in
any other form . School leaders and those aspiring to
become leaders will find preparation practices and
outlooks of leading that rest on assumptions of finality
or absolute truth in any form vulnerable to postmodern deconstructive criticism , including the scientific
method itself . 
The advantage of a postmodern outlook for educational administration is that if followed , it can lead
to redefining the idea of borders , whether rooted in
science or the humanities . It can promote a level playing field in the competition of ideas and perspectives
that can free the discipline from the intellectual doldrums in which it has rested since it was established . 
Confining it to science alone dehumanizes educational
leadership . Science has limits . A study of leadership
clearly is beyond those limits . The postmodern view is
not an argument to abandon science but to
recognize science ’ s own borders in the pursuit of
greater understanding of educational leadership . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also authority ; chaos theory ; cognitive dissonance ; critical
thinking ; deconstruction ; Kuhn , Thomas ; Popper , Karl ; 
pragmatism and progressivism ; problem solving ; semiotics
Further Readings and References
English , F .  ( 2002 )  . The point of scientificity , the fall of the
epistemological dominos , and the end of the field of
educational administration . Studies in Philosophy and
Education , 21 , 2 , 109–136 . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . The postmodern challenge to the theory
and practice of educational administration . Springfield , 
IL : Charles C Thomas . 
Ward , G .  ( 2003 )  . Postmodernism . London : Hodder & Stoughton . 
 POWER
In the social sciences , power is a highly contested
and arguably elusive concept . Theorists employ a
variety of theoretical frameworks and methodological
approaches in defining and refining the concept of
power . Common to all views , however , is the notion
that power is the ability , often through others , to cause
an effect in nature , in other people , or in oneself . It is
this “ productive ” quality of power that generates considerable interest in power as a social science concept . 
Many theorists view power as involving an element
of coercion . Max Weber believed that power was the
probability that one actor within a social relationship
would carry out his or her will , even with resistance . 
Thus when a teacher union strikes for higher pay but
then accepts a contract with a decrease in pay , the
district is said to have exerted “ power over ” the union . 
Asymmetrical relationships , conflict , and constraint
are central features of this definition . 
Social theorists took various tacks to refining
the concept of power . Theorists sought to identify the
various sources of power , identifying institutional , 
economic , military , ideological , and other bases of
power . Some compared power to currency , noting how
sources of power were exchangeable and not evenly
distributed in society . Others identified the forms
power could take , such as force ( physical or psychological )  , manipulation , persuasion , or authority , and
Power———783
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 783
explored how these forms interacted . Other refinements
characterized power by its “ extensiveness ”  ( numbers
controlled )  ,  “ comprehensiveness ”  ( variety of controls )  ,  
 “ intensiveness ”  ( strength of control )  , or “ authoritativeness ”  ( centralized and conscious as compared to
diffused and unconscious )  . 
Behavioral political scientists sought to make
power measurable and observable . Robert A . Dahl
among others began to define power by means of equations among identifiable actors , measurable intentions , 
and observable actions . The presence of power then
involved knowing the weaker actor ’ s “ will ” or wishes , 
the stronger actor ’ s intention , and the results of the
interaction . Power existed when the resulting outcomes were against the wishes of the weaker actor
and in alignment with the stronger actor ’ s intention . 
Important features of power , then , included the individual possession and conscious application of power
in a dyadic relationship . In taking a positivist ’ s view of
measurement and observation , the scope of power , as a
concept , was significantly narrowed . 
Another set of political scientists , Peter Bachrach
and Morton Baratz , emphasized that power could be
exerted through nonaction as well as overt , observable
action . Their study emphasized the importance of
nondecision making and the “ mobilization of bias ” as
the means through which the powerful actor obtains
his or her intended result . Called the “ hidden face ” of
power , this view brought to light how power may
operate covertly and in ways not directly observable . 
The idea of studying power through apparent “ nonactions ” led to a set of theorists that emphasized how
constraint on a weaker actor may function more akin to
Karl Marx ’ s notion of “ false consciousness .  ” Rather
than view power like a boxing match between a stronger
and a weaker competitor , Steven Lukes argued that
power operated invisibly , setting the desires , and hence
behavior , of the weaker actor in line with the objectives
of the more powerful actor . This alignment of desires
was an exercise of power because it occurred against
the objective or real “ interests ” of the weaker actor . This
view of power echoes the work of Antonio Gramsci
and the concept of hegemony . 
Further emphasizing the social nature of power , 
other theorists argued that power operates through
complex social and organizational structures . Michel
Foucault argued that power operated through a “ netlike organization ,  ” in which weaker actors were both
the recipient and “ vehicles ” for the exercise of power . 
His term power / knowledge emphasized how “ disciplinary ” 
knowledge , through “ normalizing ” strategies , moves
beyond views of power as dyadic ( e . g .  , actor A over
actor B )  , consciously determined ( e . g .  , intentions )  , 
and individually held . Another social theorist , 
Michael Mann , argued that power operates through
overlapping and intersecting “ sociospatial ” networks
in which weaker groups are “ organizationally outflanked ” by strong groups . 
A smaller group of theorists emphasized the more
positive potential of power . Such theorists view power as
the capacity for individuals to shape their environment 
(  “ power to ”  ) or to work with others to shape their society 
(  “ power with ”  )  . Erich Fromm , a psychologist , argued
that power was the capacity to realize one ’ s potential
while acting with others in the world . This view of power
emphasizes how the productive nature of power can operate without coercion or domination . Rather than an
asymmetrical , zero-sum game , these theorists viewed
power as mutual and reciprocal , involving the enhancement of one ’ s own power as well as another ’ s . Some
feminist theorists argued further that power could be
transformative , as in the case of mothering , in which the
mother exerts power over the child in order to enable
the child to become her equal . These theorists made an
important distinction between the result of power as
domination or liberation from the means of power . 
—Jennifer Gong
See also authority ; bureaucracy ; chain of command ; chief academic officer ; collaboration theories ; communications , 
theories in organizations ; critical theory ; decision making ; 
division of labor ; dogmatism and scales of Rokeach ; empowerment ; feminism and theories of leadership ; goals , goal
setting ; governance ; great man theory ; hierarchy , in organizations ; ideology , shifts of in educational leadership preparation ; infrastructure , of organizations ; knowledge base , of
the field ; law ; leadership , system-oriented ; leadership , 
theories of ; management theories ; morality , moral leadership ; organizational theories ; politics , of education ; principalship ; site-based management ; span of control ; standard
setting ; superintendency ; table of organization ; Weber , 
Max ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Bachrach , P .  ,  & Baratz , M .  ( 1962 )  . The two faces of power . 
American Political Science Review , 56 , 947–952 . 
Dahl , R .  ( 1957 )  . The concept of power . Behavioral Science , 2 , 
201–215 . 
Foucault , M .  ( 1980 )  . Power / knowledge : Selected interviews
and other writing 1972-1977 . New York : Pantheon Books . 
Fromm , E .  ( 1947 )  . Man for himself . New York : Fawcett . 
784———Power
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 784
Gramsci , A .  ( 1972 )  . Selections from the prison notebooks of
Antonio Gramsci ( Q . Hoare & G . Smith , Eds .  & Trans .  )  . 
New York : Irvington Press . 
Lukes , S .  ( 1974 )  . Power : A radical view . London : Macmillan . 
Mann , M .  ( 1986 )  . The sources of social power : A history
of power from the beginning to A . D . 1760 ( Vol . 1 )  . 
Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . 
Weber , M .  ( 1968 )  . Economy and society ( Vol . 1 , G . Roth & 
C . Wittich , Eds .  & Trans .  )  . New York : Bedminister Press . 
 POWER , REMUNERATIVE
Remunerative power is defined as the act of rewarding
job performance with appropriate pay for work completed . The need to improve job performance has been
the focus of many theories of motivation in order to
maximize the return on global business investments . 
Under traditional compensation packages , annual
wage increases are typically not tied to individual performance , resulting in an entitlement mentality that
decreases any real motivation for employees . Because
of increasing interest in maintaining their bottom lines
in recent years , businesses have begun to reevaluate
the effectiveness of their overall operations in order to
reduce costs while maintaining the quality of their
goods and services to remain competitive . In order to
achieve their goals , many companies have begun to
seek resources that would explain how to hire , train , 
and satisfy their workers , who would perform at optimal levels to allow for achievement of their organizational goals . In order to reward excellence more fairly , 
companies have begun to use variable compensation
structures that reward employees for production that
exceeds the norms of other employees , allowing for
differential wages that are based on actual performance . Remuneration issues in management are primarily based upon the theoretical models of motivation
that include Abraham Maslow , Amitai Etzioni , 
Frederick Herzberg , Eugene Friedman , and Robert
Havighurst , who attempted to theorize intrinsic
processes , extrinsic factors , internal and external selfconcepts , and goal identification in order to determine
how to balance pay and productivity . Factors affecting
remuneration are based upon an array of issues , including external regulation , power , peer culture , job security , benefits , productivity , and work / life balance , but
fairness in compensation for workers is strained when
gaps between frontline and executive pay that are
enormous lead to resentment , loss of confidence , lack
of ownership , and divisiveness , which ultimately lead
to an uncommitted workforce . Although the overall
employment relationship between workers and ownership is based on the economic assumption that
employees are motivated solely by money , psychologists disagree , noting that the employment relationship is more complex than is assumed , and revealed
that monetary incentives do not provide the complexity of human behavior that include access to work
experience that provides self-actualization as well as
other achievements through internal motivation . 
Newly hired employees also provide their own specialized human capital , a critical resource that each
individual worker brings as a value creation to the job , 
including access , achievement , self-actualization , 
thereby revealing that remuneration in business and
industry is much more complicated than many human
resources employees believe . An effective system of
motivating employees is necessary to provide the quid
pro quo that includes high productivity , goal setting , 
effectiveness , self-esteem , motivation , intrinsic rewards , 
satisfaction , personal growth , and relatedness . Current
research indicated that both lower-level employees
and higher-level employees can be effectively and significantly motivated by higher order needs , indicating
that motivational interventions can be highly successful for all employees . Using carefully planned systems to provide more individual attention to workers
at all levels , business and industry must ensure fairness to all employees , thereby enhancing organizational effectiveness , making individual decisions
regarding compensation , and rewarding strong performance that strengthen the overall economy as a result
of fair pay for fair play . 
—Carole Funk
See also attitudes ; attitudes toward work ; behaviorism ; belonging ; capacity building , of organizations ; collective bargaining ; 
discrimination , theories of ; economics , theories of ; finance , of
public schools ; fringe benefits ; governance ; Havighurst , 
Robert ; human capital ; job descriptions ; line and staff concept ; management theories ; Maslow , Abraham ; merit pay ; 
networking and network theory ; organizational theories ; 
rational organizational theory ; salary and salary models
Further Readings and References
Arnolds , C .  ,  & Boshoff , C .  ( 2002 )  . Compensation , esteem
valence and job performance : An empirical assessment of
Alderfer ’ s ERG ’ s theory . Human Resources Management , 
13 ( 4 )  , 697–719 . 
Power , Remunerative———785
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 785
Beer , M .  ,  & Cannon , M .  ( 2004 )  . Promise and peril in
implementing pay-for-performance . Human Resources
Management , 43 ( 1 )  , 41–43 . 
Herzberg , F .  , Mausner , B .  ,  & Synderman , B .  ( 1959 )  . The motivation to work . New York : Wiley . 
Maslow , A .  ( 1943 )  . A theory of human motivation . Psychology
Review , 50 , 370–396 . 
 PRAGMATISM AND
PROGRESSIVISM
Concepts incorporated in theories and philosophies
loosely grouped and labeled as pragmatism and progressivism are drawn from a variety of antecedents . 
However , the basic elements are induction as a way of
thinking and problem solving , the importance of
experience to human development and action , and the
relationship between science and culture . 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The roots of pragmatism and progressivism may be
found in the thinking of Francis Bacon ( 1561–1626 )  , 
who challenged the traditional approach to logic that
relied on deduction to establish basic principles of philosophy and problem solving . Deduction begins with
certain accepted statements or premises ( usually from
religious belief or speculation )  , and other statements or
conclusions are deduced logically from them . 
Bacon proposed that the old beliefs and generalizations
should be subjected to induction based on observation
and experimentation ( later called the “ scientific ” method )  , 
putting a premium on human experience in everyday life . 
He advocated limiting the inductive method to material
things , but pragmatists extended this approach to include
economics , politics , psychology , education , ethics , and all
matters of conjecture and concern . 
John Locke ( 1632–1704 ) used Bacon ’ s inductive
methods to study how human beings develop knowledge and ways of living , believing that a human mind
begins as a tabula rasa , or blank slate , and develops as
a result of the experiences a person goes through . 
More and varied experiences are , therefore , needed to
develop people so they may reach their greatest potential . Consequently , Locke advocated placing children
in an environment where they are exposed to the most
desirable experiences and influences . 
The ideas behind pragmatism and progressivism
as related to education may first be found among more
modern thinkers in the work and writing of John
Amos Comenius ( 1592–1670 )  . A Moravian bishop and
teacher , he believed that education should proceed
through a long effort to achieve encyclopedic knowledge . Breaking with tradition emphasizing memorization and recitation , however , he advocated teaching
methods that incorporated child development and the
study of nature . Exposing children to the world in which
they lived , Comenius would let children observe and
thereby be led to an understanding of things about them . 
Carrying ideas of Comenius a bit further , JeanJacques Rousseau ( 1712–1778 )  , in his book Emile , 
describes how a boy should be educated in a manner
that is natural and spontaneous , free from the evil
influences of society , so that his real self could
emerge . He would live in a world of nature , observing
what was around him , not beginning intellectual education through books and more formal teaching until
he was 13 years old . Even then , the natural curiosity
of the boy would be allowed to guide and mold his
educational experiences , with instruction being offered
only as it came to be demanded through natural experiences . Not until he reached 15 to 20 years of age was
the boy to come into contact with other boys , with the
intent then to learn basic principles of religion and
good relations with others . Consistent with his times , 
Rousseau advocated an entirely different kind of education for girls , one that would prepare them to serve
men and make them happy . 
Rousseau ’ s major contribution to pragmatism was
in the educational connection he made between nature
and experience . Although some of his views are considered overly romantic and impractical , his connection of nature and experience certainly influenced
many later educational theorists who broadened this
naturalist approach to include all human experience as
the primary force in molding and guiding human development and action . 
Greatly influenced by Rousseau , Johann Heinrich
Pestalozzi ( 1746–1827 ) tried to understand children
in order to build teaching techniques consistent with
their natural , progressive , and harmonious development . Seeking natural laws of learning , he then developed teaching methods and materials consistent with
those laws . These included what he called an “ object
lesson ,  ” in which various kinds of learning and skill
development were planned around an object found
in nature or the child ’ s normal experiences . He is also
credited with developing the first illustrated textbook
to make learning more natural and interesting . 
786———Pragmatism and Progressivism
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 786
Also following Rousseau ’ s ideas , particularly as they
could be used with young children , Friedrich Froebel 
( 1782–1852 ) believed in the natural goodness of the
child and the need to allow natural growth and development . Calling his school the “ kindergarten ,  ” the
garden of children , Froebel thought that the teacher
should help children to grow just as a gardener would
help flowers and plants to grow according to their natural inclinations and in the best natural state for allowing that growth . However , Froebel went further than
Rousseau in recognizing that the child is an individual
but also a member of a group and a society . Rather
than shielding the child from society , Froebel proposed that children should be helped to adjust to
society so growth and development could occur in the
best interests of the child and the society . Consequently , work in groups and other kinds of social participation were considered necessary to reconcile the
sometimes competing interests of the individual and
the society . This approach to education later became a
foundation stone of pragmatism and progressivism as
philosophers and educators tried to balance child-centered ideas with the interests of society and groups
within that society . 
PRAGMATISM
An American philosophy developed around 1900 , pragmatism owes its major concepts and impetus to Auguste
Comte ( 1798–1857 )  , Charles Sanders Peirce ( 1839–
1914 )  , William James ( 1842–1910 )  , and John Dewey 
( 1859–1952 )  . Darwin ’ s The Origin of Species certainly
influenced their thinking , along with the utilitarianism of
John Stuart Mill , Herbert Spencer , and others . 
Pragmatism moved away from earlier attempts by
philosophers to identify first causes and universal principles , believing that they were generally beyond the
understanding of mortals and without meaning or use . 
The real value of an idea becomes its practicality—
how it can be used and the consequences of its use . 
For the pragmatist , knowledge exists only in
relation to human experience ; it is the product of the
interaction between humans and their environment . 
It exists only in relationship to social experience , 
and has meaning only as it may be used in life . This
knowledge is not permanent or objective , and it continually changes . People develop values and ways of
living to fit a particular time and place , and these are
subject to constant revision as conditions change . 
Knowledge and values within traditional philosophies
transcend the experience of men and women , while
pragmatism argues their existence only within that
experience . 
Pragmatism sees human essence as existing
within the social being . Men and women are products
of experiences resulting from interaction with their
environment , including other human beings , and these
experiences continually mold each person in unique
ways because of their previous experiences and personal attributes . The universe then becomes evolutionary and subjective rather than objective or static as
seen by other philosophies . 
Pragmatism relies on science and the scientific
method as the route to truth . However , truth thus
discovered is seen as temporary and related to solving
immediate problems , rather than universal , permanent , 
and objective . It thereby lends itself well to philosophers
such as John Dewey who attempt to find a philosophy
that is reconcilable with a definition of democracy that
resists any kind of authoritarianism brought on by universal , permanent , and objective truth . 
Auguste Comte ( 1798–1857 )  , although not usually
categorized as a pragmatist , worked to apply science
to society , thus contributing to the later efforts of
pragmatists to use science to solve social problems . 
Discarding theology and metaphysics as a way to
understand and guide human behavior , Comte promoted the notion that scientific thinking was the best
way to understand humans as well as the physical and
material universe . As one of the fathers of modern
sociology , he viewed social structures and relationships as subject to systematic study in the scientific
mode , thus contributing to elements of social theory
that are distinct to pragmatism . 
Charles Sanders Peirce ( 1839–1914 ) received little
attention or recognition during his lifetime , but more
recognition is now given to his contributions to the
thinking of more well-known contemporaries such as
William James . Proposing that true knowledge of anything depends on testing ideas through experience , he
seems to have significantly influenced the development
of pragmatism as later articulated by James , Dewey , and
others . 
William James ( 1842–1910 )  , designated by some
as the father of educational psychology , developed
ideas and philosophy advocated by Peirce and brought
them to the attention of a wide audience . He viewed
the truth of an idea in relationship to how it worked in
human experience . To identify and understand truth , 
according to James , we must study human experiences
Pragmatism and Progressivism———787
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 787
and what they reveal . Experiences thus become a body
of knowledge that may be identified as experience and
from which truth may be drawn . Concentrating on
what he called the “ stream ” of experience , the sequential , serial course of events , James concluded that there
is no Truth , Reality , or Absolute , because the universe
is open ended , pluralistic , and in process . 
John Dewey ( 1859–1952 ) is rightfully known as
the most important contributor to the philosophy and
theories included in pragmatism and progressivism . 
James had brought these to the attention of philosophers , educators , and even the general public , but it
was Dewey who brought more organization and
system to the movement . Dewey accepted James ’ s
proposals that there are no immutable absolutes or
universals and that the proper basis for solving human
problems was experience . He also , like Peirce , advocated the consideration of consequences when approaching solutions to human problems , and he believed that
consequences could best be understood through experience rather than conjecture or logic . 
Building on James ’ s stream-of-experiences notion , 
Dewey followed Rousseau ’ s contributions relative to
the importance of nature and natural activities to child
development and education . Rousseau had proposed
three sources of education—nature , human beings , 
and surrounding material objects . Emphasizing that
these did not impact children one by one or separately , 
Dewey thought that they should be viewed relative
to their relationships and interactions . A significant
departure from Rousseau was Dewey ’ s insistence that
children should be left in a natural social environment
as their education progressed through both natural 
( unplanned ) and planned experiences . 
Dewey seems to have preferred the terms experimentalism and / or instrumentalism to designate his approach
to problem solving , rather than pragmatism . The term
experimentalism more accurately reflects his concern
with relying on experience rather than absolutes or patent
answers in solving human problems . He saw all problem
solving as an experiment to “ see what works ” by observing the consequences of certain actions . He also saw the
mind and the scientific method as instruments to be used
in carrying out these experiments to arrive at solutions to
human problems . Dewey considered something true or
false depending on what effects it has on people and
society , not on some basic , unchanging philosophy or
principle . His Laboratory School at the University of
Chicago is an example of this belief that ideas should be
tested and refined in real life settings . 
PROGRESSIVISM
What is known as the progressive reform movement of
the late 1800s and early 1900s was consistent with the
basic tenets of pragmatism as it tried to improve the
environment in which people lived and were educated . 
The movement as a whole was concerned with more
than education , but ideas from pragmatism , particularly
John Dewey ’ s emphasis on method , rather than abstract
answers or unchanging principles , as the best way to
solve human problems led to the progressive movement
in education . Progressivism in education rejected traditional idealistic and realistic notions of education and
the imposition of authoritative texts and rules . It was
also opposed to an emphasis on the learning of isolated
skills and the use of drilling and preestablished educational materials . The final test of truth and how to use it
in worthwhile fashion is in the outcome of its application to the needs and problems of human beings , and
this may change as the world and its inhabitants change . 
John Dewey is considered the prophet of the progressive movement , followed by interpreters of the
movement such as William Heard Kilpatrick , John L . 
Childs , Boyd H . Bode , and those who carried Dewey ’ s
ideas in specific directions , such as social reconstructionist George S . Counts . These and others often went
to extremes and interpreted Dewey in ways he opposed , 
but Dewey ’ s ideas and these interpretations did much
between 1920 and 1955 to change the face of American
education . 
The basic principles of progressivism as applied
to education are described as follows , as stated by
Dewey in 1916 : 
• Education should be active and related to the interests
of the child . 
• Learning should take place through problem solving
rather than the absorption of subject matter . 
• Education of the young should be life itself rather
than a preparation for living . 
• The teacher ’ s role is not to direct but to advise . 
• The school should encourage cooperation rather than
competition . 
• Education and democracy imply one another ; hence , 
schools should be run democratically . 
IMPACT ON EDUCATIONAL
LEADERSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION
Pragmatism and the progressive education movement
influenced social and educational reform in many
788———Pragmatism and Progressivism
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 788
ways . Some of these reforms were carried to extremes , 
with undesirable effects ; others simply were not
accepted by a traditional and change-resistant society
and educational system . Over a period of time , however , with erratic starts and stops , the movement continues to gain momentum and acceptance , albeit often
under different names and labels . 
One of the major forces limiting the impact of
progressivism on education has been the failure of
educational leadership and administration to change
in similar fashion . Teachers were less likely to change
their ways of teaching and classroom organization in
democratic and child-centered ways when their
leaders not only failed to exhibit similar actions but
actually modeled the opposite kinds of behavior . These
contradictions are as follows : 
• Education should be active and related to the interests of the child . Traditional educational leadership
stresses order and control , thus limiting opportunities
for teachers and students to actively and directly
relate teaching and learning to the society and to the
interests of the child . The curriculum and teaching
methods also tended to reflect interests and preferences of the adults rather than those of the children
and youth . More progressive educational leaders
have opened the school to the community and
encouraged the use of subject matter and teaching
methods consistent with active and relevant learning . 
• Learning should take place through problem solving
rather than the absorption of subject matter . More
progressive educational leaders avoid extensive control over teachers , leaving them more freedom as
they use their own professional skill and initiative to
achieve school purposes and to identify and solve the
problems of school and classroom . Rather than dictating approved content , classroom management and
teaching methods , for instance , they serve as guides
and advisers , lending their own expertise to the process
as appropriate and invited . 
• Education of the young should be life itself rather
than a preparation for living . Educational leaders
demonstrate this aspect of progressivism by emphasizing the practical and problem-solving aspects of
teaching and school organization . Parents and the
community are brought into daily involvement with
the school , its teachers and administrators , as
students learn to live by doing rather than by talking
and writing . 
• The teacher ’ s role is not to direct but to advise . 
Consistent with this principle , the progressive educational leader ’ s role is not to direct but to advise , persuade , and facilitate , particularly in matters closely
related to teaching and learning . Teachers and other
school staff members become members of a team , 
with the administrator becoming a “ transformational ” leader of the team . 
• The school should encourage cooperation rather than
competition . This principle of progressive education
again emphasizes the role of the leader as facilitator
and adviser , encouraging cooperation and teamwork
among the total school staff and the students . It deemphasizes , and many times eliminates , unnecessary
and unproductive forms of competition among
students and teachers , including things such as honor
rolls and valedictorians , achievement tests for other
than diagnostic purposes , merit pay , and ranking of
students or teachers . Even “ teacher of the year ” recognitions become suspect , as they may be replaced with
recognition for teams that produce good results . 
Teachers become members of school improvement
teams and cooperatively make important decisions
about school goals , operations , and management . 
• Education and democracy imply one another ; hence , 
schools should be run democratically . Application of
this principle from progressive education would seem
to be relatively obvious . However , major disagreements tend to occur around the meaning of “ democracy ” and how much authority should be given to
teachers , parents , and students . Comparisons to civil
government and the business world often lead to inappropriate and even “ undemocratic ” actions by educational leaders . Perhaps it is in this area of educational
leadership that there remains the most to accomplish
relative to agreeing to and understanding the purposes
and objectives of education and how educational
leaders may best facilitate their achievement . 
—Weldon Beckner
See also administration , theories of ; Aristotle ; attitudes toward
work ; authority ; behaviorism ; bureaucracy ; constructivism ; 
creativity , in management ; critical theory ; democracy , democratic education and administration ; Dewey , John ; empiricism ; 
empowerment ; existentialism ; governance ; group dynamics ; 
human resource development ; humanistic education ; individual differences , in children ; leadership , theories of ; learning , 
theories of ; management theories ; motivation , theories of ; 
organizational theories ; philosophies of education ; Plato
Further Readings and References
Crow , G .  ,  & Grogan , M .  ( 2005 )  . The development of leadership thought and practice in the United States . In F . English 
( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership 
( pp . 362–379 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Dewey , J .  ( 1916 )  . Democracy and education . New York : 
Macmillan . 
Pragmatism and Progressivism———789
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 789
Dewey , J .  ( 1938 )  . Experience and education . New York : 
Macmillan . 
Dumas , W .  ,  & Beckner , W .  ( 1968 )  . Introduction to secondary
education : A foundations approach . Scranton , PA : 
International Textbook . 
English , F .  ( 1994 )  . Theory in educational administration . 
New York : Harper Collins . 
Frost , S .  ( 1962 )  . Basic teaching of the great philosophers 
( Rev . ed .  )  . New York : Anchor Books . 
James , W .  ( 1907 )  . Pragmatism : A new name for some old ways
of thinking . London : Longmans , Green . 
James , W .  ( 1916 )  . Talks to teachers on psychology : And to
students on some of life ’ s ideas . New York : Henry Holt . 
Kneller , G .  ( 1963 )  . Foundations of education . New York : John
Wiley & Sons . 
Nakosteen , M .  ( 1965 )  . The history and philosophy of education . New York : Ronald Press . 
Ozman , H . E .  ,  & Craver , S . M .  ( 1999 )  . Philosophical foundations of education ( 6th ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Simon 
& Schuster . 
Ravitch , D .  ( 1983 )  . The troubled crusade : American education
1945–1980 . New York : Basic Books . 
 PRAYER IN SCHOOL
There has been volatile controversy over devotionals in
public education since the mid-twentieth century . Prior
to that time , Protestant observances were common in
public schools , especially in the southern Bible Belt . 
However , in the early 1960s , the Supreme Court relied
on the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment
to prohibit school-sponsored daily prayer and Bible
reading in public education . The Court reasoned that
voluntary participation of students in the religious
activities was irrelevant ; school sponsorship of devotionals abridged the First Amendment . Instead of resolving the school prayer controversy , however , these
decisions have generated more than four decades of
legislative , administrative , and judicial responses . 
Moreover , national polls have indicated that about two
thirds of Americans support a constitutional amendment to allow public school prayers , although no proposed amendment has yet been adopted . 
About one half of the states have laws authorizing
a minute at the beginning of the public school day for
students to engage in silent meditation or prayer . In
1985 , the Supreme Court rendered its only opinion to
date on such laws , Wallace v . Jaffree . In this case , the
Court invalidated a 1981 Alabama silent prayer statute
under the Establishment Clause because the law ’ s
legislative history exhibited an impermissible intent to
encourage students to pray . The Court indicated , 
however , that provisions calling for silent meditation
or prayer in public schools without such intent might
survive an Establishment Clause challenge . Subsequently , two federal appellate courts upheld state laws
calling for a moment for silent reflection or prayer in
public school classrooms at the beginning of the school
day as being religiously neutral and intended to provide students time for quiet reflection . 
More controversial than silent prayer policies have
been various attempts to allow spoken devotionals in
public schools . Courts have struck down efforts by
school staff members to lead devotionals during school
or extracurricular activities . In 1992 , the Supreme Court
in Lee v . Weisman invalidated a Rhode Island school district ’ s policy that permitted principals to invite clergy
members to deliver invocations and benedictions at middle and high school graduations because of its coercive
effect ; students felt peer pressure to participate in the
devotionals during the school-sponsored ceremony . 
Some school districts responded to Weisman by
designating the graduation ceremony as a forum for
student expression , allowing students to select their
graduation messages that may include prayers . This
practice has been upheld if student speakers are
selected based on secular criteria , such as their class
rank , and school authorities do not review their
speeches . However , if school authorities retain control
over the content of the graduation ceremony , they
have the right to censor proselytizing messages , and
the Establishment Clause may require them to do so . 
The most controversial post-Weisman strategy to
return devotionals to public schools has been to allow
students to vote whether to include student-delivered
prayers in graduation ceremonies and extracurricular
activities . Although the Supreme Court has not directly
addressed student-led graduation prayers , in 2000 it
struck down a Texas school district ’ s policy authorizing
student elections to determine whether to have studentled devotionals before public school football games . 
The Court in Santa Fe Independent School District v . 
Doe declared that student religious expression at a
school event on school property and representing the
student body under the supervision of school personnel could not be considered private speech and thus
violated the Establishment Clause . However , the
majority emphasized that the Constitution does not
prohibit public school students from voluntarily
praying at school if the devotionals are not school
sponsored . 
790———Prayer in School
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 790
Subsequently , the Eleventh Circuit in two cases
broadly interpreted constitutionally protected private
student speech , declaring that the Establishment Clause
does not require and the Free Speech Clause does not
permit suppression of student-initiated religious
expression in public schools . Also , the Eighth Circuit
found no Establishment Clause violation in a school
board member ’ s unscheduled recitation of the Lord ’ s
Prayer in the graduation ceremony , reasoning that the
board member ’ s expression was private and thus constitutionally protected , even though it took place at a
school-sponsored event . 
Federal courts also have recognized students ’ First
Amendment right to hold devotional meetings in public
schools during noninstructional time if other student
groups are allowed such access . The constitutional right
is augmented by the federal Equal Access Act ( EAA )  ; 
if secondary schools receiving federal funds create a
forum for noncurriculum student groups during noninstructional time , student groups cannot be barred based
on the religious , political , or philosophical content of
their meetings . The Supreme Court in Board of
Education v . Mergens rejected an Establishment Clause
challenge to the EAA in 1990 . Furthermore , sectarian
community groups cannot be denied public school
access if other community groups are allowed to use
school facilities when classes are not in session , 
because the First Amendment ’ s Free Speech Clause
does not allow viewpoint discrimination against religious speech . In 2002 , the Supreme Court upheld the
Good News Club ’ s right to meet in the public school
after classes ended , even though its devotional meetings
targeted young children attending the school . 
Recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance in public
schools also has generated First Amendment challenges . 
Although the Supreme Court established in 1943 that
students do not have to participate in the pledge in violation of their religious or philosophical beliefs , the current
controversy focuses on whether saying the pledge in
public schools abridges the Establishment Clause by
endorsing a belief in monotheism . Disagreeing with a
Seventh Circuit ruling , the Ninth Circuit reasoned that the
words under God were inserted in 1954 to promote religion rather than to advance the secular goal of encouraging patriotism . The Supreme Court in 2004 reversed the
Ninth Circuit ’ s decision but avoided the Establishment
Clause issue by ruling that the noncustodial parent did not
have standing to challenge the practice . 
The No Child Left Behind ( NCLB ) Act of 2001
directs the U . S . Department of Education to advise
school districts regarding permissible religious activities
and requires school districts to certify to the state education agency that no school policy prevents participation in constitutionally protected prayer in public
elementary and secondary schools . For the first time , 
such certification is required and tied to school districts ’ 
receipt of federal aid . In 2003 , the department issued
its Guidance on Constitutionally Protected Prayer in
Public Elementary and Secondary Schools . The
Guidance covers a number of areas , and for topics without a definitive Supreme Court ruling , the Guidance
supports an expansive interpretation of permissible religious activities in public schools . As a result , there are
discrepancies between the Guidance and some judicial
decisions , which may generate additional litigation over
devotional activities in public schools . 
—Martha McCarthy
See also Bible , as history ; church-state issues ; creationism ; 
fundamentalism ; law ; moral education ; politics , of education ; religion , in schools ; right-wing politics , advocates , 
impact on education ; Supreme Court , United States , key
cases in education law
Further Readings and References
Good News Club v . Milford Central Schools , 533 U . S . 98 
( 2002 )  . 
Guidance on constitutionally protected prayer in public elementary and secondary schools , 68 Fed . Reg . 9645 ( Feb . 
28 , 2003 )  . 
Lee v . Weisman , 505 U . S . 577 ( 1992 )  . 
Russo , C .  ( 2004 )  . Reutter ’ s the law of public education . 
New York : Foundation Press . 
Santa Fe Independent School District v . Doe , 530 U . S . 290 
( 2000 )  . 
Wallace v . Jaffree , 472 U . S . 38 ( 1985 )  . 
 PREGNANCY , OF STUDENTS
Despite a 31% decline in teenage pregnancies over the
last decade , adolescent pregnancy continues to be a
serious public health issue . According to the Centers
for Disease Control , 34% of women become pregnant
at least once before age 20 . According to a 2004 study
conducted by the Allen Guttmacher Institute , approximately 1 million American teenage girls aged 15–19
become pregnant each year . The United States continues to have the highest rate of teen pregnancy in the
Pregnancy , of Students———791
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 791
industrialized world . The U . S . rates are double that of
Great Britain , 4 times higher than France , and 10 times
higher than Japan . Fifty-seven percent of all teenage
pregnancies in the United States resulted in births , 28%
ended in abortion , and 14% ended in miscarriages . 
Teenage pregnancy is replete with challenges
for the mother , child , and society . Eighty three percent
of teenage mothers are from poor backgrounds and
lack the resources to adequately care for and raise
their children . One third of teenage mothers receive
inadequate prenatal care , resulting in higher rates of
low birth weight and childhood health problems . 
Teenage women are also more likely to be single
mothers , drop out of high school , and rely on welfare . 
Only 1 . 5% of teens who have a child before age 18
complete a college degree before age 30 . 
Historically , there has been intense debate over
social policies aimed at reducing the teen pregnancies . 
The gamut of moral , ideological , and social issues
surrounding teens and sex have created a sharp divide
between conservative and liberal groups as to the most
effective and appropriate route to curb teen pregnancy . 
In an effort to form a cohesive group committed to
reducing teen pregnancy , the National Campaign to
Prevent Teen Pregnancy , a bipartisan organization , 
was founded in 1995 . Their goal is to reduce the teen
pregnancy rate by one third between 1996 and 2005 . 
In order to bridge the gap between differing perspectives , the organization does not promote one solution to preventing teen pregnancy . Instead , they call on
leaders to acknowledge the problem in their communities , take action in a way that best fits their needs , 
and share their solutions with other struggling communities . While there is no statistical evidence linking
the work of the National Campaign with a reduction
in teen pregnancy rates , the teenage pregnancy rate
declined 7 . 8% in the organization ’ s first 2 years . 
Sex education in public schools has changed dramatically in the United States over the past 25 years . 
According to a 1981 study by the Alan Guttmacher
Institute , 94% of public schools offered comprehensive sex education programs aimed at arming students
to make informed decisions regarding their sexual
practices . The federal government never directly
funded comprehensive sex education , but it did fund
organizations , such as the Centers for Disease Control
Division of Adolescent and School Health , that supported comprehensive sex education . 
Over the past two decades , abstinence education has
gained support from public and private organizations
and become a legitimate sex education program . As
of 2003 , the federal government supported abstinence
programs with $100 million annually . Two congressional bills , Title V of the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act and Special
Projects of Regional and National Significance , have
also passed over the past 10 years , which support
abstinence education . 
Abstinence education is currently prevalent in
almost all sex education programs , but the abstinence
message is inconsistent across groups . Comprehensive
sex educators teach teens that abstinence is one option
to consider , while other more conservative organizations teach abstinence as the only acceptable option
before marriage . A 1999 study by Family Planning
stated that 23% of school districts report teaching
abstinence as their sole form of sex education ; this
was up from 2% in 1988 . Despite dramatic changes in
sex education over the past two decades , there is little
data tracking the success of any one approach to sex
education . A 2004 study by the Centers for Disease
Control explicates the difficulty in pinpointing the
catalyst for the declining teen pregnancy rate . Most
liberal advocates credit comprehensive sex education
starting in earlier grades and creating an open discussion about the risks of sexually transmitted diseases , 
while more conservative stakeholders argue that abstinence programs are responsible . Others contend that it
may be a copycat effect , where younger girls are emulating their older counterparts in waiting to have sex . 
There are also indications that the welfare system is
encouraging women to wait until they are older to
start families . It is difficult to isolate many of these
variables from one another and create control groups ; 
therefore , it is unclear what approach is responsible
for the decline in teen pregnancy . 
International teenage pregnancy rates have also
dropped significantly over the last 30 years , but many
countries continue to face challenges such as those in
the United States . England and Wales have the highest
rate of teen pregnancy in Western Europe , in part due
to the controversial nature of teen pregnancy , which
has resulted in decades of inaction . The government is
committed to cutting the number of teen pregnancies
in half by the year 2010 , but they do not have a concrete action plan in place . In contrast , France has
taken radical steps since 1999 to reduce its 10 , 000
teenage pregnancies each year . Schools are required to
provide 30 to 40 hours of sex education to eighth- and
ninth-grade students , and school nurses are authorized
792———Pregnancy , of Students
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 792
to pass out the morning-after pill to teenagers under
extreme circumstances . The government also developed a contraception campaign , informing residents
how to protect themselves against unwanted pregnancies through television , radio , and leaflets . 
The Netherlands ’  “ Long Live Love ” campaign
launched in the 1980s has made them an international
model for successful sex education . The 2000 data indicated that the Netherlands had one of the lowest teenage
pregnancy rates in Europe ( 12 . 2 per 1 , 000 girls between
15 and 19 )  . The media has also created an open dialogue
about sexuality to complement the Netherlands ’ comprehensive sex education programs in primary and
secondary schools . The health care system also pledges
complete confidentiality , and parents speak with their
children candidly about sex . According to the Netherlands Institute of Social and Sexological Research , 85%
of sexually active young people use a contraceptive . 
—Sara Suglia
See also adolescence ; at-risk students ; belonging ; Black education ; children and families in America ; coeducation ; counseling ; determinism , sociocultural ; dropouts ; esteem needs ; 
Federal Privacy Act ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; high schools ; human capital ; Latinos ; mainstreaming
and inclusion ; moral education ; personality ; resiliency ; sexuality , theories of ; special education ; underachievers , in
schools
Further Readings and References
Alan Guttmacher Institute .  ( 1999 )  . Facts in brief : Teen sex and
pregnancy . New York : Author . 
Alan Guttmacher Institute .  ( 2004 )  . U . S . teenage pregnancy
statistics : Overall trends , trends by race and ethnicity and
state-by-state information . New York : Author . 
Henshaw , S . K .  ( 2004 )  . U . S . teenage pregnancy statistics with
comparative statistics for women aged 20–24 . New York : 
Alan Guttmacher Institute . 
National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy .  ( 2004 )  . 
Factsheet : How is the 34% statistic calculated ? Washington , 
DC : Author . 
National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy .  ( 2004 )  . Teen
pregnancy—So what ? Washington , DC : Author . 
 PRINCIPAL , ASSISTANT
Educators who aspire to enter formal school administration are most likely to enter as an assistant principal . 
According to the National Center for Education
Statistics , there are nearly 17 , 000 assistant principals
in the United States . While there are some career
assistant principals , generally , assistant principals are
in transition because most are educators who aspire to
become principals . A challenge for assistant principals
is that they are no longer part of the teaching faculty
and they do not yet have full administrative status . 
During the 1920s , principals of larger schools often
selected teachers ( usually male ) to assist the school
principal as a general supervisor and to help with the
facility operations of the school . By the 1940s , this
individual generally held the title of assistant principal
and was primarily concerned with administrative and
managerial details of the school . In the twenty-first
century , as the role of the school principal has become
increasingly complex , the assistant principal position
has begun to include more leadership responsibilities . 
Assistant principals are most likely to be recruited
from the teaching force . Often , these educators are
noticed for this entry-level administrative position
based on their willingness to volunteer to take on special duties at school that bring them to the attention of
their superiors . Other criteria that principals use when
deciding which teachers to recommend for the role of
assistant principal include individuality ; cognitive
skills ; rapport with students , teachers , administrators , 
and community ; leadership qualities ; and professional
qualities . Loyalty to the administration is another trait
that principals and superintendents consider when
considering which faculty members to promote to the
assistant principalship . 
All states require principals to have some type
of an administrative certificate . Requirements for the
principal credential vary from state to state but usually
include a specified number of years of teaching
experience , university coursework , and an advanced
degree . More and more states are requiring that a state
certification exam be passed in order to earn a principal certificate . Occasionally , assistant principals
assume their role prior to actually earning the principal certificate , although in most cases , a temporary
credential can be issued that is valid for a certain
number of years . Consequently , many assistant principals are working toward completion of state-mandated
requirements to obtain the principal credential . 
Even though women comprise over 70% of the
teaching force , in 1978 only 22% of women were
assistant principals . However , by the early 1990s , 
48% of assistant principals were women . Assistant
principalships are also changing by ethnicity . In 1978 , 
only 5% of assistant principals were minorities , yet by
Principal , Assistant———793
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 793
2000 , 10% of assistant principals in New York , for
example , were Hispanic , while 19% were Black . 
Assistant principals are assigned a variety of job
responsibilities that generally focus on assisting the
principal as needed ; however , the most likely task
assigned to assistant principals is discipline . Other typical duties of the job include completing paperwork ; 
attending special education meetings ; conferencing with
parents , students , and other faculty ; coordinating staff
development ; observing classrooms ; evaluating faculty ; scheduling ; and transportation . 
The role of an assistant principal is demanding . 
At least 70% of elementary , middle school , and high
school assistant principals work a minimum of 50
hours per week . In addition , over 26% of high school
assistant principals reported that they worked 60 hours
or more per week . Assistant principals also report that
the job is becoming even more demanding than it
was 5 years ago , especially in the areas of paperwork , 
student discipline , and special education meetings . 
Because the role of the assistant principal is often
seen as managerial in nature , rather than leadership , 
it is important for assistant principals to work toward
gaining the skills and knowledge needed in a leadership role . A survey of 100 assistant principals found
that over 70% of them identified the following skills as
essential to being effective : people skills , good communication skills , knowledge of leadership theory , 
technique for improving curriculum , and ability to work
as a team . People skills were emphasized , and these
skills included working with others , conducting effective meetings , being flexible , being diplomatic , having
patience and empathy , maintaining positive relationships with colleagues , and understanding the school ’ s
political environment . Being a peacemaker was also
identified as an important aspect . 
In 2001 , John Daresh suggested several strategies
to implement for assistant principals who are interested in becoming principals . These strategies include
cultivating leadership skills ; cooling your ego ; assisting the principal , teachers , and students in whatever
ways you can ; being discreet ; listening ; asking to do
more ; continuing to learn about the role of leadership ; 
and being positive . How well assistant principals use
this role to learn more about leadership often determines how soon they will become a principal . 
—Sandra Harris
See also administration , theories of ; career development ; career
stages ; chain of command ; discipline in schools ; gender
studies , in educational leadership ; leadership , theories of ; 
management theories ; principalship ; recruitment of school
administrators ; school safety ; sexism ( glass ceiling )  ; violence in schools ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Daresh , J .  ( 2001 )  . Making the most of it . Principal leadership 
( high school ed .  )  , 1 ( 5 )  , 70–73 . 
Harris , S .  ,  & Lowery , S .  ( 2004 )  . Standards-based leadership : 
A case study book for the assistant principal . Lanham , MD : 
Scarecrow Press . 
Matthews , L .  ,  & Crow , G .  ( 2003 )  . Being and becoming a principal . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
National Center for Education Statistics .  ( 2002 )  . Digest of
educational statistics : School staffing survey : 1993–94 . 
Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Education Center for
Educational Statistics . 
Weiner , R .  ( 2002 )  . Changing face of assistant principals . 
Journal News . Retrieved May 27 , 2003 , from www 
. thejournalnews . com / newdroom / 103002 / 30assistants . html . 
 PRINCIPAL SUCCESSION
Simply stated , principal succession occurs when
an incoming principal replaces a departing principal . 
Leader succession is not unique to schools ; it occurs
regularly in all organizations , both large and small , and
is usually considered an important event in the life of
an organization . In small , hierarchical , and / or interdependent organizations , such as schools , leader replacement can alter the previously predictable rhythm of work
flow and social interaction ; it can also affect power
relationships and decision-making structures . 
Early principal succession researchers took cues
from those who were interested in the effect of leader
succession in business and industry . The interest of the
organizational researchers was the impact leader succession on organizational productivity . In both educational and noneducational organizations , researchers
anticipated disruption but also overall improvement as
a result of changing leaders . However , findings about
the effect of a leader succession are inconsistent . Some
studies indicate that leader changes resonate throughout the organization ; other studies suggest that the core
work of the organization continues uninterrupted . 
Research on principal succession extends over several decades . In studies of overall school performance , 
findings indicate that a succession can produce positive effects , deleterious effects , or no effect . One study
794———Principal Succession
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 794
reports that the prevailing socioeconomic status of
the student body mediates the effect of a succession , 
with larger effects evident where student socioeconomic status is low . Another study suggests that strong
teacher leadership attenuates the effect of a new principal on school improvement processes , at least in the
short term . Other studies report that teacher response
to a succession does not influence classroom practices ; thus , the teaching-learning exchange is unaffected , and overall school performance remains
unaffected as well . Finally , the effect of a principal
succession on school climate is described as difficult
to assess . 
The contradictory nature of findings suggests that
situational characteristics influence research results . 
The inconsistencies also suggest that inadequate attention is given to the reciprocal nature of the socialization
processes that occur with a succession . Not only does a
successor principal attempt to socialize those affiliated
with the school to new ways of doing things , but also
the successor is socialized to the normative behaviors
at the school . Whatever the reasons for the contradictions , the widely held expectation that changing principals will bring about increases in student achievement
is sufficiently supported to affect practice . 
Where researchers tend to agree is that principal
succession is a process rather than a single event . The
process can span most of an academic year , impact
administrators at the district level , affect principals at
other schools , and involve prearrival , arrival , and postarrival events and factors . These events and factors do
not have precise beginning or ending points and are
not independent of one another ; nonetheless , the ways
in which the succession process unfolds influence
teachers ’ response to it . 
One prearrival factor is teachers ’ feelings toward the
incumbent . In some cases , teachers may like the incumbent and anticipate the succession with certain sadness . 
In other cases , teachers may be eager for a new principal who brings traits not exhibited by the incumbent . 
Teachers ’ feelings are also affected by the circumstances leading to the incumbent ’ s exit , such as retirement , transfer , promotion , dismissal , illness , or death . 
Other prearrival factors include the process by
which the successor was selected . Teachers are not
usually involved in making the selection , though they
have opinions about it , and may resist the successor
when others , such as activist parents , are involved in the
selection decision . Resistance also is likely if teachers
have a favorite candidate who is not selected and
when decision makers are perceived to have
violated past practice in making the selection , such as
appointing someone from outside the district . 
Factors and events surrounding the arrival of the
successor are compressed in duration relative to the
prearrival and postarrival factors and events . Arrival
factors include the successor ’ s behavior toward teachers , 
especially support of and respect for the faculty , the
school , and the academic program . Successors who
respect , learn , and behave within the parameters of the
normative culture of the school ease the arrival phase . 
Violation of cherished norms and values can obstruct
a smooth transition . The successor principal has no
cache of goodwill from the faculty upon arrival . However , 
a new principal can build teacher trust and confidence
by buffering the faculty from perceived vicissitudes of
the district office . 
The success with which arrival events occur is
mediated by the stability of the faculty . When faculty
turnover is frequent , the effect of a principal succession is obscured . Not only are teachers who are veteran to the school adapting to new leadership but also
to new teaching colleagues as well . Under such circumstances , the effect of a new leader is attenuated . 
As the arrival phase evolves to postarrival phase for
the successor , expectations of district officials come
into effect . When the new principal is expected to be
a change agent by district officials , resistance is likely
to be encountered from faculty . Faculty resistance can
be mitigated to the extent that teachers are genuinely
involved in shaping changes . Successors who work to
build credibility with the faculty also ease the postarrival adjustment . Teachers expect successor principals
to exhibit competence as leaders , be knowledgeable
decision makers , and demonstrate commitment to the
school . In sum , arrival and postarrival events suggest
that a principal succession requires adjustments not
only for the school faculty and staff but for the successor and district administrators as well as . Attention
to and support for these adjustments help smooth the
transition for those involved . 
—Dianne L . Taylor
See also administration , theories of ; attitudes toward work ; 
bureaucracy ; climate , school ; collaboration theory ; consideration , caring ; empowerment ; feminism and theories
of leadership ; governance ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , teacher ; leadership , theories of ; loss of position 
( school principal )  ; management theories ; morale ; principalship ; productivity ; site-based management ; staffing , 
concepts of
Principal Succession———795
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 795
Further Readings and References
Davidson , B .  ,  & Taylor , D .  ( 1999 , April )  . Examining principal
succession and teacher leadership in school restructuring . 
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
Educational Research Association , Montreal , Canada .  
( ERIC Document Reproduction Service No . ED433618 ) 
Hallinger , P .  ,  & Heck , R .  ( 1996 )  . Reassessing the principal ’ s
role in school effectiveness : A review of empirical research , 
1980–1995 . Educational Administration Quarterly , 32 , 
5–44 . 
Miskel , C .  ,  & Cosgrove , D .  ( 1985 )  . Leader succession in
school settings . Review of Educational Research , 55 , 
87–105 . 
Ogawa , R .  ( 1991 )  . Enchantment , disenchantment , and accommodation : How a faculty made sense of the succession of its
principal . Educational Administration Quarterly , 27 , 30–60 . 
Takahashi , S .  ( 1998 , April )  . The keeper of the house : Principal
succession and the mending of the hearts . Paper presented
at the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association , Montreal , Canada .  ( ERIC Document
Reproduction Service No . ED421757 ) 
 PRINCIPAL-AGENT THEORY
The principal-agent theory explains the relationship
between an individual ( individuals )  , called principal , 
who delegates the authority to an individual ( individuals )  , called agent , to perform certain tasks or behaviors . However , the principal and the agent do not share
the same information , and this often creates conflict
between them during the process of fulfilling the task , 
which is called the principal-agent problem . 
The principal-agent problem can be observed
anywhere , from our daily life to complex organizations . For example , when you take your car to a
mechanic , you are involved in the principal-agent
problem . Another example would be a group of shareholders choosing a president to run a big corporation
or a firm . In both cases , the process can be explained
by the principal-agent theory in that you and the
shareholders are the principal and the mechanic and
the president are the agents in the framework of the
theory . Clearly , the objective in the first case is to get
the car repaired ; however , the mechanic or the agent
may engage in other activities to try to take advantage
of the ignorance of the owner of the car , such as doing
unnecessary work on the car so that more money can
be raised for the shop . Similarly , the president of the
company may behave in a way that is not compatible
with the stockholders ’ objective of maximizing their
profit . For instance , the agent or the president may
take long and expensive vacations at the expense of
the firm instead of focusing on maximizing the profit , 
called shirking activities . In either case , the problem
arises because the parties , the principal and the agent , 
do not share the same information , which leads to
unwanted actions . 
This difference in the information is called asymmetric information , which is the main assumption
of the principal-agent theory . The asymmetry of the
information is present both before and after the principal and agent are involved in a contract . The existence of the asymmetric information before the
contract is called adverse selection , which creates
problems when finding the best agent to accomplish
the task . On the other hand , the asymmetry of the
information after the contract is called moral hazard , 
which can result in issues when the agent is performing the task . In that respect , the principal-agent problem
is more apparent , and it can be thought of as a special
case of the moral hazard problem . 
The principle-agent theory is extensively used and
popularized by economists in explaining the behavior
of a profit-maximizing firm . However , it has been
extended into other areas because of the uncertainty and
asymmetry of the information shared by individuals in
organizations . These areas include politics , research , 
health , and government organizations , and education is
no exception . In education , the principal-agent relationship exists in the following situations : school boards and
superintendent , superintendent and principals , and principals and teachers and other workers . The superintendent ( the agent ) is assumed to run the schools , but he or
she may have some hidden agenda that the school board 
( the principal ) is not aware of . Likewise , the superintendent ( in this case the principal ) hires school principals 
( the agents ) to run specific schools , but the school principals can engage in some other activities that are not
desired by the superintendent . Finally , teachers and other
school workers may have been involved in actions that
are in conflict with the objective of teaching students . 
—Orhan Kara , Ibrahim Duyar , 
W . Keith Christy , and Larry McNeal
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; boards of
education ; bureaucracy ; capacity building , of organizations ; chain of command ; decision making ; economics , 
theories of ; governance ; human resource development ; 
leadership , theories of ; role conflict ; superintendency ; 
working conditions , in schools
796———Principal-Agent Theory
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 796
Further Readings and References
Braun , D .  ,  & Guston , D .  ( 2003 )  . Principal-agent theory and
research policy : An introduction . Science and Public
Policy , 30 ( 5 )  , 302–308 . 
De Villiers , A .  ( 1999 )  . South African education : A principalagent problem . South African Journal of Economics , 67 ( 3 )  , 
381–402 . 
Ferris , J .  ( 1992 )  . School-based decision making : A principalagent perspective . Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis , 14 ( 4 )  , 333–346 . 
Guston , D .  ( 2003 )  . Principal-agent theory and the structure of
science policy revisited :  “ Science in policy ” and the U . S . 
report on carcinogens . Science and Public Policy , 30 ( 5 )  , 
347–357 . 
 PRINCIPALSHIP
Principals are midlevel managers responsible for the
efficient and effective functioning of the building and
the occupants in it . They serve as a vital connecting link
between central office / board of education and classrooms and between teachers and parents . As a result , 
principals face very busy , demanding , unpredictable , 
stressful workdays filled with conflict , confrontation , 
and compromise as groups and individuals compete for
their attention . It is common knowledge that many principals feel overworked and underappreciated . 
The acronym LEA ( for leading educational authority ) embodies the multidimensional responsibilities and tasks of the principalship . As the LEA in the
building , successful principals create a dynamic synergy between themselves and the environment in
which they operate . Their knowledge , skills , attributes , and values permeate the system through the decisions they make and their moral behavior / leadership . 
Yet a theme of responsiveness to the environment also
defines the principalship and has done so throughout
the history of the role . That role requires principals to
be sensitive to the emergent behavior of the organization and the culture around them , a collective phenomenon that for the individual is a counterintuitive
response to the hierarchical demands of the role . 
The position at whatever grade level is about
decision making related to human and organizational
development . Positioned between the superintendent / board and the faculty , the principal enforces
school district policy , meets the professional and personal needs of the faculty and staff , leads for change , 
and remains committed to personal goals . A typical
high school principal makes 150 decisions a day . And
decision making is value laden . Such decision making
is risky and demanding , for in the world of administration , each interaction demands a response , and that
response is a decision through which a principal creates a school . 
As a line-management position , the principal is
held responsible for crafting an environment in which
student learning is optimized . To do that , the principal
must tap into the dynamics of student behavior and
learning , teacher motivation and beliefs , adult learning
theory , community and school board expectations / 
demands , and his or her own personal motivation and
ambition . Principals develop a high tolerance for ambiguity , for within highly complex organizations such as
schools , success or failure rarely results from one decision but rather from a series of small decisions that
when taken together tip the organization forward or
backward . Different theories of leadership , such as the
great man theory and transformational leadership
versus transactional leadership , attempt to unravel the
micro / macro politics of the principalship , but none
have fully explained the complexities of the position or
the individual who occupies it . 
The job description focuses on five functional
areas : instructional leadership , student services , 
curriculum , financial and facility management , and
community relations plus any other duties as assigned . 
This tension between leadership and management
duties remains contentious in practice and in preparation , since efficient managers require different skill
sets than effective leaders . Toward this dichotomy , 
higher education programs that prepare principals 
( a ) offer courses in finance , law , organizational theory , 
public relations , and instructional supervision ,  ( b ) explore
concepts of power , conflict , systems thinking , and
strategic planning , and ( c ) examine theories of organizations and of leadership in complex systems . 
Throughout history the role has attracted individuals with specific dispositions—the ability to make
decisions , the ability to deal with conflict and confusion , and the ability to respond to , meet , and anticipate
the needs of the people and the organization . Such dispositions are critical to the success of the individual . 
A glance at the Interstate School Leaders Licensure
Consortium ( ISLLC ) Standards reveals a list of dispositions that 36 states feel a principal should possess : 
Standard 1 : The administrator believes in , values , 
and is committed to
Principalship———797
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 797
• The educability of all
• A school vision of high standards of learning
• Continuous school improvement
• The inclusion of all members of the school
community
• Ensuring that students have the knowledge , 
skills , and values needed to become successful
adults
• A willingness to continuously examine one ’ s
own assumptions , beliefs , and practices
• Doing the work required for high levels of
personal and organization performance
Standard 2 : The administrator believes in , values , 
and is committed to
• Student learning as the fundamental purpose of
schooling
• The proposition that all students can learn
• The variety of ways in which students can learn
• Lifelong learning for self and others
• Professional development as an integral part of
school improvement
• The benefits that diversity brings to the school
community
• A safe and supportive learning environment
• Preparing students to be contributing members
of society
Standard 3 : The administrator believes in , values , 
and is committed to
• Making management decisions to enhance
learning and teaching
• Taking risks to improve schools
• Trusting people and their judgments
• Accepting responsibility
• High-quality standards , expectations , and performances
• Involving stakeholders in management
processes
• A safe environment
Standard 4 : The administrator believes in , values , 
and is committed to
• Schools operating as an integral part of the
larger community
• Collaboration and communication with
families
• Involvement of families and other stakeholders
in school decision-making processes
• The proposition that diversity enriches the
school
• Families as partners in the education of their
children
• The proposition that families have the best
interests of their children in mind
• Resources of the family and community needing to be brought to bear on the education of
students
• An informed public
Standard 5 : The administrator believes in , values , 
and is committed to
• The ideal of the common good
• The principles in the Bill of Rights
• The right of every student to a free , quality
education
• Bringing ethical principles to the decisionmaking process
• Subordinating one ’ s own interest to the good of
the school community
• Accepting the consequences for upholding
one ’ s principles and actions
• Using the influence of one ’ s office constructively and productively in the service of all
students and their families
• Development of a caring school community
Standard 6 : The administrator believes in , values , 
and is committed to
• Education as a key to opportunity and social
mobility
• Recognizing a variety of ideas , values , and
cultures
• The importance of a continuing dialogue with
other decision makers affecting education
• Actively participating in the political and policymaking context in the service of education
• Using legal systems to protect student rights
and improve student opportunities
More individuals are in this position than any other
leadership position within school systems . Principals
can be found at the elementary , middle school , high
school , and alternative school levels . Depending on
student enrollment , building-level administrative
hierarchy may consist of a principal , associate principal ( s )  , and assistant principal ( s )  . Duties for high
school assistant principals focus on student discipline , 
distributing textbooks , cafeteria supervision , locker
assignments , and attending student activities , as noted
by Ann Hassenpflug in 1991 . Associate positions require
specialized expertise such as special education or curriculum . Urban schools tend to have this hierarchical
structure , while rural schools usually have just one
principal per building , a jack-of-all-trades , who may
lead the faculty in innovative pedagogical strategies in
the morning and lime the playing field for a ballgame
that afternoon . 
798———Principalship
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 798
HISTORY
Compulsory education began with the passing of the
Massachusetts Law of 1642 , but since education took
place in the Puritan home , that law did not establish
schools . By 1750 , with the adoption of the Tenth
Amendment to the Constitution , states had assumed
responsibility for public education . Schools became
places where generations could be socialized to maintain , participate in , and contribute to a democracy . 
After the end of the Civil War , cities grew , schools
grew , and a need for administrators arose . Never a
clearly defined position like teaching , the principalship
emerged in response to increased school enrollments , 
growing numbers of teachers , and school services . The
jack-of-all-trades mentality that defines the principalship was present at the beginning . Administrative
numbers grew , and the Department of Superintendence , 
the forerunner of the American Association of School
Administrators , became a reality in 1866 . 
The position of principal ( i . e .  , head ) teacher was
at first a teaching position with additional duties . 
Then in several large metropolitan cities , Boston , 
Chicago , and New York City , these principal teachers
were given release time from teaching . That release
time brought a professional status to the role of principal as instructional supervisor . 
Before 1900 , school administration was a profession
of high value focus . School leaders were called much
like ministers were called by God to the ministry . 
America was a country chosen by God to fulfill a great
destiny , and school and school leaders were responsible
for helping the country to achieve that destiny . The
industrial revolution brought changes American society
enthusiastically embraced . Business and industry took
the spotlight from destiny , and school administrators
once again reinvented themselves . They became
businesspeople . The principal became a middle manager
within an educational bureaucracy . 
The influx of immigrants at this time revealed
another need : the control of large numbers of people , 
both within schools and without . Three men , Frederick
Taylor , Max Weber , and Henri Fayol , had the answers , 
and they influenced how businesses were run and how
schools are now run , for their organizational and
economic rationalism holds sway today . Taylor ’ s book
The Principles of Scientific Management , published in
1911 , introduced fundamental principles of scientific
management to increase efficiency and maximize production . Weber ’ s contributions included a concept
known as chain of command , policy rules and regulations , and impersonal relationships between management and staff , among others . By the 1950s , school
administrations had adopted the management concepts
of Taylor and Fayol , including Fayol ’ s five key functions of effective managers : 
1 . Plan and forecast future actions . 
2 . Organize the structural , material , and human
resources of the enterprise . 
3 . Command and maintain purposeful activity among
employees . 
4 . Coordinate and unify the activities and efforts of
employees . 
5 . Control organizational operations and tasks according to established policies
Between 1946 and 1985 , Americans embraced
science , which emphasized value-free inquiry and
proof . Once again , school leadership reacted quickly
to societal forces and reconstructed itself . The science
of school administration took hold within preparation
programs . Principals struggled to become objective
and rational in their decision making . That concept of
scientific decision making dominated preparation programs for almost 30 years and overthrew the past
wisdom of experience , observation , and reflection that
had ruled from the era before 1900 . 
The scientific concept of value-free decisions
emphasized objectivity and scientific realism . As
a result , only the beliefs of science could yield reliable
insights . A closer look reveals that once again administrators aligned themselves to a higher social order , 
this time to scientists . As preparation programs
focused on science and theory , the study of ethics , 
morality , values , self-exploration , and reflection lost
the spotlight . 
During this same general period , the role of school
leader as bureaucrat began to emerge . The 1960s were
a time of social and political turbulence , and against
this tableau , shrewd , politically astute principals protected their authority , respected superiors , and
guarded against power takeovers by teachers . By this
time , the causal relationship of science had infiltrated
evaluation of the principalship . This accountability to
so many stakeholders brought , and continues to bring , 
role conflicts , stress , and opportunities . 
Principals in the 1970s were urged to turn their
backs on bureaucracy . They were expected to engage
Principalship———799
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 799
in and support emotionally positive relationships
within and outside their schools . Three values permeated this era : self-actualization ( a Maslowian term )  , an
emotionally supportive school climate , and societal transformation . The 1970s also saw an increase in federal
involvement . 
If the 1970s were a time for principals to envision
this sharing , supportive community , the 1980s brought
focus to instructional supervision , being a change agent , 
and leadership accountability . In the 1990s , principals
once again were called upon to be responsive to the
environment around them , but this time that environment was exceptionally critical and hostile . Changing
demographics , social justice issues , and the retention
of the United States as a global powerhouse brought
powerful forces of criticism against education . 
TODAY ’ S PRINCIPALS
Today ’ s school principals more than ever embody the
jack-of-all-trades mentality that began the profession . 
Buffeted by the accountability culture , increasing state
and federal demands , including No Child Left Behind
and state budget cuts , principals are burdened by the
demands of the job , frustrated by the lack of resources , 
and dismayed and angry that the crunching of numbers
for student promotion / retention do not take into
account the human condition . Moral leadership and
democratic leadership are emerging as schools struggle with diversity , injustices , and inequities . For the
practitioner , there are not enough hours in the day to
accomplish what the job has become . 
Today ’ s principals need help to transform schools , 
and they know it . Generating teacher loyalty and trust
are high priorities . The extent to which teachers describe
principals as accepting responsibility for their own
actions , as nonmanipulative , and as a person first , principal second , determines that leader authenticity . 
Proclaiming that strategic planning and large-scale
reform have failed to help schools improve , critics now
urge school leaders to listen to the voices of professional learning communities within the building . 
Tapping this sleeping giant has meant retreating from
the accepted image of the principal as a charismatic , 
lone ranger who can transform schools . Nested within
the national culture of accountability , jack-of-all-trades
mentality , and traditional school hierarchy , this reshaping of power constructs creates moral dilemmas for
many principals . A study of the National Association of
Secondary School Principals ( NASSP ) State Principals
of the Year found that when confronted by traditional
cultural role obligations , like supervision of personnel , 
principals knew what to do . When confronted with culturally ambiguous messages , they relied on intuition
and gut feelings to do what was right for kids . 
CHANGES
After decades of effective schools research and whole
school reform , best practices , strategic planning , systems thinking , and other hot topics that promised to
change and improve schools , the one-size-fits-all
answer to school problems has not been found . The
trend now is school improvement research , which is
concerned with the how of successful schools . Today ’ s
principal still gets things done through other people . It
is the how that has changed . The current climate of
standards and high-stakes testing has underscored the
importance of teacher performance in the classroom . 
For learning to occur , students and teachers must
be engaged . Constructive criticism remains a tool of
instructional supervision , but today ’ s principals recognize that individual teachers are at different levels of
development , expertise , and commitment that demand
a plethora of constructive interactions . This developmental supervision approach incorporates adult learning theory , particularly the theory of andragogy . 
Evidence is emerging that empowering teachers , 
especially in regard to curriculum , can improve
student performance . This sharing of power is a value
shift for the principalship . Terms like shared decision
making , empowerment , and site-based management
highlight this shift as schools move from coercive
organizations to more collegial relationships . The
speculation is that this dynamic will change the principalship from an office of coercive , legitimate power
to expert power as the most significant element in relationships between teachers and principals . 
Expert power will put additional pressures on the
principal . Brain research has reconstructed the traditional picture of knowledge transmission within the
classroom . For optimal learning , teachers must access
students ’ prior knowledge , build on that knowledge , 
and then incorporate metacognitive skills to cement
the knowledge . Not only do principals have to keep
abreast of such new research , but they must also help
teachers utilize that research to construct classroom
environments that optimize learning . Another profound change taking place within the literature , both
educational and public , is the replacement of the word
800———Principalship
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 800
knowledge with lifelong learning . This indicates a
dramatic shift in our culture ’ s perspective on education . 
Yet another movement of change is the integration of
special needs students into mainstream classrooms . 
Such restructuring efforts change the lives of the disabled students , their teachers , and nondisabled students . 
How principals do that in their role as social architect
can set the stage for the success or failure of the initiative and of the nation . Historically , schools have not
served at-risk or special needs students very well . 
To illustrate the complexity of such an initiative , 
successful leaders in six inclusive elementary schools 
( a ) established a system of communication that allowed
for disagreement ,  ( b ) involved themselves in the individualized education program ( IEP ) process ,  ( c ) built
a philosophy of inclusion with staff ,  ( d ) established
discipline policies for students with disabilities ,  ( e ) followed a personal plan of professional development ,  
( f ) used data in decision making , and ( g ) demonstrated
skills in problem solving . 
Within preparation programs , a new vision of leadership is emerging . In his book Centering Educational
Administration : Cultivating Meaning , Community , 
Responsibility , Robert Starratt presents his theory of
what educational administration needs to do in order
to be successful . He builds on the 1990s work of three
influential educational administration scholars , Kenneth
Leithwood , Richard Elmore , and Joseph Murphy , and
their contributions to the reorganization of theory and
practice . School reform , he contends , must cultivate
meaning , cultivate community , and cultivate responsibility , and the work of administrative leadership is
intellectual work . That thinking goes against powerful
historical and sociological frameworks . For example , 
most high school principals are expected to supervise
athletic competitions . That has little to do with intellectual leadership for a better tomorrow and everything to do with management , a different concept
altogether . Transformational leaders set direction , 
develop people and redesign organizations . Although
Starratt acknowledges the value of Leithwood , Doris
Jantzi , and Rosanne Steinbach ’ s research , he contends
that it is not grounded in what schools teach and what
students learn . 
Six conceptions of leadership have emerged in
recent times : instructional ( teacher behavior affecting
student growth )  , transformational , moral , participative , 
managerial , and cultural , as discussed by Leithwood
and associates . Of the six , only instructional supervision
is particular to education . 
TRENDS
In the 1960s and 1970s , people thought of education in
terms of resources , services , and innovation . Schools , 
and thus principals , concerned themselves with equity
issues , needs of handicapped students , legal battles over
means and ends , and the right of teacher organizations
to bargain collectively , which gave teachers unprecedented power . With the publication of A Nation at Risk
in 1983 , that emphasis changed , and the American
public once again focused on the academic performance of students . In 2003 , the Koret Task Force examined the changes wrought by A Nation at Risk and
concluded that Risk had failed to confront essential
issues of power and control . 
From the recommendations made by the Koret
Task Force , a forecast can be made of the educational
trends that will confront principals in the coming
decade and perhaps beyond . Accountability in the
form of high-stakes testing and standards will remain , 
with increased consequences for students and adults . 
Choice for parents means competition from charter
schools and voucher experiments or through private
enterprises sustained through public education funds . 
Teacher competence ( and by association principal
competence ) will be measured by classroom performance . That implies more reliance on instructional
supervision and expert power , requiring both formative
and summative evaluations to determine teacher retention or promotion in conjunction with testing results . 
For many principals , that translates into an old adage : 
spend more time with people , not with paper . 
Behind the number of failing schools published
in the newspaper are the faces of children . A grassroots
effort is emerging from the schoolhouse , protestor for
educational rights of children . Consistent attacks on
public schools from state , federal , and private organizations have helped educators to understand that if they do
not control their own destiny , that future will be thrust
upon them by others . This resistance to the top-down
mandates imposed by state and federal governments is
centered upon our democracy and the place schools
have in sustaining that democracy through the education
of students both as individuals and as citizens . 
Principals of the future will be called upon to defend
and protect the rights of students , educators , parents , 
and communities . Their charge will be to determine
what is in a student ’ s best interests as well as the academic , moral , and societal environment needed to shape
individual growth and citizens for tomorrow within
Principalship———801
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 801
a democracy . Support for such democratic supervision
has been reinvented in site-based decision making , 
boundary spanning , and participative leadership . 
For principals who have power and influence over
others and who are in the business of creating persons , 
such responsibility implies a duty to be proficient in
ethical reasoning and to adhere to ethical codes . Yet
current and future principals cannot be absolute . To tie
knowledge to absolutes in the arena of ethics creates
a puddle of perfection that cannot withstand the
droughts brought about by change . In a pluralistic
society , change is the only constant . 
Mobility is a present trend that will continue into
the future . In one southwestern state , the principalship
is seen as the highest paid itinerant workforce in the
state . Several factors contribute to this mobility rate , 
including career advances , politics , fit , bureaucracy , 
disenchantment , and life stage challenges . 
—JoAnn Franklin Klinker
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; administration , 
theories of ; at-risk students ; attitudes ; attitudes toward work ; 
authority ; behaviorism ; bureaucracy ; capacity building , of
organizations ; career stages ; collaboration theory ; communities , types , building of ; community relations ; conflict management ; constructivism ; decision making ; discipline in
schools ; division of labor ; elementary education ; empowerment ; high schools ; human resource development ; innovation , in education ; Interstate School Leaders Licensure
Consortium ; junior high schools ; leadership , theories of ; line
and staff ; middle schools ; National Association of
Elementary School Principals ; National Organization of
Secondary School Principals ; organizational theories ; school
improvement models ; site-based management ; Taylor , 
Frederick ; Weber , Max ; women in educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Blase , J .  ,  & Blase , J .  ( 2003 )  . The phenomenology of principal
mistreatment : Teachers ’ perspectives . Journal of Educational Administration , 41 ( 4 )  , 367–422 . 
Brown , K .  ( 2005 )  . Pivotal points : History , development , and
promise of the principalship . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 89–108 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Chubb , J . E .  , Williamson , M . E .  , Finn , C . E .  , Hanushek , E . A .  , 
Hill , P . T .  , Hirsch , E . D .  , et al .  ( 2003 )  . Our schools , our
future : Are we still at risk ? Education Next : A Journal of
Opinion and Research , 9–15 . 
Cooper , B .  , Fusarelli , L .  ,  & Randall , E .  ( 2004 )  . Better policies , better
schools : Theories and applications . New York : Allyn & Bacon . 
Davies , D .  ( 2002 )  . The 10th school revisited : Are school / 
family / community partnerships on the reform agenda now ? 
Phi Delta Kappan , 83 , 388–392 . 
Elmore , R .  ( 2000 )  . Building a new structure for school leadership . Washington DC : Albert Shanker Institute . 
Glickman , C .  , Gordon , S .  ,  & Ross-Gordon , J .  ( 2004 )  . 
SuperVision and instructional leadership : A developmental
approach ( 6th ed .  )  . New York : Allyn & Bacon . 
Grogan , M .  ,  & Andrews , R .  ( 2002 )  . Defining preparation
and professional development for the future . Educational
Administration Quarterly , 38 ( 2 )  , 233–256 . 
Hassenpflug , A .  ( 1991 )  . Commentary : What is the role of the
assistant principal ? NASSP Assistant Principal Special
Newsletter , 7 ( 1 )  , 1–7 . 
Hoy , W .  ,  & Miskel , C .  ( 2005 )  . Educational administration : Theory , 
research , and practice ( 7th ed .  )  . Boston : McGraw-Hill . 
Katzenmeyer , M .  ,  & Moller , G .  ( 2001 )  . Awakening the sleeping giant : Helping teachers develop as leaders . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Klinker , J .  ,  & Hackmann , D .  ( 2004 )  . An analysis of principals ’ 
ethical decision making using Rest ’ s four-component
model of moral behavior . Journal of School Leadership , 
14 , 434–457 . 
Leithwood , K .  ,  & Duke , D .  ( 1999 )  . A century ’ s quest to understand school leadership . In J . Murphy & K . Seashore Louis 
( Eds .  )  , Handbook of research on educational administration ( 2nd ed .  )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Leithwood , K .  , Jantzi , D .  ,  & Steinbach , R .  ( 1999 )  . Changing
leadership for changing times . Philadelphia : Open
University Press . 
Murphy , J .  ,  & Forsyth , P .  ( 1999 )  . A decade of change : An
overview . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Murphy , J .  ( 1999 )  . The quest for a center : Notes on the state
of the profession of educational leadership . Columbia , 
MO : University Council for Educational Administration . 
Pounder , J .  ,  & Coleman , M .  ( 2002 )  . Women : Better leaders
than men ? In general and educational management it still 
 “ all depends .  ” Leadership and Organization Development
Journal , 23 ( 3 )  , 122–133 . 
Schmoker , M .  ( 2004 )  . Tipping point : From feckless reform to
substantive instructional improvement . Phi Delta Kappan , 
85 ( 6 )  , 424–432 . 
Starratt , R .  ( 2003 )  . Centering educational administration : 
Cultivating meaning , community , responsibility . Mahwah , 
NJ : Erlbaum . 
Webb , L .  , Metha , A .  ,  & Jordan , K .  ( 2003 )  . Foundations of
American education ( 4th ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : 
Merrill Prentice Hall . 
Williams-Boyd , P .  ( 2002 )  . Educational leadership : A reference
handbook . Denver , CO : ABC-CLIO . 
 PRIVATIZATION
Privatization has been the subject of ongoing public
policy debates for decades . In a broad sense , privatization involves transferring the production and delivery
802———Privatization
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 802
of a wide range of services from the government to the
private sector and / or contracting with private companies
to handle public services ( e . g .  , solid waste collection , 
fire fighting , and the management of jails and prisons )  . 
Proponents of privatization favor issues of efficiency
and accountability , whereas critics of privatization favor
issues of social justice and equity . The theoretical support for privatization is grounded in ( a ) market theory ,  
( b ) public choice theory , and ( c ) property rights theory . 
Key tenets of each theory are as follows : 
Market theory speaks to the virtues of competition , 
efficiency , and consumers exercising utility preferences in the private markets and the lack of such market forces in public monopolies . Public choice theory
explains that government inefficiency is the result of
incentive structures of public agencies that encourage
public managers to build empires ( e . g .  , power , budgets , and staffing ) out of self-interest over societal
interests . Property rights theory states that property
will be cared for in proportion to individual gain from
tending it ; hence , private ownership increases ownership and efficiency , whereas public ownership
decreases ownership and increases inefficiency . 
BUSINESS SECTOR INFLUENCE
In 1983 , the administration of President Ronald Reagan
published a document titled A Nation at Risk : The
Imperative for Educational Reform , which stated that
global competitors had replaced the preeminence of the
United States in all sectors and that educational foundations had been eroded by mediocrity . Accordingly , the
solution lay in educational reform . Business and industrial groups demanded a return to teaching traditional
academic subjects , shoring up the quality and quantity
of science and math courses , and holding teachers accountable . The accountability movement had begun . 
In 2004 , Kathy Emery and Susan Ohanian chronicled
the vetting process between the Business Roundtable 
( BRT ) and the National Governor ’ s Association over the
past 25 years , revealing an undeniable alignment of educational policy with economic development . In the end , 
the No Child Left Behind Act ( NCLB ) of 2001 is as
much Democratic President Bill Clinton ’ s legacy as
Republican President George W . Bush ’ s . 
PRIVATIZATION OF K–16 EDUCATION
At the K–12 level , privatization has involved to a
lesser extent educational services and to a greater
extent noneducational services . With noneducational
services , privatization or contracting for transportation , 
food , and maintenance of facilities has been commonplace . As noted by Katrina Buckley in 2005 , a new
phenomenon known as educational management
organizations ( EMOs ) have emerged , which offer services ( predominately to charter schools ) that range
from bookkeeping to report writing to managing every
aspect of a school ’ s operations . 
To a much lesser extent , privatization is associated
with charter schools ; however , charter schools are
nonsectarian public schools that operate independently of many local and state regulations . Charter
schools have burgeoned , and their numbers are
expected to increase with school districts failing to
meet Adequate Yearly Progress ( AYP )  . As of 2005 , 
the Center for Education Reform estimated that there
are 37 states with charters ( excluding Puerto Rico )  , 
2 , 695 schools in operation ( 15% increase from last
school year )  , with nearly 685 , 000 students enrolled . 
The growth of charter schools has surpassed the
acceptance of vouchers . Nonetheless , both vouchers
and charter schools have long been seen as exemplars
of change and founts of improvement to public education by business interests , while opposed by most
educators . The proponents of vouchers typically refer
to Milton Friedman ’ s inequity arguments . Proponents
suggest that vouchers allow parents of underperforming schools a choice , with charter schools serving as an
option . Opponents of choice plans and charters argue
that diverting public school funding to charter schools
is detrimental and their improved student performance
unproven . 
Privatization in higher education is most visible with
technology transfer initiatives . Increasingly , public
universities have experienced reduced state appropriations , heightened state regulation , and control , and
demand that universities find private sources of funding . According to the National Association of College
and University Business officers , in 2003 the University of Virginia became the first public institution to
derive a majority of its annual funding from private
sources ( e . g .  , $134 million in private funds in fiscal
year 2004 compared to $131 million in state support )  . 
Many universities have endeavored to commercialize
research by becoming entrepreneurial enterprises . 
Typically , venture capitalists provide resources for the
development of labs and facilities and in return acquire
positions in market-bearing research . University scientists provide the intellectual labor , and universities
Privatization———803
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 803
often retain a stake in market-bearing research to
boot . 
APPROPRIATENESS OF
PRIVATIZATION OF EDUCATION
Privatization has occurred in the transportation , utilities , and communications industries . However , the
success of such privatization appears dubious , considering the solvency issues with the airlines , the
California energy crisis , and the corporate malfeasance
associated with long-distance phone service providers . 
For this reason , privatization efforts with education
should be viewed with caution . 
To be sure , the business sector has successfully
guided educational reform policy over the past 25
years to promote economic development . However , 
is it appropriate to place so much emphasis on the
development of human capital ? Do the interests of an
elite class in corporate America represent the average
American ? 
Most educators would agree that there is room
for improvement across the board in the management , 
structures , personnel , teaching , and assessment of public education . But with that being said , one should not
lose sight of one of the greatest problems afflicting
public education today : underfunding . 
At the K–12 level , privatization of noneducational
services seems clear with contracting and EMOs , 
whereas privatization of educational services seems
nebulous with the general association of charters
and vouchers with forms of privatization per se . The
siphoning of students and funds from public schools
that accompanies charter schools and vouchers should
be considered . Technology transfer initiatives at the
tertiary level , which result in a loss of “ autonomy ”  
( e . g .  , university mission and faculty research ) as
private , external funding increases , should also be of
concern . 
Overall , the perils of applying private sector models of efficiency , competition , and utility preferences
to public education as reform measures should be
heeded and serve as the focus for future scholarship . 
—Paul Melendez
See also charter schools ; competition , forms of , in schools ; 
Friedman , Milton ; globalism ; human capital ; market theory
of schooling ; A Nation at Risk ; No Child Left Behind ; 
right-wing politics , advocates , impact on education ; 
voucher plans
Further Readings and References
Buckley , K .  ( 2005 )  . Losing voice ? Educational management
organizations and charter schools ’ educational programs . 
Education and Urban Society , 37 ( 2 )  , 204–234 . 
Emery , K .  ,  & Ohanian , S .  ( 2004 )  . Why is corporate America
bashing our public schools ? Portsmouth , NH : Heinemann . 
Friedman , M .  ( 1962 )  . Capitalism and freedom . Chicago : 
University of Chicago Press . 
Greene , D . J .  ( 2005 )  . Public administration in the new century : A concise introduction . Belmont , CA : Wadsworth . 
National Association of College and University Business
Officers .  ( 2003 )  . University of Virginia projects more private than public funding for fy04 . Retrieved March 18 , 
2005 , from . 
U . S . Charter Schools .  ( 2005 )  . Basic national statistics . 
Retrieved March 18 , 2005 , from 
schools . org . 
 PROBLEM SOLVING
Problem solving is a multiple-step process that
purposefully analyzes an issue , generates alternatives , 
evaluates and implements selected choices , and monitors progress . For the purposes of this entry , it will be
assumed that a team approach to problem solving will
be used . At an early point , the importance of the problem should be evaluated in comparison to the values
of a possible solution . The following types of questions need to be addressed : Is this problem important
for the school or the district , or what will happen if the
problem is unresolved ? Is it best that the problem
remain unsolved ? Some problems can remain unresolved without significant impact on the mission and
strategic plan . At a basic level , the steps include the
following : identify the problem , generate solutions , 
evaluate the alternatives , implement the selected alternative , and evaluate progress . 
At the first stage , identification and clarification
of the problem are essential ; describe the problem but
avoid potential solutions—solutions will come later . 
The following types of questions will help the team
keep on task : What is the problem , and is the problem
relevant to the mission and strategic plan of the organization ? What are the symptoms associated with the
problem ? It must be understood that symptoms , root
causes , and the problem are confused but must be kept
separate . Do not assume that these differences are
understood by the person who presented them or that
you totally understand the problem . Collect data that
804———Problem Solving
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 804
describe the problem and define the impact the problem has had or will have on the organization . In some
cases , restating the problem in general terms or
providing illustrative examples can clarify the issues . 
During the definition of the problem , ambiguous
issues should be clarified . To illustrate ,  “ reading scores
are too low ” is unclear and is an ill-defined statement
of a problem . Does this mean all students or selected
students ? What type of assessment was used to determine reading level ? What is an acceptable reading
level ? When will assessments occur ? When will the
problem be judged as resolved ? The criteria for success should be clearly stated as a part of the definition
of the problem ; this information is needed at all steps
in the problem-solving process . 
After the problem is defined and understood , the
next step is to generate as many alternative solutions as
possible . Because educators are very intent on developing solutions to immediate problems , and complex educational problems have multiple root causes , the team
should be encouraged to consider all possible alternatives without judging the value of the alternatives . 
The generation of multiple possible solutions is time
consuming and can produce many false starts , but the
process is necessary to identify potential solutions with
merit . Often , when complex problems are discussed , 
assumptions , symptoms , solutions , and subjective data
are intermixed and confused . 
Teamwork and brainstorming are beneficial skills
that can be used to generate alternative approaches to
the problem . Alternatives should not be evaluated and
assessed ; however , avoid blame for the problem , 
because blame is unproductive and destructive to the
process . The goal is to generate a wide variety of solutions : some realistic , some analytical , and some very
creative . Traditional rules for brainstorming should
guide the brainstorming process . Open discussion that
is not personalized encourages communication and
supports team building . 
Next , the various alternatives must be evaluated
and an approach selected to resolve the problem . The
possible alternatives should be considered in relationship to the vision , mission , and strategic plan of the
organization . Numerous questions should be considered . What are costs , time restraints , and personnel
requirements ? The strengths and weaknesses of each
approach should be considered in relationship to both
short-term and long-term impact . In addition , existing
policies and procedures should be reviewed in reference to each alternative . During this phase of problem
solving , the team should be objective , record data , 
collect feedback , make pertinent notes , and listen for
root causes . The potential results , causes , and impacts
of the problem are valuable information . 
The bottom line is that an alternative must be selected . 
The chosen alternative must address the root causes
identified , and it must be implemented completely . An
action plan should be developed to provide a road map
for the implementation process . In schools , most meaningful changes will require a significant adjustment in
budget , program adjustments , and staff changes ; therefore , the plan will need to address personnel , timelines , 
facilities , and external issues . Roles and responsibilities
related to implementation need to be clarified . Who is
responsible for implementation , communication , and
evaluation ? Each member of the team must commit to
making the improvement happen . 
At this point , problem solving will become a project
management process ; the plan must be implemented , 
managed , and monitored . Formative evaluation of the
implementation process can provide feedback on budget , 
timelines , personnel , and policies . The process of implementation must be monitored to ensure that the plan was
implemented . If changes were made during the implementation process , then information must be recorded
for consideration during the evaluation component . 
Because the criteria for success were identified in
early stages , the evaluation of the progress is easier . 
Evaluation of the success of a selected solution should
be a formative process , and many issues related to monitoring progress need to be clarified . Was the plan implemented ? Are other measures available as indicators that
the problem has been resolved ? Do not assume a single
problem exists—apply systems thinking . Was the problem resolved , and was the alternative responsible for the
improvement ? Did the plan result in a systemic change , 
or is it likely that the problem will reoccur ? The evaluation of progress enables the organization to determine
the extent of success and level of implementation . 
Finally , communication with stakeholders is essential at each step of the problem-solving process . A clear
communication plan that openly discusses the alternative will eliminate guessing , develop a broader base of
support , and reduce some potential problems if the
plan is unsuccessful . 
Feedback at each step will support the process of
teamwork and group involvement in problem solving . 
Effective group problem solving requires that a group
be creative , systematic , and thorough in its problemsolving approach . 
Problem Solving———805
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 805
The leader ’ s role helps determine whether group
problem solving is effective or not . Although the
members also are responsible for the group ’ s ultimate
output , the leader can facilitate effective problem solving by making sure that the important problem-solving
functions are met . The leader needs to be highly skilled
to keep the problem-solving process on track . 
—Bill Thornton and George C . Hill
See also accountability ; behaviorism ; case studies ; critical
theory ; curriculum , theories of ; decision making ; empiricism ; feedback ; globalism ; Interstate School Leaders
Licensure Consortium ; knowledge base , of the field ; leadership , theories of ; management theories ; organizational
theories ; politics , of education ; principalship ; rational organizational theory ; role conflict ; school districts , history and
development ; superintendency ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Hanson , M .  ( 2003 )  . Educational administration and organizational behavior ( 5th ed .  )  . Boston : Pearson Education . 
Lessinger , L .  ,  & Salowe , A .  ( 1997 )  . Game time : The educator ’ s playbook for the new global economy . Lancaster , PA : 
Technomic . 
Morgan , R .  ,  & Smith , J .  ( 1996 )  . Staffing the new workplace . 
Milwaukee , WI : ASQC Press . 
Robbins , S .  ( 2001 )  . Organizational behavior . Upper Saddle
River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
 PROBLEM-BASED LEARNING
Problem-based learning ( PBL ) is a catchall term for
several educational strategies , each of which employs
different terminology and instructional purposes . While
PBL strategies may be called PBL modules , scenarios , 
vignettes , critical incident analyses , or teaching cases 
( not to be confused with case study methodology )  , they
share in common that they employ problems in the
instructional process . Problem-based learning exercises
generally have three distinctive design features : a narrative , responses / activities , and a debriefing . 
1 . Narratives describe a specific , complex predicament that is written as a scenario for exploring critical
issues . As used in the preparation , training , and professional development of educational leaders , narratives
range from a completely developed case , which includes
extensive and detailed qualitative and / or quantitative
information , to narratives that are constructivist in
orientation . That is , while PBL strategies may present
students with a great deal of data , they may also call for
students and instructors to search for or generate additional information to complete the exercise . 
2 . Responses / activities entail analyzing information provided in the narrative and crafting actionable
solutions to those problems . It has been suggested that
analyses of PBL exercises generally follow the following sequence :  ( a ) recognizing the problems in the narrative ,  ( b ) framing the problems in the narrative using
a perspective grounded in curricular and / or course
content ,  ( c ) searching for viable analytic alternatives ,  
( d ) developing and implementing a plan of action , and 
( e ) evaluating the processes students used to formulate
their solution and the quality and viability of their
solutions . 
3 . Debriefing , often the final step of PBL activities , 
has a twofold purpose . First , debriefing discloses
the instructors ’ evaluation of student work . Second , 
debriefing provides a chance for the instructor and
students to constructively discuss alternative solutions
or interpretations ( and possibly group processes ) they
may not have previously considered . 
There are many potential benefits to employing
PBL educational strategies in the preparation , training , 
and professional development of educational leaders . 
Service-oriented fields such as medicine , business , 
and engineering have employed PBL educational
strategies effectively to provide students with opportunities to apply their academic knowledge to the
solution of real-life situations as part of preinternship
preparation . Increased interest in the use of PBL educational strategies to aid in the development of educational leaders over the latter half of the twentieth
and beginning of the twenty-first century has yielded
many useful resources , including The Journal of
Cases in Educational Leadership , a peer-reviewed
journal devoted solely to the development and dissemination of high-quality PBL exercises ( available
in full text online at www . ucea . org )  . While there are
other useful educational strategies available that are
designed to help prospective educational leaders understand the complexities of practice , few approaches
offer the benefits of PBL strategies . Such benefits
have been identified as increasing awareness of where
additional knowledge is required within the existing
806———Problem-Based Learning
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 806
knowledge base and fostering collaboration between
professors , practitioners , and students . 
—Jeffrey S . Brooks
See also academic freedom ; accountability ; accreditation ; 
behaviorism ; case studies ; critical theory ; curriculum , 
theories of ; decision making ; empiricism ; feedback ; 
Interstate School Leaders Licensure Consortium ; knowledge base , of the field ; leadership , theories of ; learning , 
theories of ; management theories ; organizational theories ; 
politics , of education ; principalship ; problem solving ; rational organizational theory ; role conflict ; school districts , 
history and development ; superintendency ; universities , 
preparation of educational leaders in
Further Readings and References
Bridges , E .  ,  & Hallinger , P .  ( 1997 )  . Problem-based leadership
development : Preparing educational leaders for changing
times . Journal of School Leadership , 7 ( 6 )  , 592–608 . 
Bridges , E .  ,  & Hallinger , P .  ( 1997 )  . Using PBL to prepare educational leaders . Peabody Journal of Education , 72 ( 2 )  , 131–146 . 
Cunningham , W .  ,  & Cordeiro , P .  ( 2003 )  . Educational leadership : A problem-based approach . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Lortie , D .  ( 1998 )  . Teaching educational administration : 
Reflections on our craft ( 1994 Mitstifer Lecture )  . Journal
of Cases in Educational Leadership , 1 ( 1 )  . Retrieved
October 11 , 2004 , from . 
Taylor , L .  ,  & Whittaker , C .  ( 2003 )  . Bridging multiple worlds : 
Case studies of diverse educational communities . Boston : 
Allyn & Bacon . 
 PRODUCTIVITY
In its simplest form , productivity can be defined as
achieving the maximum output of a process with the
use of minimum inputs . Productivity can be applied to
education in the same way that economists analyze
the relationship between inputs and outputs ; however , 
the difference between the two methods is simply that
it is difficult to define and measure the inputs and particularly the outputs of education . The demands for
additional funding have been continuously increasing , 
while the public has been dissatisfied with the outputs
of the education system . This development has
sparked the American public ’ s desire for increased
productivity and accountability in public education . 
Traditionally , two concepts of productivity are considered : technical productivity and economic productivity . Technical productivity refers to maximizing the
outputs for a given set of inputs and indicates the best
input mix through the utilization of production technology . This best mix requires the lowest cost of the
output . Schools are criticized for being technically
inefficient . The first argument to support this view is
that educational organizations do not aim to maximize
profits or lower the costs of the teaching and learning . 
Also , educational decision makers may not understand the production process and therefore may not
maximize the outputs for a given set of inputs . A limitation inherent in technical productivity is that this
approach assumes that the educational decision makers know and measure all the inputs to the production
process . However , skill and ability differences of
students and teachers may yield variations in output . 
Economic productivity refers to the correct choice
of input mix , given the prices of inputs . The question
of how resources should be allocated in order to produce different goods and services raises the question
of economic efficiency . In economic productivity , the
lowest cost is not achieved at the expense of quality of
a product . Because of the quality consideration , economic productivity is also called “ effectiveness ” in
the literature . Increasing economic productivity of an
educational system can be attained either by educating
and training more students without decreasing the
quality or by increasing the quality of educational services offered to the same number of students . 
Another categorization of productivity calls for
internal and external productivity . Both internal and
external productivity can be viewed on the quality and
quantity dimensions . Internal productivity refers to
the relationship between inputs and outputs of a system . In this sense , internal productivity indicates the
degree of attainment of the standards or goals of the
educational system . These standards may be identified
quantitatively such as graduation rate or qualitatively
such as behavioral objectives . External productivity
refers to the fit between educational system outputs
and the needs of society . 
Although various models have been developed , the
literature recognizes the difficulty and limitations in
identifying and measuring inputs , outputs , and quality
of education . For instance , education has many different goals to achieve at the same time . Similarly , the
same measured inputs may not yield the same outputs
because of the skill or quality differences . Therefore , 
it is sometimes argued that it is impossible to measure
the productivity of education . Others , on the other
Productivity———807
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 807
hand , argue that this is equivalent to admitting that
schools have no way of judging how successful they
are in achieving the goals and standards they set out
for themselves . 
Being a $450 billion enterprise , productivity in
public education is as important for taxpayers as it is
for the owners or shareholders of a private organization . Taxpayers want to know where their money
is going and whether additional funds are justified . 
Seemingly minimum or no advancement in student
achievement despite the drastic increases in funding
over recent decades sparked the American public ’ s
desire for increased productivity and accountability in
public education . These developments require the
close examination of educational productivity in the
form of resource allocation and utilization . 
Early research in productivity of public education
has produced mixed results . Early production function
research was inconclusive . This mostly stemmed from
the complexity of the schooling process and factors
outside the schools ’ control . It has been difficult to
isolate statistically one-to-one correlations between
inputs and student learning . The most famous production function study was the U . S . Department of Energy ’ s
1966 Coleman Report . This massive survey of
600 , 000 students in 30 , 000 schools concluded that
socioeconomic background influenced student success more than various school and teacher characteristics . Similarly , in 1989 , Eric Hanusek analyzed 187
production function studies in the last 20 years and
found no systematic , positive relationship between
student achievement and seven schooling inputs . 
Recent literature ties the failure to document
educational productivity to education production
function approach , the approach that has been applied
to all studies . Education production is the process of
transforming inputs into outputs . There are several
reasons why the production function has been relatively unsuccessful in identifying relationships
between resource uses and student achievement . First , 
production function research assumes that all school
systems are pursuing the same goals . The fact is that
school systems pursue a variety of goals , and in many
cases , these goals are not tied to student achievement . 
Second , it is difficult to identify inputs . Educators and
researchers utilize different inputs , and there is no
consensus on what exactly constitutes educational
inputs . Furthermore , the production function ignores
process and its input variables , such as curriculum and
instruction . Third , there are difficulties in determining
the functional relationship among variables . Most
studies assume a linear relationship among variables , 
but the relationship may be logarithmic or curvilinear . 
Finally , most studies use cross-sectional rather than
longitudinal data and thus cannot analyze value-added
in relating education to student achievement . 
Recent research through the advancement and use
of sophisticated techniques showed that the increase
in average spending or increase in the quality of input
and / or process measures would significantly increase
student achievement . The research proved that there
are factors controllable by the school systems to
increase educational productivity despite the existence
of uncontrollable factors such as deteriorating socioeconomic background and lack of parental involvement . 
For instance , in 1994 , Larry Hedges and his colleagues
found that about 10% or a $500 increase in spending
per pupil would significantly increase student achievement . In 1995 , Faith Crampton found that expenditures
matter when the money is spent for smaller classes . 
The more experienced and highly trained teachers , 
in an analysis of inputs , affected the achievement in
New York public school students . 
Other studies show that investments on selected
inputs have paramount effects on educational productivity . There is a consensus in the literature that programmatic expenditures are likely to increase student
achievement . There is a widespread agreement that
expenditures for programs designed to prevent school
failure or enhance student achievement , especially for
poor children , increase educational productivity . 
Similarly , preschool programs for poor children and
intervention programs to prevent school dropouts also
have relatively high cost-benefit ratios . 
In addition , some studies examining factors hindering educational productivity found that poor
resource distribution , schools ’ bureaucratic structure , 
uneven pay schedules favoring senior teachers , and
focus on services and labor-intensive practices
increased costs and lowered productivity . Similarly , 
unstable governance , lack of incentives to leverage
productivity improvement , structures favoring continuity over continuous improvement , and inadequate
quality controls on innovations were identified as
factors reducing educational productivity in a 1995
report of Consortium on Productivity in the Schools . 
Challenges of productivity also exist in higher education . At post-K–12 institutions , there is no consistent
definition of productivity or agreed upon way to measure it . The traditional measurement of productivity in
808———Productivity
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 808
colleges and universities is the cost per hour of instruction per student . Newer approaches redefine productivity measurement as the cost per unit of learning per
student , not the amount of instruction given to them . 
—Ibrahim Duyar , Larry McNeal , 
Orhan Kara , and Jane McDonald
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; budgeting ; 
cost-benefit analyses ; decision making ; Deming , W . 
Edwards ; economics , theories of ; finance , of public schools ; 
Friedman , Milton ; management theories ; measurement , 
theories of ; operational definitions ; organizations , types of , 
typologies ; resource management ; school plant management ; taxes , to support education ; total quality management ; 
work task measurement
Further Readings and References
Consortium on Productivity in the Schools .  ( 1995 )  . Using
what we have to get the schools we need : A productivity
focus for American education . New York : Author . 
Crampton , F .  ( 1995 , March )  . Is the production function dead ? 
An analysis of the relationship of educational inputs on
school outcomes . Paper presented at the annual conference
of the American Education Finance Association . 
Duyar , I .  ( 1999 )  . Internal efficiency in education . Journal of
College of Educational Sciences , 11 ( 2 )  , 223–235 . 
Hanusek , E .  ( 1987 )  . Educational production functions . In
G . Psacharopoulos ( Ed .  )  , Economics of education research
and studies . Elmsford , NY : Pergamon Press . 
Hanusek , E .  ( 1989 )  . The impact of differential expenditures
on school performance . Educational Researcher , 18 ( 4 )  , 
45–51 . 
Hedges , L .  , Laine , R .  ,  & Greenwald , R .  ( 1994 )  . Does money
matter ? A meta-analysis of the effects of differential school
inputs on student outcomes . Educational Researcher , 
23 ( 3 )  , 5–14 . 
 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Professional development refers to processes
designed to enhance educators ’ knowledge , skills , 
and attitudes for the purpose of improving students ’ 
learning . Terms that have been used synonymously
in the past include staff development , in-service education , on-the-job training , adult learning , and continuing education . Underlying all of these terms is
the premise that , due to an ever-evolving knowledge
base pertinent to teaching and learning , educators
must continuously expand , renew , and refine their
expertise . 
Professional development can also be understood
as one of several means of school improvement .  
( Examples of others are curriculum articulation , materials acquisition , community partnerships , special
programming , and policy development .  ) As such , it
reflects both instructional and organizational leadership functions for educational administrators . 
In practice , principals and superintendents seldom
lead particular professional development activities . 
Nonetheless , they , and other school leaders , are responsible for sharing decision making about professional
development content and design , creating supportive
contexts for adults ’ and children ’ s learning , allocating
resources , planning , evaluating , and making multiple
improvement initiatives cohere . 
These leadership responsibilities are complicated
by a limited research base and lack of consensus about
what characterizes effective professional development
practice . Thomas Guskey ’ s analysis indicates that , 
overall , the professional development knowledge base
relies more heavily on theorizing and expert opinion
than on conclusive results from empirical study . He
also notes that it is understandable that there remain
many unknowns and disagreements about processes
as context-dependent and complex as leadership and
adult learning . 
Dennis Sparks points out that current thinking about
professional development reflects several differences
from the past . For example , consistent with the standardsbased reform movement , expert opinion is currently more
concerned with potential impact on student learning outcomes than adult participants ’ satisfaction with their own
learning experiences . Contemporary professional development is expected to be an ongoing process integrated
into the normal workday rather than intermittent special
events occurring a few times a year . Directly related to
this job embeddedness , school-based professional development approaches are currently more highly valued than
the districtwide experiences of the past . 
Moreover , current aspirations for educational
improvement are that schools function less like bureaucratic organizations and more like learning communities . The latter shifts professional development goals
from exclusive focus on individual growth and development to improved school capacity to solve problems , 
renew itself , and pursue desired student learning results
collectively . This shift also means that the entire school
staff , not just teachers and principals , should be continuously learning , so that all parts of the system contribute to children ’ s growth and development . 
Professional Development———809
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 809
FIVE COMMON MODELS
In addition to the largely hortatory and normative scholarship summarized above , much of the relevant literature on professional development describes its various
forms , formats , or activities . Though scores of particular
designs have appeared over time , all correspond fundamentally to one of five models synthesized by Guskey , 
Sparks , and Susan Loucks-Horsley : individually guided , 
collaborative problem solving , observation and assessment of teaching , training , or action research . 
The essence of the individually guided model is that
educators define and direct their own learning , much
like when secondary or higher education students exercise options for independent study . As its name suggests , individual choice and self-direction are integral
to this type of professional development . In an ideal
form of this model , for example , a teacher first determines a goal or learning objective , then decides upon a
means of working toward the goal—both completely
independently . Often , in practice , either the goal or the
planned activities may be required to be approved by
an administrator or linked directly to school priorities
for student learning . Examples of individually guided
activities are self-selected reading , journaling or writing for publication , videotaping and analyzing one ’ s
performance , developing a portfolio of work samples
and reflections , taking or teaching a college or online
course , and attending a professional conference . 
In contrast to individually guided professional development , the collaborative problem-solving model
involves two or more educators thinking and working
together . It is grounded on the premise that , through
the collaborative work , worthwhile learning will occur . 
Constructivist theories suggesting that learning is a
social as well as cognitive process provide additional
grounding for the kinds of interpersonal and group discussion , dialogue , and reflection that characterize the
collaborative problem-solving model . 
In contemporary practice , this design also takes a
variety of forms , including , for example ,  ( a ) school
improvement or shared decision-making teams , whose
charges can be broad and wide ranging ,  ( b ) curriculum
development committees , with goals often more
narrowly defined by content area ,  ( c ) study groups , 
wherein participants learn together about a topic of
mutual interest or concern ,  ( d ) assessment teams that
create tests or other measures of student learning outcomes , to be used by multiple teachers ,  ( e ) mentoring , 
with a more experienced educator helping and guiding
a novice ,  ( f ) critical friends , wherein either pairs or
groups challenge and support each other in any
number of areas , and ( g ) student work analysis groups , 
with participants examining samples of student work
to enable improvement of lesson design . 
A third model of professional development is
observation and assessment . It also is grounded in collaboration , but in this instance primarily by pairs of
teachers and focused specifically on observations in
each other ’ s classrooms . The goal is to serve as a second set of eyes and ears for one another , for subsequent
joint discussion and reflection on the instructor ’ s
teaching and the students ’ learning . Sometimes this
model is referred to as peer coaching , cognitive coaching , or collegial supervision . However , the essence of
the model is formative , rather than summative , assessment . 
That is , classroom data and feedback are provided
exclusively for the observed teacher ’ s consideration
for personal growth and self-improvement . In addition , 
the observing teacher is expected to benefit from being
immersed in a colleague ’ s classroom and seeing firsthand others ’ approaches to students , the curriculum , 
and instruction . 
Three steps are typically included in this model : 
1 . Pre-observation conversation about what would be
most helpful for the observer to focus on
2 . Classroom observation with some systematic way of
recording information about the agreed upon focus
3 . Postobservation dialogue in which the observer and
the observed analyze and discuss the recorded data
A fourth model , called training or skills training , 
has traditionally dominated professional development in
education . The research of Bruce Joyce and Beverly
Showers demonstrates that there are five components
necessary for training to result in both effective acquisition of skills and transfer of those skills to the workplace : 
1 . Theory . Presentation of the theory or rationale that
defines the value , importance , and use of the skill .  
( Often this takes the form of large-group , direct
instruction or expert lecturing . It is the “ telling ” or 
 “ describing ” portion of training .  ) 
2 . Demonstration or modeling of the skill , typically by
an experienced trainer . 
3 . Practice . Opportunities for learners to practice the
skill , both while under the direction of experts and
over time in more natural work settings
810———Professional Development
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 810
4 . Feedback . Timely and constructive feedback on
learners ’ practice , so that they can understand what
they are doing well and what needs further refinement
5 . Follow-up or coaching . Long-term guidance and
assistance so that what was practiced in training sessions or other simulations is transferred to the actual
work setting
In practice , skills training for educators is often
incomplete . That is , it may include one or two of the
elements required to be effective , but not all five . 
Multiple opportunities for practice with feedback , as
well as follow-up over time , are frequently neglected
or absent . Consequently , the anticipated change in
performance on the job does not occur . 
The fifth model , action research , also is commonly
referred to as inquiry , practitioner research , or reflective action . One way to differentiate this model from
the others is to think of it , for example , as teachers
conducting miniexperiments , then changing some practice as a result of what is learned from the experiment . 
The changed practice is what makes this actionoriented research . Its teacher-directed aspects distinguish it from more formal educational research wherein
teachers are more likely to be the subjects , rather than
the initiators , of empirical studies . 
Action research may be an independent , smallgroup , or whole-school professional development
activity . As such , it shares characteristics of the individually guided and collaborative problem-solving
models described above . Although action research can
take a variety of forms , three steps are common to this
model . One or more educators ( 1 ) identify a question
or area of interest ,  ( 2 ) collect relevant data through
active experimentation , and ( 3 ) change what they do
on the job , based on their interpretation of the data . 
RESEARCH ON EFFECTIVE PRACTICES
Despite the emphasis in the professional development
literature on varied designs and advocacy for all staff ’ s
participation , most of the empirical work on effectiveness has focused on teachers . Recent studies conducted by Beatrice Birman , Laura Desimone , Andrew
C . Porter , and Michael Garet suggest that the form or
model of professional development is not what matters
most to teachers ’ learning . That is , training in the form
of workshops or institutes , as well as multiple variations of any of the other four models summarized
above , all can be effective . Effectiveness derives not
from the model but from five other features that cut
across design :  ( 1 ) focus on content knowledge ,  ( 2 ) collective participation ,  ( 3 ) use of active learning strategies ,  ( 4 ) coherence , and ( 5 ) duration . 
Content Knowledge
First , focusing on content means targeting a staff
development activity on a specific subject area or on a
subject-specific teaching method , such as increasing
teachers ’ understanding of motion in physics or of
the way elementary students solve story problems in
mathematics . 
This finding is contrary to commonplace practices
that focus professional development on generic instructional strategies , such as using cooperative groups , 
computer technology , or concept maps in the classroom . It is consistent , however , with the increased
expectations for student learning reflected in the contemporary curriculum standards of many states and
school districts . For example , those standards often
expect higher-level thinking of students and abilities to
apply , rather than simply recall , information . Accordingly , educators require deeper understanding of particular curriculum content and how students best learn
that content . When the latter becomes the focus of professional development , participants ’ knowledge and
skills increase . 
Collective Participation
Relatedly , professional development has been
found to be more effective when teachers participate
in it with grade-level , subject area , or department colleagues from their own school . Such participation
contrasts with staff development structures in which
teachers from different schools participate individually . Instead , collective participation can beget sharing
and problem solving around common concerns , goals , 
students , curriculum , methods , assessments , and often
even supplies and materials . 
Active Learning Strategies
In addition to a strong subject matter focus and
collective participation , effective professional development is also characterized by opportunities for participants ’ active learning . This finding is consistent with
Professional Development———811
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 811
research on training that demonstrates that hands-on
practice is essential for the transfer of new skills to
classroom use . Examples of active learning strategies in
effective professional development include discussion , 
application exercises , simulations , planning , reviewing
student work , role playing , observing or being observed
teaching , and creating presentations , demonstrations , or
other written products for authentic audiences . 
Coherence
A fourth feature of effective professional development practice is that it is coherent . In this context , 
synonyms for coherence are connection , complement , 
and fit . That is , to be effective , professional development should complement , fit , and be connected to
• Curriculum standards and assessments , because in
contemporary schools , both directly influence educators ’ work and goals
• The substance of previous professional development
initiatives , so that learning is experienced as a cumulative and recursive enhancement of prior knowledge
Duration
Last , longer duration contributes to effectiveness , 
because it increases the frequency of opportunities to
incorporate the preceding four features : focus on depth
of content , collective participation , active learning strategies , and coherence . The value of longer duration applies
to both the professional development activity itself and
the time span during which follow-up is supported . 
As mentioned earlier , however , consensus on the
characteristics of effective professional development
remains elusive . Guskey points out that much of the
recent research on effective practice has focused on
mathematics and science teaching , with no assurances
that those findings apply equally well to other subject
areas or contexts . 
In addition to the five features underscored in Birman
and colleagues ’ work , for example , the National
Council for Staff Development ’ s standards for professional development include ( a ) using disaggregated
student data to determine adult learning priorities ,  ( b ) 
linking adult learning closely to student learning
goals ,  ( c ) organizing adults into learning communities ,  ( d ) dedicating sufficient resources to professional
development initiatives ,  ( e ) attending to equity and
quality teaching in professional development content ,  
( f ) creating supportive contexts through skillful leadership , and ( g ) involving families and other stakeholders in school improvement efforts . 
—Marilyn Tallerico
See also adult education ; capacity building , of organizations ; 
career stages ; collaboration theory ; continuing education ; 
human capital ; human resource development ; learning , 
theories of ; life span development ; mentoring ; performance
assessment ; personnel management ; portfolios ; professional
development schools ; professional learning communities ; 
school improvement models ; schools of education ; supervision ; working conditions , in schools ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Birman , B .  , Desimone , L .  , Porter , A .  ,  & Garet , M .  ( 2000 )  . 
Designing professional development that works . 
Educational Leadership , 57 ( 8 )  , 28–33 . 
Gordon , S .  ( 2004 )  . Professional development for school
improvement : Empowering learning communities . Boston : 
Allyn & Bacon . 
Guskey , T .  ( 2000 )  . Evaluating professional development . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Guskey , T .  ( 2003 )  . What makes professional development
effective ? Phi Delta Kappan , 84 ( 10 )  , 748–750 . 
Joyce , B .  ,  & Showers , B .  ( 2002 )  . Student achievement through
staff development ( 3rd ed .  )  . Alexandria , VA : Association
for Supervision and Curriculum Development . 
National Staff Development Council .  ( 2001 )  . NSDC Standards
for staff development . Retrieved January 12 , 2004 , from
www . nsdc . org / standards / about . 
Sparks , D .  ( 2002 )  . Designing powerful professional development for teachers and principals . Oxford , OH : National
Staff Development Council . 
Sparks , D .  ,  & Hirsch , S .  ( 1997 )  . A new vision for staff development . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development & National Staff Development
Council . 
Sparks , D .  ,  & Loucks-Horsley , S .  ( 1990 )  . Models of staff
development . In R . Houston ( Ed .  )  , Handbook of research on
teacher education ( pp . 234–250 )  . New York : Macmillan . 
 PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT SCHOOLS
The educational field has been rife with calls for
reform over the past several decades . One of these
calls for reform has been to create partnerships between
K–12 schools and teacher preparation programs in
higher education . The Holmes Group , a national
812———Professional Development Schools
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 812
coalition of colleges of education in research universities , founded in 1985 and restructured as the Holmes
Partnership in 1996 , continues to stress the need for
developing such relationships . These relationships are
typically called professional development schools 
( PDS )  . 
PDSs are an organizational arrangement pairing
K–12 schools with colleges of education or other
higher education units preparing teachers or administrators . PDSs are claimed to be a new hybrid educational organization governed by both K–12 school
systems and higher education partners . Partners must
be accountable to each other as well as to other stakeholders if the PDS is to thrive . 
PDSs became popularized in the mid-1980s when
the Holmes Group used the term in a report titled
Tomorrow ’ s Teachers . By definition , a PDS is a collaborative partnership , although there are many structural
models , prompting some criticism about what really
qualifies as a PDS . Ideally , PDSs are mutually beneficial partnerships between K–12 schools and institutions of higher education responsible for teacher
preparation . Other agencies such as teacher unions or
human service agencies can be partners . Liberal arts
colleges are increasingly being included as partners in
PDS arrangements . For these partnerships to flourish , 
there should be common goals and mutually agreed
upon outcomes . 
A PDS should have a governance structure drawing from the expertise of group members . This new
design for governance suggests that school-based
administrators must be willing to share their leadership responsibilities , creating spaces for leaders both
within the school and elsewhere . It is essential that the
school ’ s higher education and other partners have
meaningful input into the running of the school if the
PDS is to succeed and become a new type of organization . There must be established , trusting relationships if leaders and others are going to be willing to
allow others to share in the leadership responsibilities
of their educational worlds . 
Teachers tend to play a stronger leadership role
in professional development schools as they are called
upon to teach and evaluate preservice teachers , work
collaboratively with university personnel and other
teachers , and engage in research about the effectiveness of teaching and learning practices . This change in
role for classroom teachers may encourage a greater
sense of efficacy and professionalism , resulting in
their ability to be more effective teachers . 
All partners must find ways to be accountable
to each other . In addition , new evaluation designs must
be negotiated so the mutually established goals can be
assessed in ways each stakeholder group values . 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
SCHOOL PURPOSES
The purposes of PDSs generally include the simultaneous renewal of teacher education and public K–12
education , better preparation of teacher candidates , 
professional development for practicing teachers , 
better understanding by all parties of the issues and
needs facing higher education and K–12 educators , 
and conducting research to improve teaching and learning . There is supposed to be an increased focus on
meeting the needs of diverse learning groups in these
settings . There are many claims that the PDS can
serve as an important avenue for reform in both K–12
and higher education , prompting deep structural changes
in both organizations . 
By working collaboratively to prepare future teachers , 
current teachers and university personnel can learn new
practices and ideas from each other . According to the
underlying premises about PDSs , the university professors bring insights about educational theory to the practicing teachers . By integrating theory into their daily
routines , classroom teachers are supposed to develop
deeper understandings about why they do what they do
in the classroom and how their efforts to teach young
people can be improved . Teachers , in turn , help to
inform professors about the daily realities of life in the
classroom . This information from teachers is supposed
to help professors gain deeper insights about how to
better prepare future teachers . 
Additional goals for many PDSs include improved
student learning at all levels preschool–16 , development
of new school / university partnerships in regions
of intense educational and economic need in order to
strengthen both partner institutions and the region , 
increased capability of schools to solve their problems
through collaborative research , expanded relationships
between theory and practice , more effective use of
scarce educational dollars through sharing of resources
and expertise , and creation of a body of research about
education to aid others in the creation of effective
reform strategies to foster educational improvement at
all levels . 
Another reason for creating a PDS is to provide
ongoing professional development for classroom
Professional Development Schools———813
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 813
teachers while creating professional learning communities . Having university professors participate as
members of the school community may increase
opportunities for whole-school professional development . Job-embedded professional development
should occur on a regular basis as teachers and university personnel engage in dialogues about best
practices for teaching and learning . Typically , PDS
goals emphasize the value of engaging in research to
explore what works and what does not . As university
and K–12 personnel work collaboratively with future
teachers and younger students , each group can gain
important insights and information to improve interactions with the other as well as to improve the quality of experiences offered to their students . 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
SCHOOL STRUCTURES
PDS structures vary , but most include the involvement
of classroom teachers , university faculty , graduate
students , and school administrators at both the K–12
and higher education level . Ideally , a PDS becomes a
unique organization , building upon the strengths of
both K–12 and higher education . In this way , a PDS
becomes a hybrid organization and theoretically is
governed by the most engaged stakeholder groups . 
Governance in these organizations is not easy work . 
Relationship building and structural supports cannot
be shortchanged if people in a PDS are to work
together collaboratively and deep cultural changes are
to occur and be sustained . 
National groups such as the Holmes Partnership and
other coalitions and networks promoting PDS arrangements ( e . g .  , the American Association of Colleges of
Teacher Education or John Goodlad ’ s National Network
for Educational Renewal ) provide support and informational resources to personnel in PDSs , helping to support the difficult work of cultural change . 
REPORTED BENEFITS
Many have claimed benefits through PDSs , including
an improved quality of teacher education , ongoing
professional development for practicing teachers , a
deepened understanding of K–12 needs by professors , 
active and ongoing inquiry into best practices for
teaching and learning , and improved student learning
due to the increased attention placed on teaching
and learning . PDSs are intended to be learner-centered
organizations reflecting the best practices for teaching
and learning so educators-in-training can learn effective teaching strategies while providing high-quality
educational experiences for K–12 students . All PDS
members are viewed as active participants and learners . When it works effectively , a PDS can serve as a
site of best professional practices , foster a culture of
inquiry where professionals critically examine innovation while seeking to identify best practices , and
create empowered communities where all participants
share in decision making about the school and the
learning process . Ideally , the PDS provides opportunities to engage in practices that refocus the work of
schools on adult and student learning . 
CONTROVERSIES
Controversies surrounding PDSs include the lack of
consistency concerning required participants and
objectives , financial and governance issues , accountability to multiple stakeholders , an inadequate supply
of human resources to deliver programs , assessment
practices , and equity issues . PDSs require at least one
higher education partner for each K–12 school or
school system , but some areas do not have geographic
access to these partners . Lack of access can prohibit
some K–12 schools from forming a PDS . There have
been legislative and other groups concerned about the
inequalities created by having some schools in PDS
arrangements and other schools without a partnership , 
especially when this situation occurs within a single
school district . 
True PDS relationships require a financial and
human resource commitment from all partners . In
impoverished schools , these commitments may not be
possible due to other financial demands . As many colleges and universities face financial and personnel
cutbacks , their ability and willingness to engage in a
PDS may be diminished . 
Institutional promotion and tenure demands for
college professors may inhibit their willingness to
participate in a PDS . Professors are expected to chair
doctoral and / or master-level committees , teach courses , 
conduct and publish research , and usually are required
to engage in outreach or service activities . The intensive requirements of PDS work can interfere with
the more acceptable and rewarded forms of faculty
productivity . 
It is difficult to evaluate the effectiveness of PDSs
due to their hybrid nature as an organization . This
814———Professional Development Schools
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 814
difficulty is compounded by the lack of consistency
about who should be involved and what objectives
should be evaluated . While it is important for local
contexts and resources to be considered in the design
and implementation of a PDS , the lack of consistency
has made it difficult for PDSs to be widely recognized
as a potential tool for educational reform . 
In addition , there has been substantial debate over
assessment practices for students and preservice
teachers . Ideally , in a PDS there are opportunities to
determine the best practices for assessing student work
as well as the work of preservice teachers . In many
instances , performance-based assessment and portfolio
development have been preferred methods for evaluating learning . With the implementation of the No Child
Left Behind legislation in 2001 , school systems have
been faced with meeting federally mandated standards
such as Average Yearly Progress ( AYP ) that are administered and interpreted by each state . This increased
emphasis on high-stakes assessment practices has made
it more difficult for PDSs to utilize their collaboratively
developed approaches to student assessment . Time is a
limited commodity , and there does not appear to be
adequate time to meet the demands of both assessment
approaches on a regular basis . 
Governance struggles , brought on by lack of trust
as well as organizational requirements for control on
certain issues , have made sustainable collaboration
difficult in some PDS settings . Concerns about the
financial responsibilities of each stakeholder group
may have further complicated the creation and sustainability of new organizations comprising all partners . This has become especially troublesome as state
education budgets become leaner . 
Increasingly , colleges of education are engaging in
partnership relationships with K–12 schools . However , 
not all K–12 / higher education partnerships are true
PDSs . There are many PDS relationships in name
only as well as other types of partnerships never
intended to reform student learning or teacher education . Because of this complexity , it will be important
for those interested in PDS work to clearly articulate
their structures , goals , and purposes to eliminate confusion with other types of partnerships . PDS work is
time consuming and frustrating at times , yet overall it
is generally professionally rewarding . A PDS is not a
static organization . It takes time , energy , and
resources to build and maintain PDS partnerships and
create the deep structural changes differentiating a PDS
from other K–12 / higher education partnerships . PDSs
are a unique arrangement between K–12 schools and
teacher preparation programs in institutions of higher
education that are focused on the simultaneous
renewal of both entities . 
—Cynthia J . Reed
See also adaptiveness of organizations ; collaboration theory ; 
constructivism ; decision making ; democracy , democratic
education and administration ; diversity ; empowerment ; 
governance ; group dynamics ; Holmes Group ; human
resource development ; innovation , in education ; leadership , 
theories of ; learning environments ; life span development ; 
literacy , theories of ; management theories ; mentoring ; 
motivation , theories of ; organizational theories ; parental
involvement ; principalship ; rational organizational theory ; 
research methods ; school improvement models ; schools of
education ; site-based management ; staffing , concepts of ; 
systemic reform
Further Readings and References
Goodlad , J .  ( 1994 )  . Educational renewal : Better teachers , 
better schools . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Holmes Group .  ( 1986 )  . Tomorrow ’ s teachers : A report of the
Holmes Group . East Lansing , MI : Author . 
Holmes Group .  ( 1990 )  . Tomorrow ’ s schools . East Lansing , 
MI : Author . 
Holmes Group .  ( 1995 )  . Tomorrow ’ s schools of education : 
A report of the Holmes Group . East Lansing , MI : Author . 
Kochan , F .  ,  & Kunkel , R .  ( 1998 )  . The learning coalition : 
Professional development schools in partnership . Journal
of Teacher Education , 49 ( 5 )  , 325–333 . 
Levine , M .  ,  & Trachtman , R .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1997 )  . Making professional development schools work . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Reed , C .  , Kochan , F .  , Kunkel , R .  ,  & Ross , M .  ( 2001 )  . 
Designing evaluation systems that inform , reform , and
transform professional development schools . Journal of
Curriculum and Supervision , 16 ( 3 )  , 188–205 . 
Stallings , J .  ,  & Kowalski , T .  ( 1990 )  . Research on professional
development schools . In W . Robert Houston ( Ed .  )  , 
Handbook on research on teacher education ( pp . 251–
256 )  . New York : Macmillan . 
 PROFESSIONAL
LEARNING COMMUNITIES
The continual search for more effective strategies for
school improvement has led to a number of new models of school reform . Some of these rely heavily upon
findings in the field of human relations and organizational
Professional Learning Communities———815
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 815
theory . The professional learning community ( PLC ) 
represents an emerging model for school improvement that draws from what we know about human
relations and organizational change . 
While the literature provides various characteristics that describe the operations of a PLC , extensive
research has led Dr . Shirley Hord to propose five
attributes or dimensions that characterize professional
learning communities : 
1 . Supportive and shared leadership : Collegial and
facilitative participation of the principal who shares
leadership , power , and authority through involving
staff in decision making
2 . Shared values and vision : Shared vision that is
developed from a steadfast commitment on the part
of staff to students ’ learning and one that is consistently articulated and referenced in the staff ’ s work
3 . Collective learning and application of learning : 
Collective learning among staff and learning application to solutions for addressing the needs of the students
4 . Supportive conditions : Physical conditions and
human capacities that continually support the operation of a PLC through a collegial atmosphere and
collective learning
5 . Shared practice : Visitation and review of each
teacher ’ s classroom behavior by colleagues as feedback and assistance activity to actively support both
individual and community improvement
These attributes collapse and comprise the majority
of characteristics cited within the literature . Additional
descriptors offering a vision of how PLCs function
include the incorporation of reflective dialogue , a collective focus on student learning , sharing of norms , 
family-like atmosphere , connectedness , collaborative
teaming , results orientation , always seeking to improve , 
and possessing a collective resolve . The PLC serves as
an infrastructure and provides a new way to organize
and arrange staff . This infrastructure becomes critical
in seeking and implementing new strategies and
methods designed for overall school improvement . 
Current national and state legislation seeks ongoing
improvement , regardless of the current status and / or
success of the school , thus establishing a need to
incorporate strategies designed to promote continual
improvement . 
Ongoing research has moved beyond the description of PLCs by investigating how schools become
PLCs and how this structure is sustained . This new
line of research can provide an infrastructure for
schoolwide reform and reculturing while focusing
on addressing key phases of change . As this research
continues to enhance the knowledge base of PLCs , 
valuable insights will surface in preparing schools
with a structure that focuses on both professional and
student learning . 
—Dianne Olivier
See also adult education ; climate , school ; collaboration theory ; 
constructivism ; decision making ; democracy , democratic
education and administration ; diversity ; empowerment ; 
governance ; group dynamics ; human resource development ; 
innovation , in education ; leadership , theories of ; learning
environments ; life span development ; management theories ; 
mentoring ; motivation , theories of ; organizational theories ; 
principalship ; rational organizational theory ; research methods ; school improvement models ; schools of education ; sitebased management ; systemic reform ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Hord , S .  ( 1997 )  . Professional learning communities : Communities of continuous inquiry and improvement . Austin , TX : 
Southwest Educational Development Laboratory . 
Hord , S .  ( 1997 )  . Professional learning communities : What are
they and why are they important ? Austin , TX : Southwest
Educational Development Laboratory . 
Hord , S .  ( 1998 )  . Creating a professional learning communities : Cottonwood Creek School . Austin , TX : Southwest
Educational Development Laboratory . 
Hord , S .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Learning together—Leading together . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Olivier , D .  ( 2001 )  . Teacher personal and school culture
characteristics in effective schools : Toward a model of a
professional learning community . Unpublished doctoral
dissertation , Louisiana State University . 
Olivier , D .  , Hipp , K .  ,  & Huffman , J .  ( 2003 )  . Professional
learning . community assessment . In J . Huffman & K . Hipp 
( Eds .  )  , Reculturing schools as professional learning communities . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Press . 
 PROMOTION , SOCIAL
Promotion is the change in grade-level assignment at
the end of the school year for a student who meets the
criteria for advancement to the next highest grade
level . Social promotion is the passing of students who
have not mastered the academic requirements to successive grades in order to keep them with their peers . 
The practice of social promotion is often carried out
in the interest of a student ’ s social and psychological
well-being , without regard to achievement . 
816———Promotion , Social
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 816
Social promotion evolved as a solution to the serious
problems caused by grade retention in the nineteenth
century . As graded schools began replacing the oneroom schoolhouse , students were promoted on “ merit ,  ” 
the mastery of fixed academic requirements for each
grade level . Approximately one half of the students
were retained during their first eight years of school . 
Many times , students repeated more than one grade . 
Attrition of students , especially those from poor and
immigrant families , was widespread . With loose compulsory attendance and child-labor laws , children , in the
early twentieth century , had alternatives to staying in
the education system , and ended up in manual work . 
During the 1930s to 1970s , school districts adopted
policies of social promotion of students by age rather
than by merit , lowering the percentage of students who
were overaged for their grade level or who dropped out . 
A consequence of compulsory attendance laws was the
dilemma of what to do with students who do not make
progress in schools . Low-performing students could
stay with their age grouping or with their academic
peers . Educators frequently chose to keep students with
their same-age peers and social promoted them . 
In 1999 , the U . S . Department of Education , acting
on the challenge from President Bill Clinton , encouraged educators to end social promotion , while at the
same time ensuring that all students have the opportunity and assistance to meet academic standards . Along
with the political rhetoric , public opinion strongly favors
ending social promotion . Nearly 75% of parents and
more than 80% of teachers and employers think it is
worse to promote students to the next grade who have
not mastered the basics than to retain them . Yet , there
are no statistics kept on social promotion , so it is difficult to validate its widespread use . In a survey of 85
urban school districts by the American Federation of
Teachers ( AFT )  , including the 40 largest in the United
States , there were no districts with a policy endorsing
social promotion . There are , however , indicators that
it has long been a practice for dealing with lowperforming students . A national survey of teachers by
the AFT indicated that a majority of them had promoted
unprepared students . 
The common alternative to social promotion is
retention or requiring the student to remain at the same
grade level in the subsequent school year . Despite
decades of research findings on the negative effects of
grade retention , the use of retention has gained momentum . However , most districts have vague criteria for
promotion , lack uniform grading policies , and have
limitations on retention ( e . g .  , who can be retained and
how often )  , making the practice of social promotion
inevitable . 
The negative effects on school budgets resulting
from the added costs of increasing the time it takes a
student to complete school leads to the abandonment of
tough retention policies and renewal of social promotion . As an alternative , retention is expensive , costing
an average of $10 billion to $14 billion annually . A phenomenon referred to as “ economic ” promotion occurs
as the added costs of retaining students cause school
districts to quietly abandon the counterproductive practice and begin to move children along through the
grades . Through the decades , a school reform pendulum swings between the two extremes of retention and
social promotion policies that have not worked in the
past and lack any evidence they will work in the future . 
Critics of social promotion argue that it hurts
students by placing them in grades where they cannot
do the work , burdens teachers with accommodating
the underprepared students , gives parents a false sense
of their child ’ s abilities , and does little to address
the learning deficits of low-performing students . At
the same time , it erodes society ’ s faith in education as
colleges and businesses divert millions of dollars to
provide remedial instruction to high school graduates
who lack skills in reading , writing , and math . 
In contrast , if ending social promotion means more
retained students , there are additional dilemmas for
teachers , children , and parents . Grouping children of
varied ages together based only on academic performance is not completely bereft of serious problems . 
Placing 13-year-olds with 10- and 11-year-olds , or
placing 16-year-olds with 12- and 13-year-old students , 
may not be acceptable alternatives . 
Interest in social promotion is clearly tied to
standards and accountability . The public believes that
students should master higher standards in core
subjects as a condition of promotion , while nearly
90% of parents favor policies that require students to
pass a test to be promoted . Nationwide , school districts have put in place strict new promotion standards
and have abandoned social promotion policies that
push students ahead , regardless of their academic performance . Unfortunately , neither social promotion nor
retention is effective for improving student achievement . The results of both are unacceptably high dropout
rates and diminished life chances . 
The social promotion controversy confronts irreconcilable objectives . Differences in social and personal
adjustment of children and youth may render varied
age groupings based solely on academic performance
Promotion , Social———817
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 817
as undesirable . Moreover , policies requiring only
students who achieve at grade level to be promoted
does not solve the problem of social promotion . 
Grade-level promotion standards have not been clearly
defined , and regardless of what standard is set for any
grade level in any subject , there will be a dispersion of
student performance around an average . Discussions
about social promotion must address underlying
causes for low achievement and seek improvements in
schooling and teaching practices to ensure that all
children succeed . 
—Bobbie J . Greenlee
See also achievement tests ; Black education ; bureaucracy ; 
child development theories ; class size ; classroom management ; cognition , theories of ; compensatory education ; critical race theory ; cultural capital ; discrimination ; diversity ; 
dropouts ; elementary education ; expectations , teacher and
student cultures ; individual differences , in children ; intelligence ; Latinos ; learning environments ; literacy , theories of ; 
mainstreaming and inclusion ; parental involvement ; school
improvement models ; tracking , of students ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
American Federation of Teachers .  ( 1997 )  . Passing on failure : 
District promotion policies and practices . Washington , 
DC : Author . 
Goodlad , J .  ( 2004 )  . Romances with schools . New York : 
McGraw-Hill
Johnson , J .  ,  & Duffett , A .  ( 2003 )  . Where we are now : 12 things
you need to know about public opinion and public schools . 
Public Agenda . Retrieved from 
. org / specials / wherewearenow / wherewearenow . htm . 
North Carolina Education Research Council .  ( 1999 )  . Research
on retention and social promotion : Synthesis and implications for policy . NCERC Policy Brief . Retrieved from http :  /  / 
erc . northcarolina . edu / docs / publications / socialpromo . pdf . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 1999 )  . Taking responsibility
for ending social promotion : A guide for educators and
state and local leaders . Washington , DC : Government
Printing Office . 
 PROPERTY TAX
The property tax has long been the mainstay of local
government finance , including public school finance . 
In 2000 , property tax collections represented 28 . 6% of
total state and local tax collections . Its long-standing
role as the primary source of public school revenue was
assumed by state governments during the substantial
school finance reforms of the 1970s . Nevertheless , the
property tax steadily produces substantial amounts of
revenue for local governments , and except for a few
local governments that can levy sales and income
taxes , it is the only broad-based tax available to local
governments , including school districts . 
THE PROPERTY TAX PROCESS
The property tax differs from other state and local
taxes in at least two important ways . First , both the tax
rate and the tax base are determined by government . 
Unlike an income or sales tax , for which the value
of the base ( income or sales ) is usually established
by private economic activity , the property tax base , or
property value , often must be estimated when market
transactions are not available . This is because the
property tax is a tax on wealth , a stock variable , rather
than an annual economic flow ( e . g .  , income or sales )  . 
Therefore , methods and procedures for assessing the
value of property for tax purposes must be part of the
property tax structure . Second , different government
agencies are responsible for establishing the tax base 
( assessed value )  , while another sets the tax rate . 
Setting the Tax Base
To set the tax base , first , the assessed value ( taxable
value ) of each piece of property is computed by an
assessor from an estimate of the market value of the
property made according to a specific set of procedures , 
usually established by state law . Once the market value
is established , the assessed value is set by law or practice as a specific percentage of market value . This
percentage is the assessment ratio . Tax assessors are
generally professional employees of general-purpose
local governments such as cities or townships , although
in some areas assessors are still locally elected officials . 
In most states , local assessors are bound by state laws
and procedures , and their assessments are subject to
county and / or state review . If different types or classes
of property ( e . g .  , residential , commercial , industrial , 
agricultural ) are assessed according to different assessment ratio rules so that the effective tax rate ( i . e .  , tax
paid divided by market value ) varies by class , the tax is
called a classified property tax . Under a classified tax , 
residential property is usually assessed at a lower ratio
than commercial and industrial property . Classification
allows government to alter the relative property tax
burdens among different types of property . In addition , 
some types of property may be exempt from property
818———Property Tax
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 818
tax . In these cases , the assessed value is implicitly set
equal to zero , although in practice exempt properties
usually are not assessed . 
The property tax base , or net assessed value ( NAV )  , 
is established at the standard assessment date (  “ tax
day ”  ) for the taxing unit ( e . g .  , school district , city , 
township )  . As noted above , assessed value is generally
a statutorily defined percentage of the value initially
appraised by an assessor . The most widely used standard for property appraisal is market value , or cash price
a property would bring in a competitive market . Since
records are kept on home sales , determining the market value of homes is relatively straightforward . For
homes that have not sold recently , sale prices for comparable homes are used to set market value . However , 
while this approach is technically feasible , maintaining
updated tax rolls entails political as well as technical
challenges . Some feel it is unfair to tax a homeowner
on unrealized gains in home value , as happens where
tax rolls are updated regularly . 
A few states depart from this market value standard . 
One alternative assessment standard is the acquisition
value or assessment-on-sale (  “ Welcome Stranger ”  ) system required in California by Proposition 13 ( 1978 )  , in
Florida by Amendment 10 ( 1992 )  , and in Michigan by
Proposal A ( 1994 )  . Under this system , assessments are
adjusted regularly but rise more slowly than market
value until they are sold . At that time , they are revalued
at the new transaction price . Such acquisition value
assessment creates several problems . First , it distorts
the property market , as prospective buyers face a higher
property tax than would a prospective seller . Second , it
creates a property record substructure of sales without
recorded deeds as people seek to avoid reassessment
and higher property taxes . Third , this approach creates 
 “ horizontal inequities ” as owners of homes with equal
market value pay widely different property taxes . 
The assessment of nonresidential property presents
additional issues . For example , commercial enterprises
that use land and buildings that are rarely sold cannot
be assessed according to market value . Consequently , 
a process called “ capitalizing income ” or “ capitalizing
rents ” is often used . By this method , value equals total
sales divided by profit expressed as a rate of return . 
This method of capitalized valuation may not be practical , however , for a business with multiple plants
where it is difficult to allocate profits and sales to individual plants . In such cases , value is set as replacement
costs less depreciation . Unlike homeowners , businesses are allowed to depreciate plants and factories as
an incentive to reinvest and improve properties over
time . Thus , true value for a plant or factory would be
replacement cost less accumulated depreciation . 
Farmland poses another set of issues . Although a
market generally exists for farmland , the actual selling
price often exceeds the farming value of the land , particularly for farms near growing urban and suburban
areas . Furthermore , even if the market value of farmland
equaled the capitalized value , a drought or other natural
disaster could reduce a farm ’ s earnings to zero in any
given year , making it difficult to pay property taxes on a
farm that retained some value . Consequently , every state
uses some method to limit property taxes on farmland . 
The traditional approach is to assess the value of farmland in its current use , which may be less than its full
market value . For example , farmland on the edge of an
urban area might be substantially more valuable if used
for residential property . Such use-value assessment of
farmland serves to prevent increases in property taxes
on farmland as these alternative uses become more
attractive and may help to curb urban sprawl . 
Another variation of use-value assessment is to
assess the value of farmland according to current use
but impose a deferred tax on the full value for some
fixed number of past years if the property is converted
to nonfarm use . In this way , the tax advantage conferred
by use-value assessment , at least for a number of years , 
is recaptured by the taxing governments if the tax
advantage does not succeed in preventing conversion . 
Setting the Tax Rate
To set the tax rate , the revenue from any tax is computed by multiplying the tax base by a tax rate . Most
tax rates change only with special legislative action ; 
they are the portion of the fiscal system that changes
incrementally while the base is defined in statute and
is changed less often . Examples are the state sales tax
and state and federal income taxes . Property tax rates , 
in contrast , are typically set as part of the annual budget process . The rate is generally readopted each year
at a level sufficient to balance the government ’ s operating
budget and service debt . Thus , the property tax rate ( r ) 
may be represented as follows : r =  ( E–NPR )  / NAV , 
where E is total expenditures approved by government , 
NPR is total estimated revenue from nonproperty tax
sources , and NAV is net assessed value in the taxing
jurisdiction . 
Property tax rates have historically been specified
in mills , with the rate referred to as the millage . One
mill is one tenth of 1% , or $1 of tax per each $1 , 000
of taxable value . In recent years , there has been some
Property Tax———819
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 819
tendency to refer to property tax rates in terms of a
percentage ( similar to other tax rates ) or dollars of tax
per $100 or $1 , 000 of taxable value . In every state , the
local governments are constrained in setting the property tax rate by state laws limiting the tax rate , property
tax revenue , or both . In some cases , a referendum 
( popular vote ) is required to set the property tax rate or
revenue . 
Property Tax Relief Measures
States use a variety of measures to reduce property
taxes for specific groups of taxpayers or classes of property . These measures are generally intended to make the
property tax and the overall state and local tax structure
more progressive by reducing relative tax burdens for
low-income taxpayers . Such methods of tax relief include
exemptions of assessed value for homesteads , state government tax credits or rebates for local residential property taxes , and limits on assessed values . 
The simplest and most widely used tax relief method
for houses is the homestead exemption . These exemptions
allow homeowners a specified assessed value base before
any property taxes are levied . Such exemption programs
are politically popular but do create some problems . 
First , the programs usually have a statewide purpose , but
because property taxes generally support local government , the revenue loss is local . Second , the homestead
exemption often fails to target relief to low-income
households . All people falling into the applicable categories ( e . g .  , all homeowners , seniors , veterans ) receive
aid regardless of income . Third , if the exemption is sufficiently broad , as in the case of general homestead
exemption programs , property tax rates may have to be
increased substantially to recover lost revenue . Fourth , 
individual exemption programs generally exclude renters , 
many of whom are much less affluent than homeowners . 
Another popular property tax relief mechanism is a
state-government-financed credit or rebate for property taxes paid to local governments . This type of
property tax relief usually takes the form of a rebate
paid to the taxpayer or a credit against state income
tax .  ( A refundable credit is paid to a local property
taxpayer with little or no state income tax liability .  ) 
The relief generally is targeted to specific groups of
taxpayers ( e . g .  , seniors , the disabled )  , and the credit or
rebate usually applies to property taxes that exceed a
specified percentage of a taxpayer ’ s income . Because
of this last feature , these credits are often referred to as 
 “ circuit breakers .  ” Just as an electrical circuit breaker
will be tripped by a circuit overload , this tax relief
takes effect only when a taxpayer ’ s income is overburdened by property taxes . Property tax credits were
devised as a way of preventing senior citizens with
high-valued houses relative to their retirement incomes
from having to sell their houses because of the property tax . A number of states thus restrict their programs
to elderly taxpayers who meet other criteria . Nonelderly low-income homeowners , however , may face
similar overloads as well , particularly in the early years
of home ownership or when a family income earner
becomes unemployed . Some states allow renters to
benefit from their circuit breaker programs . This practice is based on the presumption that renters bear a
portion of the property tax burden on the units they
occupy .  ( Of course , the ability of landlords to shift all
or a portion of the property tax burden onto tenants
depends on the market conditions for rental housing .  ) 
Renter relief presumes a property tax equivalent as a
specified percentage of rent paid . 
Circuit breakers employ either threshold or slidingscale relief formulas . The former approach defines a
threshold percentage of income as the overload level . 
Property tax payments above that overload level are
eligible for partial relief . Relief is computed by a formula of the following sort : R = t ( PT–kI )  , where R is
tax relief , t is the percentage of the overload that will
be rebated back to the taxpayer , PT is the property tax
payment , k is the overload percentage , and I is family
income . Some states reduce their cost by increasing
the threshold percentage as income increases . 
An alternative approach is the sliding-scale relief
formula . Here , relief is computed as a percentage of
property tax payment , with the percentage falling as
family income rises : R = zPT , where z is the percentage of property tax relieved for the income class and
R and PT are as defined above . Circuit breakers are
flexible and easy to administer in conjunction with the
state income tax . These formulas can target families
in greatest need of relief and are financed from state
rather than local revenue . One drawback is that they
may encourage higher property tax rates as some costs
of local services are shifted to the states . Such concerns , 
however , are generally outweighed by the circuit
breaker ’ s contribution to tax equity . 
Finally , in addition to these property tax relief
measures adopted by states , property tax payments
can be deducted from federal income tax payments . 
This deductibility reduces the impact of the property
tax on homeowners who itemize deductions on their
federal income tax and provides some incentive for
increased housing consumption . 
820———Property Tax
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 820
PROPERTY TAX INCIDENCE
In general , the ultimate payer of a tax can differ from
the initial payer . This difference can be most easily
seen in the case of business taxation . The initial incidence of a tax on business property is on the business . 
However , businesses “ shift ” the final incidence or burden of the tax to others : to the owners of the capital
supporting the business , in the form of lower profits ; 
to the vendors supplying the businesses , in the form
of lower prices ; to the employees of the businesses , in
the form of lower wages ; or to the customers of the
business , in the form of higher prices . 
The incidence of the property tax has been the
subject of some debate among public finance economists . It has been argued that the property tax is primarily a tax on housing , and therefore regressive . This
argument holds that because the tax is essentially a proportional tax on the value of a dwelling unit , and since
lower-income families tend to spend a higher proportion of their wealth on housing , property tax liabilities
constitute a larger fraction of the incomes of lowerincome families . However , the “ new view ” of the property tax , based upon modern general equilibrium
analysis , finds that the average rate of the property tax
across all jurisdictions functions essentially as a tax
on all capital . That is , because nearly all local communities are taxing local capital , the average rate of the tax
essentially becomes a national tax on capital . Because
higher income people tend to own more capital , the
property tax tends to be progressive . Regarding the tax
burden that arises from the differences in property
taxes around the national average , a positive correlation
among the states between per capita income and effective property tax rates has been reported . Because the
effect of these property tax rate differentials across the
states is to hurt those with higher rates , these tax burdens appear to be progressive . It is difficult to differentiate empirically between the two models , due to their
similar predictions . That is , both theories imply that the
benefits and costs of local programs are borne locally
and are capitalized into local property values . 
STABILITY AND GROWTH
One major criticism of the property tax is that it is not
responsive to economic growth . It has been observed
that the income elasticity of the property tax is less than
one ( median estimate was 0 . 87 )  , meaning that as aggregate income rises , property tax revenues rise more
slowly . As a result , governments that depend heavily on
property taxes ( e . g .  , most local school districts ) must
raise their property tax rates to meet the rising service
levels demanded by the public , including education . 
This low income elasticity of revenue yield is
characteristic of a stable revenue source . This attribute
is beneficial in times of economic recession because
revenue collections will fall more slowly than aggregate income . Thus , the property tax is considered a
stable revenue source precisely because it is relatively
unresponsive to both economic growth and decline . 
—Michael Addonizio
See also accountability ; boards of education ; budgeting ; 
bureaucracy ; class size ; collective bargaining ; elections , 
of school boards , bond issues ; finance , of public schools ; 
governance ; salary and salary models ; staffing , concepts of ; 
taxes , to support education ; unions , of teachers
Further Readings and References
Aaron , H .  ( 1975 )  . Who pays the property tax ? Washington , 
DC : Brookings Institution . 
Fisher , R .  ( 1996 )  . State and local public finance ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
Chicago : Irwin . 
Mikesell , J .  ( 1995 )  . Fiscal administration ( 4th ed .  )  . Belmont , 
CA : Wadsworth . 
Monk , D .  ,  & Brent , B .  ( 1997 )  . Raising money for schools : A
guide to the property tax . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Netzer , D .  ( 1966 )  . Economics of the property tax . Washington , 
DC : Brookings Institution . 
Odden , A .  ,  & Picus , L .  ( 2004 )  . School finance : A policy
perspective ( 3rd ed .  )  . Boston : McGraw-Hill . 
Zodrow , G .  ( 2001 )  . Reflections on the new view and the benefit view of the property tax . In W . E . Oates ( Ed .  )  , Property
taxation and local government finance . Cambridge , MA : 
Lincoln Institute of Land Policy . 
 PSYCHOLOGY , TYPES OF
Psychology , in its broadest sense , is the study of
human behavior . It involves the investigation of learning , motivation , memory , personality , intelligence , and
leadership . Psychological theory provides the framework by which causation , prediction , and control of
behavior can be systematically addressed . Those types
of psychology most closely related to the field of education include
• Behaviorism
• Developmental psychology
• Humanistic psychology
• Descriptive psychology
Psychology , Types Of———821
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 821
• Social psychology
• Cognitive psychology
• Psychometry and psychological testing
Behaviorism , or behavioral psychology , is based
primarily on the work of Edward Thorndike and B . F . 
Skinner . It is an attempt to address human behavior
from a scientific , functionalist , objectivist perspective . 
Behaviorism relies on direct observation of measurable behavioral phenomena . The prime focus of
behavioral psychology is to determine the effect of
consequences on behavior and thereby enhance learning , motivation , and performance . The construct
encompassed in Thorndike ’ s law of effect , that behaviors that are followed by positive consequences tend to
be repeated and those that are followed by aversive or
neutral consequences tend to fall out of use , is the basis
for the application of behaviorism in educational settings . By understanding the manner in which consequences are delivered ( reinforcement schedules )  , the
nature of past consequences ( reinforcement history )  , 
and the strength of specific antecedents ( discriminative
stimuli )  , environments can be designed to enhance
learning and promote positive outcomes . 
The work of Donald Baer , Montrose Wolf , Todd
Risley , and Vance Hall in the 1970s and 1980s established applied behavior analysis as the preeminent
form of behaviorism . At this time , the focus of behaviorism ceased to be on basic research , and the established principles of behaviorism were applied to “ real
world ” problems of social importance ( many involving
educational settings )  . During this period , many of
those techniques that today are established educational
practice were developed and validated ( i . e .  , systematic
attention , time-out , token economies , response cost )  . 
In addition , behaviors from toilet training to spelling
and math proficiency or on-task behavior were targeted
for behavior modification . The target of such intervention was usually the specific behaviors of a given individual . Therefore , single subject research designs for
applied research were developed . The impact of
behaviorism in education has been most directly felt in
the areas of special education and classroom management . Leadership and administration have also been
impacted by behavioral psychology via Frederick
Taylor ’ s scientific management . 
Developmental psychology focuses the normal
cognitive , affective , and physical processes and how
they change as an individual grows . Those developmental psychology theories most pertinent to the profession
of education focus on social development and learning . Such theories are either stage theories ( emphasizing movement from one level of functioning to
another , more advanced level ) or sequence theories 
( generally age independent and emphasizing a
sequential progression through observable behaviors , 
ways of thinking , or world views )  . 
Stage theories include Erik Erikson ’ s theory of
psychosocial development , Jean Piaget ’ s theory of
cognitive development , and Robert Havighurst ’ s
theory of developmental tasks . All three of these
theories have had a significant effect on education and
continue to affect the field through applications to curricular and instructional issues . Erikson ’ s theory , 
emphasizing the successful resolution of problems at
a given developmental stage as a predictor of future
success , has had a significant effect on K–12 education . Erikson suggests that the stages of his theory
are interconnected and possess both important events
to be addressed and a developmental crisis to be
resolved . In essence , mastering the tasks that make up
the significant event and resolution of the developmental crisis at any stage has a long-lasting impact on
a person ’ s self-image and view of society . Schools
have been influenced by Erikson ’ s theory in curricular , instructional , and social contexts . In addition , 
compensatory and special education services both
have a basis in Erikson ’ s theory . Academic support
programs in elementary and middle schools and extracurricular secondary programs ( both social and preprofessional ) are the direct result of the application of
Erikson ’ s theory to educational settings . 
Piaget ’ s theory has long held the primary position
among those developmental theories employed by
educators . The concept of “ developmentally appropriate practice ” as a catalyst for enhancing student learning and as a precursor for movement to the next stage
of development has long been a basic tenet of elementary education . Piaget ’ s principles of activity-based
learning and individual construction of knowledge
still underpin best practice in elementary education
and form the foundation of constructivism . 
Havighurst formulated a theory of socially constructed developmental tasks embedded within the
schools . He hypothesized that each grade level of the
schools is infused with tasks to be mastered that are
socially and culturally agreed upon as being important . Havighurst further felt that mastery ( or the lack
thereof ) of these school-related developmental tasks
was directly related to future school and life success . 
822———Psychology , Types Of
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 822
He further hypothesized that the impact of the majority culture on the school curriculum and the associated
developmental tasks placed minority students at risk
for academic failure . Havighurst ’ s theory formed the
foundation for compensatory education and multicultural studies . 
While stage theories tend to be more prominent in
education , sequence theories have also had significant
influence . Sequence theories include Abraham Maslow ’ s
hierarchy of needs and Claire Graves ’ s theory of
sociobiological development . Maslow ’ s hierarchy of
needs , along with behaviorism , has had a primary
influence on thought and practice in the field of education . Graves ’ s theory of sociobiological development
has long been employed in rehabilitation counseling
and business settings but is gaining credence and
acceptance in educational leadership . 
Graves was a psychologist who developed a sociobiological theory of human development that emphasized an individual ’ s need to solve specific problems
or answer specific questions at a given developmental
level . Maslow suggested that all behavior is driven by
innate needs that range from lower-level needs ( physiological , safety , love / belonging ) to upper-level needs 
( self-esteem , self-actualization )  . The lower-level
needs are termed “ deficiency needs ” or needs that
necessarily must be met for a person to function at
a minimum level . The upper-level needs he labeled 
 “ being needs ” or those needs that can never be completely met and lead to growth toward mature psychological functioning . Maslow arranged the needs in
a hierarchical pattern and theorized that the needs at a
specific level must be adequately addressed before a
person could be motivated by higher-level needs . 
While self-actualization was seen by Maslow as the
ultimate goal of human development , self-actualized
individuals are , in a sense , unmotivated . The behavior of
self-actualized persons is not directed toward obtaining
specific items , objects , or states to satisfy a deficit . They
are focused on achieving their potential and knowing
and understanding themselves and their world . 
Maslow ’ s theory is a theory that bridges the gap
between developmental and humanistic psychology . It
holds direct application for schools and schooling in
programs for gifted and talented children , individual
counseling , free and reduced meals , and constructivist
learning applications . It further set the stage for the
humanistic psychology movement . 
Humanistic psychology is rooted in Maslow ’ s work
and emphasizes self-determination , self-evaluation , 
personal perceptions , and individual choice of goals
and activities . Humanistic psychology is based on the
premise that understanding is individual and personal
in nature and that individuals can find the solutions to
their own problems via free choice and a supportive
environment . Carl Rogers and Art Combs were those
humanistic psychologists who have had the most profound influence on education . 
Humanistic psychology is a forerunner of postmodernism due to its emphasis on the deconstruction
of events and one ’ s individual construction of reality . 
Both Rogers ’ s client-centered approach and Combs ’ s
phenomenology emphasize personal perceptions , attitudes , and feelings . 
Rogers ’ s nondirective therapy was built on
Maslow ’ s concept of self-actualization , which Rogers
termed the actualizing tendency present in all individuals . Rogers also developed the concept of organismic
valuing . This concept states that all persons have
the answers to their problems and / or questions within
themselves . Rogers ’ s most important contribution to
humanistic psychology is likely the concept of unconditional positive regard . This is a positive and accepting feeling toward others and their perceptions or
positions . Rogers stated that growth toward more positive psychological states was dependent on the presence of unconditional positive regard . 
Arthur Combs was a humanistic psychologist who
developed the theory of phenomenology . Phenomenology was a precursor to postmodernism ( as was the
entire field of humanistic psychology ) due to its emphasis on each individual ’ s unique construction of reality . 
Combs identified “ frames of reference ” and the associated “ phenomenal field ” as the means by which individuals interpreted events in the world and selected
appropriate courses of action . For Combs , all human
behavior was purposeful yet not based on the “ facts ” as
others see them but on the “ facts ” as that individual
sees them . Combs identified the phenomenal field as
each person ’ s complete and unique field of awareness
at any given moment , and all behavior , without exception , was determined by and pertinent to this field . 
While each of us sees errors or illusions in the phenomenal field of another , we seldom see the same features in our own perceptual field . 
Combs ’ s basic tenet was that we must take individuals as they are and work forward from that point . The
reason that students or employees in an educational setting often present problem behaviors is due to the nature
of their personal phenomenal field and interpretation of
Psychology , Types Of———823
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 823
reality . Before behavior can change , the phenomenal
field must change . 
Combs ’ s work has had a significant impact on both
conflict resolution and administrator / teacher perceptions ( particularly in relation to the postevaluative
conference )  . His research also forms the foundation
for the current “ dispositions movement ” in teacher
education . 
Descriptive psychology ( DP ) is a set of systematically related conceptual distinctions designed to provide formal access to all facts and possible facts about
persons , their behavior , and the real world in which
persons operate . It grew out of Peter Ossorio ’ s profound dissatisfaction with contemporary psychological theory and practice , which he saw as unnecessarily
deterministic and reductionistic in ways that were
detrimental both to understanding persons ’ behavior
and to working constructively with persons in educational and therapeutic practices . The relevance of DP
to educational theory and leadership can be seen in
three examples . How does a person have the ability to
create or socially construct his or her own world ? 
Why is the task of providing leadership for schools
and school district so challenging ? And what principles and concepts are relevant to effective therapy ? 
Ossorio thought that a person had status in the
world as an actor , as an observer , and as a critic . From
the actor ’ s perspective , to act is to select among
options and to shape one ’ s world by the way one treats
those options . In this sense , then , people ’ s behavior is
creative rather than merely reflective of their circumstances . Their behavior gives value or meaning to their
movements . The observer ’ s role is one of noting what
has happened , and the critic ’ s role is that of appraising
the success or failure of one ’ s actions and making appropriate corrections if necessary . The actor-observer-critic
schema provides the formal distinctions necessary to
represent human self-regulation—something that we
expect adult humans to be able to do . 
In DP , freedom and creativity are built into the
notion of a person ’ s behavior . What requires explanation are ( a ) constraints on a person ’ s freedom and ( b ) 
the development of one ’ s ability to create a world . The
major constraints lie in ( a ) human limitations vis-à-vis
the physical world ,  ( b ) one ’ s embodiment ( its age , 
health , damage due to accidents or illness , and strength
of one ’ s physical body )  , and ( c ) one ’ s eligibilities due
to membership in various communities . With respect
to ( a )  , I will not be able to wave my arms and then take
off flying like Peter Pan . With respect to ( b )  , diseases
may strike that lead to long-term limitations in what I
can do for myself . With respect to ( c )  , each community
that I am a member of provides me with some positions , but not others , from which to play the game of
life . One ’ s ability to create one ’ s own world gets
enhanced by empirical discoveries or inventions that
alter how we can treat the physical world . With the variety of aircraft that we have invented , persons can fly—
although not just like Peter Pan . The state of one ’ s body
can be altered through exercise , diet , and physical therapy . One ’ s position in one ’ s communities can be changed
by education , training , and other preparation for new
roles . Relationships can be changed via changes in
one ’ s own behavior . Treating another as someone to be
trusted invites reciprocation ; whether the other reciprocates or not is informative about the relationship . DP
provides a framework within which both the freedom to
construct one ’ s world and the constraints on successful
constructions can be understood . 
In DP , significance is a formal parameter of behavior , and the classic assessment question is , What is the
person doing by doing that ? Following one ’ s answers
to the question that are consistent with the facts of the
case will typically permit the development of a coherent explanation of behavior . Actions are things that
one can choose to engage in or not , whereas happenings are beyond one ’ s control . The critic ’ s function is
for the benefit of the actor . When functioning in the
critic ’ s position , one has tremendous power to define
what is acceptable versus not and to hand down judgments . For many clients , opportunities to learn forgiveness and compassion are central to being in a new
behavioral world . Rather than Rogers ’ s single status
of “ unconditional acceptance ,  ” DP identifies nine statuses that offer a positive place but not a total positive
regard that is naïve and unrealistic . Among these are 
 “ one who makes sense ,  ”  “ one whose interests come
first ,  ” and “ one who is an agent .  ” 
Many DP advances in organizational psychology
have been directed toward the conflicts within organizations between different functions and toward systematic procedure to enhance productivity . Two crucial
features of organizations have been identified . The
first is that an organization is a community with a distinctive mission and that this feature of organizations
provides a rationale both for a manager and for his or
her moral authority in the stewardship of resources . 
Resources and activities not directed toward the
accomplishment of the organizational mission are , at
the least , wasteful and , in the extreme , criminal . The
824———Psychology , Types Of
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 824
DP approach allows for a form of systems theory that
distinguishes the multiple perspectives from which
any single organization may be viewed . The crucial
feature of this analysis is the notion that every organization , to be well managed , requires the manager to
view it from multiple perspectives . Typically , these
perspectives will take the form of financial , people
and production perspectives , and any organizational
policy or principle that does not allow success from all
three perspectives will ultimately produce problems
and organizational failure . Of particular interest to
descriptive psychologists are the “ on-behalf-of ” organizations as opposed to the classic command-and-control
or market-driven organizations . Such organizations 
( i . e .  , schools ) provide services to a group of people 
( students and parents ) who may have little say about
the nature of services provided and that are paid for by
yet another group ( taxpayers )  . When a school system
attempts to introduce a new instructional curriculum
for the benefit of students , parents may not see the
curriculum as the best method of teaching the subject , 
because it differs from the way they were taught , and
school board members may wonder whether the proposal constitutes the best use of funds provided by the
taxpayers . Differences can arise in this type of situation because each group has a different customer in
mind and thus a different perspective on what constitutes a success . 
What is required to work out such differences is
leadership—not merely management . Leadership , 
from a DP perspective ( in contrast to management )  , is
a behavioral notion , whereas management implies
that one has a certain formal position , for example , 
chairman of the board or principal of a school . 
Leaders work through any of a number of practices
such as motivational , helping to develop relevant perspectives that are missing , providing training in skills
required to solve organizational dilemmas , or providing the coordination required for successful action . In
the special case of “ on-behalf-of ” organizations , the
leader has the special task of helping members to recognize their different perspectives and to create an
atmosphere in which these perspectives and values
can each be honored . Because each group ’ s best solution in the educational example above will often not
be a best solution for the others , the task is to keep
members looking at the issues from all viewpoints to
look for good , rather than “ perfect ,  ” solutions for
each . When and if everyone can see a good solution , 
then the dilemma has been resolved . Such a process
serves to keep each group committed to the final product
and willing to work for it . 
Social psychology emphasizes human social
behavior and how that behavior influences us . Social
psychologists apply scientific methodology to human
behavior in an attempt to understand that it is influenced by the actual , imagined , or implied presence of
other persons . Kurt Lewin ’ s field theory and Albert
Bandura ’ s social learning theory are among the most
influential social psychology theories in the field of
education . 
Lewin is considered to be the founder of the field of
social psychology . He developed field theory on the
perspective that both internal and external factors influenced behavior . He felt that internal , goal-directed forces
came into conflict with external , restraining forces to
influence individual behavior . Individuals ’  “ cognitive
field ” allowed them to interpret environmental events
and determine courses of action . Lewin ’ s research has
influenced the educational areas of management , organizational behavior , and group dynamics . 
Bandura ’ s social learning theory incorporates
the principles of behaviorism with those of social psychology . Bandura felt that while behavior was indeed
influenced by antecedents and consequences , it also
was influenced ( primarily ) by observing the relationship between behavior and consequences in others . He
stated that the relationship between reinforcement and
antecedents was mediated by internal structures and
that most reinforcement was naturalistic ( naturally existing in the environment ) and vicarious in nature . Special
education practices such as attending to a student producing desirable behaviors ( e . g .  , in seat , on task ) 
while ignoring those producing less desirable behaviors are rooted in Bandura ’ s research . The importance
of positive role models , mentoring , field-based practica , and shadowing programs in schools and schooling also find support in Bandura ’ s work . 
Cognitive psychology is an area of psychology that
emphasizes internal cognitive processes such as language , problem solving , and memory . It first emerged
in the 1950s and became formalized during the 1970s . 
Cognitive psychology includes the emerging field of
cognitive neuroscience , which focuses on the molecular and chemical basis of cognition and consciousness
and metacognitive approaches to problem solving . 
While cognitive psychology developed from and was
influenced by a wide variety of theoretical perspectives , the individual primarily responsible for the initial influences of cognitive psychology on education
Psychology , Types Of———825
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 825
was Donald Hebb . Hebb developed the notion of
synaptic firing as the basis for learning and memory . 
In essence , repeated firing of a synapse during a learning activity strengthened the neurons and caused
metabolic changes at the synapse , which increased its
future efficiency . When groups of these neurons
became associated or consolidated into a cell assembly during learning , memory was strengthened . Many
groups of neurons can become so interconnected that
once a behavior begins , it persists long after the original stimulus has disappeared . This “ consolidation
theory ” is currently the most widely accepted explanation of neural learning . Hebb also suggested that the
connections of neurons into phase cycles or phase
sequences in complex ways was the basis for thinking
and reasoning . This theory influenced and continues
to influence the field of education in the drill , repetition , and guided practice methodologies in classroom
instruction . The additional practice provided by homework also has support in Hebb ’ s theory . 
The work of cognitive psychologist David Ausubel
has also had a significant impact on the field of education . Ausubel felt that the most important factor that
influenced individuals ’ learning was what they
already knew . In essence , he felt that individuals built
links between old knowledge and new knowledge to
construct meaningful knowledge . The concept that
individuals perceive patterns in objects , information , 
and events based on previous experience is the foundation of Ausubel ’ s position . For Ausubel , learning
was an interactive process in which prior knowledge , 
personal experience , previous instruction , sensory
awareness , and direct observation play a critical role . 
A major problem in learning and instruction , according to Ausubel , was the presence of misconceptions
on the part of the student that resulted in “ buggy algorithms ” or flawed procedures in relation to thinking
and application . Ausubel ’ s work ( along with that of
Piaget ) forms the foundation of constructivist philosophy
and practice in our schools . 
A final area of cognitive psychology that has been
important to the field of education is that of metacognitive research . The leading individuals in this area are
Ann Brown , Judith Flavel , Gordon Alley , and Don
Deshler . These individuals have focused their work on
how we organize information , know when , what , and
how to remember , and monitor our cognitive activity . 
In essence , their research has involved understanding
the deliberate conscious control of our individual cognitive actions . Flavel and Brown conducted much of
the initial basic research in metacognition , seeking to
build a theoretical and philosophical basis for the
phenomenon . Alley and Deshler built on the work of
Brown and Flavel to develop the learning strategies
approach to instruction and provide teachers with the
instructional means to help students understand and
apply content flexibly in a variety of situations . This
area of cognitive psychology is currently impacting
the education of students with learning disabilities and
students at risk for academic failure in significant
ways . 
Psychometry and psychological testing are those
areas of psychology , aptitude , ability , and the probability that a given individual can benefit from a specific
curriculum , program , or placement . The measurement
of intelligence , academic achievement , specific abilities , and attitudes is of prime importance . Given this
fact , psychometry and psychological testing have a
direct impact on both social and educational policy . 
Important individuals in the field of psychometry and
psychological testing include Alfred Binet , Louis
Terman , Louis Thurstone , Robert Thorndike , David
Wechsler , Jerome Sattler , Raymond Cattell , Charles
Spearman , and Alfred Jensen . 
Psychological testing and psychometry involve the
development , refinement , and validation of instruments
to measure human attributes , achievement , and abilities . 
In its purest sense , this area of psychology is focused on
determining the soundness of assessment instruments . 
At the heart of psychometry and psychological testing is
the notion that all measurement is imperfect . That is , all
test scores contain some degree of error , whether systematic , nonsystematic , or both . This error compromises
the integrity of scores and reduces the precision with
which absolute or relative judgments concerning the
scores can be rendered . In essence , the primary goal of
psychologists operating in this field is to minimize error
so that more accurate judgments can be made . 
Improving the internal consistency of instruments ( reliability ) and the soundness of the instruments ’ procedures / 
items ( validity ) allows for greater relevance , predictive
accuracy , precision of measurement , and degree of
response element interface . 
Accurate measurement of academic progress has
become the holy grail of public education . Both state
and federal government agencies have focused a significant amount of attention and resources on student
progress and the accurate measurement thereof . In addition , the use of such measurement has been extended
beyond the realm of student progress into the efficacy
of teaching , administration / leadership , and school district culture . 
826———Psychology , Types Of
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 826
While academic achievement has been a major feature of psychological testing and psychometry , the most
controversial feature has been the measurement of intelligence . This is due to the social implications of intelligence and intelligence testing to policy , cultural , and racial
issues . Concepts such as general intelligence , fluid and
crystalline intelligence , and multiple intelligences have
all been proposed to explain and delineate the variation
in human intellectual abilities . Furthermore , the ongoing
nature / nurture debate among psychologists and its relationship to the genetic ( and racial ) basis of intelligence
has impacted psychometry and psychological testing in
relation to schools and schooling . 
The various areas and disciplines of psychology have
provided a plethora of philosophies , policies , procedures , 
and practices to those involved in educational settings . 
Virtually all aspects of the field of education have
been affected by psychology and psychological
research . The study of the physical , affective , and
cognitive aspects of our behavior will continue to have
direct application to continued work in the schools . 
—J . M . Blackbourn , William Barrios , 
Keith E . Davis , and Jennifer Fillingim
See also achievement tests ; at-risk students ; Baer , Donald ; 
behaviorism ; Binet , Alfred ; brain research and practice ; 
Burt , Cyril ; Cattell , Raymond ; child development theories ; 
cognition , theories of ; Csikszentmihalyi , Mihalyi ; discipline in schools ; flow theory ; Freud , Sigmund ; Graves , 
Claire ; Havighurst , Robert ; Jung , Carl ; life span development ; Maslow , Abraham ; metacognition ; neuroscience ; 
Ossorio , Peter G .  ; perceptual psychology ; Piaget , Jean ; 
psychometrics ; Rogers , Carl , self-actualization ; social psychology ; Spearman , Charles ; testing and test theory development ; Thorndike , Edward ; Wolf , Montrose
Further Readings and References
Alley , G .  ,  & Deshler , D .  ( 1979 )  . Teaching the learning
disabled adolescent : Strategies and methods . Denver , CO : 
Love . 
Ausubel , D .  ( 1968 )  . Educational psychology : A cognitive view . 
New York : Holt , Rinehart ,  & Winston . 
Baer , D .  , Wolf , M .  ,  & Risley , T .  ( 1968 )  . Some current dimensions of applied behavior analysis . Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis , 1 , 91–97 . 
Baer , D .  , Wolf , M .  ,  & Risley , T .  ( 1987 )  . Some still current
dimensions of applied behavior analysis . Journal of
Applied Behavior Analysis , 20 , 313–337 . 
Bandura , A .  ( 1977 )  . Social learning theory . Englewood Cliffs , 
NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Binet , A .  ,  & Simon , T .  ( 1905 )  . Methodes nouvelles pour le
diagnostic du niveau intellectuel des anormaux . L ’ Annes
Psychologique , 11 , 191–244 . 
Blackbourn , J .  ,  & Fillingim , J .  ( 2004 )  . Leadership and human
development . The Record in Educational Leadership , 
18 ( 1 )  , 28–33 . 
Brown , A .  ( 1975 )  . The development of memory : Knowing , 
knowing about knowing , and knowing how to know . In
W . Reese ( Ed .  )  , Advances in child behavior . New York : 
Academic Press . 
Flavel , J .  ( 1973 )  . Metacognitive aspects of problem solving . In
L . B . Resnick ( Ed .  )  , The nature of intelligence . Hillsdale , 
NJ : Erlbaum . 
Graves , C .  ( 1970 )  . Levels of existence : An open system of
values . Journal of Humanistic Psychology , 10 , 131–155 . 
Graves , C .  ( 1974 )  . Human nature prepares for a momentous
leap forward . The Futurist , 8 , 72–87 . 
Lee , S .  ( 2005 )  . The encyclopedia of school psychology . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Lewin , K .  ( 1935 )  . A dynamic theory of personality . New York : 
McGraw-Hill . 
Ossorio , P .  ( 1995 )  . Persons . Ann Arbor , MI : Descriptive
Psychology Press .  ( Original work published 1966 ) 
Ossorio , P .  ( 1998 )  . Place . Ann Arbor , MI : Descriptive
Psychology Press . 
Sattler , J .  ( 2002 )  . Assessment of children : Behavioral and clinical applications ( 4th ed .  )  . La Mesa , CA : Jerome M . Sattler . 
Spearman , C .  ( 1923 )  . The nature of intelligence and the principles of cognition . London : Macmillan . 
Terman , L .  ( 1916 )  . The measurement of intelligence . Boston : 
Houghton Mifflin . 
Thorndike , R .  ( 1971 )  . The concept of culture-fairness . Journal
of Educational Measurement , 8 , 63–70 . 
Wolf , M .  ( 1978 )  . Social validity : The case for subjective measurement , or how behavior analysis is finding its heart . 
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 11 , 203–204 . 
 PSYCHOMETRICS
Psychometrics is the science of mental measurements . 
The focus of this discipline is on theories and techniques for quantifying psychological attributes . 
Psychometrics provides the scientific foundations and
the standards that guide the development and use of
mental measurements common in education and the
social sciences . It is essential for educational administrators to be familiar with the basic concepts of psychometrics such as reliability and validity . 
ORIGINS
The origins of psychometrics can be traced to the
work of experimental psychologists in the nineteenth
century who sought to bring the rigor of “ scientific
methods ” to the measurement of mental attributes . 
Following the traditions of physicists and other natural
Psychometrics———827
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 827
scientists , German psychologists sought to quantify
the relationship between the intensity of a mental sensation and the magnitude of the stimulus needed to
invoke the sensation . Similar efforts to quantify psychological attributes were also being developed in
England in the mid-nineteenth century . Influenced
by the work of Charles Darwin , his cousin , Francis
Galton , sought to develop scientific measures and procedures for studying the relationship between intelligence and other characteristics of individuals . 
Because of his development of mental tests , use of the
normal distribution and work on the statistical techniques of correlation and regression , he is considered
by many to be a key figure in the development of modern psychometrics . However , it is Charles Spearman
who is credited with development of the classical
model of mental test scores , introducing the term reliability coefficient , and creating factor analysis and the
two-factor theory of intelligence during the first decade
of the twentieth century . 
Psychometrics is a relatively young science but one
that has seen tremendous advances in the past 100
years . When Spearman introduced the concept of the
reliability of a measure , his intent was to show how
measurement errors adversely affected the measurement of an attribute and the resulting correlation of
that attribute with any other . His definition relied on
the possibility of measuring a single trait with two
similar measures . Since his initial work , the concept
of reliability has changed tremendously . Researchers
have expanded the concept from a focus on two
measures to many and shown that as the number of
similar measures increases , reliability increases . The
traditional view or model of reliability did not permit
researchers to differentiate sources of measurement
errors . The emergence of generalizability theory not
only permitted researchers to isolate the source of
measurement errors , but equally important , it made it
possible to plan a measurement process so as to minimize specific sources of error . Recent developments
in reliability have emphasized the fact that reliability
coefficients reflect the influence of measurement error
on test scores and can vary from one group to another . 
There have also been significant developments in
mathematical models of test scores . The simple classical model guided test development and use for most of
the early part of the twentieth century . However , in the
1950s , Fred Lord introduced a series of models that
made strong assumptions about the relationship
between observed test performance and the underlying
trait measured by the test but yielded many advantages
over the classical model . The so-called item response
theory models explicitly modeled the probability that
an examinee would respond correctly to an item as a
function of his or her ability . The shift in focus permitted test developers to develop tests that did not rely for
their properties on the specific group of examinees on
which they were field tested or normed and the measurement of an examinee ’ s ability independent of the
specific group of items which he or she happened to
take . This latter result facilitated the development of
computerized adaptive tests that measure examinees
with considerable accuracy in less time by targeting
their ability level based on their response patterns to
selected items . Item response theory models have
become the dominant theory behind most large-scale
testing programs . They have developed significantly
over the past 50 years . They now include multivariate
models , models that permit ordinal or nominal test
items , and even models that generate ability estimates
for multiple aggregates such as classes or schools . 
The concept of the validity of a measure has also
undergone significant developments over the past
century . In particular , the focus has changed from different types of validity , seen as distinct , to a unified
concept in which the test developer collects data to
support the validity of a test for a particular purpose . 
This conceptual shift has also been accompanied by
many technical developments , principally the use of
factor analysis models for investigating the latent
structure of a test . Since Spearman ’ s early work , factor
analysis has evolved from exploratory techniques to
structural equation models that explicitly permit the
researcher to model the relationship between unobserved latent variables and observed indicators and the
relationships among latent constructs . 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
For most of their early years , mental measurement was
used largely to sort and compare individuals . This was
especially true of large-scale testing programs such as
the Scholastic Aptitude Test ( SAT )  , which were
designed to select examinees for admission into colleges . More recently , in response to changes in the
ways in which learning is thought to happen , achievement testing has changed to more of a focus on openended items and items that present more cognitively
complex tasks . Much of the technical characteristics of
these newer types of assessments are only now being
developed . The focus on performance-based assessments in recent years , for example , has created new
828———Psychometrics
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 828
problems regarding the validity and reliability of
measurements , as well as test development and use . 
Psychometricians , for example , have been challenged
to develop and investigate measurement techniques
that provide more information than simply a score
about an individual and that have greater instructional
utility than traditional measures . A final arena that has
seen many developments is the use of computers and
technology in mental measurements . Computers
greatly expand the types of assessments that can occur
from those that parallel paper-and-pencil measures to
those that are adapted to the individual taking the test
to those that appear to learn and diagnose the
strengths and weaknesses of an individual tester and
proscribe instructional next steps . Because of their
flexibility , computers present significant challenges
for measurement specialists . 
—Eugene Kennedy
See also accountability ; achievement gap , of students ; 
achievement tests ; at-risk students ; Baer , Donald ; behaviorism ; Binet , Alfred ; Black education ; brain research and
practice ; Burt , Cyril ; Cattell , Raymond ; child development
theories ; cognition , theories of ; cultural capital ; Graves , 
Claire ; Havighurst , Robert ; intelligence ; item response
theory ; J-curve theory ; Latinos ; metacognition ; neuroscience ; Ossorio , Peter G .  ; perceptual psychology ; Piaget , 
Jean ; Rogers , Carl ; S-curve theory ; self-actualization ; 
social psychology ; Spearman , Charles ; testing and test
theory development ; Thorndike , Edward
Further Readings and References
American Educational Research Association , American
Psychological Association ,  & National Council on
Measurement in Education .  ( 1999 )  . Standards for educational and psychological testing . Washington , DC : 
American Educational Research Association . 
Haertel , E .  ,  & Herman , J .  ( 2005 )  . The uses and misuses of data
in accountability testing . Malden , MA : Blackwell . 
Kane , M .  ( 2001 )  . Current concerns in validity theory . Journal
of Educational Measurement , 38 ( 4 )  , 319–342 . 
Kilne , T .  ( 2005 )  . Psychological testing . A practical approach
to design and evaluation . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Wood , J .  , Nezworski , M .  , Lilienfeld , S .  ,  & Garb , H .  ( 2003 )  . What ’ s
wrong with the Rorschach ? San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
 PYGMALION EFFECT
The possibility of increasing student achievement
through modifications in teacher behavior has produced
research and controversy for more than half a century . 
The first major experiment to address the issue was conducted by Robert Rosenthal and Lenore Jacobson in the
mid-1960s with the results being published in their book
Pygmalion in the Classroom . Their “ experiment ” used
false information about students to influence teacher
expectations , which resulted in a reported significant
increase in student scores on a general intelligence test , 
even though the teachers were unaware that their behavior toward the students had changed . Influencing
teachers to subconsciously raise expectations for student
achievement has become known as the Pygmalion
effect . The study and subsequent book came under sustained attack from the research community , which
accused the researchers of overgeneralizing from their
data and resorting to using tables with false zero lines
and elastic scales . The study was also scored for design
and sampling problems as well as for the selection of a
measuring instrument that had not been normed on
young children , especially those from low-income
brackets . The Janet Elashoff and Richard Snow critique
of the so-called Pygmalion effect was that it failed to be
demonstrated in the Rosenthal and Jacobson study . 
Several subsequent studies of teacher expectations for
student performance used different treatments that produced mixed results , but they helped to broaden understanding of the conditions through which teachers may
influence student achievement . Researchers also have
been interested in discovering if the Pygmalion effect
could apply to leadership activities in other leader-follower relationships not related to teaching . Studies such
as those by Dov Eden , whose work focused on military
leadership , have provided significant information about
the strengths and limitations of the Pygmalion effect . 
In a work environment , the Pygmalion effect
shows more prominently when the group is new and
the leaders and followers do not know each other well . 
The effect has not been observed in groups that have
been established for a significant length of time and
where the members are well acquainted with the
leaders and with each other . 
Sex differences also influence the Pygmalion
effect . Men seem to be better at developing increased
performance than women . Males do well leading
groups of men or women . Females are not as effective
in creating higher levels of performance when they are
leading either male or female groups . 
—Max S . Skidmore
See also at-risk students ; behaviorism ; child development theories ; 
climate , school ; cognition , theories of ; compensatory education ; 
Pygmalion Effect———829
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 829
expectations , teacher and student cultures ; gender studies , 
in educational leadership ; grades , of students ; halo effect ; 
Hawthorne Studies , The ; individual differences , in children ; 
intelligence ; learning , theories of ; motivation , theories of ; 
research methods ; resiliency ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Eden , D .  ( 1984 )  . Self-fulfilling prophecy as a management tool : 
Harnessing Pygmalion . Academy of Management Review , 
9 ( 1 )  , 64–73 . 
Eden , D .  ( 1988 )  . Pygmalion , goal setting , and expectancy : 
Compatible ways to boost productivity . Academy of
Management Review , 13 ( 4 )  , 639–652 . 
Elashoff , J .  ,  & Snow , R .  ( 1971 )  . Pygmalion reconsidered . 
Worthington , OH : Charles A . Jones . 
Rosenthal , R .  ,  & Jacobson , L .  ( 1992 )  . Pygmalion in the classroom . Williston , VT : Crown House .  ( Original work published 1968 ) 
White , S .  ,  & Locke , E .  ( 2000 )  . Problems with the Pygmalion
effect and some proposed solutions . Leadership Quarterly , 
11 ( 3 )  , 389–416 . 
830———Pygmalion Effect
P-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 830
 QUALITATIVE RESEARCH , 
HISTORY , THEORIES , ISSUES
The term qualitative research was first used in the
social sciences in the 1970s to refer to a broad array of
research traditions , assumptions , and methods . Many
theoretical paradigms and disciplines employ qualitative
methods . Widespread use in social sciences , humanities , 
and professional fields makes it difficult to concisely
define qualitative research . However , qualitative research
has common characteristics across paradigms and disciplines . Naturalistic qualitative research is conducted in
the field where events occur . The researcher collects
data through observation , interviewing , and document
analysis . The researcher seeks to understand the context
of research participants and sites . Concerned with
process and meaning , the researcher tries to discover
how participants interpret their situations . Data are
descriptive . Research findings emerge from the data
through inductive analysis . Multiple interpretations of
data are possible , depending on the theoretical framework , yet all interpretations are grounded in the data . 
Qualitative methods were first used in social science
research in the late 1800s and early 1900s . Qualitative
research originated in ethnography , anthropology , and
sociology as researchers collected data in the field . 
Anthropologists Franz Boas and Bronislaw Malinowski
established fieldwork as a legitimate method . Fieldwork is still associated with anthropology . Ethnographers of the 1800s studied the evolution of culture
and civilization . In the late 1800s , they shifted their
attention to racial and cultural groups inhabiting urban
areas . They conducted social surveys to understand
people ’ s lives . Well-known social surveys include
Frederick LePlay ’ s study of working-class families
and Charles Booth ’ s descriptive surveys of the London
poor . In the eastern United States , churches sponsored
social surveys to aid in the social adjustment and moral
development of diverse ghetto populations . W . E . B . Du
Bois ’ s 1899 The Philadelphia Negro , the first qualitative community study , grew out of this movement . The
Robert and Helen Lynd 1929 study of Middletown
used anthropological methods to collect data about a
typical American community . Church and corporate
surveys dominated social research until the 1920s . 
The University of Chicago Sociology Department
made a major contribution to qualitative research from
approximately 1910 to 1940 . Robert Park and other
Chicago School sociologists directed a number of
ethnographic case studies that examined urban groups
outside the middle class . For three decades , studies of
minority communities described the Jewish ghetto , 
Little Italy , Chinatown , and other marginalized , deviant , 
and immigrant groups from the context of the
subjects ’ lives . Other students of Park studied the “ folk
society ” of rural , homogeneous small towns . August
Hollingshead ’ s study of Elmtown ’ s youth represents
this group of studies . E . Franklin Frazier ’ s ethnographic work on the exclusion of Blacks drew on the
life histories of his subjects and himself , stressing the
importance of personal experience in ethnographic
description and interpretation . William Foote Whyte ’ s
Street Corner Society , a study of Italian slums , labeled
participant observation as a formal research technique
and remains a model for participant observation . 
Changes taking place in the United States beginning in the 1940s had a profound impact on the
831
Q
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 831
evolution of qualitative research . Despite declining
interest in qualitative methods in the 1940s and 1950s , 
they were still used to study people in the context of
their lives . During the Depression , the Works Progress
Administration sent out unemployed writers and photographers to record oral biographies and to shoot
documentary photographs of dispossessed people . 
Educational researchers became interested in qualitative research in the 1960s . The civil rights movement
made it obvious that there was little understanding of
children ’ s experience in schools . Federal monies funded
ethnographies of children ’ s unsuccessful school experiences , integration , new teachers in urban schools , and
racism in schools . The emphasis in these studies on
studying the powerless fit well with the democratic
focus of the times . Qualitative research grew in other
fields as anthropologists began to study American urban
culture and sociologists began using ethnomethodology . 
A number of methods books were published , among
them the idea of grounded theory in 1967 . 
Qualitative research gained widespread acceptance
in the 1970s and most of the 1980s . Interdisciplinary
and professional fields , including education , women ’ s
studies , social work , nursing , and human services , 
contributed to the field . Feminist researchers made
gender a central topic in studies employing qualitative
methods , giving unprecedented attention to the importance of relationships between researchers and their
subjects . The first book devoted to qualitative research
in education was published by Robert Bogdan and
Sari Biklen , in 1982 . 
In the late 1980s and 1990s , qualitative research
was accepted in a broad range of paradigms and disciplines that focus on race , class , and gender . With widespread acceptance , however , traditional qualitative
methods became the center of debate . Postmodernists
criticized inductive reasoning and focused on the qualitative researcher as interpreter . They supported interpretive theories in place of traditional grounded
theories , blurring the distinction between fieldwork
and writing . Critical theorists challenged traditional
approaches in research as insufficient to benefit the
marginalized , whom they believe are made powerless
by an unjust society . The wide variety of approaches in
the 1980s and 1990s led to an extensive discussion of
methodology in the literature . A number of scholarly
journals began publishing qualitative research , including the International Journal of Qualitative Studies
in Education , Anthropology and Education Quarterly , 
and Qualitative Inquiry . 
In the 1990s and 2000s , participatory and advocacy
practices have been the center of discussion about qualitative research . Action and activist research are conducted and reported in narrative form . Research is seen
not as a neutral process , but as a collaborative process
shaped by class , gender , and race . In the 2000s , multiple , 
often conflicting , paradigms and methods for reporting
qualitative research are available . 
The qualitative researcher ’ s theoretical perspective
determines what is studied , how the study is conducted , 
and how the data are interpreted . Theory development
in qualitative research emphasizes the inductive development of theory instead of deductive theory development based on a priori assumptions . There is a strong
connection between how a theory is developed and how
data are collected . How the study is conducted determines what is learned from the study . 
Most qualitative researchers in the social sciences
use some form of phenomenology as a theoretical perspective . Phenomenology , rooted in philosophy and
sociology , is interpretivist . The researcher ’ s goal is to
understand social phenomena or experiences from the
participant ’ s own point of view . Phenomenologists
strive to understand the motives and beliefs behind
people ’ s actions . The development of phenomenology
began with the work of German philosopher Edmund
Husserl . The work of Alfred Schutz extended and
established phenomenology as a philosophical and
social science perspective . Husserl ’ s work was based
on the assumption that people can know only what they
experience . They interpret what they experience to the
point that descriptions and interpretations of experience
are intertwined . There is no objective reality for people . 
Subjective experience incorporates the objective experience and the individual ’ s interpretation . 
Methodologically , the phenomenological perspective may mean one of two things . It may mean that the
researcher focuses on people ’ s experiences and interpretations of those experiences , or it may mean that
the researcher actually experiences the phenomena
being studied . In both cases , the researcher examines
how the participant experiences his or her world . In
the first case , the researcher may rely on interviews to
collect data . In the second case , the researcher must be
a participant observer to experience the phenomena . 
In both instances , the researcher defines reality as
people perceive it to be . The phenomenological perspective assumes , however , that there are shared
essences to experiences and that it is possible to analyze and compare them . Phenomenologists search for
832———Qualitative Research , History , Theories , Issues
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 832
commonalities in experiences . They can report their
findings as plausible given that the data are grounded
empirically in their participants ’ experiences . Results
can be compared and integrated with results of other
phenomenological studies of the same phenomena . 
Symbolic interactionism is a major theoretical perspective within the phenomenological tradition . 
Symbolic interactionism emphasizes the importance
of social meanings that people attach to their experiences . People create shared meanings through interactions and act according to how they see their world , 
not according to external rules or norms . Shared
meanings become reality . Symbolic interactionists
look for common sets of symbols and understandings
that give meaning to interactions . The importance of
symbols and the interpretive process distinguish symbolic interactionism . 
Symbolic interactionism originated in the work of
John Dewey , Herbert Blumer , Margaret Mead , Robert
Park , and others . Students of Mead ’ s work at the
Chicago School , including Howard Becker , Blanche
Geer , and Everett Hughes , were influential in the
development of symbolic interactionism . Mead ’ s
1934 book , Mind , Self , and Society , was the most
influential discussion of this perspective . 
Given that interpretation of human experience is
central to symbolic interactionism , the researcher must
be a part of the defining and interpretation process . 
Close contact and direct interaction are important for
the researcher through participant observation . Blumer
is credited with being one of the first researchers to use
group discussions and interviews to grasp understanding of their interpretive process . 
Ethnomethodology is a theoretical perspective that
fits within phenomenology . Ethnomethodology has
influenced phenomenology and has been particularly
important in sociology . Ethnomethodologists study
how people create and understand daily life . They
focus on the ordinary , routine details of everyday life . 
Ethnomethodologists are interested in a group ’ s tacit
knowledge . Harold Garfinkel , who invented the term , 
explains the perspective in his 1967 book , Studies in
Ethnomethodology . Ethnomethodology was popular
in the 1960s and 1970s , but its popularity waned in
the 1980s . Ethnomethodologists made criticisms of
empiricism that have been raised more recently by
postmodernists . For example , ethnomethodologists
urge researchers to suspend their assumptions and
worldviews instead of taking them for granted . More
recently , postmodernists raise the same concern . 
Ethnomethodologists study the methods by which
people make sense of their worlds . They are interested
in the norms and assumptions that people take for
granted because they are deeply ingrained in their
lives . They believe that people do not think about why
they do the things that they do , making meanings
behind actions complex and ambiguous . Unlike other
phenomenologists , ethnomethodologists conduct
intrusive research . They violate cultural norms in ethnographic experiments to see how people react . For
example , they might stand too close to another person in
casual conversation . Other methodological techniques
include depth interviews and participant observation . 
Ethnomethodologists study transition points in
people ’ s lives to see how they adapt and develop routine
responses to daily events . Ethnomethodologists deal
with specific elements of conversations and vocabulary and have contributed to the development of conversational analysis . 
Ethnography , another theoretical perspective , has as
its framework the concept of culture . Intensive fieldwork through participant observation by anthropologists
has been traditionally associated with ethnography . 
Today , other researchers conduct ethnographies with
expanded definitions of culture . Ethnographies describe
cultures or aspects of culture . Classic ethnographies
by anthropologists studied primitive cultures . Modern
ethnographies focus on contemporary societies , social
problems , organizations , organizational development , 
and education . Ethnographies are used in program evaluation and applied educational research . Today , many
educational researchers use the term ethnography synonymously with qualitative studies . 
The theoretical framework of ethnography assumes
that any group of people together over a period of time
will develop a culture . As researchers in various fields
have conducted ethnographies , several definitions of
culture have evolved . Most simply , culture includes a
group ’ s beliefs , knowledge , and behavior patterns . 
Clifford Geertz ’ s concept of “ thick description ” 
describes what ethnographers do . The researcher
describes the meanings of behaviors in a specific culture and interprets them to outsiders . Some ethnographies are semiotic or study signs in language . These
studies are interested in the interaction of culture and
the meanings that people attribute to events . Ethnographers interpret shared cultural meanings known to
participants but unknown to outsiders . What distinguishes ethnographies is the interpretation of findings
from a cultural perspective . 
Qualitative Research , History , Theories , Issues———833
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 833
Theoretical perspectives under the phenomenological umbrella are traditional qualitative frameworks . 
Phenomenologists believe that the researcher can be
objective and report empirical findings from participation with research subjects . The newer theoretical perspectives challenge the traditional view . Most of the
newer theoretical perspectives are postmodern . 
Philosophically , they come after modernism and challenge the scientific objectivity of the modern era . These
interpretive theories , maintaining that the researcher is
not an objective , all-knowing outside observer , focus on
how the researcher ’ s background influences the
research setting and report . Of particular interest are
the researcher ’ s race , gender , class , and social position . 
The primary purpose of the postmodernists is to change
social structures and processes . Another newer perspective , feminist research , focuses on women but is
conducted in a number of disciplines . Feminists have
emphasized the importance of relationships in research . 
Critical theorists examine social organizations that
privilege some people while marginalizing others . Their
goal is to empower the marginalized and remedy social
injustice . Among other newer perspectives are action / 
participatory action research , critical ethnography , narrative analysis , and poststructuralism . 
Qualitative research is used extensively in evaluation studies . Qualitative methods have been used in
problem solving , decision making , policy analysis , 
organizational / community development studies , and
educational policy / program evaluations . Process studies and evaluations study the internal dynamics of program or organizational operations . In programs that
emphasize individualized outcomes for clients , individual case studies of clients may be used to construct an
overview of patterns of client outcomes . Case studies , a
mainstay of educational research and evaluation , may
be used to study unusual outcomes of programs . A
number of case studies may be used to synthesize
larger conclusions about overall processes of programs . 
Qualitative methods may be used to evaluate the inputs , 
activities , processes , and structures of program implementation . Studies of quality use qualitative methods to
describe program meaning and quality for participants . 
Qualitative methods may be used in other applications ; 
among them are legislative monitoring and documentation of program development over time . 
Widespread acceptance has been accompanied by
debate among qualitative researchers over basic principles guiding the field . The absence of a single definition
of qualitative research prohibits unity across paradigms , 
theoretical perspectives , and disciplines . The result is
the absence of a common set of standards by which to
conduct and evaluate qualitative research . Instead , each
discipline has its own language and strategies . The languages of theoretical perspectives and disciplines can
be obscure to the point that different disciplines are
unable to communicate with each other . 
Postmodernism ’ s rejection of traditional qualitative
perspectives and methods has challenged long-standing
beliefs about the role of the researcher in the research
process . Challenging the objective stance of traditional
qualitative researchers , postmodernists think that it is
impossible for the researcher to remain detached from
the research setting and participants . Rather than providing what were once considered scientific , objective
research reports , postmodernists believe that the
researcher should provide an interpretivist discussion
of his or her role in the research . Traditional qualitative
researchers believe it is still possible to maintain a certain level of objectivity and report empirical conclusions . This shift from objective to an interpretivist
position leaves traditional methods in disfavor . Yet both
traditional and interpretivist approaches are subscribed
to and practiced by researchers with different disciplinary and theoretical perspectives . This debate leaves
researchers faced with many choices , while the field is
pulled in contradictory directions . 
—Carolyn L . Wanat
See also constructivism ; constructivism , social ; contextual
knowledge ; cross-cultural studies ; ethnography ; feminism
and theories of leadership ; gender studies , in educational
leadership ; interpretive studies ; postmodernism ; quantitative research methods ; research methods
Further Readings and References
Becker , H .  ,  & Geer , B .  ( 1960 )  . Participant observation : The
analysis of qualitative field data . In R . Adams & J . Preiss 
( Eds .  )  , Human organization research . Homewood , IL : 
Dorsey Press . 
Blumer , H .  ( 1969 )  . Symbolic interactionism : Perspective and
method . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Bogdan , R . C .  ,  & Biklen , S . K .  ( 2003 )  . Qualitative research
for education ( 4th ed .  )  . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Du Bois , W . E . B .  ( 1967 )  . The Philadelphia negro : A social study . 
New York : Benjamin Bloom .  ( Original work published 1899 ) 
Garfinkel , H .  ( 1967 )  . Studies in ethnomethodology . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Geertz , C .  ( 1973 )  . Thick description : Toward an interpretive
theory of culture . In The interpretation of cultures . 
New York : Basic Books . 
834———Qualitative Research , History , Theories , Issues
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 834
Glaser , B .  ,  & Strauss , A . L .  ( 1967 )  . The discovery of grounded
theory : Strategies for qualitative research . Chicago : Aldine . 
Hollingshead , A . B .  ( 1961 )  . Elmtown ’ s youth : The impact of
social classes on adolescents . New York : Science Editions .  
( Original work published 1949 ) 
Hughes , E .  ( 1971 )  . The sociological eye . Chicago : Aldine . 
Lynd , R . S .  ,  & Lynd , H . M .  ( 1937 )  . Middletown in transition : 
A study in cultural conflicts . New York : Harcourt , Brace . 
Mead , M .  ( 1934 )  . Mind , self , and society . Chicago : University
of Chicago Press . 
Whyte , W . F .  ( 1955 )  . Street corner society : The social structure of an Italian slum ( 2nd ed .  )  . Chicago : University of
Chicago Press . 
 QUALITY CONTROL
Quality control is a process of continual connection
between a work standard or objective , work assessment , 
and work activity directed toward attaining desired work
outcomes or standards . For an organization to attain
quality control , people in the organization must connect
these three elements together in an operational environment . There should be ongoing and purposeful interaction between these three elements . It is assumed as these
elements are adjusted that the work itself reaches more
of its intended objectives as revealed by the measure or
measures of the work , and these data become the basis
for tighter connections between work activity , work
assessment , and the attainment of the desired work
objectives . This is the idea behind the concept of datadriven decision making . It is also the idea undergirding
the concept of total quality management , or TQM , as
advanced by W . Edwards Deming . 
When quality control is applied in educational settings , the designation of the work standard is often
contained in state curricular standards or objectives 
( state frameworks )  , state high-stakes testing , and the
configuration of teaching activities ( the work ) toward
attaining tighter connections between all three on a
day-to-day basis . The results are assumed to be improved
test scores on whatever else has become the measurement of the work activity . The practice of tightly connecting teaching objectives and teaching activities lies
behind the idea of curriculum alignment , which has
demonstrated empirically that test scores do improve
when this occurs . 
Quality control can be divided into two basic parts . 
The first part involves curriculum design . Design
issues involve needs assessment , curricular format , 
and the specification or specificity and the type of 
 “ fit ” to the schooling environment . This latter idea
refers to the extent to which the curriculum ( as work
specification ) is compatible with the basic organizational structure . The second part is curriculum delivery , and it involves the matter of the skills of the
teacher , the fidelity of the implementation ( classroom
learning environment )  , monitoring to ascertain if there
is a fit between the curricular objectives and the teaching objectives , the use of feedback ( test or other
assessment data )  , and the overall aspect of utilization / application in an ongoing process of tightening
the linkage between all elements to attain improved
test or assessment scores . 
The use of quality control is predicated on schools
and classrooms being orderly places . By that is meant
that there is a measure of stability present in the
schooling environment . For internal school activities
to be directed toward accomplishing measurable objectives that are aligned with the measurement instruments
does require some stability upon which improvement
rests . Another assumption is that there is a conscious
awareness on the part of administrators and teachers
about the connections between work objectives as
exemplified in a reliable and usable curricular format 
( sometimes called “ guides ”  ) and the actual work
teachers do in the classrooms . Another activity is the
deliberate use of test or assessment data as feedback by
which the school faculty judges its progress . Schools
have been used to functioning despite such information . Newer forms of accountability require a change
in this regard . Historically , schools have not been
tightly connected to precise work specifications . 
Teachers have historically enjoyed great latitude in
working within loose curricular frameworks . When
schools are to be judged as adequate or inadequate in
state and / or federal accountability schemes , this ambiguity becomes a major problem in securing improved
performance . Teacher resistance to such schemes is
often a sign that many view the intrusion of testing and
attendant requirements for the use of test data in the
classroom as intrusions in the sanctity of their workplace . Other criticisms center on the use of industrial
concepts in educational settings as inappropriate , 
examples of a penchant for cost reduction strategies , 
and a reinforcer for social inequality . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; alignment , of curriculum ; curriculum , theories of ; Deming , W . Edwards ; Department of Education ; economics , theories of ; Educational
Quality Control———835
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 835
Testing Service ; goals , goal setting ; J-curve theory ; learning
environments ; management theories ; measurement , theories
of ; operational definitions ; outputs , of systems ; performance
assessment ; planning models ; productivity ; rational organizational theory ; school improvement models ; standard setting ; standardized testing ; state departments of education ; 
systemic reform ; testing and test theory development ; total
quality management ; unions , of teachers
Further Readings and References
English , F .  ( 1978 )  . Quality control in curriculum development . Arlington , VA : American Association of School
Administrators . 
English , F .  ,  & Hill , J .  ( 1994 )  . Total quality education : 
Transforming schools into learning places . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Juran , J . M .  ( 1979 )  . Quality control handbook . New York : 
McGraw-Hill . 
 QUANTITATIVE
RESEARCH METHODS
DATA , VARIABLES , AND MEASUREMENT
Quantitative research begins with the idea that to measure something , particularly in numerical form , is to
understand it better . The information that is collected
is referred to collectively as data . The things that are
measured are variables , meaning simply something
that varies in value in repeated observations . Observational units can be individual students or teachers , 
school districts , states , or any other entity for which
data are collected . 
Variables come in two primary forms : qualitative and
quantitative . Qualitative , or nominal , variables are
simply names for categories . An example is sex , categorized as male or female . Although sex is a qualitative
variable , it can be expressed , or coded , in numeric
terms ; for example , we could code sex as male = 0 and
female = 1 . Quantitative variables differ in that they
have a clear direction , with values representing more or
less of the variable . The simplest form of quantitative
variable is measured at the ordinal level , which means
that it consists of categories that are ordered from smallest to largest values of the variable . An example of an
ordinal variable is educational attainment , measured as : 
1 = less than high school education
2 = high school diploma
3 = some higher education , but no degree
4 = associate ’ s degree
5 = bachelor ’ s degree
6 = some graduate education , but no graduate degree
7 = Master ’ s degree
8 = MD , PhD , or other terminal professional degree
The next-highest level of sophistication in measurement is an interval variable , for which there is a
constant increment between successive values of the
variable , but no fixed and meaningful zero point . An
example is Stanford-Binet intelligence quotient ( IQ ) 
scores , which are calibrated to have mean 100 and standard deviation 16 . A student with IQ of 150 has a score
that is 75 points higher than another student who scores
75 , but the higher-scoring student is not twice as intelligent as the lower-scoring student . The ratio of 150 / 75
does not translate as a meaningful multiple because IQ
scores do not have a meaningful zero ; that is , zero IQ
does not mean that a person has no intelligence and
probably would not be a meaningful value in any event . 
For some quantitative variables , however , it is possible to form a ratio of values that is meaningful . 
An example of these ratio-level variables is family
income . A family earning $100 , 000 a year has 4 times
as much income as another family earning $25 , 000 a
year . In practical quantitative applications , the distinction between ratio and interval levels of measurement
is not very important , and these variables are treated
as though they were measured at the same level . 
Variables also can be distinguished as to whether
they are composed of discrete or continuous measurements . Discrete variables are measured in units that
cannot be divided into smaller quantities . An example
is the number of buildings in a school district ( you
can ’ t have a fraction of a building )  . Continuous
variables in principle can be divided into an infinite
number of fractional values , although it is common to
round such variables to an arbitrary number of decimal places . An example of a continuous variable is
an annual school district budget , which can be divided
down to the nearest penny ( or even fraction of a cent )  . 
SAMPLING AND STATISTICAL INFERENCE
Most quantitative analyses involve samples of larger
populations , either because the entire population isn ’ t
available or because it would be too costly to collect
836———Quantitative Research Methods
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 836
that much data . Samples are selected from populations that can be either finite or infinite . A finite population is countable , although it may have a large
number of observations , like the total K–12 enrollment in the United States . An infinite population is
uncountable , which may mean either that it literally is
infinitely large or that it can ’ t be determined because
the number is increasing over time and therefore
does not constitute a fixed amount ( for example , the
number of textbooks that have ever been used or will
be used in public school classrooms )  . 
Samples are essential for understanding statistical
inference , which has to do with making informed
guesstimates about the unknown characteristics of
the population from which the sample was drawn . 
According to the Central Limit Theorem , the information from a single sample of sufficient size is needed
to establish desirable properties for the sampling distribution of the parameter that is being estimated—
usually the population mean , proportion , or variance . 
The larger the sample , the better the estimate will be . 
If the sample is more than about 5% of the population
size , it is necessary to adjust the estimated standard
error of the parameter estimate by the finite population correction factor , to take into consideration the
changing odds of selecting successive observations
without replacement from the population to place into
the sample . Generally , to simplify the process of estimation , it is assumed that the sample has been
selected at random from an infinite ( or at least very
large ) population , which avoids such complications . 
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Before statistical inference can be undertaken , it is
important to have valid and meaningful measures of
the characteristics of the sample . This can be accomplished both visually and numerically . 
Visual representations of the sample can be
obtained through pie charts , bar charts ( for categorical
variables )  , or histograms ( for continuous variables )  , 
stem and leaf displays , radar / spider charts , box plots , 
maps , trend lines , scatter plots for two or more variables , multidimensional rotations ( using XGobi and
other advanced software )  , dot charts , and a large
number of other designs . 
Numerical descriptive statistics measure central
tendency and dispersion . Central tendency can be
measured , for example , by the most commonly occurring value or range of values ( the mode )  , the value at
the 50th percentile ( the median )  , the values at each
quartile , or the arithmetic average ( the mean )  . 
Dispersion is measured , among other ways , by the difference between the largest and smallest values ( the
range )  , the difference between the 50th and 25th percentile values ( the interquartile range )  , the average
distance any observation is from the mean ( the mean
absolute deviation )  , the sum of squared deviations
around the mean divided by the sample size minus
one ( the variance )  , the square root of the variance ( the
standard deviation , which measures how far any
observation is from the mean )  , and the ratio of the
standard deviation to the mean multiplied by 100 ( the
coefficient of variation )  . 
SIMPLE LINEAR
CORRELATION AND REGRESSION
Bivariate correlation and regression evaluate the
degree of relationship between two continuous variables , such as the size of school districts ( measured
by certified enrollment ) and the number of dollars
expended in their annual budgets . Bivariate correlation measures the association between two variables
without assuming that one variable depends on the
other . In contrast , bivariate regression predicts values
of the dependent variable from values of the independent variable . For example , we could use district size
to predict district expenditures , under the assumption
that larger districts have bigger budgets . 
MULTIPLE LINEAR CORRELATION
AND REGRESSION
Multiple correlation assesses the degree to which one
continuous dependent variable is related to two or more
other variables that are usually continuous . Its value is
the result of correlating the actual values of the dependent variable with the predicted values of the dependent variable . For example , we could correlate district
budgetary expenditures with the combination of district
size , student / teacher ratio , and total assessed property
value in the district . 
Multiple regression is used to predict the value of the
dependent variable ( say , annual district budget ) from
the combination of size , student / teacher ratio , and
assessed property value . The predictive ability of a multiple regression can be measured either for the entire
set of predictor variables simultaneously or sequentially , 
in order of importance determined by the researcher . 
Quantitative Research Methods———837
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 837
Automated forms of sequential multiple regression
come in several different forms :  ( a ) forward selection , 
which enters the most important predictor variables
one at a time ;  ( b ) backward elimination , which starts
with all of the predictors and deletes the least important predictor at each step ;  ( c ) stepwise , which combines forward and backward approaches by permitting
a variable previously deleted to be added back in if
doing so improves the model ;  ( d ) maximum R-square , 
which produces the best model for any given number
of predictor variables ; and ( e ) minimum R-square , 
which starts with the worst combination of different
numbers of predictor variables and improves each until
the best possible combination is attained . 
CANONICAL CORRELATION
AND MULTIVARIATE REGRESSION
It is also possible to correlate one set of continuous
variables with another set of continuous variables , 
which results in a canonical correlation . For example , 
we could correlate several measures of district expenditures ( such as capital budget , teacher salaries , and
supplies ) with district size , student / teacher ratio , and
assessed property value . If we predict one set of variables ( the expenditure measures , as three dependent
variables ) from the other set of variables ( district size , 
student / teacher ratio , and assessed property value , 
treated as three independent variables )  , the result is
known as a multivariate regression . 
FREQUENCY TABLES AND LOGIT MODELS
Two-way frequency tables are used to assess the relationship between discrete variables , particularly those
measured at a nominal or ordinal level with a relatively
small number of categories . A large family of nonparametric measures of general association and correlation
coefficients are used to measure the relationships
between these cross-classified variables . These analyses can be extended to include three or more categorical variables , although doing so requires a large data set
because the analysis divides the total number of observations into “ cells ” at the intersection of all of the variables ’ categories . An example of a three-way frequency
table would examine the relationship between whether
students participated in a special reading curriculum
and their ethnicity , controlling for the students ’ sex . 
A logit analysis , commonly expressed in the form
of a log-linear model , is conducted when one of the
cross-tabulated variables is treated as a dependent
variable and the others as independent variables . Such
models involve the logarithms of the odds ratios of the
likelihood of one outcome of the dependent variable
for different combinations of the categories of the
independent variables . 
ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE ( ANOVA ) 
AND RELATED METHODS
A number of different forms of analysis of variance
are appropriate when the goal is to compare mean
levels of a continuous dependent variable across the
levels of a categorical “ main effect ”  ( which consists
of a series of dummy variables indicating whether any
given observation is in a given category or not )  . 
One-way ANOVA is basically the same as a t test to
compare means between two groups . For example , we
might want to compare mean district budgetary expenditures between urban districts and rural districts . An
extension to comparing means across more than two
categories requires the use of ANOVA methods , which
compare variation across the group means with variation within the groups . A comparison of mean district
expenditures across four geographical regions of the
country ( Northeast , Southeast , Midwest , and West ) 
would be conducted using one-way ANOVA . 
If one or more continuous predictor variables are
added to a one-way ANOVA , the result is a one-way
analysis of covariance ( ANCOVA )  . For example , we
could add district size and assessed property value to
the one-way ANOVA comparison of mean district
expenditures across geographical regions . This analysis permits the comparison of adjusted mean expenditures across regions , after adjusting for differences
across the regions in mean district size and mean
assessed property value . 
Factorial ANOVA involves the use of more than
one categorical main effect . For example , we could
predict district expenditures from both region and
whether the district is in an urban or suburban location . The distinctive aspect of factorial models is that
they also make it possible to measure the effect of the
two-way interaction between the main effects—for
example , to see whether there is a difference in mean
district expenditures between rural districts in the
Southeast and urban districts in the West . Factorial
models can include several categorical main effects , 
resulting in complex multiway interactions and
high degrees of multicolinearity that often produce
838———Quantitative Research Methods
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 838
nonsignificant model parameters . Factorial ANCOVA
models also can be estimated by adding continuous
predictor variables ( e . g .  , district size ) to the factorial
structure . 
If the F test results in rejecting the null hypothesis
that the means are equal for all categories of a main
effect , multiple comparison procedures can be used to
compare across selected categories of the main effect
variables . We could compare , for example , all six possible pairs of regions , to see which specific regional
differences in mean district expenditures are significant , using a wide array of different post hoc multiple
comparison methods . There are many such multiple
comparison methods , because which approach is optimal depends on whether there are equal variances
within each group , whether each group has an equal
number of observations , and how many groups are
being compared at one time . In addition , a priori , or
preplanned , multiple comparisons can be constructed
to test for mean differences across compound combinations of groups—for example , whether mean district expenditures in the Southeast and Northeast
combined are significantly different from mean district expenditures in the West and Midwest combined . 
MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE 
( MANOVA ) AND COVARIANCE ( MANCOVA ) 
Multivariate forms of ANOVA and ANCOVA are
appropriate when there are two or more continuous
dependent variables and one or more categorical main
effects , taking into account correlations among the
dependent variables ( MANOVA )  , and adjusting
for continuous covariates ( MANCOVA )  . Factorial
MANOVA and factorial MANCOVA models also can
be estimated . Multiple comparisons and preplanned
comparisons may be used with any of these multivariate ANOVA and MANCOVA methods . 
Repeated measures is a special type of MANOVA
in which we either measure the same thing at different
times or have multiple measures of the same trait . The
classic pretest-posttest comparison , of , for example , 
student knowledge scores before and after taking a
course is the simplest form of repeated measures . 
More elaborate repeated measures models can be
estimated for a larger number of time periods , as we
might measure the motor ability of children every 6
months from birth to entry into kindergarten . We also
would use repeated-measures ANOVA in comparing
scores of students on several different subscales of
intelligence , to ascertain whether the various instruments all measure the same underlying trait . These
models are all examples of within-subjects designs , 
which do not require categorical main effects or
continuous covariates to predict outcomes . However , 
main effects and covariates may be added to produce
between-subjects repeated-measures MANOVA or
MANCOVA models . An important condition that
must be satisfied for repeated measures results to be
satisfied , at least without appropriate adjustments , is
sphericity , or constant correlations among values of
the same variable measured repeatedly over time or
among different measures of the same trait . 
DISCRIMINANT ANALYSIS
If the goal is to correctly predict the membership of an
observation on a categorical outcome variable and all
the independent variables are continuous and normally distributed , then discriminant analysis is the
appropriate procedure to use . This is the opposite
of the measurement characteristics of a MANOVA
model . For example , discriminant analysis would use
district size , assessed property value , and enrollment
to predict ( that is , to discriminate between ) whether a
given district has a budget that is in balance or in
deficit . The goal is to see if there are differences
in these continuous traits between the two sets of
districts . The utility of a discriminant analysis is determined by how well it predicts the correct classification overall , and for each of the outcome categories
separately . Sequential forms of discriminant analysis
are available , comparable to those employed in
sequential regression . 
LOGISTIC REGRESSION
Similar to discriminant analysis , logistic regression is
used to produce models that correctly classify outcomes for a categorical dependent variable . However , 
logistic regression is a more flexible procedure for
two reasons : It is more appropriate when there is
a combination of continuous ( district size , assessed
property value , and enrollment ) and categorical ( e . g .  , 
urban or rural ) predictor variables , and it is a better
procedure when the dependent variable consists of
an ordinal set of categorical outcomes ( for instance , 
district budgets with large deficits , small deficits , 
precisely balanced budgets , small surpluses , and large
surpluses )  . 
Quantitative Research Methods———839
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 839
FACTOR ANALYSIS
Factor analysis consists of a complex combination of
procedures that are appropriate when the goal is to
establish construct validity , which involves determining
the number of composite variables ( factors ) underlying
a usually large number of continuous variables . For this
reason , factor analysis often is referred to as a method
of data reduction . Using correlations among a set of
items , factor analysis involves a two-step procedure :  ( a ) 
extract an appropriate number of factors , or latent variables , that do a good job of summarizing the correlations among those items and ( b ) rotate the resulting
factors to improve the fit of each item on a factor . The
ideal outcome is “ simple structure ,  ” in which any
one item has a strong correlation (  “ loading ”  ) with only
one factor and each item is attached to a factor . For
example , in a complex survey of teachers ’ perceptions
of school administration , 30 separate questions might
be reduced to only five factors , each of which represents a dimension of teacher / administrator interaction 
( e . g .  , curriculum , governance , relations with parents , 
student achievement , and policy priorities )  . 
STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODELING ( SEM ) 
Structural equation models combine aspects of factor
analysis , canonical correlation , and multiple regression to estimate complex relationships among variables by estimating several equations simultaneously . 
SEM is most appropriate when a dependent variable
in one equation is an independent variable in another
equation . In its simplest form , called path analysis , 
SEM uses observed variables ( as opposed to composite factors ) to estimate continuous dependent variables . SEM results are sensitive to problems with lack
of normality , particularly kurtosis , in the dependent
variables . The validity of SEM is assessed largely by
the extent to which the simplified model accurately
reproduces the sample covariances among the model
variables . SEM is particularly important for its ability
to estimate both direct relationships among variables , 
which can be done in other linear models ( regression
and ANOVA , and their offshoots )  , and indirect effects , 
in which other variables intervene between a predictor
variable and a dependent variable , which cannot be
estimated by other linear models methods . For
example , SEM could be used to estimate the relationship between college undergraduate students ’ ACT
scores and their first-year cumulative grade point
averages , mediated by their high school grade point
averages . 
HIERARCHICAL LINEAR MODELS ( HLM ) 
Hierarchical linear models are used when variables in
a model are measured on two or more types of observational units . National Assessment of Educational
Progress ( NAEP ) data are structured this way , with
student-level information such as their scores on , say , 
five mathematics strands , together with their gender
and race , combined in a two-level model with teacherlevel variables such as training in or acceptance of
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics classroom reform practices , as well as teacher gender , race , 
and years of experience . Student-level data vary for
the students in the same teacher ’ s classroom , but the
teacher-level variables are constant for those same
students , which requires a nested , or mixed-model , 
HML analysis . 
TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS
If a variable is measured repeatedly over long
stretches of time , preferably at regular intervals , then
time-series analysis is an appropriate method . 
Particularly when there are 50 or more such repeated
observations , it is possible to develop forecasting
models to predict future values of outcomes such as
certified enrollment . This can be done as a univariate
model , based on determining the patterns that exist
over time among successive repeated values of the
variable ( such as certified enrollment )  , or as a multivariate input-output model for one or more continuous
predictor variables measured repeatedly over the same
time interval ( e . g .  , size of the school-aged population ) 
or a transfer function model with categorical input
variables that measure the onset of an intervention and
the extent of its intensity and duration ( e . g .  , annexation of a new subdivision or consolidation with
another district )  . 
FORMAL MATHEMATICAL MODELS
Other forms of quantitative models also are used in
education research . These include : 
• Survival / failure ( life testing , or event history ) models
to estimate the time it takes for something to happen , 
such as achieving metropolitan status with a population
840———Quantitative Research Methods
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 840
of at least 50 , 000 ( survival ) or a district going into
bankruptcy ( failure )  . 
• Proportional hazards models , which model the rate
of occurrence of an event , rather than the length of
time until an event occurs , that could be used , for
example , to estimate the number of times per year 
( i . e .  , the rate ) that students will be expelled or suspended for behavior reasons . 
• Stochastic process models , of which Markov chains
are the simplest example , can be used to measure the
transition probabilities , for example , by which educational achievement increases or decreases across
generations . 
• Bayesian methods cover a large number of different
applications , but are particularly relevant to the use
of simulations ( such as Markov chain Monte Carlo
methods ) to estimate parameters for models when
little or no data exist , and when the assumptions of
classical statistical methods are inappropriate . 
—Mack C . Shelley
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; hierarchical developmental models ; measurement , theories of ; questionnaires ; standardized testing ; surveys and survey results ; 
research methods
Further Readings and References
Agresti , A .  ,  & Finlay , B .  ( 1997 )  . Statistical methods for the
social sciences ( 3rd ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice
Hall . 
Hinkle , D . E .  , Wiersma , W .  ,  & Jurs , S . G .  ( 2003 )  . Applied
statistics for the behavioral sciences ( 5th ed .  )  . Boston : 
Houghton Mifflin . 
Howell , D . C .  ( 2002 )  . Statistical methods for psychology 
( 5th ed .  )  . Pacific Grove , CA : Duxbury . 
Tabachnick , B . G .  ,  & Fidell , L . S .  ( 2001 )  . Using multivariate
statistics ( 4th ed .  )  . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
 QUEER THEORY
An epistemological perspective that emerged in the
1990s as a poststructural constructivist critique of
identity and sexual subjectivities , queer theory represents a philosophical framework that aids in the
analysis of the modes in which power and desire are
hegemonically enacted in social spaces in such a way
that sexuality is normalized and differences are
repressed . Queer theory has as one of its principal
aims to disrupt both terms of the homo / hetero binary
and to destabilize each of these categories and the
relationships between them ; that is to say , queer
theory argues for the possibility that neither homosexual nor heterosexual are reliable and valid descriptors
of identity . Queer theory ’ s fundamental challenge to
the notion of a foundational homosexual subject is
based in part on the objection that an essentialized
homosexual identity replicates the hetero / homo binarism that perpetuates the heteronormativity of society . 
To define queer remains an elusive task given its
multiple and elastic significations . Once a derogatory
term to denote homosexuality , queer has been reappropriated by some to represent an expression of empowerment . At times , the word queer equates to lesbian , 
gay , or bisexual and is used by some authors as a convenient shorthand for the unwieldy laundry list of
identity categories . Yet queer theorists argue that this
facile association of queer with identity-based analyses
ignores the oppositional stance of queer theory toward
the foundational categories of lesbian , gay , bisexual , 
and transgender . Queer , then , represents a paradoxical
tension between an identity category that seeks ever to
remain unstable and fluid and a theoretical critique of
the notion of identity itself . 
Because queer destabilizes the concept of sexual
and other identities , it offers the political advantage of
allowing new coalitions to emerge amongst individuals who would otherwise be separated by the essentializing categorization mechanism that prevails in
a social system of compulsory heterosexuality . Thus , 
the rigid classification scheme that sorts everyone into
straight , lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender , and other
identity categories—which allows identity-based
political movements to flourish—collapses as identity
is subjected to interrogation . It must be noted , however , that queer can never escape the social realities of
a heteronormative milieu that ( re ) produce the social
inequalities and material effects of the categorization
it seeks to transcend . Individuals in the heteronormative system experience these material effects with
very real consequences , indeed , as a result of the
social meanings and relationships that accrue from the
process of categorization . Thus , race , gender , class , 
age , ability , and sexual orientation ( amongst others ) 
continue to generate inequitable distributions of power , 
even as queer theorists attempt to subvert the theoretical implications of identity . 
Attempts to circumscribe the definitional parameters of queer theory have often met with resistance . As
a theoretical posture that is permeated with a frustration with the tyranny of normalizing processes , queer
Queer Theory———841
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 841
theory defies a stance of positivity , always maintaining , instead , an antithetical relation to the process of
normalization . This precise resistance to be delimitated has resulted in many affirmative declarations
concerning the ( highly valued ) indeterminacy and
flexibility of the theory . 
Queer theory allows researchers to interrogate commonsense practices by exposing and examining the
links between knowledge and ignorance from a perspective situated at the margins of normality . One of the
most influential and controversial texts that deals with
the relationship between sexuality and knowledge / 
ignorance is E . K . Sedgwick ’ s 1990 Epistemology of
the Closet , a thoroughly argued discussion the pervasive effect that sexuality has had on twentieth-century
Western systems of thought . Queer theory , then , seeks
to deconstruct—in a Derridean sense—the binary
oppositions that regulate the formation of identities and
to expose the inequitable power structures that underlie
the construction of subjectivities . 
Building on the seminal works of literary critics , 
sociologists , anthropologists , and philosophers , queer
theorists in education have explored the implications
of a queer perspective on curriculum , pedagogy , 
gender relations , reading practices , and the tensions
between knowledge and ignorance . Others have used
queer theory to examine the social , legal , economic , 
and professional relationships amongst the stakeholders in the public education system . Common to all
these studies is an insistence on queering the takenfor-granted assumptions that underlie the current
hegemonic practices of public education . Such
assumptions include , for example , the assignment of
proper roles for male and female subjects , the notion
that “ family ” is monolithically and naturally defined
rather than socially constructed , and the idea that the
privileging of some sexual identities at the expense of
others is both normal and justified . 
Critiques of queer theory abound amongst scholars
and activists who argue that queer analyses privilege
the fragmentation of identity and the deconstruction
of the community over the acknowledgment of
oppressive structural forces within society . Some educational scholars have responded , however , by uniting
the theoretical postulates of queer theory with a sense
of practical activism imbued with a mission of social
justice . Whether or not these efforts contain an element of theoretical inconsistency , they are faithful to
the paradoxical concerns of a theory that defines itself
both as against the oppressive processes of normalization
and for social change , even as the theory itself might
have no way of knowing for certain beforehand the
direction of such change . 
Ironically , the strength of queer theory as an analytical tool derives from its effort to point toward possibilities that it cannot define in advance . Queer is ever
engaged in the process of becoming rather than seeking
the realization of a preestablished goal . The very oppositional and negative stance that characterizes queer is
precisely what allows queer theorists to uncover the
power dynamics of an inequitable society and to resist
the formidable forces of normalization . A perspective that dares to know the unknowable , to speak the
unspeakable , and to unhide the hidden , queer theory
disrupts everything we take for granted in education . 
Queer theory may find application amongst educational leaders by providing a way to decenter and disrupt the heterosexist normalization processes that
surround , constrain , and essentialize administrators , 
teachers , parents , children , and community members . 
It can incite educational leaders to examine and think
differently about curriculum and pedagogy—and the
way these are used to construct knowledge and perpetuate inequitable power systems—in order to intervene in the hegemonic discourses that stifle diversity . 
Finally , through its ontological interrogation of identity formation , queer theory can help educational
leaders to discover new ways of building coalitions
amongst individuals and groups in order to promote
more democratic relationships in the public schools . 
—James W . Koschoreck
See also discrimination ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; homophobia ; lesbian / gay / bisexual / transgender issues
in education ; sexuality , theories of
Further Readings and References
Blount , J . M .  ( 2005 )  . Fit to teach : Same-sex desire , gender , and
school work in the twentieth century . Albany : SUNY Press . 
Kumashiro , K .  ( 2002 )  . Troubling education : Queer activism
and antioppressive pedagogy . New York : RoutledgeFalmer . 
Lugg , C . A .  ,  & Koschoreck , J . W .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2003 )  . The final
closet [ Special Issue ]  . Journal of School Leadership , 13 ( 1 )  . 
Sedgwick , E . K .  ( 1990 )  . Epistemology of the closet . Berkeley
and Los Angeles : University of California Press . 
 QUESTIONNAIRES
Probably the most common method for collecting survey
data is the questionnaire , which can be administered in
842———Questionnaires
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 842
a number of ways . Questionnaires can be sent through
the mail , filled out on the Web , attached to an e-mail
and returned via e-mail to its sender , filled out by an
interviewer who is present in person with the respondent , completed on laptop computers just about anywhere on the planet , delivered over the telephone with
data possibly entered instantly by the interviewer using
computer-assisted telephone interviewing ( CATI ) 
software , and dropped off on the seats of an audience
attending a class or some other public event . Interactive
voice response can be solicited to prerecorded telephone messages . Whether the survey is self-administered or administered by a trained interviewer makes a
big difference in response rate and cost . Responses can
be handwritten , entered directly on a computer file or
Web page , entered on a telephone keypad , scanned
from “ bubble sheets ,  ” or imaged . Some modes of
delivery decay in their utility with time and societal
changes . Telephone questionnaires have become more
difficult owing to “ no call ” national legislation
designed to avoid an annoying blizzard of phone call
solicitations particularly around meal times , the rapid
proliferation of unlisted cell phone numbers and the
corresponding disappearance of land lines , and a shift
in attitudes toward the intense personal use of portable
phones that most people do not want used for anything
other than contact with family or friends . 
Generally , response rates are higher for questionnaires that are filled out during a personal interview , 
probably because of the eye contact and other personal connections established that make it difficult for
a respondent to say no , lower for telephone or Web
surveys , and lower still for mailed questionnaires . If
you have a captive audience , such as a class full of
students , however , it is relatively easy to get a high
response rate . The cost of getting useable data from
questionnaires is highest for personal interviews
because of the expert personnel time and travel costs
required to produce high response rates , lowest for
Web surveys , and somewhere in between for questionnaires delivered on the telephone or through the
mail . This combination of cost and response rate considerations has led to contemporary use of mixedmode surveys , with a mixture of face-to-face
interviews , phone or mail contacts , and Web or e-mail
contacts . 
Donald Dillman , who developed the tailored
design survey method , provided expert guidance in
2000 about how to get the best response rate and most
valid data from questionnaires , based on social
exchange theory , which places a premium on establishing trust , increasing rewards for participation , and
reducing social costs associated with completing the
questionnaire . For establishing trust , provide a token
of appreciation in advance , make it clear that the questionnaire is sponsored by legitimate authority ( for
example , a building principal , a district superintendent , or a university provost or college dean )  , make
the task of filling out the questionnaire seem to be
important , and invoke other exchange relationships 
( such as helping a student complete her dissertation
research or offering to share a summary of the results
with the respondent )  . Increasing rewards can be
accomplished by showing the prospective respondent
due respect , politely asking the respondent for help
and thanking the respondent once the questionnaire is
completed , asking the respondent for advice , supporting group values , providing tangible rewards such as
by enclosing a small financial contribution , making
the content and purpose of the questionnaire interesting , providing social validation , and communicating
to the respondent the need to respond because of the
scarcity of response opportunities from others . Social
costs can be reduced by avoiding language that might
make the respondent feel subordinate to the questionnaire writer , avoiding language that might be embarrassing , avoiding anything in the questionnaire that
might be inconvenient to the prospective respondent , 
making the questionnaire brief and easy to fill out , 
minimizing requests on the survey instrument for
personal information , and emphasizing that the
requested questionnaire is similar to other requests
for information . 
Questions , of course , are at the heart of a questionnaire survey instrument . Broadly speaking , there are
two kinds of survey questions : fixed format ( or multiple choice ) and open-ended . Fixed-format questions
can come in many forms . One type of fixed-format
item is the simple dichotomy ; for example , students
might be asked : 
Have you ever studied in small groups ?  Yes  No
A more complex , and more informative , fixedformat question provides an ordinal range of alternatives on the same topic : 
In the last month , how many times have you studied in
small groups ? 
 None  1  2–5  6–10  More than 10
Questionnaires———843
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 843
Other fixed-format questionnaire items provide a
set of categories that are not necessarily ordered . For
example , teachers might be asked : 
Which of the following do you think is the best description of your feelings about building a new middle
school ? 
 It ’ s a good idea , but the district can ’ t afford it now . 
 It ’ s a good idea , but a vote at the next election isn ’ t
going to succeed . 
 I ’ d rather wait until next year , after the school board
elections . 
 We ought to work harder to build public support
before pushing for a new building . 
 Other ( please specify ) _________________________
Actually , the “ Other ( please specify )  ” choice is followed by room for the teacher to write in a brief openended explanation of what he or she wants to convey
that isn ’ t covered in the other available choices . This
is probably the simplest possible example of openended questions . A more elaborate form of openended item is common particularly in Web-delivered
surveys , in which the respondent might be asked : 
If you had advice for the school board , what would you
tell them about the best strategy for building a new middle school ? 
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
_____________________________________________
Producing survey items that are valid , that is , do the
best possible job of measuring what they are intended
to measure , is an art form . There are a few basic guidelines and matters of common sense to follow . 
It is better to use simple words that are easily
understood , rather than more complex words that might
sound fancy but can produce misleading results , and
fewer words rather than more . In questionnaires that are
meant to be sent to the public , a general guideline is to
write items that can be read at a sixth-grade level . 
More generally , the wording of questions should be
consistent with the level of knowledge or expertise of
the intended audience . 
It is common in longer surveys to use a series of
fixed-response items and to try to create scales from
the entire set of items or from a subset of them . In
such cases , it is a good idea to have as much as possible an equal number of items that have positive and
negative “ valence ,  ” or direction . After reverse coding , 
say , the negative-valence set of items , a meaningful
summated rating scale can be established that validly
measures a full range , from least to most favorable . 
Leading questions should be avoided because they
will produce biased results . For example , a biased
question about public school prayer might read : 
How do you feel about public schools that take God out
of the classroom ? 
whereas more valid responses would be obtained from
this unbiased question on the same subject : 
There is a lot of discussion these days about whether
students in public schools should be allowed time for
silent reflection prayer when they are at school . How do
you feel about this issue ? 
Response choice categories should be mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive . That is , there should be
no overlap in the choice between two alternatives , and the
choices should cover all possible responses . For example , 
a poorly designed questionnaire item on the frequency
with which students watch television is : 
How often do you watch TV during an average week ? 
 I don ’ t ever watch TV
 Just a couple of hours a day
 3–5 hours a day
 about 10 hours a week
 Just about every day
A much better version of this question would be : 
On average about how many hours a week do you watch TV : 
 0
 1–5
 6–10
 11–15
 15–20
 21–25
 more than 25
844———Questionnaires
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 844
It also is good practice to avoid double-barreled
items , which contain more than one question . For
example , in a recent telephone survey , the author 
( who is a faculty member ) was asked the following
question : 
Do you think that faculty and administrators at the
Regents universities are overpaid ? 
The obvious problem is that a faculty member
probably would want to answer “ no ” to faculty
salaries and might want to say “ yes ” to administrators ’ salaries . Incidentally , when the faculty author
asked the survey interviewer about this option , he was
told to answer the question as posed , although “ no
opinion ” was offered as an alternative . In such cases , 
it is usually best to ask two different questions : 
Do you think that faculty salaries are too high at the
Regents universities ? 
Do you think that administrator salaries are too high at
the Regents universities ? 
Other complications and other options abound
regarding how best to structure survey questions to
obtain valid data from respondents . Including a “ don ’ t
know ” response option will reduce the useable sample
size of the survey data because such responses probably
will need to be treated as missing data . Occasionally , 
it will be ambiguous whether a “ don ’ t know ” response
means the same thing as “ I really don ’ t have any opinion on this subject ”  ( what Philip Converse and other
survey researchers have called “ nonattitudes ”  ) or “ I
have an opinion all right , but you haven ’ t given me the
right set of options .  ” 
On Likert-type ordered response items , another
consideration is whether an even or odd number of
categories should be used . An odd number of categories usually means that there will be a middle “ neutral ” category that permits respondents to avoid
having to lean in one direction or the other . For the
question ,  “ Do you agree or disagree with the school
board ’ s policy banning political statements on T-shirts ?  ” 
an odd number of categories would be : 
 Strongly agree
 Agree
 Both agree and disagree
 Disagree
 Strongly disagree
An even number of categories makes it more difficult to evade a directional answer and for that reason
probably would be preferable in most circumstances . 
For this example : 
 Strongly agree
 Agree
 Disagree
 Strongly disagree
There are a number of design and style issues that
should be considered in constructing questionnaires . 
For one thing , the order in which questions are asked
can have a powerful , and often unintended , impact on
the validity of the responses obtained . One particular
manifestation of the effect of question order is the
halo effect , or carryover effect , in which responses to
a general question carry over to other , more specific
items . If a survey of citizen satisfaction with the governor ’ s education policy leads off with “ How good a
job do you think the governor is doing ?  ” then attitudes
about any later questions about specifics ( such as the
state budget for special education , initiatives for new
bonding , or efforts to consolidate smaller districts ) are
likely to be influenced by the general attitude evoked
by the stimulus of the initial question about the
governor ’ s overall performance . Consequently , respondents who agree with the governor in general may be
more likely to say they agree with specifics of her
education policy , to avoid cognitive dissonance , and
their actual attitudes may not be measured . 
In addition , it is essential to think through the
implications of questionnaire design and style for
response rate , validity of the responses you get , and
how the data will be analyzed after they have been
collected and cleaned . Issues such as the following
need to be considered : 
• For printed questionnaires , a booklet format generally
is better received by respondents . 
• Make sure the first question applies to all potential
respondents , is easy to answer , and holds their interest . 
• Every respondent should be guided through the survey with effective visual and verbal instructional
stimuli , so they see and understand everything in the
questionnaire in the same sequence . 
• Minimize the use of complex answer formats , such as
matrices in which more than one answer is required for
each item ( for example , how important are various
aspects of the school board ’ s policy decisions , and how
well is the school board doing each of them now ?  )  . 
Questionnaires———845
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 845
• Make good use of white space , shading , and brightness . 
• Make the instrument as attractive as possible for the
respondent , paying attention in particular to the aesthetics of the first and last pages ( or screens for an
online questionnaire )  . 
• Be prepared to go through a number of revisions
until the instrument is as effective as it can be . 
• Use a pilot study ( i . e .  , a pretest ) to make sure the
questionnaire items are answerable by the target
audience , that the survey is not too long , and that
there are no unforeseen problems with wording , 
question order , or layout . 
Recently , particular attention has been directed to
enhancing the value of questionnaire pretests . Although
pretesting is the only way to evaluate in advance
whether a questionnaire may cause problems either for
the respondents or for the interviewers ( if the questionnaire involves face-to-face or voice contact )  , most
applications of pretesting have taken the form of being
only a dress rehearsal for the actual application of the
questionnaire , with little scientific basis for concluding
whether the instrument is valid and reliable . The need
for more carefully conducted pretests arises from 
( a ) the increased need to improve data quality for the
sake of attaining the objectives of the questionnaire ;  
( b ) the application of new methods for testing questionnaire validity and reliability , such as cognitive
interviews , behavior coding , response latency , vignette
analysis , formal respondent debriefings , experiments , 
and statistical modeling ;  ( c ) the emergence of new
modes of administration , including self-administered
questionnaires , computer-assisted questionnaires , and
Web questionnaires ;  ( d ) questionnaires designed for
increasingly specialized populations , including children , 
special education students , the disabled or infirm elderly , 
establishments , and multilingual or non-English-speaking
respondent groups ; and ( e ) the emergence of multimodal survey methods using a mixture of questionnaire
types . Improved questionnaires depend on correctly
diagnosing the problem to reduce measurement error , 
controlling survey costs , repairing the flaws in questionnaires by applying the best of basic research and
theory , and developing a database to facilitate the accumulation of knowledge about optimal questionnaire
design and implementation . 
Future applications of questionnaires in educational administration will need to be responsive to
newly evolving subject areas and to new technologies
and methods that can produce valid and reliable data
for data-driven decision making . 
—Mack C . Shelley
See also attitudes ; evaluation ; measurement , theories of ; quantitative research ; research methods ; surveys and survey
results ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Dillman , D . A .  ( 2000 )  . Mail and Internet surveys : The tailored
design method ( 2nd ed .  )  . New York : Wiley . 
Presser , S .  , Rothgeb , J . M .  , Couper , M . P .  , Lessler , J . T .  , 
Martin , E .  , Martin , J .  ,  & Singer , E .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Methods
for testing and evaluating survey questionnaires . Hoboken , 
NJ : Wiley . 
Schuman , H .  ,  & Presser , S .  ( 1996 )  . Questions & answers in
attitude surveys : Experiments on question form , wording , 
and context . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
846———Questionnaires
Q-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 846
 RATIONAL ORGANIZATIONAL
THEORY
Theories have histories , and rational theories of organizations are no exception . Rational views of organizations
dominated the early world of organizational development and leadership ( mid-1800s to World War II ) as
well as the early study of organizational sociologists in
Germany and America ( pre-1950s )  . During these periods , organizations were largely viewed as “ pure ” forms
of bureaucratic structure , complete with hierarchical
authority , driven by goal specificity and rational understandings and formalization . Rationality refers not to the
selection of goals but to their implementation as well as
their technical and functional rationality that structures
work activity with emphasis upon information , efficiency , optimization , implementation , and design . 
Scientific management research became the main
vehicle by which rational theories of organizations
were applied to organizations . Its focus was to improve
specific technical and skill actions of workers , time and
space management , task analysis , and factory efficiency . 
Scientific management influenced education in similar
ways , including grading and grouping processes , structuring of classrooms and administrative functions , and
even curricular content and teaching . 
Nevertheless , even as early as the 1930s , rational or
closed views of organizations were being challenged , at
first by those emphasizing social aspects of organizing
such as Mary Parker Follett , and then later by those
researching the influence of environments on organizing . 
Subsequent thought and study over a four-decade
period , starting with the human relations theory ( in
the late 1930s )  , through Herbert Simon ’ s concept of
satisficing ( with strongest influence in the 1950s )  , and
research on the nonrationality of internal processes
and the influence of environments on organizational
planning and function from the 1960s and on , did
much to unravel the tight hold efficiency and closed
systems played in rational theory . 
Three challenges did the most to moderate the “ rationality ” in rational theory . First , the emerging field of
industrial and organizational psychology , specifically
the work of Karl Weick , worked to nuance rationality
as sense making . Organizational design , communication , planning , and administrative decision making was
not so linear but informed by creativity , improvisation , 
and enactment . Sense making was constructed and
bootstrapped within organizations . Second , institutional
theorists argued and then showed that rationality itself
was framed by both broad and local ( a ) regulatory ,  ( b ) 
normative , and ( c ) mimetic processes . Finally , contingency and environmental organizational researchers
documented the heavy influence of external pressures , 
resources , and forces on organizational process . 
Contingency theory championed the view that the
best way to organize is dependent on the context of
the environment in which it must function . As that
environment changes , organizations must adapt and
alter their strategic plans to respond to those external
constraints . This view challenged naive views of formal and closed systems . It dismissed the notion that
organizational structure can be explained without reference to external constraints .  “ Contingencies ” can be
sporadic , intermittent , and unpredictable , and continue to challenge linear and systematic rationality . 
However , noting the constraints or limits of rationality in organization did not itself replace rational explanations . Organizations still must attend to structuring their
847
R
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 847
work in effective and efficient ways , and many of the
early findings of rational theorists , even scientific management researchers , provide useful ways of doing so . 
—Duane M . Covrig
See also administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; goals , goal
setting ; governance ; knowledge base , of the field ; leadership , situational ; leadership , system-oriented ; leadership , 
task-oriented ; management by objectives ; management
information systems ; management theories ; organizational
theories ; organizations , types of , typologies ; productivity ; 
resources management ; school improvement models ; strategic planning ; systemic reform ; work task measurement
Further Readings and References
Follett , M . P .  ( 1942 )  . Dynamic administration . New York : Harper . 
Simon , H . A .  ( 1997 )  . Administrative behavior : A study of decision-making processes in administrative organization ( 4th
ed .  )  . New York : Free Press . 
Taylor , F . W .  ( 1911 )  . The principles of scientific management . 
New York : Harper & Brothers . 
Weick , K . E .  ( 1995 )  . Sensemaking in organizations . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Weick , K . E .  ( 2001 )  . Making sense of the organization . 
Malden , MA : Blackwell . 
 READING , HISTORY
OF , USE IN SCHOOLS
Reading may be defined as an activity characterized
by the understanding of the written word through the
translation of symbols , or letters , into words and sentences that have meaning to the individual . The reader
also brings knowledge and understanding to the written word to be able to make sense of it . The history of
reading gives a clearer perspective on current practices in the field of reading . In any school , it is not
uncommon to find different teachers whose procedures exemplify the outstanding characteristics of several of the movements in reading . It is advantageous
that teachers analyze their own techniques and materials of instruction from the standpoint of the historical periods from which they evolved . 
The history of reading to convey meaning dates
back to 4000 BC , where the first writings of Sumerian
logographs portray pictures of objects and activities . 
The first writings were probably invented in
early Mesopotamia for commercial reasons with the
advantage that tablets could store an insurmountable
amount of information compared to relying on one ’ s
memory . In approximately 2000 BC , Phoenicians developed the first method to represent spoken language
consisting of an alphabet of four consonants , and in
1000 BC , the Greeks added vowels to the alphabet , creating essentially the same alphabet we use today . In 200
BC , punctuation appeared in Alexandrian manuscripts . 
Before then , written words were strung together in one
continuous line . Medieval scribes invented the lowercase characters around 700 AD and the insertion of
spaces between words in 900 AD . The invention of
spaces made it possible for the vast majority of readers
to be able to read silently , when previously most readers had to read out loud in order to be able to determine
appropriate pauses and stopping points . 
THE PRIMER
Early in the history of religious instruction , priests
believed that certain religious selections were so fundamental that they should be memorized by all adults
and children . In the year 813 in the 44th Canon of the
Council of Mainz , children were to receive the universal instruction of religious selections , which created the first books to be taught to children . In the
Middle Ages , this book generally contained the Creed , 
the Lord ’ s Prayer , the Ten Commandments , and a few
psalms . It was called a “ primer ” because it was primary in containing the minimum essentials deemed
necessary for one ’ s spiritual existence . Gradually , the
alphabet and lists of syllables and words were added
to this simple religious manual , and it became the
standard book for instruction in reading . The New
England Primer , probably printed in England in late
1600s , became the first reading textbook printed in
America , and it was the standard textbook of reading
instruction throughout the colonial period . 
THE PERIOD OF RELIGIOUS
EMPHASIS , 1607–1776
In this period , the Church of England changed from
Catholicism to Protestantism , and the Church maintained the right to control the schools . Each individual
was to be directly responsible to God for his or her
own salvation and was directed to read the word of
God directly and draw his or her own conclusions . This
new religion fostered reading instruction and provided
school training that gave the children a thorough
grounding in their reading ability so that they could
read the word of God for themselves . In the 1600s , 
848———Reading , History of , Use in Schools
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 848
methods of teaching reading including learning the
ABC book ( a manual of church services ) by rote forward and backward and pointing out letters first in the
alphabet then in any other place . Another method
included mastery of the alphabet , followed by syllabarium , which initiated the child into those few syllables that consist of one vowel after a consonant such
as ba , be , bi , bo , and bu . 
The Lord ’ s Prayer , the Creed , and the Ten
Commandments were to be memorized by the child in
many cases . After finishing the primer , the child was
permitted to read from the Bible , and used spelling as
the only technique for solving new words . Toward the
end of the 1700s , learning the alphabet , spelling syllables and words , memorizing sections of content , and
reading orally were prevalent methods of reading
instruction . Oral reading was very important , as illiteracy was highly prevalent , and it was customary for
the uneducated members of the family to gather to listen to the oral readings of the scriptures . 
THE PERIOD OF NATIONALISTICMORALISTIC EMPHASIS , 1776–1840
The establishment of America as an independent
nation precipitated reading content that was expected
to purify the American language , to develop loyalty to
the new nation ’ s traditions , institutions , occupations , 
and resources , and to inculcate the high ideals of
virtue and moral behavior that were considered a necessary part of the general program of building good
citizenship . Materials for reading instruction in this
period had exercises and rules for pronunciation and
enunciation designed to overcome the diversity of
dialects and to promote greater unity in the American
language . They contained patriotic selections and
selections by American authors designed to promote
an appreciation of the talent within America , historical selections to acquaint children with the history of
America and Europe , informational selections to
better enlighten children about their own country , and
oratorical selections . 
Prominent authors such as Noah Webster , Caleb
Bingham , Lyman Cobb , George Hillard , and Lindley
Murray created the idea of a set of readers during this
period . Learning the alphabet was the most important
first step of reading instruction . Emphasis on articulation and pronunciation brought about the practice of
teaching the sounds of letters as well as their names . 
Methods were included in each series for committing
a lengthy set of rules to memory . 
THE QUEST FOR INTELLIGENT
CITIZENSHIP , 1840–1880
Educators came to realize that the success of the new
democracy depended on developing the intelligence
of the people who would choose its leaders and determine the policies of a new nation . Horace Mann was
one of the most influential leaders of this period as he
brought Prussian influence reflecting Pestalozzian
principles to American reading instruction . Reading
texts of this period included information on the
subjects of science , nature study , geography , history , 
and general informational content , as well as emphasis upon teaching the sounds of letters and the
arrangement of subject matter proceeding from the
simple to the complex . Primers and first readers contained realistic materials , and pictures in these readers
became more plentiful and representative of objects
familiar to children and their lives . 
Methods of this period discontinued syllabarium as
a means of inducting children into reading and introduced the concept of proceeding from the simple to
the complex along with introducing a small number of
new words through repetition . Teaching the alphabet
remained prevalent , along with a strong tendency to
teach the sounds of the letters with the letter names
or instead of the letter names . Hence , the alphabetphonetic method was born . Spelling and reading were
closely tied together during this period , coupled with
writing as children were required to copy the letters
and phonetic combinations as well as script sentences
that appeared in the primer . Attention to meaning in
the upper grades became apparent through questions
about the content and definitions of words . Elocution
continued to be stressed with the upper readers . 
The graded school evolved during this period , 
resulting from reports concerning German Pestalozzian
schools in which the children were divided according to
age and attainments . The McGuffey series was the most
widely used reader of this period and must be given
credit for being the first series produced to clearly
define one reader for each grade in the elementary
school . 
THE NEW MOVEMENT , 1880–1900
The nation was in a status of tranquility and security
and now had the leisure and peace of mind to turn to
cultural pursuits in music , art , and literature . Aims , 
methods , and materials were directed toward the goal
of developing permanent interest in literature , gaining
thought from the author from the written or printed
Reading , History of , Use in Schools———849
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 849
page , and giving oral expression to these thoughts . 
Professional books in reading came into prominence
during this period with Scudder ’ s Literature in the
Schools published in 1888 and Sarah Louise Arnold ’ s
Reading : How to Teach It published in 1899 . Edmund
Burke Huey produced the first scientific contribution
to reading instruction , The Psychology and Pedagogy
of Reading . Beginnings in reading research and reading disability were noted in this period . 
As an outgrowth of the word method , elaborate
phonetic methods appeared , such as the Pollard method , 
which taught sounds within the context of a story . The
sentence or story method also appeared , which had
students memorize a story or rhyme and then read and
analyze the separate words and phrases . Supplemental
materials in the form of classic literature also
appeared during this period . 
THE SCIENTIFIC MOVEMENT , 1910–1924
During World War I ( 1917–1918 )  , it was discovered
that thousands of American soldiers could not read
well enough to follow printed instructions . This initiated the improvement of reading instruction and also
made teacher improvement a growing concern . The
term functional literacy was born with standardized
tests used frequently to determine students ’ reading
levels . The advent of instruments of measurement , 
which made it possible to obtain scientific information
about the effectiveness of reading methods and materials in the classroom , occurred . 
Major innovations of this period include the switch
from oral to silent reading , rapid expansion of reading
research , and the development of remedial reading
techniques . Teachers ’ manuals were emphasized during this period as every author of new reading textbooks furnished generous instructions for the use of
their materials . Experience charts were initiated in
which teachers invited discussion of some experience , 
and students dictated sentences about that experience , 
which were written on the chalkboard and then read
by the children . 
From 1925 to 1935 , reading philosophies were
divided between teaching students using sequential
skills using basal readers or having students learn by
permitting children to carry out their own purposes
through the needs and experience of their own activities ( the Activity Program )  . The Activity Program was
actuated by the principles of Rousseau , Froebel , 
Pestalozzi , Dewey , and Kilpatrick . Other developments
in this period were expansion and application of reading research , establishment of the readiness concept , 
and extended development in diagnosis . A general
tendency to teach reading in connection with various
activities and interests throughout the school day and
not to confine it to periods devoted solely to reading
instruction was a new method of this period . Phonics
was being taught much more moderately and was subordinate to other phases of reading instruction . Phonics
were taught only to those who needed it , and the
teacher began grouping to individual needs . The beginning readers used in most schools after the 1920s were
usually based on the word or look-say method , with 
 “ Dick ,  ” Jane ,  ” and “ Spot ” becoming household names . 
Although these books were supposed to be based on
meaning , they showed a remarkable lack of substance . 
NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL
UNREST , 1935–1960s
Reduction in teaching personnel due to World War II
produced crowded classrooms and low-quality teaching . It was rediscovered that thousands of young men
in the military could not read well enough to follow
simple printed instructions . Therefore , renewed emphasis was placed on systematic reading instruction
developing from one stage to another . New emphasis
was placed on integrating reading into other subject
areas and teaching reading in other curricular areas . 
The use of context clues and structural analysis
appeared for the first time as techniques that should be
taught to children . Long , organized skill charts were
provided that indicated the many different reading
skills to be developed with more attention to comprehension using “ critical reading .  ” Educators feared that
listening to the radio , looking at comics , and viewing
movies would reduce the interest in reading and
decrease the amount of reading done . 
In response to the high adult illiteracy of the 1960s , 
new methods were instituted in reading instruction . 
They included rewriting books using a limited graded
vocabulary , teaching words and letters simultaneously , 
and the most common , teaching phonics directly . 
Most publishers of school texts put out developmental
readers and supplementary texts such as DISTAR 
( Direct Instructional System for Teaching and Remediation )  . Improving skills in speed and comprehension
became popular using devices to train eye movements . 
Special courses were introduced into teacher training
for reading specialists , and learning theorists contributed
850———Reading , History of , Use in Schools
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 850 
 “ taxonomies ” so that levels and types of achievement
could be tested . 
THE GREAT DEBATE : PHONICS VERSUS
WHOLE WORD INSTRUCTION , 1960s–1980s
The “ great debate ” erupted in the 1960s because of
the predominance of two methods for teaching reading : phonics and whole word . Phonics instruction
guided children to learn the relationship between
sounds and letters using an explicit set of phonics
rules ( code emphasis )  , while the whole word method
used carefully prepared texts that would enable
children to discover the relationship of word families 
( meaning emphasis )  . The great debate encompassed
the dispute between these rival approaches to reading instruction . The phonics method incorporating
intense , systematic phonics instruction with constant
teacher-student interaction prevailed during the
1960 / 1970s . But it did not last . 
WHOLE LANGUAGE , 1980–1990
In the 1980s , the amazing results of Marie Clay ’ s
Reading Recovery program in New Zealand transpired
to the whole-language philosophy in America . This
method of teaching reading focused on students actually reading real books using context clues , pictures , 
and known words to understand the text . The learning
was child centered , not teacher directed , and was
suggested as a revival of the look-and-say method . 
Kenneth Goodman and Frank Smith are cited as the
leaders of the whole-language movement in the United
States . They had found that readers rely on context to
determine an upcoming word rather then using the
spelling of the word . Some evidence supported the
effectiveness of whole language , and many schools
and teacher training institutions embraced it . However , the explosion of learning disabilities resulted in
schools having to hire costly psychologists , special
education teachers , and reading specialists . Also , many
parents become frustrated by what they perceived as
inadequate development of language skills by their
children and bought into using commercial phonics
programs . The “ back to basics ” movement had begun
as a reaction to the whole-language movement . In the
late 1990s , some states even decreed that phonics must
be taught , which precipitated the idea of a balanced
approach in the teaching of reading using both components of phonics and whole language . 
THE CURRENT SITUATION
Currently , the emphasis on reading instruction centers
on the proper mix of each approach in a comprehensive reading program . Many federal and state policies
require that explicit skills instruction be part of a reading curriculum . In 2000 , the National Reading Panel 
( NRP ) released an extensive review of reading
research that defined five elements that yielded positive results in reading achievement . Those five elements are phonics , phonemic awareness , fluency , 
vocabulary , and comprehension . The NRP report
helped to shape the requirement of the Reading First
initiative authorized under the No Child Left Behind
Act of 2001 . Reading First requires that states spend
federal money to use only those components of reading instruction and materials with sound evidence that
work . Subsequently , many reading programs are being
restructured to incorporate those elements from the
NFP ’ s review , and many school systems are adopting
new materials and providing specific teacher training
to align with those five elements . Reading instruction
has become politicized , and it continues to be hotly
debated in curricular corners as well as in mainstream
politics . 
—Kimberley Martinez
See also accountability ; at-risk students ; brain research and
practice ; compensatory education ; critical theory ; cultural
capital ; cultural politics , wars ; Department of Education ; 
diversity ; individual differences , in children ; language
theories and processes ; Latinos ; metacognition ; resiliency ; 
right-wing politics , advocates , impact on education ; underachievers , in schools ; writing , teaching of
Further Readings and References
Allington , R .  ( 2002 )  . Big brother and the national reading
curriculum : How ideology trumped evidence . Portsmouth , 
NH : Heinemann . 
Borman , G .  ,  & Hewes , G .  ( 2002 )  . The long-term effects
and cost-effectiveness of success for all . Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 24 ( 4 )  . 243–266 . 
Coles , G .  ( 2003 )  . Reading the naked truth : Literacy , legislation , and lies . Portsmouth , NH : Heinemann . 
D ’ Agostino , J .  ,  & Murphy , J .  ( 2004 )  . A meta-analysis of reading recovery in United States schools . Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 26 ( 1 )  , 23–38 . 
Goodman , Y .  ( 1989 )  . Roots of the whole-language movement . 
Elementary School Journal , 90 ( 2 )  , 113–128 . 
McLeod , S .  , D ’ Amico , J . J .  ,  & Protheroe , N .  ( 2003 )  . K–12
principals ’ guide to No Child Left Behind . Arlington , VA : 
Educational Research Service . 
Reading , History of , Use in Schools———851
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 851
Miskel , C .  ,  & Song , M .  ( 2004 )  . Passing reading first : 
Prominence and processes in an elite policy network . 
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 26 ( 2 )  , 89–110 . 
Pearson , P .  ( 2004 )  . The reading wars . Educational Policy , 
18 ( 1 )  , 1–37 . 
Staresina , L . N .  ( 2004 )  . Reading . Education Week on the Web . 
Retrieved May 13 , 2004 , from 
context / topics / issuespage . cfm ? id = 101 . 
Svobodny , D .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1985 )  . Early American textbooks , 
1775–1900 . Washington , DC : Government Printing Office . 
Wilson , R . M .  ( 2000 )  . Teaching reading : A history . Retrieved
May 13 , 2004 , from 
histeduc / wilson10 . html . 
Whitehurst , G .  ,  & Lonigan , C .  ( 2001 )  . Emergent literacy : 
Development from prereaders to readers . In S . Neuman & 
D . Dickinson ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of early literacy research . 
New York : Guilford Press . 
 RECOGNITION
THEORY / IDENTITY POLITICS
The etymology of the word recognition ( the Latin
recognoscere ,  “ to know again ”  ) intimates this insistence
on knowability , and current uses of the word rely on
such a meaning . The concept of recognition offers a
robust picture of people who are imbricated instead of
isolated . People live and flourish with “ circuits of recognition .  ” Recognition theory acknowledges that individuals need a positive reflection by others of their group
affiliation . Humans need more than to be left alone . 
Recognition , as identity shaping , is situated in socialcultural contexts and is concerned with public space , 
such as a school . Within this public space , one ’ s particularity , one ’ s very identity , is itself vulnerable , malleable , and even multiple in public spaces such as the
school . The recognitive process that an individual
experiences within social-cultural contexts is replete
with multiple encounters that shape identity , one ’ s
own and the identity of others . Such encounters begin
with the assumption that neither knowledge nor
acknowledgment is ever just ours to decide , that
recognition always takes place within a larger horizon
of socially imbued discourses , and that those discourses are circumscribed by social power , institutional constraints , and hegemonic norming . Both
knowing about a person and confirming a person need
to be considered within the context of the largely
unspoken cultural assumptions that inform them . 
Such cultural assumptions are all the more prevalent , and all the more enforced , in the “ ideological
state apparatus ” of the school . Recognition , as sociocultural process , must consider both the constructive
nature it has in relation to identity shaping as well as
the cultural politics of the recognitive process , that is , 
how the dominant ideologies of different cultures
work to shape one ’ s identity through the recognitive
process . Any analysis of recognition must consider
the ability of both mirroring and confirmation as acts
of acknowledgment . 
One way to describe the event of public recognition in sociocultural contexts , such as schools , is to
speak in terms of mirrors . That is to say , when individuals enter the public sphere , they need someone , or
some thing , that will mirror back to them an affirming
sense of who they are . Charles Taylor explained that
our identity is partially shaped by recognition or its
absence , often by misrecognition of others , and so
our identity is damaged or distorted if people or society
mirror back to us a confining or demeaning or contemptible picture of ourselves . 
These social mirrors not only “ reflect ” us , they constitute us . Mirrors , in relation to recognition theory , 
afford a double mode of reflection and constitution during the public encounter , which is why the recognitive
interchange is both promising and uncertain . Mirroring
brings on a new sense of self at the same time that it
solidifies the old sense . The encounter is reflective and
reflexive , as it both portrays the self and works on the
self . Confirmation , as Martin Buber explained , has to
do with what one does in relation to the “ other ” and
what “ can become ” by means of a recognitive reaction
that cannot be prepared beforehand . In order to foster
recognition in the public space of school , these aspects
must be fostered within relationships of presence . A
major aspect of recognition is presence with the other . 
Experiencing the other authentically is as important as
knowledge of the other , and that interpersonal confirmation is fundamental to recognition in the classroom . 
Confirmation is achieved only with face-to-face experience between self and other . As Charles Bingham wrote
in 2001 , the classroom should be a public space of confirmation between self and other . However , the classroom must also be a place , with respect to shaping
identity , that students and teachers are cognizant of the
effect that ideologically embedded discourse , curriculum , and instruction present . Within the context of
classroom teaching , this is especially significant , since
curriculum and pedagogy are too often thought of as
somehow distinct from the identity of the one who does
the teaching . 
852———Recognition Theory / Identity Politics
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 852
Recognition as identity shaping is concerned with
identification , within social , cultural , and political
contexts . Two lessons can be learned in relation to
identity . Identities and the acts attributed to them are
always forming and re-forming in relation to historically specific contexts , and these contexts are political
in nature , that is , defined by issues of diversity such as
race , ethnicity , language , sexual orientation , gender , 
and economics . 
Relatedly , identities and their cultural resources are
responses to , develop in , and so include the dilemmas
by the struggles , personal crises , and social recruitment under which they form . Recognition , or the
absence of recognition , or ideologically charged
recognition , gives way to a politics of identity . Identity
politics , the tendency to base one ’ s politics on a sense
of personal identity , assumes that the most radical , 
activist politics develop when one comes to understand the dynamics of how one is oppressed and how
one oppresses others in one ’ s daily life . 
Recognition , as identity shaping , is often framed by
difference , understood not as fact but as perspective .  
 “ What is not ” defines the boundaries of “ what is .  ” 
Who is the same as I am , who is other , and according
to what criteria ? How are racial differences essential or
constructed , and what do they mean in our lives ? 
The second lesson is that identity forms in and
across intimate and social contexts , over long periods
of time . The historical timing of identity formation cannot simply be dictated by discourse . The identities
posited by any particular discourse become important
and a part of everyday life , based on the intersection of
social histories and social actors . Most important , the
social-cultural use of identities leads to another way of
conceptualizing histories , personhoods , cultures , and
their distributions over social and political groups . 
—Patrick M . Jenlink
See also anti-Semitism ; Asian Pacific Americans ; Black education ; bullying ; civil rights movement ; competition , forms of , 
in schools ; critical race theory ; critical theory ; crosscultural studies ; cultural capital ; determinism , sociocultural ; 
diversity ; Du Bois , W . E . B .  ; equality , in schools ; esteem
needs ; ethnicity ; ethnocentrism ; expectations , teacher and
student cultures ; Fascism and schools ; homophobia ; immigration , history and impact in education ; Latinos ; lesbian / 
gay / transgender issues in education ; minorities , in schools ; 
moral education ; multiculturalism ; peer interaction / friendships ; personality ; queer theory ; resiliency ; sexism ( glass
ceiling )  ; social context ; social relations , dimensions of ; 
underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Bingham , C .  ( 2001 )  . Schools of recognition : Identity politics
and classroom practices . New York : Rowman & Littlefield . 
Buber , M .  ( 1965 )  . Between man and man . New York : Collier
Books . 
Holland , D .  ( 1998 )  . Identity and agency in cultural worlds . 
Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . 
Kerr , D .  ( 1997 )  . Toward a democratic rhetoric of schooling . In
J . I . Goodlad & T . J . McMannon ( Eds .  )  , The public purpose
of education and schooling ( pp . 73–83 )  . San Francisco : 
Jossey-Bass . 
Nieto , S .  ( 2000 )  . Affirming diversity : The sociopolitical context of multicultural education ( 3rd ed )  . New York : Addison
Wesley Longman . 
Taylor , C .  ( 1991 )  . Sources of self . Cambridge , MA : Harvard
University Press . 
Taylor , C .  ( 1994 )  . The politics of recognition . In Amy Gutman 
( Ed .  )  , Multiculturalism : Examining the politics of recognition ( pp . 25–73 )  . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . 
 RECRUITMENT , OF
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS
Recruitment refers to both formal and informal processes
aimed at eliciting applicants for administrative position
vacancies . The goal of recruitment is to replace or enhance
the supply of administrators . Common recruitment activities include alerting prospective applicants to current or
upcoming job openings , identifying individuals believed
to have the potential to succeed in a particular leadership
role , sharing information about employment opportunities , and encouraging the completion of certification , 
licensure , and application requirements . 
Formal recruitment processes can entail personnel
officials : advertising administrative vacancies in public
media internal or external to schools , establishing structured relationships with the placement offices of colleges and universities that prepare educational leaders , 
accessing the resume databases of administrators ’ 
professional organizations , participating in job fairs and
conference sessions attended by administrative aspirants , offering training programs for career change into
administration for teachers , and hiring search consultants or firms that specialize in administrator placement .  
( The latter have been more frequently relied upon for
superintendencies than for other administrative roles .  ) 
Informal recruitment can involve more exclusive
and less publicly visible processes such as incumbent
administrators ; networking with others who share
Recruitment , of School Administrators———853
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 853
common interests , affiliations , or backgrounds ; seeking personal referrals from experienced leaders or
others in positions of power and influence in education ; selectively communicating job opportunity
information to friends , acquaintances , and other preferred prospects ; mentoring , sponsoring , or promoting
protégés for position vacancies ; and grooming favored
successors by providing special counsel , coaching , or
opportunities to enhance leadership skills . 
The history of K–12 schooling in the United States
includes deep-seated traditions of informal recruitment
leading to administrative hiring . That is , employment
in the field has not relied exclusively on unsolicited applications submitted in response to publicly
announced job openings . Instead , college professors
and veteran administrators have always played active , 
influential roles in targeting , supporting , and paving
the way for selected associates ’ career advancement . 
Because of these traditions , recruitment practices
have been criticized for being more closed than open
and for contributing to the demographic homogeneity
that has characterized educational administration historically . In the vernacular , such practices are sometimes
referred to as a self-perpetuating “ good old boys ’  ” system at work , since most incumbent administrators , college professors , and search consultants are White males . 
Affirmative action and the enforcement of equal
opportunity employment laws are often cited as
means of making recruitment and selection practices
more inclusive . Advocates for greater diversity in
educational leadership underscore the importance of
recruitment practices that include and support people
of color , women , persons with disabilities , and other
populations historically underrepresented in educational administration . 
—Marilyn Tallerico
See also affirmative action ; Black education ; career stages ; 
diversity ; human resource development ; licensure and certification ; mentoring ; minorities , in schools ; networking
and network theory ; personnel management ; principal
succession ; sexism ( glass ceiling )  ; staffing , concepts of ; 
teacher recruitment and retention ; women in educational
leadership ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Brown , K .  ,  & Wynn , S .  ( 2004 )  . Why leadership-skilled women
teachers are saying “ no ” to the principal ’ s role : A matter of
individual choice or institutional constraint ? Journal of
School Leadership , 14 ( 6 )  , 686–712 . 
Jones , B .  ( 2001 )  . Supply and demand for school principals : 
A nationwide study . Columbia , MO : Consortium for the
Study of Educational Policy . 
Kowalski , T .  ,  & Brunner , C .  ( 2005 )  . The school superintendent : Roles , challenges , and issues . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The
SAGE handbook of educational leadership . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Lunenburg , F .  ,  & Ornstein , A .  ( 2004 )  . Educational administration : Concepts and practices ( 4th ed .  )  . Belmont , CA : 
Wadsworth / Thomson Learning . 
Pounder , D .  ,  & Merrill , R .  ( 2001 )  . Job desirability of the high
school principalship : A job choice theory perspective . 
Educational Administration Quarterly , 37 ( 1 )  , 5–26 . 
 REDUCTION IN FORCE
Most states have statutes directly dealing with the
abolition of teaching or other positions without fault
on the part of individual employees , commonly
referred to as reduction in force ( RIF )  . The grounds
for RIF , the order in which employees are released , 
can “ bump ” others , and call-back rights are matters of
state law subject to modifications by board policies
and collective bargaining contracts . 
RIFs are most commonly permitted for declines in
student enrollment , financial exigencies , elimination
of positions or programs , and board discretion . While
courts usually defer to board discretion on the good faith
needed for RIFs , if challenged , administrators must
prove that they carried out justifiable RIFs in accord
with state law and their own policies and / or bargaining
contracts . In addition , courts expect policies to include
descriptions of the criteria that board officials rely on
and how they are weighed in implementing RIFs . 
Once boards find that RIFs are necessary , they
must determine the order of release . Although RIFs
are ordinarily based on seniority , seniority rights must
be based on statutes or collective bargaining contracts . 
Even though boards typically bear the burden of proving that a job is no longer necessary , they are not ordinarily required to interchange large numbers of
courses between and among existing positions to create positions for teachers who were subjected to RIFs . 
In evaluating seniority , absent modifications based
on board policy or bargaining contracts , the first criterion is full-time service . Beyond that , board methods
must be reasonable and not prohibited by statute . 
Furthermore , where tenured teachers lose their jobs as
part of RIFs , nontenured faculty members typically
854———Reduction in Force
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 854
cannot remain in similar positions , nor may board policies grant them the status of tenured faculty . In other
words , incumbents of eliminated positions are entitled
to retain jobs for which they are certificated even if
jobs are occupied by colleagues with less seniority . 
Individuals who lose their jobs in RIFs are responsible to assure board officials that their certifications for
other positions are valid when it is time for bumping . 
Bumping is a term of art that permits employees with
more seniority , and the same credentials , to preserve
their jobs at the expense of more junior colleagues . 
Subject to board policy and collective bargaining contracts , RIF statutes typically provide that the positions of
certificated employees who have been released cannot be
filled until they have first been offered their jobs back . 
State law may even specify how many years of seniority
they retain on preferred eligibility lists for positions . 
Under preferred eligibility provisions , employees are
usually called back in the order of seniority such that the
first to be let go is the first to be called back . 
—Charles J . Russo
See also collective bargaining ; contracts , with teacher unions ; 
job security ; management theories ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; working conditions , in schools
Further Readings and References
DeMitchell , T .  ( 2005 )  . Unions , collective bargaining , and the
challenges of leading . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 538–549 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Hartmeister , F .  ,  & Russo , C . J .  ( 1999 )  .  “ Taxing ” the system
when selecting teachers for reduction-in-force . Education
Law Reporter , 130 ( 3 )  , 989–1008 . 
Lieberman , M .  ( 1997 )  . The teacher unions . New York : Free Press . 
 REDUCTIONISM / PARSIMONY
Reductionism is a deliberate outcome of traditional
theory making , while parsimony is regarded as one of
the premier virtues that qualifies theory as commendable . Reductionism is based in the assumption that the
appearance of complexity can be accurately and usefully abridged by creating a concise schematic representation or theoretical picture of underlying , more
fundamental , factors , which are often regarded as
existing in a causal relationship to observed phenomena . A ready example is the Marxist reduction of the
epiphenomena of social institutions , practices , and
individual fates to their purportedly economic origins . 
In educational administration , such a neo-Marxist
reduction is characteristic of critical theory , which
depicts the school and its administrative arrangements
as the visible consequences of the unequal distribution
of wealth or capital among definable social classes . 
The Marxist and neo-Marxist would claim that the
reduction of experience to economy produces “ true
consciousness ,  ” or a more accurate and objective picture of what is , in fact , the case . Similarly , most reductivist theories suggest that their particular reduction
contributes substantially to a true or , more modestly , 
to a more useful picture of reality than that yielded by
raw observation . Theories are typically tested for truth
or utility—their theoretical adequacy—by measuring
the extent to which the principles and assertions that
result from reductivist operations facilitate the explanation , prediction , and the control of circumstance . 
A theory ’ s truth or usefulness , then , is verified by
the predictive power of the more fundamental principles disclosed through reduction . This verification may
come through the prediction of future occurrences or in
the design of interventions that accomplish predicted
effects . In sum , empirical adequacy is determined by
a theory ’ s ability to make what previously appeared
as mysterious and intractable ( e . g .  , fate , fortune , or
chance ) available for understanding and mastery . To
refer to critical theory once again , the neo-Marxist
reduction of schools and their administration to more
fundamental matters of economy should permit an
enhanced understanding of school life made evident in
the prediction of observable realities and in the design
of measures that result in desired improvements . 
Parsimony or economy of explanation has traditionally been considered to be a cardinal virtue in
theory making and a robust principle to be applied in
the adjudication of competing theoretical schemas . As
the reductivist purpose of theory is to represent complexity in simplified form , parsimony is a self-evident
measure of a theory ’ s success , providing that the
theory proves its empirical adequacy . Said with appropriate shortness , brevity is taken to be a powerful measure of a theory ’ s potential worth . The familiar “ KISS
principle ,  ” which can be politely summarized in the
admonition “ keep it simple ,  ” both abides by the principle of parsimony and conveys its content accurately . 
The most historically esteemed expression of the
principle of parsimony is Ockham ’ s Razor , so named
because it is found in the writings of William 
( 1285–1349 )  , a Franciscan friar and philosopher with a
Reductionism / Parsimony———855
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 855
logician ’ s sensibilities who lived in the English village
of Ockham . Echoing Aristotle ’ s assertion that nature
itself operates in the most economic way possible , 
William ’ s avowal that the logic of parsimony calls for the
cutting away of extraneous aspects of theory would be
repeated by many philosophers and scientists , including
Gottfried Leibniz , Isaac Newton , and Albert Einstein . 
When multiple theories that meet the test of empirical adequacy contest for predominance , parsimony
dictates that the theory of greatest simplicity is to be
preferred . There is an aesthetically pleasing as well as
an epistemologically satisfying quality that characterizes theories that effect the reduction of extreme complexities to the barest formulations . The extent to
which Einstein ’ s E = mc2 has become a cultural icon
is reflective of the cachet attached to parsimonious
reductions of what may at first glance appear impenetrably complex . In educational administration , a similar value attaches , for example , to the Getzels-Guba
diagrammatic reduction of the seemingly endless
complexities of organizational life to the interaction
of “ nomothetic ”  ( collective ) and “ idiographic ”  ( individualistic ) elements , values , and practices . 
Reductionism and parsimony , however , have not been
without their critics , particularly in educational administration . T . B . Greenfield ’ s idea that notions of organizations must be as complex as the reality we are trying to
understand would counterbalance the hazards of oversimplification that can result from the indiscriminate
application of the reductionism and parsimony favored in
the positivistic sciences . Greenfield ’ s caution is amplified by Christopher Hodgkinson ’ s observation that
reduction and parsimony are necessarily held in check by
the irreducible and sometimes ineffable human realities
that are the subject matter of educational administration . 
Because of its concern with such protean “ raw
material ,  ” theory in educational administration is necessarily pluralistic , diverse , and changing . Given the
likelihood that many of the truths associated with the
thoroughly human enterprise of education will inevitably
be multiplex , local , and unstable , the value of reductionism and the virtue of parsimony may benefit from
qualification in both research and practice . 
—Martin Barlosky
See also chaos theory ; critical theory ; deconstruction ; empiricism ; hypotheses , in research ; knowledge base , of the field ; 
organizational theories ; postmodernism ; quantitative
research methods ; research methods
Further Readings and References
Barlosky , M .  ( 1996 )  . Knowledge , certainty and openness
in educational administration . In C . Evers & G . Lakomski 
( Eds .  )  , Exploring educational administration : Coherentist
applications and critical debates ( pp . 247–261 )  . Oxford : 
Pergamon / Elsevier Science . 
Barlosky , M .  ( 1996 )  . A rejoinder to Evers and Lakomski . In
C . Evers & G . Lakomski ( Eds .  )  , Exploring educational
administration : Coherentist applications and critical
debates ( pp . 271-278 )  . Oxford : Pergamon / Elsevier Science . 
Barlosky , M .  ( 2001 )  . Leadership study and administrative
practice : Shall the twain ever meet ? In K . -C . Wong & 
C . W . Evers ( Eds .  )  , Leadership for quality schooling : 
International perspectives ( pp . 67–89 )  . London : Routledge . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . The postmodern challenge to the theory
and practice of educational administration . Springfield , 
IL : Charles C Thomas . 
Greenfield , T . B .  ,  & Ribbins , P .  ( 1993 )  . Greenfield on educational administration : Towards a humane science . London : 
Routledge . 
Hodgkinson , C .  ( 1991 )  . Educational leadership : The moral
art . Albany : State University of New York Press . 
Young , M .  ,  & Lopez , R .  ( 2005 )  . The nature of inquiry in educational leadership . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 337–361 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 REFORM , OF SCHOOLS
The call to reform K–12 public schools has been an
enduring movement in the United States since the
1850s , when Horace Mann helped establish common
schools in Massachusetts . School reform is characterized by cycles of what educational historians have
termed progress and regress . One day schools are the
best vehicle for the nation ’ s overall progress toward a
well-educated citizenry . In the next period , their failure
is predicating the downfall of the nation ’ s future . 
Reform tends to occur when the public is convinced
that schools are regressing and something must be
done to fix them , but at the heart of such pessimism is
an inherent progressive ideal that schools can be fixed
and that fixing them will indeed lead to a better nation . 
HISTORY OF PROGRESS AND REGRESS
Progressivism
After the 1850s , many states passed compulsory
schooling laws not only to educate native-born
American citizens but also to “ Americanize ” growing
856———Reform , of Schools
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 856
numbers of immigrant children . In addition to
language instruction , schools included vocational
training and social services such as vaccinations and
school meals . Some of these efforts in schooling were
rooted in the Progressivism Movement from about
1890 to 1920 , which aimed to reform society ’ s ills , 
from poverty to unfair labor laws . Public schools , with
their captive population of children , became one more
institution ( in addition to religious bodies and legislatures ) that social progressives could use to create programs and practices that would improve society . 
While the progressives were reforming society
through social programs in schools , some progressives
also sought to reform pedagogy and curriculum by making it more child centered . John Dewey ’ s work at the
University of Chicago lab school led the way for schools
to build upon children ’ s experiences to make education
meaningful to them . Dewey also espoused Mann ’ s
desire for schools to foster a democratic society , claiming that schools allow the opportunity for knowledge to
be built through shared experiences and interests . 
Progressivism in education also included the 
 “ administrative progressives ” who sought to make
schools more efficient by means of standardized testing and curriculum differentiated for different abilities , whether vocational or college preparation . 
This emphasis on differentiated curriculum for
efficiency ’ s sake led progressive education in the
1940s and 1950s to the life adjustment movement . 
Undergirding life adjustment was the theory of vocational educator Charles Prosser that only 20% of
students would be ready for college and 20% for vocational work , so that schools should prepare the
remaining 60% of students for everyday life by teaching skills such as parenting and health . In the 1950s , 
critics of the life adjustment movement claimed that
schools had become too child centered , were “ dumbing down ” their curriculum , and needed to return
to extensive academic preparation . Thus was born a 
 “ back to the basics ” movement , which continues
today . The preference for basics over life skills was
reinforced by a national event that started yet another
push for extensive school reform : Sputnik . 
Post-Sputnik Reform
In 1957 , the Soviet Union launched the satellite
Sputnik I , thus winning the first heat of a space race
between the Soviet Union and the United States . 
Because of Cold War-era tension , Americans were
immediately concerned about falling behind in space , 
viewing it as a threat to national security and attributing the failure to poor public schools . In 1958 , 
President Eisenhower signed the National Defense
Education Act , which dedicated federal funds to
improving public education . Schools became much
more focused on rigorous curriculum to teach math , 
science , and foreign languages . The National Science
Foundation sponsored science fairs and provided training for teachers as well as led less successful initiatives
such as New Math and an elementary school anthropology curriculum called Man : A Course of Study . 
While the focus on science , math , and languages continued , the concern over the United States ’ s place in
the space race was assuaged somewhat by the successful Apollo 11 landing on the moon in 1969 . However , 
Sputnik established what has become a recurring
theme of concern about how America ’ s schoolchildren
compete compared to the rest of the world ’ s . 
Civil Rights , Brown , 
Desegregation , and Access
In addition to post-Sputnik concerns about what
schools should be teaching and how , the civil rights
movement of the 1950s and 1960s led schools to
reform access . The 1954 Brown v . Board of Education
decision outlawed racial segregation and “ separate
but equal ” schools . In some places , desegregation
occurred grudgingly but peacefully ; in others , violently . Resistance by Whites to the enrollment of
Black students in Central High School in Little Rock , 
Arkansas , led President Eisenhower to call out the
National Guard . In 1974 , Boston erupted under a
forced-busing policy of integration . 
In 1965 , the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act allocated federal funds for schools as part of
President Johnson ’ s war on poverty . Since it followed
the 1964 Civil Rights Act , which prohibits federal funds
going to programs or activities that discriminate on the
grounds of race , color , or national origin , states that
wanted to receive the federal funds had to comply with
desegregation orders . Schools also eventually integrated
Latinos , Asian Americans , and Native Americans . 
In the years since Brown , courts and schools have
tried to determine how to decide whether they are
desegregated enough and whether they have demonstrated a good faith commitment to desegregation . 
Parents and educators have echoed Justice Clarence
Thomas ’ s caution in Missouri v . Jenkins that it should
Reform , of Schools———857
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 857
not be assumed that Black schools are inherently
inferior to White schools , and some have called for
strengthening Black schools instead of integrating
them with White schools . 
Desegregation has certainly not been accomplished ; researchers at the Harvard Civil Rights
Project indicate that , in fact , desegregation is reversing to segregation , and that while the minority population grows across the United States , White students
are more likely to attend school with other Whites . 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act
Besides its effect of forcing schools to desegregate
or risk losing federal money , the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act ( ESEA ) of 1965 reformed
schools most notably by means of its Title I funding , 
which provided a billion dollars a year to high-poverty
schools and disadvantaged children . The ESEA
directed funds toward programs for children with disabilities , bilingual education , and Head Start . From a
reform perspective , the ESEA was one of the first
instances of the federal government taking a larger
role in schooling and tying that role to funding . The
ESEA was reauthorized in 1994 under the Improving
America ’ s Schools Act and most recently in 2001
under the No Child Left Behind Act . 
A Nation at Risk , Standards , 
and Goals 2000
In 1983 , the National Commission on Excellence in
Education , created by Secretary of Education Terrel H . 
Bell , issued an “ open letter to the American people ” 
reporting in rhetorically powerful language that schools
were failing . The commission found that schools were
inadequate in their content , expectations , use of time , 
and teaching . Their recommendations included
strengthening graduation requirements , adopting rigorous and measurable standards , lengthening the school
day or year , and improving teacher quality . 
States responded to A Nation at Risk by increasing
graduation requirements , setting content standards , 
and adding tests . The nation ’ s governors convened
and set national goals , formalized by Congress in
1994 under President Clinton as the Goals 2000 : 
Educate America Act . Goals 2000 provided participating states with grants in return for initiating reforms
aimed at improving student achievement , such as
standards , teacher quality , and technology . In a 1999
review of progress toward the goals , journalist David
Hoff noted that although student achievement was not
markedly improved as the year 2000 approached , the
goals did serve to heighten public concern and focus
state reform efforts , which by itself is some progress . 
Goals 2000 has since been supplemented by a much
more extensive reform : the reauthorization of the
ESEA , or the No Child Left Behind Act . 
No Child Left Behind
The No Child Left Behind Act ( NCLB ) of 2001
once again increased the federal role in school reform
by tying federal Title I funding to states ’ cooperation . 
NCLB introduced extensive annual testing through
Grade 8 and the goal of proficiency for every student
by 2014 , including students in four subgroups : low
socioeconomic status , students with disabilities , 
students with limited English proficiency , and major
racial and ethnic groups . Individual schools must make 
 “ adequate yearly progress ” toward their state ’ s proficiency goal for each subgroup . Schools that do not
make adequate yearly progress for 2 consecutive years
must notify parents , provide students with the option to
attend school elsewhere in the district , provide supplemental services such as tutoring , and receive technical
assistance from the state . NCLB also requires teachers
hired with Title I funds to be “ highly qualified ,  ” meaning degreed and certified in their subject area . 
NCLB has been controversial . Some hail it as muchneeded accountability and for its seeking to reduce
inequities in achievement by identifying student subgroups ’ test results . Others criticize it for the weight it
places on testing as a measure of school success and for
what they see as an impossible goal of universal proficiency by 2014 . There is also little agreement about
whether or not the law has been adequately funded . 
Some states , such as Utah , see NCLB as an infringement on their own role in education or , because of
its strict state reporting requirements , as a drain on
resources . Since its enactment , the U . S . Department of
Education has clarified some of NCLB ’ s requirements , 
such as how districts can use Title I funds for professional development , and it is likely that such clarification and modification will continue . 
ISSUES AND TRENDS
There are several factors that continue to surface in
the cycle of educational reform : who is in charge , 
858———Reform , of Schools
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 858
what should be taught and how , how students can have
equal opportunity to learn , how to measure progress
toward learning , and how to prepare students to compete in a global economy . 
Governance and Accountability
School reform tends to be not only a history of
progress and regress but of response to shifting current
events and political pressures . Schools are expected
simultaneously to shape the future of society and
respond to its needs . One issue that naturally arises , 
then , is one of governance , or of who should be in control of schools . Related to that issue is accountability , 
meaning how responsive schools are to reform efforts . 
As publicly funded institutions usually administered by professional educators who report to locally
elected or appointed school boards or officials , it is
not clear what roles local , state , and federal governments play . The state of Iowa , for example , maintains
local control so strongly that it remains the only state
without statewide content standards , thus earning an
F every year on the standards and accountability section of the “ Quality Counts ” reports compiled by
Education Week . According to popular reform initiatives , Iowa ’ s students should therefore be low achieving . Yet about 75% of Iowa ’ s fourth graders are
proficient on statewide tests , it ranks in the top 10 or
so of states on national tests , and it has the second
highest graduation rate in the nation . While some of
this success is attributable to the state ’ s relatively
homogeneous and stable student population , such
good results belie the statewide standards and
accountability that other states have worked so hard to
implement and allow Iowa to continue to rely on local
rather than state control . 
Another issue of governance has been that of professional versus nonprofessional interests . The culture
of efficiency established by administrative progressives valued professionalism , specialization , hierarchy , and credentials , all of which have led educators to
be somewhat resistant when noneducators want to critique and reform schools . This resistance was enacted
in the 1960s during the civil rights movement and
continues in response to NCLB . While NCLB
demands more accountability from educators than
ever before , the research on accountability tells us that
external demands such as NCLB are always mediated
by the internal structures a school has in place . It takes
time for schools to develop such complex internal
structures . Thus one can expect that whatever reform
is enacted—be it desegregation or NCLB—it will take
time to implement . 
Instructional Leadership
From the early days of progressive education , an
ongoing issue in school reform has been curriculum
and pedagogy : what should be taught and how . Goals
2000 and the standards movement helped nearly
all states establish content standards—what students
should know—as well as performance standards—
how well students should be able to do what they
know . NCLB also provides some standards for teacher
quality in terms of credentialing . Some reform initiatives are aimed at how teachers should teach , such
as the National Board for Professional Teaching
Standards and the Coalition for Essential Schools ’ 
Critical Friends Groups . Some design pedagogical
scripts , like Success for All and Direct Instruction . 
But for the most part the educational community does
not address what good pedagogy looks like . This lack
of discussion means that administrators , who are supposed to be instructional leaders , have less guidance
about what teachers should be doing , let alone be able
to build an instructional community based on distributed leadership . 
Equity
A motivating concern in school reform has continued to be equity , or the opportunity for all children to
learn . As noted earlier , NCLB has been hailed for its
efforts to acknowledge and reduce the achievement
gap between subgroups of students . Reforms such as
reducing class size , inclusion of students with disabilities , and the plan in Cambridge , Massachusetts , of
desegregating schools by socioeconomic status are all
promising . 
Testing
The extensive testing required by NCLB has historical roots in the world of differentiated instruction
and progressive education , as noted earlier , as well as
in eugenics . Students then were to be tested to discover the occupation to which they were best suited . 
Students now are to be tested to make sure they are
proficient . Several states have also adopted high-stakes
tests that students must pass in order to graduate from
Reform , of Schools———859
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 859
high school . The American Educational Research
Association has cautioned against using tests as a single measure of student progress , and other scholars
have noted adverse effects , such as dropping out , of
high-stakes testing on minority students . However , the
American public currently favors testing of students . 
Competing Globally and Providing
Alternative Schooling Models
Since Sputnik and A Nation at Risk , both of which
were concerned with how United States students measured up to their counterparts across the globe , a continuing rationale for schooling has been preparing students to
compete in a global economy . This rationale is rooted
in America ’ s capitalist structure , and one of the ensuing
trends in school reform has thus been to model schools
after business . Some school systems have privatized , 
offering school operations to for-profit companies such as
the Edison Schools . Other systems have created alternative schools from which parents can choose . Advocates of
school choice suggest that providing a market in which
schools compete for students will improve schooling
quality overall . Thus , several states have enacted charter
school laws so that new schools , freer of bureaucratic
strictures and open to new ideas , can be created by innovative leaders . Some communities , notably Milwaukee
and Cleveland , have also enacted voucher systems where
parents can send their children to private schools , including private religious schools , using public funds . 
All of these efforts are true to the experimental
spirit of progressivism while continuing the cycle of
regressive reaction to school reform . 
—Joanne M . Marshall
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; Black education ; 
charter schools ; choice , of schools ; civil rights movement ; 
class size ; desegregation , of schools ; Dewey , John ; equality , 
in schools ; governance ; immigration , history and impact in
education ; innovation , in education ; Kentucky Education
Reform Act ; Latinos ; Mann , Horace ; A Nation at Risk ; No
Child Left Behind ; politics , of education , privatization ; 
restructuring , of schools ; school improvement models ; standard setting ; standardized testing ; state departments of education ; systemic reform ; tracking , of students ; voucher plans
Further Readings and References
American Educational Research Association .  ( 2000 )  . AERA
position statement : High-stakes testing in Pre-K–12 education . 
Retrieved from . 
Dewey , J .  ( 1916 )  . Democracy in education : An introduction to
the philosophy of education . New York : Macmillan . 
Report card : Iowa . Quality Counts 2005 : No small change : 
Targeting money toward student performance .  ( 2005 , 
January 6 )  . Education Week , 24 , 118 . 
Frankenberg , E .  , Lee , C .  ,  & Orfield , G .  ( 2003 )  . A multiracial
society with segregated schools : Are we losing the dream ? 
Cambridge , MA : Civil Rights Project , Harvard University . 
Fuhrman , S .  ( 2003 )  . Redesigning accountability systems for
education ( CPRE Research Report Series No . RB-38 )  . 
Philadelphia : Consortium for Policy Research in
Education . 
Fullan , M .  ( 2000 )  . The three stories of education reform . Phi
Delta Kappan , 81 ( 8 )  , 581–584 . 
Greene , J . P .  ,  & Winters , M . A .  ( 2005 )  . Public high school graduation and college-readiness rates : 1991-2002 . New York : 
Center for Civic Innovation at the Manhattan Institute . 
Madaus , G .  ,  & Marguerite , C .  ( 2001 )  . The adverse impact of
high stakes testing on minority students : Evidence from
100 years of test data . In G . Orfield & M . L . Kornhaber 
( Eds .  )  , Raising standards or raising barriers ? Inequality
and high-stakes testing in public education ( pp . 85–106 )  . 
New York : Century Foundation Press . 
McNeil , L .  ,  & Valenzuela , A .  ( 2001 )  . The harmful impact of
the TAAS system of testing in Texas : Beneath the accountability rhetoric . In G . Orfield & M . L . Kornhaber ( Eds .  )  , 
Raising standards or raising barriers ? Inequality and
high-stakes testing in public education ( pp . 127–150 )  . New
York : Century Foundation Press . 
Missouri v . Jenkins , 515 US 70 ( 1995 )  . 
National Association of Secondary School Principals .  ( 2004 )  . 
Breaking ranks II : Strategies for leading high school
reform . Reston , VA : Author . 
O ’ Day , J . A .  ( 2002 )  . Complexity , accountability , and school
improvement . Harvard Educational Review , 72 ( 3 )  , 
293–329 . 
Spillane , J . P .  , Halverson , R .  ,  & Diamond , J . B .  ( 2001 )  . 
Investigating school leadership practice : A distributed perspective . Educational Researcher , 30 ( 3 )  , 23–28 . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 1996 )  . Goals 2000 : 
Increasing student achievement through state and local
initiatives : Introduction . Washington , DC : Author . 
 REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973
The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 , as amended , is a
federal statute providing funding for occupational
rehabilitation services to people with disabilities . 
Commonly referred to as the Rehab Act , it replaced
federal vocational rehabilitation statutes and amendments passed in 1920 and 1943 . The act also contains
important provisions protecting persons with disabilities from discrimination and is designed to provide the
860———Rehabilitation Act of 1973
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 860
federal government with a leadership role in improving
the lives of persons with disabilities . 
THE ACT ’ S DEFINITIONS OF
INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES
The act provides two definitions of individuals with
disabilities . As a general rule , it defines an individual
with a disability as someone ( a ) with a physical or
mental impairment that constitutes or results in a substantial impediment to employment and ( b ) who may
benefit from vocational rehabilitation . For nondiscrimination and advocacy provisions ( most notably Section
504 )  , however , an individual with a disability is
defined as someone ( a ) with a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more major
life activities ,  ( b ) with a record of such an impairment , 
or ( c ) who is regarded as having such an impairment . 
This second definition is similar to the definition used
in the Americans With Disabilities Act ( ADA )  . The
Rehab Act excludes several persons from these definitions , depending on which part of the act is implicated , 
such as illegal drug use , individuals with infectious
diseases , certain sexual minorities , and individuals
with certain mental illnesses . 
For purposes of vocational rehabilitation , the act
defines an individual with a significant disability . One
has a significant disability when one ( a ) has a severe
physical or mental impairment that seriously limits
one or more functional capacities ( which impairment
is listed in the definition or is of a comparable severity ) and ( b ) will need vocational rehabilitation over a
lengthy period . Individuals with significant disabilities may be entitled to priority in states with wait-lists
for vocational rehabilitation services . 
THE REHABILITATION
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
The act established the Rehabilitation Services
Administration ( RSA )  . Housed in the Department of
Education , the RSA approves and monitors each
state ’ s vocational rehabilitation plan . The RSA provides grants to states and nonprofit organizations to
train rehabilitation services personnel . The RSA also
may make grants for pilot projects and demonstration
programs related to vocational rehabilitation , grants
to provide vocational rehabilitation to migrant farm
laborers , and grants for recreation programs that assist
in maximizing the independence and integration of
persons with disabilities . One percent of the funds
appropriated to the RSA are to be spent on projects
serving traditionally underserved populations , such as
the African American and Hispanic communities and
American Indian tribes . 
VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION SERVICES
An example of cooperative federalism , the act ’ s provisions for vocational rehabilitation are similar to the
provisions for special education under the Individuals
With Disabilities Education Act ( the IDEA )  . The RSA
will approve grants to states for the provision of vocational rehabilitation , so long as each state submits a
plan conforming to the act ’ s requirements . To receive
a grant , each state must submit a plan containing 24
required elements . Each state ’ s plan must designate a
responsible state agency ( or agencies , in case the state
elects to separately provide vocational rehabilitation
services to individuals who are blind )  . The plan must
ensure that the whole state is served . To ensure an adequate supply of persons trained in vocational rehabilitation , the plan must set forth a comprehensive
system of personnel development and necessary interagency agreements to guarantee that the state complies with the act ’ s requirements . The plan must
ensure that each individual eligible for vocational
rehabilitation is provided with services under an individualized plan for employment , unless the plan provides for a wait-list in case of insufficient resources . 
The plan must provide for public comment , frequent
review , and citizen involvement . Each state must
report annually to the RSA regarding its compliance
with its plan . If the RSA rejects a state ’ s plan , the state
is entitled to an impartial hearing . Each state may
spend some of its grant to train employers about the
employment requirements of the ADA . 
The responsible state agency must have a procedure to determine eligibility for vocational rehabilitation . One must benefit from vocational rehabilitation
services , yet all are presumed to benefit , and the state
agency must rebut that presumption before denying
services due to inability to benefit . Individuals who
receive disability benefits under the Social Security
Act , including SSI , are presumptively eligible . The
agency has 60 days to determine eligibility . 
Each state must provide an individualized plan for
employment to all who receive vocational rehabilitation services . The plan must be a written document , 
must contain the individual ’ s procedural rights , must
Rehabilitation Act of 1973———861
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 861
focus on the individual ’ s strengths , must be developed
with the individual ’ s input and with regard for the individual ’ s choice of a vocational outcome , must contain
measurable goals and objectives , and must state how
and where specific vocational rehabilitation services
are to be provided , and by whom . Services are to be
provided in the most integrated setting possible . If an
individual is dissatisfied with any aspect of the plan , 
including an adverse eligibility determination , that
individual may seek mediation , an impartial hearing , 
and , ultimately , review in state or federal court . Each
state is required to offer a client assistance program to
provide advice , information , advocacy , and problemsolving assistance to people receiving assistance from
a vocational rehabilitation program . The client assistance program may not be housed in the agency
responsible for vocational rehabilitation services . 
Vocational rehabilitation services include , but are not
limited to , assessment , counseling and guidance , job
search and retention assistance , vocational training , 
funding not otherwise available ( such as tuition assistance or health care assistance )  , transportation , interpretation services , start-up costs , licensing fees , assistive
technology , referrals , and supported employment . These
services may be provided to individuals with disabilities
or to groups of persons with disabilities . 
Vocational rehabilitation services are often an
important part of any postsecondary transition plan
required under the IDEA . 
INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND ADVOCACY
The Rehab Act contains several provisions requiring
affirmative action in employment and prohibiting discrimination against individuals with disabilities by
federal agencies , by recipients of federal contracts of
over $10 , 000 , and , under Section 504 , by recipients
of federal financial assistance . The act imports the
ADA ’ s employment discrimination standards by
cross-reference . Remedies for violating the act ’ s
nondiscrimination provisions are set forth and include
damages , equitable relief , and attorneys ’ fees for prevailing parties . 
Section 508 of the Rehab Act requires that federal
departments maintain electronic and information
technology that is accessible to individuals with disabilities . The act also creates the Access Board , which
is to promulgate standards for barrier-free accessible
buildings and transportation . The act provides technical and financial assistance to certain groups seeking
to remove architectural , transportation , or communication barriers . 
The act also provides appropriations for protection
and advocacy services to individuals with disabilities . 
MORE ABOUT SECTION 504
As noted above , Section 504 prohibits employers who
receive federal financial assistance from discriminating against workers with disabilities . This provision , 
however , does so much more . It protects any individual with a disability , who is otherwise qualified , from
being excluded from participating in any program
or activity receiving federal financial assistance . To
maintain a cause of action under Section 504 , plaintiffs must show four things :  ( 1 ) they are individuals with
a disability ,  ( 2 ) they were otherwise qualified , and 
( 3 ) they were discriminated against solely because of
their disability ( 4 ) by a program or activity receiving
federal financial assistance . 
Regarding the first element , an individual with minor
or correctable impairments is not an individual with a
disability . Certain individuals are excluded by the act ’ s
definitions . For example , an employee with an infectious or communicable disease may not be an individual
with a disability if that disease is a direct threat to others
or prevents the employee from performing job duties . In
nearly all cases , the direct threat posed by an employee
must be assessed in light of each employee ’ s unique
facts and based on reasonable medical judgment . 
Regarding the second element , individuals are 
 “ otherwise qualified ” if they may participate in the
program or activity with or without reasonable
accommodation . Failure to accommodate may violate
Section 504 ; however , major alterations in the program or activity are not required . 
Regarding the third element , discrimination may
include failure to interview , hire , promote , or retain an
employee with a disability , failure to make a program
or activity accessible to people with disabilities , failure
to make reasonable accommodations for individuals
with disabilities , and retaliation against individuals
who assert rights under Section 504 . Certain small
providers need not make significant structural changes
to comply with Section 504 . 
Regarding the fourth element ,  “ program or activity
receiving federal financial assistance ” is broadly
defined . The phrase includes cash and in-kind assistance . In nearly all cases , a recipient is covered if any
of its units or divisions receives qualifying assistance . 
862———Rehabilitation Act of 1973
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 862
Nearly all state and local governments are covered 
( including school systems at all levels )  , as well as
most private schools , colleges , universities , and medical institutions . 
While the ADA contains many identical protections , Section 504 remains a critically important
antidiscrimination statute . First , Section 504 applies
to all recipients of federal money and aid ; in contrast , 
certain of the ADA ’ s employment provisions , for
example , apply only to employers that have a certain
threshold number of employees . Second , many
actions in federal court under the ADA against state
government have been barred by the U . S . Constitution ’ s Eleventh Amendment ; however , most federal
court actions against states under Section 504 have not
been barred by the Eleventh Amendment . 
SECTION 504 IN EDUCATION
As noted above , Section 504 covers nearly all education institutions , and the act reaches nearly all aspects
of education . The following nonexhaustive list of
examples illustrates Section 504 ’ s reach : 
• The act requires school leaders to reasonably accommodate employees with disabilities . It requires
schools to provide special education or related services to children with disabilities , who may or may
not be covered by the IDEA . 
• It may require accommodations to policies or practices , such as waivers of eligibility rules for extracurricular activities . 
• It may require structural alterations to make the
school facility accessible to persons with disabilities . 
• Finally , it may require school leaders to intervene
and prevent harassment and bullying based on
disability . 
OTHER PROVISIONS
The act has several other important features . It created
the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research , which conducts and funds research on
rehabilitation services and disseminates results . It created the National Council on Disability ( NCD )  , an
independent agency composed primarily of individuals with disabilities , which is empowered to promote
equal opportunity for persons with disabilities in all
aspects of society . The NCD advises the president of
the United States , executive agency heads , the commissioner of the RSA , and the director of the National
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research , as
well as annually submitting a report on disability policy
to the president and Congress . The act also provides
support for independent living centers and services for
individuals with significant disabilities and individuals who are blind and are age 55 and older . Finally , the
act provides for cooperative efforts with industry to
encourage employment of persons with disabilities
including supported employment . 
—Thomas A . Mayes
See also accountability ; adaptiveness of organizations ; affirmative action ; architecture of schools ; bureaucracy ; costbenefit analyses ; Department of Education ; Federal Privacy
Act ; individual differences , in children ; law ; learning environments ; negligence ; politics , of education ; school safety ; 
working conditions , in schools
Further Readings and References
Americans With Disabilities Act , 20 U . S . C . A . §§ 12101-213 
( West 1998 & Supp . 2004 )  . 
Bender , W .  ( 2002 )  . Differentiating instruction for students
with learning disabilities . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin
Press . 
Imber , M .  ,  & van Geel , T .  ( 2005 )  . Education law . Mahwah , 
NJ : Erlbaum . 
Karten , T .  ( 2004 )  . Inclusion strategies that work . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Longmore , P .  ( 2003 )  . Why I burned my book and other essays
on disability . Philadelphia : Temple University Press . 
Mayes , T . A .  ,  & Zirkel , P . A .  ( 2000 )  . State educational agencies and special education : Obligations and liabilities . 
Boston University Public Interest Law Journal , 10 , 62–90 . 
McLaughlin , M .  ,  & Nolet , V .  ( 2004 )  . What every principal
needs to know about special education . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
Michalko , R .  ( 2002 )  . The difference that disability makes . 
Philadelphia : Temple University Press . 
Obiakor , F .  ,  & Ford , B .  ( 2002 )  . Creating successful learning
environments for African American learners with exceptionalities . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Osborne , A .  ,  & Russo , C .  ( 2003 )  . Special education and the
law : A guide for practitioners . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Corwin Press . 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 , as amended , 20 U . S . C . A . §§ 701-
796l ( West 1998 & Supp . 2004 )  . 
School Board of Nassau County v . Arline , 480 U . S . 237 
( 1987 )  . 
Southeastern Community College v . Davis , 442 U . S . 397 
( 1979 )  . 
Thompson , S .  , Quenemoen , R .  , Thurlow , M .  ,  & Ysseldyke , J .  
( 2001 )  . Alternate assessments for students with disabilities . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973———863
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 863
 RELIGION , IN SCHOOLS
In the United States , religion and its place within the
public school walls has been a source of ongoing controversy for well over 150 years . Under the rubric of
secularism , the early common schools of the nineteenth century generally favored a loosely Protestant
ethos , and the textbooks and daily practices tended
to reflect this . Textbooks generally carried an overt
Protestant orientation and could be fiercely antiCatholic , with some even warning against the evils of 
 “ popery .  ” Many public schools began their days with
collective prayers and readings out of the King James
Version of the Bible . Such vaguely Protestant practices were viewed by the courts as secular , and consequently , unproblematic . These daily practices would
remain the norm in many public schools—but not
all—until the mid-twentieth century . 
The most important change regarding religion and
public schooling occurred during the early 1960s , when
the U . S . Supreme Court more narrowly defined secularism . In a series of Supreme Court decisions , statesponsored prayer was invalidated and then a year later , 
compulsory Bible readings . In each instance , the court
ruled that nonspecific , nondenominational religious
exercises were still state-sponsored religious , not secular , exercises and , as such , were banned under the
establishment clause of the U . S . Constitution . Subsequent court decisions invalidated ( a ) bans on the teaching of evolution in public schools and ( b ) state
requirements to teach creationism if evolution were
taught in public schools , as well as legislated “ moment
of silence ” mandates . Since the 1960s , secularism has
meant that public schools could neither favor nor disfavor religion . Public schools were and are free to teach
about various religions and religious history , but they
cannot teach religion as “ truth ” or as history or science . 
While there was strong support for the Supreme
Court ’ s redefinition of secularism , some Protestants
strenuously objected to the elimination of collective
school prayer and Bible readings . By the late 1970s , 
as part of a larger movement , Protestant conservatives
mobilized in hopes of gaining a large enough political
majority to roll back these recent court decisions . One
part of their agenda was to return more overt religious
practices and displays to the public school while eliminating those aspects that were considered a threat to
faith , under the rubric of fostering a common morality
for an increasingly diverse America . As a consequence , 
movement activists employed a multifaceted strategy
focused on ( a ) running like-minded adherents for the
local school board or securing their appointment to
the state board of education and ( b ) litigation , particularly in the areas of curriculum , student , and faculty
religious expression , and providing public monies for
parents who send their children to private religious
schools . 
However , beginning in the 1960s , the religious and
political culture was moving in simultaneous and contradictory directions . While many Americans were
increasingly public regarding their Protestant devotion , 
there was an explosion of religious innovation and
exploration , with over half of the current 2 , 000 religious
organizations forming after 1960 . Such heterodoxy has
been a hallmark of American religious culture , which
has also been remarkably individualistic , entrepreneurial , and idiosyncratic since the colonial era . 
For public schools , this heightened and polyglot of
religiosity and faith is playing out in interesting ways . 
First , while a vague Protestantism once permeated
most schools , this is much less the case since the
1960s . In addition , not only are U . S . students increasingly diverse across Christian denominations , but they
are incredibly diverse across religious faiths , as well
as those students who follow no theological tradition . 
One result of the religious diversity is that students are
free to pursue their religious beliefs during the school
day so long as this pursuit does not interfere with the
maintenance of an orderly school environment . 
Furthermore , it is clear that public schools are free
to teach students about various religious heritages so
long as they do not endorse or demean religion itself . 
Academic study of religion is constitutional in public
schools . Public schools can also cover material , such
as sexuality education and evolution , that some religious parents might find morally objectionable . The
federal courts have been clear that mere exposure to
possibly religiously objectionable material does not
burden a student ’ s free exercise rights . 
Finally , the politics surrounding public education
and religion might be as intense as at any point in U . S . 
history , given the sheer religious diversity interacting
with a highly mobilized religious political constituency . These long-standing issues have only
become more complex over time . It is clear that issues
of religion , religious faith , belief , nonbelief , and secularism will continue to shape U . S . public education . 
—Catherine A . Lugg
864———Religion , in Schools
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 864
See also Bible , as history ; Christian Coalition ; creationism ; 
dogmatism and scales of Rokeach ; fundamentalism ; rightwing politics , advocates , impact on education
Further Readings and References
Armstrong , K .  ( 2000 )  . The battle for God . New York : Knopf . 
Detwiler , F .  ( 2000 )  . Standing on the premises of God : The
Christian Right ’ s fight to redefine America ’ s public
schools . New York : New York University Press . 
French , R .  ( 2003 )  . Shopping for religion : The change in everyday religious practice and the importance to the law . 
Buffalo Law Review , 51 , 127–199 . 
Lugg , C . A .  ( 2001 )  . The Christian Right : A cultivate collective
of interest groups . Educational Policy , 15 ( 1 )  , 41–57 . 
Lugg , C . A .  ( 2004 )  . One nation under God ? Religion and the
politics of education in a post-9 / 11 America . Educational
Policy , 18 ( 1 )  , 169–187 . 
 RESEARCH METHODS
Educational research and its associated methodologies
comprise a vast array of investigative methods , all of
which are intended to improve the quality and delivery
of educational services today . Traditionally , scientific
studies have been thought of as either basic or applied . 
Whereas the purpose of the former has been simply to
advance knowledge , the purpose of the latter has been
to solve immediate , practical , or pressing problems . 
However , not all studies fit this simple dichotomy , particularly those in the social and biobehavioral sciences . 
Recently , a third term has been put forth by the scientific community to include those studies that are
neither exclusively basic nor exclusively applied and
that serves as a bridge between the two . These studies
are referred to as translational research and have the
express purpose of linking new developments in the
laboratory with improvements in clinical practice and
care . In the applied social sciences , like education , 
investigators tend to further classify their methods
based on the nature of their data rather than simply the
type of outcome . In this regard , educational researchers
tend to describe their methods as either quantitative
or qualitative . The following discussion of educational
research methods is organized this way as well . 
SCIENTIFIC METHOD
Within any scientifically justifiable form of research
resides a scientific method . Although the sequence of
events may vary based on the type of research practiced , investigators of all disciplines recognize the
importance of a sound and verifiable methodology . 
For example , investigators using quantitative methods
tend to follow a linear sequence of events in the execution of their studies : 
Observe → Define → Hypothesize → Test → Conclude
Investigators using qualitative methods tend to
follow a different , more circular path to knowledge generation . The qualitative approach requires that the investigator repeatedly cycle through the first three steps of
the sequence , at increasingly greater depths , before ending with a hypothetical statement . Both approaches are
scientifically valid and philosophically justifiable , but
neither one alone is capable of capturing the breadth and
depth of investigative educational research methodologies today , despite the recent attempt to reinforce the
primacy of some methods by the National Research
Council ’ s 2002 book Scientific Research in Education . 
QUANTITATIVE METHODS
Quantitative research methods are those in which statistical techniques are applied to data gathered as a part of
well-defined , carefully executed study . Very often these
studies involve experimental methods using numerical
data or , more formally , a numerical explanation of some
aspect of reality . Quantitative methods assume that the
characteristics of events can be accurately represented
with numbers , and that if we can understand how the
numbers fluctuate or covary with other factors , we will
be closer to understanding the events and the problems
that give rise to them well enough to intervene . The
philosophical basis for this line of thinking is considered
to be positivism , the premise of which assumes that true
knowledge can come only from the natural sciences and
is derived from verifiable observations of actual events . 
A hallmark of most quantitative studies is that of deductive reasoning , which is interpreted to mean that all scientific problems can actually be subdivided into smaller
problems based on prior verifiable truths that are now
amenable to more focused investigation . Listed below
are several of the more prominent quantitative research
methods and a brief explanation of their defining criteria : 
• Experimental : experiments with active manipulation
of a condition in which individuals are the units of
analysis
Research Methods———865
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 865
• Quasiexperimental : experiments with active manipulation of a condition in which naturally occurring
groups are the units of analysis
• Survey : oral or written questionnaires in which the
thoughts , beliefs , or opinions of respondents are
solicited
• Validity : attributes of an instrument , theory , or measure are studied and compared with the attributes of
another instrument , theory , or measure
• Descriptive : computation of frequency counts and / or
measures of central tendency , variability , or association , exclusively
Most quantitative studies are hypothesis driven and
have a twofold purpose :  ( 1 ) to describe attributes of a
group ( or groups ) of participants on one or more variables of interest and ( 2 ) to compare the group ’ s
performance with an established population value 
( one-sample test ) or with the performance of another
appropriately comparable group ( two-sample test )  . In
either case , it is usually the group means that are compared and usually within the context of some measure
of variability such as the variance or standard deviation . In some cases , when only very few subjects are
available for analysis , or the data deviate substantially
from normality , the medians and ranges are compared
in lieu of the means and variances . The former is
referred to as a nonparametric test , while the latter is
considered a parametric test . 
Educators have a wide range of designs available to
them when studying the performance of groups . In the
case of two groups , it is imperative that one group serve
as the control ( no treatment ) or at least the standard of
treatment to which the new approach is being compared . 
Without some type of control group , it is impossible
to estimate how much of the change in performance
is attributable to the new treatment and how much is due
to chance fluctuation . Where possible , investigators
should strive to collect information on the variables of
interest immediately prior to the experimental period 
( baseline observations ) as well as immediately after the
experimental period ( follow-up observations )  . There are
two major benefits to the pretest-posttest approach to
experimentation :  ( 1 ) it increases the sensitivity of the
design by adjusting the follow-up scores for the baseline
scores and ( 2 ) it enhances the potential experimental
validity of the study by minimizing the number of alternative explanations for the change . More sophisticated
designs for longitudinal studies actually allow for multiple pretest and multiple posttest evaluation periods
to get a better sense of change over smaller intervals as
well as to offset some of the potential threats to experimental validity . 
These sources are also referred to as sources of
invalidity and include factors that relate to internal
validity ( or factors that confound the effect of the
experimental condition ) and internal validity ( the representativeness of the research results )  . Internal variance or invalidity can be due to
• History : specific events other than the experimental
condition that occur between the first and second
measurement
• Maturation : processes such as growing older , hungrier , and so on that operate within the subjects as a
function of the passage of time
• Testing : the impact or effect of an initial test or measurement on a following test or measurement
• Instrumentation : changes in obtained measurements
due to changes in observers or changes in the calibration of the instrument employed
• Statistical regression : a naturally occurring phenomenon related to selection of subjects based on their
extreme scores
• Selection : differential , nonrandom selection of
subjects due to bias
• Experimental mortality : loss of respondents over the
course of the research project
• Selection-maturation interaction : effects related to
how the subjects were selected and interacted with
the processes encountered
External sources of variance or invalidity include
• Reactive / interactive effects of testing : the effect of a
pretest or initial measurement on the subject ’ s sensitivity to the implementation of the experimental condition
• Interactive effects of selection and the experimental
condition : effects related to bias in the selection of
subjects and their responsiveness to the experimental
condition
• Reactive effects of experimental arrangements : 
effects related to possible exposure to the experimental condition in nonexperimental settings
• Multiple treatment interference : the effect of previous treatments on future performance when more
than one experimental condition is employed
QUALITATIVE METHODS
Qualitative research methods are those in which interpretive frameworks are applied to subjectively
obtained themes observed in narrative data . Most
often the interpretive frameworks are based on the
866———Research Methods
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 866
feelings , beliefs , or subjective experiences of the investigator . Field notes , written records of interviews , and
physical artifacts typically constitute the units of
analysis in these studies . For the qualitative investigator , the key to understanding a given problem lies in
seeing it through the eyes of others , complete with
the conditions and contexts that accompany individual
evaluations . In this regard there is little in the way of
universal truths , numerical or otherwise , on which to
base conclusions . Hence , qualitative studies tend to
embrace inductive thinking and , as a result , derive
interpretive themes from a collection of actual events
but always within a given context . The philosophical
roots of qualitative research run deeply and multifariously throughout history ; however , most seem to credit
postpositivism and its more applied offshoot , constructivism , as providing the intellectual basis for the
methodology . For many qualitativists , it is not simply
movement from specific cases to a general one that
advances science but rather the pursuit of multiple
realities ( as opposed to a single truth )  . Listed below are
several of the more prominent qualitative methods and
a brief explanation of their defining criteria : 
• Case study : organized , in-depth investigation of a
specific person , place , or set of events
• Historiography : formal analysis of past events to
understand some aspect of contemporary behavior
• Ethnography : systematic descriptions of cultural
phenomena using specifically defined segments of
society
• Grounded theory : iterative , data-driven account of
general trends and / or themes present in observations
capable of producing a theoretical description of
some aspect of reality
• Phenomenology : in-depth account of individually
held evaluations of life experiences
Qualitative research is focused on contextual
understanding and / or contextual factors . Qualitative
research often focuses on naturally existing conditions
and forgoes the introduction of experimental interventions . Induction and inductive logic / reasoning form the
foundation of qualitative research . Unanticipated or
serendipitous results are of prime interest to those
working in the area of qualitative research . A precondition of such inferencing is that of the validity of the
descriptive findings ; that is , the ability of an investigative team to validate that the test has different
implications for the ethnographic and phenomenological types of studies . 
Whereas quantitative researchers tend to emphasize the context-independent nature of their findings , 
qualitative researchers strive to interpret their findings
within a particular context . It is precisely the conditions under which the events of interest occur and the
values placed on these events by specific groups of
people that help explain the meaningfulness and the
richness of events . As such , qualitative research is
usually but not always descriptive in nature . 
Qualitative studies have a number of defining criteria . First and foremost is that hypotheses generally
derive from a study ’ s findings rather than serve as the
basis for one . Whether one is analyzing transcripts , 
field notes , or a completed ethnographic record , it is
only after the recorded information has been thoroughly
analyzed that hypothetical statements can actually be
obtained from the information at hand . Second , the
subjective nature of the evaluation necessitates that the
investigator state any preconceived notions , beliefs , or
biases about the project a priori so that reviewers are
able to evaluate the findings in light of the investigator ’ s predisposing positions in a given area . Third , 
although the scientifically justifiable methods are used
in both quantitative and qualitative studies , the pathway to science in the qualitative studies is much more
circular than linear , and necessitates revisiting elements of a study at increasingly more sophisticated
levels of specification as the study progresses . 
MIXED METHODS RESEARCH
Published research today tends to exist in distinct
methodological forms ; that is , either exclusively quantitative or exclusively qualitative . Because of the very
different philosophical orientations of each and the
limitations inherent in both paradigms , incorporating
elements of both types of methods into a single , wellintegrated study remains a difficult task even for the
most experienced investigator . Nonetheless , investigators are trying to incorporate elements of both methodologies into their studies with increasing frequency . 
Mixed methods studies is the term given to such studies . Integration of the different approaches can occur in
many different forms throughout a given study , either
by using single applications ( quantitative or qualitative
method ) within alternating phases of the study or by
using multiple applications ( quantitative as well as
qualitative ) with a single phase of a study—either to
confirm findings , extend findings , or to provide complementary information that may not be available with
Research Methods———867
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 867
either method alone . As with other forms of research
methods , the designs themselves can get complex . 
There are a number of fairly straightforward types of
mixed methods designs for investigators wishing to
experiment with such applications . 
A further demarcation that exists in research methodology is the delineation between group research and
single-subject research . Group research and designs
involve the comparison of specific groups of individuals related to a feature of interest . Often it is the effect
of a particular experimental condition on the identified
feature that is of interest to the investigator . Group
designs can encompass both survey and experimental
research . Group research yields an average or overall
effect of a particular experimental condition on the
group as a whole , and the results of any research using
a group design are compared to the likelihood that
those results could have occurred by chance . 
Group designs involve the examination of an experimental condition ’ s effect on a group of individuals . 
Generally , the effect of the condition on the members of
an experimental group is compared to the effect on a
similar or equivalent group whose members did not
receive the condition ( i . e .  , a control group )  . The vast
majority of educational research involves the use of
group designs , and much of what is established as best
practice in the field is based on data derived from such
research . However , the great shortfall of group design is
that the results obtained from such research may result
in outcomes that may not naturally exist ( as they are
averages of the individual performance of each group
member )  . Group designs can be either experimental or
quasiexperimental in nature . Examples of group
designs include
• The pretest-posttest control group design
• The posttest only control group design
• The Solomon four-group design
• The nonequivalent control group design
• The separate sample pretest-posttest design
• The separate sample pretest-posttest control group design
The pretest-posttest control group design is
arguably the most commonly employed design for
educational research . The design involves randomly
selecting two groups of participants and measuring
a behavior of interest among the members of each
group . One group ( the experimental group ) then is
exposed to an intervention or condition that might
affect the behavior of interest , while the other group 
( control group ) is excluded from this exposure . The
measurement procedures are then repeated with both
groups , and the posttest scores are then compared
with each other and significant differences are noted
and analyzed . Any significant differences in postintervention functioning by the experimental group is
attributed to the effect of the intervening condition . 
Pretest scores are used in this design as a comparison
to posttest functioning and as a covariate in statistical
analysis . 
The posttest only control group design is an experimental design in which two randomly selected
groups of participants are selected with one ( the
experimental group ) exposed to an intervening condition while the second ( control group ) is not . No
pretests are conducted in this design , and the equivalence of the two groups is assumed based upon the
nature of the random selection process . A pretest is
not necessary within the confidence limits of any
selected measures of significance , given the lack of
bias inherent in randomization . For psychological reasons , many educators possess a distrust of this design
based upon a need to know the nature of both groups ’ 
performance prior to the application of the experimental condition . The design does address any invalidity that could be due to the interactive effect of
testing and the experimental condition . 
The Solomon four-group design is an extended
modification of the pretest-posttest control group
design in which four randomly selected groups of participants are employed . In structure , this design is a
combination of the two previous designs . Initially , the
design is identical to the pretest-posttest control group
design , but two additional groups ( one that receives
both the experimental condition and a posttest and one
that is posttested only but is not exposed to the experimental condition ) are included as extensions of the
experimental and control groups . While this design
parallels the pretest-posttest control group design , it
can provide greater support for the generalizability of
any experimental condition and greater understanding
of the interactive effects of intervention . 
The nonequivalent control group design is one
of the most common designs employed in real-world
school settings . It is similar to the pretest-posttest control group design in that two groups are identified as
either the experimental or control group and pretested . 
The experimental group then receives the prescribed
intervention while the control group does not . 
Posttests are then conducted on both groups , and the
data are compared and analyzed . The primary difference
868———Research Methods
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 868
in this design and the pretest-posttest control group
design is that the two groups are not randomly
selected but rather are drawn from naturally assembled collections ( i . e .  , classrooms )  . The assignment of
the experimental intervention is randomly applied to
one group , or the other is assumed to be random . 
Another quasiexperimental design is the separate
sample pretest-posttest design . This design involves
the use of two samples , one of which is pretested and
may or may not receive the prescribed intervention
and a second group to which the experimental condition is applied and then posttested . These samples can
consist of a variety of subgroups that cannot be randomly selected and segregated to receive the prescribed intervention . Those conducting the research
can , however , exercise control over when the measurements will take place and who will be assessed . 
The various groups are assembled into the two samples based upon whether or not they were exposed to
the experimental conditions , and the resulting data are
compared and analyzed . 
The separate sample pretest-posttest control group
design is an extension of the previous design and is
identical to the separate sample pretest-posttest design
except for the addition of two samples that are not
exposed to the experimental condition . This design
allows for the inclusion of large subgroups in each
sample ( as does the previous design ) yet also provides
a control group sample ( one group that receives only
the pretest and another group that receives only the
posttest ) to be used for comparison . 
Single-subject research and designs evolved as a
reaction to the focus of group designs on the mean or
average performance of the various groups . It was felt
that this average could ( and often did ) result in a measured level of performance that did not naturally exist . 
Single-subject research involves the effect of manipulating a specific experimental condition on the observable and measurable behavior of a single individual . 
Formal single-subject research designs were developed in the 1960s by behavior analysts as a means of
validating certain behavior modification practices / 
procedures . Single-subject research designs include
• The reversal design
• The multiple baseline design
The reversal design involves measuring a behavior
of interest over time to obtain a picture of its operant
level and stability . The experimental condition is then
applied , and the behavior continues to be measured to
determine if the experimental condition produces an
observable change . If this is the case , the experimental
condition is then discontinued ( or altered ) to determine
if the behavior change is indeed related to the presence
of the experimental condition . If the behavior change
seems to be dependent on the experimental condition , 
then the expectation is that the behavior of interest
would return to preexperimental levels . Should this be
the case , the experimental condition is then applied
again to recover the behavior change . In essence , the
efficacy of the experimental condition is demonstrated
by the predictable behavior change when that condition is systematically applied and removed . 
Special cases of the reversal design are the alternating treatments and multielement designs . The alternating treatments design is employed to examine the
relative efficacy of two or more experimental conditions . The design is identical to the reversal design
except that during the experimental conditions , several
techniques are applied sequentially . The impact of each
condition on behavior is then compared both to baseline
conditions and to each other . The multielement design is
a modification of the reversal design in which different
experimental conditions are applied individually and
sequentially to determine their relative efficacy . The
impact of each experimental condition is compared to
the baseline level of the target behavior and to each
other to identify which had the most positive effect . 
The multiple baseline technique is an additional single-subject design that may be employed as an alternative to the reversal technique . This approach is
appropriate when a behavior is irreversible ( such as
reading ) or when reversing a behavior is not ethically or
practically desirable ( such as physical aggression )  . In
this design , several different behaviors are measured
over time to establish a baseline of their stability and
level . An experimental condition is then applied to one
of the behaviors to produce an observable and measurable change . Both the change produced in that particular behavior and any lack of change in the other
observed behaviors is noted . If this is indeed the case , 
the experimental condition is then applied to a second 
( unchanged ) behavior . If the experimental condition
results in a similar change in the second behavior , and
no change is noted in the other unchanged behaviors , it
is then applied to those unchanged behaviors in a systematic manner over time . Continued similar changes
in the various behaviors under study over time upon
the application of the experimental condition provides
Research Methods———869
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 869
evidence that the observed changes are due to the condition and not to coincidence . 
The changing criterion design and the intensified
treatments design are special types of multiple baseline
techniques . In the changing criterion design , a baseline
level of the target behavior is determined and a series
of stepwise changes in a criterion or performance level
necessary for reinforcement are established . Changes
in behavior to meet the preset criterion are noted and
compared to previous performance . In the intensified
treatments design , the delivery of reinforcement or
punishment itself is intensified across sequential
experimental phases . In essence , the experimenter looks
for behavior changes consistent with increasing intensity or higher criterion levels . 
A combination of the multielement or alternating
treatments and multiple baseline designs can also be
employed to compare the effect of different experimental conditions over time and with different individuals . In these designs , a baseline level of the target
behavior is established for three or more individuals , 
and a sequence of discrete experimental conditions are
applied to the behavior in the different individuals . As
with the multiple baseline design , the experimental
conditions are initiated at different points in time and
the experimenter looks for similar changes in subject
behavior across the different conditions and baselines . 
The only difference for the alternating treatments , multiple baseline design is that two experimental conditions are alternated during the intervention phase and
are again both initiated across each individual situation
at differing points in time . 
Regardless of whether a group or single-subject
approach to research is employed , errors in the interpretation of experimental results are inevitable . Some
errors are due to experimenter bias and some are naturally occurring side effects of the research itself . Of
those errors due to the design of research , both paradigms are subject to Type 1 and Type 2 errors . 
Type 1 errors occur when one affirms that an
experimental condition is functional , when in fact it
is not . Type 1 errors occur in group designs at a rate
determined by the level of statistical probability set
for a given experiment . For example , if a 0 . 05 level of
significance is set for a particular study , a 1 in 20
chance exists for the experimenter to make a Type 1
error . As single-subject research has no preset confidence level , but rather depends on visual inspection
related to an experimental condition ’ s functionality , 
the chances of making a Type 1 error are infinitesimal
by comparison . 
Type 2 errors occur when an experimental condition is functional yet is identified as being ineffective . 
Group designs have statistically predictable rates for
the occurrence of Type 2 errors that are moderately
high and directly related to their preset significance
levels . Single-subject designs , due to their extraordinarily low rates of Type 1 errors , are inherently
subject to extremely high rates of Type 2 errors . 
In essence , the lower the chance of committing a
Type 1 error in any experiment , the higher the chance
of committing a Type 2 error and vice versa . Group
research has moderately low levels of potential Type 1
errors and correspondingly moderately high rates of
Type 2 errors . Single-subject research operates at very
low levels of Type 1 errors and correspondingly higher
rates of Type 2 errors in relation to group research . 
When designing experiments , those conducting
research must decide whether it is more desirable to
reject potentially effective practices ( Type 2 errors ) at
a higher rate in order to ensure that only the most
effective , robust interventions are validated by using
single-subject designs or to accept the moderate levels
of Type 1 and Type 2 errors in group research and
thereby ensure the validation of both many ineffective
practices and the rejection of a similar number of
effective ones . 
Research errors stem , in large part , from bias on
the part of the experimenter . Bias can affect the selection of subjects , the evaluation of data , and the interpretation of results . Bias can influence data via
variables whose effects cannot be separated from the
effect of the experimental condition . Control of selection though randomization and control of confounding
variables through their identification and elimination
are the experimenter ’ s only options to reduce existing
bias . The use of nonrandom ( nonprobability ) sampling makes generalization of the study ’ s results to
other populations and settings invalid , as the sample
use is distorted and not representative of the overall
population . 
While all research is subject to influences of
individual interpretation , concern exists among professionals in relation to the identification and measurement
of subjective factors . Social validity , or the concept that
any research effort should address issues of social
importance , may be the most critical feature of any
research project . However , the very concept of social
validity has subjective connotations . Further contextual
factors such as unique environmental conditions or the
personal perceptions of subjects , research observers , or
the public in general have been a focus of the concern
870———Research Methods
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 870
related to research subjectivity . Indeed , understanding
those unique contextual factors related to the success of
any experimental intervention is often critical to validating the efficacy of that intervention . 
The concern over subjective contextual factors has
led many to question the certitude of empirical data . 
The perspective that each individual constructs personal meaning from data has also given rise to concerns over the meaningfulness of research findings . 
These positions have brought the postmodern perspective to the forefront and placed it in direct opposition to the traditional approaches to conducting , 
analyzing , and reporting research findings . 
The postmodern perspective has arisen in reaction
to the traditional approaches and the position that
modern scientific research methods are the singular
foundation of determining the definition and nature of 
 “ truth .  ” Postmodernism attempts to take an atheoretical approach to understanding data and constructing
meaning . Postmodernism , in relation to educational
research , attempts to provide possible alternative
explanations or interpretations of experimental data
by expanding the parameters used to define and support these explanations and / or interpretations . The
inclusivity of the postmodern approach allows for the
consideration of all interpretations or explanations
except for the modernistic perspective of exclusivity
that would subordinate these alternatives . 
—J . M . Blackbourn , Richard Ittenbach , 
and Jennifer Fillingim
See also action research ; Baer , Donald ; behaviorism ; effect
size ; empiricism ; item response theory ; Kuhn , Thomas ; 
mixed methods , in research ; postmodernism ; qualitative
research , history , theories , issues ; quantitative research
methods ; questionnaires ; surveys and survey results
Further Readings and References
Blackbourn , J . M .  ,  & Fillingim , J . G .  ( 2004 )  . The multielement multiple baseline design . Proceedings of the
Southeastern Association on Mental Retardation
Conference , Philadelphia , MS : AAMR . 
Burke , J .  ( 2001 )  . Toward a new classification of nonexperimental quantitative research . Educational Researcher , 
30 ( 2 )  , 3–14 . 
Creswell , J . W .  ( 2003 )  . Research design : Qualitative , quantitative , and mixed methods approaches . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Sage . 
Creswell , J . W .  , Plano Clark , V . L .  , Gutmann , M . L .  ,  & 
Hanson , W . E .  ( 2003 )  . Advanced mixed methods research
designs . In A . Tashakkori & C . Teddlie ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of
mixed methods in social and behavioral research ( pp . 209–
240 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Eisner , E .  ( 1997 )  . The promise and perils of alternative forms
of data representation . Educational Researcher , 26 ( 6 )  , 4–9 . 
Goodall , H .  ( 2000 )  . Writing the new ethnography . Walnut
Creek , CA : Altamira . 
Janesick , V . J .  ( 2001 )  . The choreography of qualitative
research design : Minuets , improvisations , and crystallization . In N . K . Denzin & Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of
qualitative research ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 379–399 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Johnson , R .  ,  & Onwuegbuzie , A .  ( 2004 )  . Mixed methods
research : A research paradigm whose time has come . 
Educational Researcher , 33 ( 7 )  , 14–26 . 
King , G .  , Keohane , R . O .  ,  & Verba , S .  ( 2001 )  . Designing
social inquiry : Scientific inference in qualitative research . 
Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . 
Morse , J . M .  ( 2003 )  . Principles of mixed methods and multimethod research designs . In A . Tashakkori & C . Teddlie 
( Eds .  )  , Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research ( pp . 189–208 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Towne , L .  ,  & Shavelson , R .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2002 )  . Scientific research
in education . Washington , DC : National Academies Press . 
Van Houten , R .  ,  & Hall , R . V .  ( 2001 )  . The measurement of
behavior : Behavior modification . Austin , TX : Pro-Ed . 
Wersma , W .  ,  & Jurs , S . G .  ( 2004 )  . Research methods in education : An introduction . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
 RESILIENCY
Resiliency or resilience is the ability to “ bounce back ” 
from a stressful or traumatic experience . Resiliency
has been an issue in psychology and counseling for
years . More recently , it has become a topic of increasing interest to educators generally . Discovering what
makes an individual resilient and learning how to
develop conditions in schools to help students and
staff become more resilient are current interests of
administrators . In addition , administrators themselves
are assessing their own resiliency and trying to find
ways to increase their resiliency as the roles of school
and district leaders become more and more complex
and stressful . 
The ability to adapt or adjust becomes of particular
importance as the research accumulates indicating
that those people who are resilient will be more likely
to overcome adversity and cope with and / or adapt to
change . A major factor in resilient adaptation is good
relationships . Investigators have consistently pointed
to the critical importance of strong connections with
at least one supportive adult : in many instances a primary caregiver , who is among the earliest , most proximal , and most enduring of socializing influences . 
Sound interpersonal relationship in the early years can
Resiliency———871
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 871
foster the growth of effective coping skills that , in turn , 
can help children in managing assorted adversities
subsequently encountered in life . 
Of particular interest to educators is the consistent
finding that relationships with individuals outside the
family can positively influence the development of
resiliency . Neighborhood networks and / or home-visit
interventions can be invaluable in helping parents
cope with their own stressors and consequently avoiding the transfer of personal stress to their own
children . Teachers and informal mentors in the community can be just as valuable as support systems as
family members . If such relationships reach a critical
point , these connections can compensate greatly for
difficult family situations . 
DEVELOPMENT OF RESILIENCE
Rather consistently , studies on resilience point to a
common set of findings regarding what influences the
development of resilience . There appear to be three
major categories of protective factors : individual
attributes , such as good intellectual skills , positive
temperament , and positive views of the self ; family
qualities , such as high warmth , cohesion , expectations , 
and involvement ; and supportive systems outside the
family , such as strong social networks or good schools . 
A list of attributes of individuals and their contexts
often associated with resilience have been developed . 
They include cognitive abilities ( IQ scores , attention
skills , executive functioning skills )  , self-perceptions
of competence , worth , confidence ( self-efficacy , selfesteem )  , temperament and personality ( adaptability , 
sociability )  , self-regulation skills ( impulse control , 
affect and arousal regulation )  , and a positive outlook
on life ( hopefulness , beliefs that life has meaning , 
faith ) as examples in the individual differences perspective . In the area of relationships , some examples
include parenting quality ( including warmth , structure
and monitoring , expectations )  , close relationships
with competent adults ( parents , relatives , mentors )  , 
and connections to prosocial and rule-abiding peers 
( among older children )  . As for community resources
and opportunities , good schools , connections to
prosocial organizations ( such as clubs or religious
groups )  , neighborhood quality ( public safety , collective supervision , libraries , recreation centers )  , and
quality of social services and health care are offered . 
While Jerry Patterson ’ s 2001 work addresses school
administrators rather than children and adolescents , his
point that resilience is not a short-term characteristic
that changes daily but a capacity individuals have to
move ahead under adversity is important , regardless
of developmental stage . Like those who have
researched resiliency in children , Patterson declares
that there is no single , magic checklist for strengthening resilience . He does , however , identify two central
points that can be used as guides . First , keep in mind
that it is not so much what you do , it is how you think
about what you do that makes all the difference . 
Second , keep in mind that people don ’ t choose to be
nonresilient . They simply choose not to do what it
takes to become resilient . 
—Anita Pankake and Sylvia Mendez-Morse
See also at-risk students ; Black education ; child development
theories ; esteem needs ; immigration , history and impact in
education ; individual differences , in children ; Latinos ; leadership effectiveness ; mentoring ; networking and network
theory ; personality ; psychology , types of ; social capital
Further Readings and References
Cortina , R .  ,  & Gendreau , M .  ( 2003 )  . Immigrants and schooling : Mexicans in New York . New York : Center for
Migration Studies . 
Luthar , S . S .  ,  & Zelazo , L . B .  ( 2003 )  . Research on resilience : 
An integrative review . In S . S . Luthar ( Ed .  )  , Resilience and
vulnerability : Adaptation in the context of childhood
adversities ( pp . 510–549 )  . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge
University Press . 
Masten , A . S .  ,  & Powell , J . L .  ( 2003 )  . A resilience framework
for research , policy , and practice . In S . S . Luthar ( Ed .  )  , 
Resilience and vulnerability : Adaptation in the context
of childhood adversities ( pp . 1–15 )  . Cambridge , UK : 
Cambridge University Press . 
Patterson , J .  ( 2001 )  . Resilience in the face of adversity . The
School Administrator , 6 ( 58 )  , 18–21 . 
Yates , T . M .  , Egeland , B .  ,  & Stroufe , A .  ( 2003 )  . Rethinking
resilience : A developmental perspective . In S . S . Luthar 
( Ed .  )  , Resilience and vulnerability : Adaptation in the context of childhood adversities ( pp . 243–266 )  . Cambridge , 
UK : Cambridge University Press . 
 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Resource management is the facilitation and coordination of fiscal , human , and physical resources in
alignment with the mission and strategic plan of the
organization . In public schools , resource management involves planning , development , and control of
872———Resource Management
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 872
restricted and unrestricted resources available to the
organization or division . Resource management
focuses on efficient direction and control of staff , 
facilities , equipment , budget , and resource development to accomplish organizational goals . The key
question is , How does the school allocate resources to
most effectively support the strategic plan ? 
Because personnel-related costs represent 80% to
90% of a public school budget , staffing patterns , recruiting , retaining , and development are major components
of resource management . Most school districts have
central office functions that direct and control employee
benefits and compensation , employee records , and personnel policies . In addition , the staffing patterns of most
schools are established by district policies . 
Resource management involves an ongoing process
of developing systems , policies , and procedures that
are designed to improve productivity in relationship to
fiscal , personnel , and facilities . Cost-effective analysis , 
feasibility studies , and the evaluation of fiscal data
are integral elements of resource management . Data
analysis and systems thinking are necessary skills for
effective resource management . Education leaders
need to be able to use financial information data as
readily as they use other forms of data . 
Since state and federal laws can affect both current
and future funding , resource management requires ongoing reviews of legislation , proposed funding , and new
laws . It also requires research , program evaluation , and
recommendations for more cost-effective procedures . 
Cash flow is an ongoing issue for districts ; potential negative cash flow is the primary problem . Most
school districts have centralized policies and procedures that ensure that expenditures and revenues are in
balance . As a result , most operating expenses and personnel costs are controlled by the district ’ s central
office . Principals are provided guidelines and procedures for expenditures of funds . 
Resource management requires that leadership
establish basic functions and evaluate between competing alternatives . The relationships between school
district goals , scope of services , costs , and performance benchmarks are complex . District leadership
needs to seek input and feedback from stakeholders
and balance proposed improvements with existing
services . For example , most districts have centralized
purchasing , transportation , and capital construction to
promote efficiency . However , leaders are continuously
faced with evaluating centralized efficiency compared
to advantages of site-based decision making . 
Overriding issues for resource management include
the efficient use of resources and the elimination of
waste . Resource management is complex ; education
leaders must coordinate , integrate , and formalize
resource utilization and develop revenue projections , 
expenditures , and baseline data . Organizational efforts
to ensure that all stakeholders actively work to eliminate waste are ongoing and never ending . 
Many believe that principals and other stakeholders must be empowered in meaningful ways
if resource management is to be effective within
schools . The General Accounting Office ( GAO ) identified three large school districts ( Prince William
County , Virginia , Dade County , Florida , and Edmonton , 
Alberta ) that have successfully delegated substantial
authority for budget , personnel , and instruction to
school site-based decisions . If districts hope to
develop meaningful site-based resource management , 
they need to establish proactive systems that empower
stakeholders . Because most of budget and human
resource management have become centralized routines , districts must engage stakeholders in special
efforts to redesign the systems , to counteract the
centralized bureaucracy , and to meet the needs of the
students served . 
—Bill Thornton and George C . Hill
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; budgeting ; 
capacity building , of organizations ; Chicago school reform ; 
cost-benefit analyses ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; finance , of public schools ; governance ; innovation , in education ; principalship ; reform , of schools ; 
restructuring , of schools ; salary and salary models ; school
improvement models ; site-based management ; staffing , 
concepts of ; systemic reform ; work task measurement ; 
working conditions , in schools ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Catterall , J . S .  ( 1998 )  . A cost-effectiveness model for the
assessment of educational productivity . New Directions for
Higher Education , 103 , 61–84 . 
Hummel-Rossi , B .  ,  & Ashdown , J .  ( 2002 )  . The state of costbenefit and cost effectiveness analyses in education . 
Review of Educational Research 72 ( 1 )  , 1–30 . 
Monk , D . H .  , Pijanowski , J . C .  ,  & Hussain , S .  ( 1997 )  . How
and where the education dollar is spent . Financing Schools
7 ( 3 )  , 51–62 . Retrieved from . 
Morgan , R . B .  ,  & Smith , J . E .  ( 1996 )  . Staffing the new workplace . Milwaukee , WI : ASQC Press . 
Ward , R .  ( 2004 )  . Improving achievement in low performing
schools . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Resource Management———873
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 873
 RESTRUCTURING , OF SCHOOLS
Since the mid-1950s , the United States has legislated
billions of dollars to improve education and secure
America ’ s competitive edge in the modern world . The
publication of A Nation at Risk in 1983 provided
evidence that earlier attempts at school reform had
not succeeded . In a renewed effort to correct what
was wrong with American education , restructuring
became the new buzzword for educators interested in
boosting student performance that would link 1980s
research findings with policy and practice . The focus
of restructuring was to place the student at the center
of the learning environment by addressing individual
needs within the school organization . Innovative
efforts included site-based management , interdisciplinary team teaching , flexible scheduling , and portfolio
assessment . 
Historically , a bureaucratic model has provided the
frame for the development of the nation ’ s school system . Under this model , large comprehensive schools , 
especially at the secondary level , were built to offer
students variety in course choice and activities . 
Principals and administrative staffs typically manage
the schools in a top-down manner through formalized
goals and procedures . Subjects and teachers are
divided into departments and students are often placed
according to ability and career objectives . The concept of restructuring has provided opportunities to
look beyond the bureaucratic model in search of new
possibilities . 
In an effort to provide stakeholders with a greater
voice and meet the rising needs of the increased
accountability that accompanied the 1990s , states
began instituting site-based decision making while
districts experimented with a wide variety of comprehensive reform models that included best practices . 
At about the same time , a new movement began that
encouraged large inner-city high schools to make significant departures from conventional school organizations and practices to a new model that viewed
teaching and learning as processes that cannot be controlled through standardized practices . This model
was a call for increased collaboration among teachers
to examine and solve the challenges they and their
students were facing . In essence , it called for restructuring the way schools met the needs of its stakeholders . Key to any restructuring effort was the attention
given to size—the size of the classes and the size of
the school . 
Findings resulting from efforts to change the way
schools are led and organized documented that school
restructuring can improve student learning , but for
it to be most effective it should focus on four key
factors : student learning , authentic pedagogy , school
organizational capacity , and external support . By the
mid-1990s , efforts to study the long-term effects of
restructuring began when agencies such as the Center
on Organization and Restructuring of Schools gathered data from public schools involved in the process . 
It soon became obvious that major departures from
conventional practice were taking place in student
experiences ; the professional life of teachers ; leadership , management and governance ; and the coordination of community services . 
Supported by the U . S . Department of Education
and collected by the Center on Organization and
Restructuring Schools , the initial conclusions concerning restructuring were derived from four national studies : School Restructuring Study ( 1994 )  , in which data
were drawn from 24 significantly restructured urban
public schools , evenly divided among K–12 and
located in 16 states ; National Educational Longitudinal
Study of 1988 ( 1992 )  , in which data were drawn from
a nationally representative sample of over 10 , 000
students that began in 1988 and followed participants
from Grade 8 through Grade 12 in 800 high schools ; 
Study of Chicago School Reform ( 1994 )  , which
included survey data from 8 , 000 teachers and principals in 400 elementary and 40 high schools ; and the
Longitudinal Study of School Restructuring ( 1994 )  , 
which included 4-year case studies of eight schools that
had embarked on different forms of restructuring in
four different communities . 
Data from the studies found that in successful
schools ( a ) a vision for the school ’ s mission was seen
as essential to the planning , implementation , and evaluation of restructuring changes ,  ( b ) the communication
of clear goals was essential for all stakeholders and
included in-depth understanding of core subjects as
well as the ability of students to solve problems that
have real world meaning , and ( c ) the building of internal capacity as schools promoted not only improved
achievement for all students but also higher expectations for the staff to work collaboratively as a single
unit . 
Research also showed that in restructured high
schools , teachers were assuming the role of coaches
and encouraging students to become self-directed
learners . Students were being given more hands-on
874———Restructuring , of Schools
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 874
experiences and encouraged to go beyond their textbooks . The expectation for student learning offered
the potential of moving from knowledge , comprehension , and application to analysis , synthesis , and evaluation . The results had a positive impact on school
climate as well as student achievement . Classrooms
began to change their appearance . No longer controlled by lecture , recitation , and teacher-assigned
work , students were encouraged to participate in open
discussion and to focus on more complex self-directed
learning , often in collaborative groupings . 
By 1999 , the U . S . Department of Education began
to offer comprehensive school reform demonstration
grants as a way to assist public schools in their restructuring efforts . Researchers began looking for additional
innovative ways to improve student achievement , and
public and private educational institutions began to
design reform models to assist schools with best practices and building capacity . With so much interest in
restructuring as a way to increase student achievement
and close the existing gaps among students at risk of
academic failure , it was not long before a growing
body of research confirmed that smaller is better if one
is trying to improve a school ’ s instruction and achievement , student behavior , climate , and community relationships . Smaller learning communities as an important
piece of restructuring , especially for high schools , gained
momentum . 
The obvious reason for focusing on smaller learning communities as a viable way to increase achievement is that in a smaller environment , teachers and
students come to know each other better , there is
greater collaboration among the staff , and parents feel
they have a stronger voice in their child ’ s learning . In
addition , the increase in student violence led many
educational reformers to call for the creation of a
better system to meet the needs of the whole child . 
Creating smaller learning environments has since
become synonymous with restructuring , especially at
the high school level , because it is more apt to personalize the educational experience . 
With most American high school students attending schools enrolling more than 1 , 000 students , the
debate surrounding how to meet individual student
needs had generally centered on class size—the
number of students a teacher can effectively teach
during a class period . In the last few years , however , 
the debate has shifted to school size and the consequences for students and teachers if large metropolitan schools are divided into what has come to be
known as smaller learning communities , house plans
and families , or schools within a school . 
Students in schools that were restructured into
smaller learning communities by dividing a large high
school population into groups of approximately 400
students developed sustained relationships with their
teachers and other participating adults . Teachers
improved their working relationships with each other
and increased the time they were able to devote to
meeting individual student needs . Student achievement
improved as students were given greater opportunities
to work productively with one another in mixed-ability
groups using cooperative learning approaches . Parental
participation in school activities increased , with greater
numbers acting as volunteers and becoming actively
involved in their child ’ s progress . 
The research efforts of Mary Anne Raywid , 
Kathleen Cotton , Neal McClusky , and the Bank Street
College of Education in the late 1990s and early 2000
provided strong evidence to the U . S . Department of
Education that restructuring schools into smaller
communal families improved student learning . 
Downsizing within a large high school , researchers
argued , provided the same environment that naturally
small schools achieved and could be seen in improved
achievement , effective governance , stronger internal
supports , improved staff effectiveness and satisfaction , better advisement , and enhanced curricula . 
Equally important , Craig Howley and Robert Bickel
in 2000 found the larger the school , the greater the
negative effect of poverty on student achievement . 
Armed with compelling evidence , a movement
began that suggested that smaller learning communities could be a partial answer to correcting much that
is wrong with American education . Implementing
a variety of structures and strategies , each attempts
to promote academic achievement and prepare all
students for graduation with the knowledge and skills
necessary to make the successful transition to college
and careers ( see Tables 1 and 2 )  . 
The belief in the benefits of restructuring large
schools , particularly inner-city high schools into
smaller learning communities , is broad based and
includes not only the U . S . Department of Education
but private interests such as the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation , Carnegie Foundation of New York , 
and the Annenberg Institute . Together , these groups
have made millions of dollars available to schools
willing to pursue the concept of smaller learning communities as a way of improving education . In addition
Restructuring , of Schools———875
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 875
to improving student achievement , the hope exists that
smaller learning communities will also have a positive
impact on teachers and parents by making effective
communication easier , offering opportunities for collaboration , and encouraging meaningful relationships
between students and adults . 
To assist schools interested in restructuring with
the formation of smaller learning communities , the
U . S . Department of Education has since 2000 offered
discretionary and competitive funding in the form of
12-month planning grants and 36-month implementation
grants . Awards range from $25 , 000 to $250 , 000 for
planning grants and $250 , 000 to $550 , 000 for implementation grants . With the signing of the No Child
Left Behind Act of 2001 , the important purpose of
smaller learning communities was clearly outlined . It
ensured that the funding for smaller learning communities will continue to assist large public high schools
that are defined as schools that include Grades 11 and
12 and enroll at least 1 , 000 students in Grades 9 and
above . Recipients of the grants are authorized to use
their funds to ( a ) study the feasibility of creating
smaller learning communities ,  ( b ) research , develop , 
and implement strategies for creating smaller learning
communities ,  ( c ) provide professional development
for school staff in the teaching methods that would be
used in smaller learning communities , and ( d ) develop
and implement strategies to include parents , business
representatives , community-based organizations , and
other community members in the activities of the
smaller learning community . 
Current trends in restructuring continue to represent an interest in fundamentally changing the way
schools meet the needs of their students and staff . 
Because it enables practitioners to identify and
resolve their own problems , restructuring remains a
dynamic force in educational reform . 
—Shirley Jackson
See also accountability ; achievement gap , of students ; Black education ; expectations , teacher and student cultures ; innovation , 
in education ; Latinos ; learning , theories of ; learning environments ; 
876———Restructuring , of Schools
Table 1 Smaller Learning Community Structures
Name
Academies
House Plans
A School-Within-a-School
Magnet Schools
Description
Subgroups within schools are organized
around particular themes such as a career . 
They combine principles of the school-tocareer movement with academic and
vocational instruction . 
Students within a large school are divided
into groups of several hundred , either
across grade levels or by grade levels . All
houses within the larger school share the
same curriculum and instruction with only
minimal changes . 
A small , autonomous program housed
within a larger school building . Generally
responsible to the district rather than to
the host school ' s principal ; each has its
own culture , program , budget , and school
space . 
Programs use a specialty core focus
such as math , science , and creative
arts to attract students from the entire
school district . They may be located
within an existing school or have their
own building . 
Observation
Often providing work-based learning
opportunities as well as mentors and work
internships , the emphasis is on building
relationships with teachers and employers . 
Students take some or all courses
with their house members and from their
house teachers . House plans personalize the
high school experience by having its own
discipline plan , student government , and
cocurricular and extracurricular activities . 
Like academies , schools-within-a-school
support constructive relationships between
students and staff by taking core courses
with the same group of teachers . 
With acceptance based either on
competitive admission or an open
enrollment , students stay together for
their core classes . They may take other
courses with nonmagnet students
depending on the logistics of their location . 
SOURCE : Adapted from U . S . Department of Education .  ( n . d .  )  . Smaller Learning Communities . Retrieved August 11 , 2004 , from 
. 
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 876
No Child Left Behind ; problem-based learning ; reform , of
schools ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; school
improvement models ; school size ; site-based management
Further Readings and References
Bank Street College of Education .  ( 2001 )  . Executive summary : Small schools : Great strides . Retrieved from
Technical Questions , webmaster @ bankstreet . edu . 
Cotton , K .  ( 2001 )  . New small learning communities : Findings
from recent literature . Portland , OR : Northwest Regional
Educational Laboratory . 
Criteria for school restructuring .  ( n . d .  )  . Retrieved August 11 , 
2004 , from 
cors / issues_in_restructuring_schools / issues . 
Evans , P . M .  ( 2003 )  . A principal ’ s dilemmas : Theory and
reality of school redesign . Phi Delta Kappan , 84 ( 6 )  , 
425–437 . 
Restructuring , of Schools———877
Table 2 Smaller Learning Community Strategies
Name
Freshman
Transition
Activities
Multi-year Groups
Alternative
Scheduling
Adult Advocate
Systems
Teacher Advisory
Systems
Academic
Teaming
Description
First-year high school students are placed in
their own setting , sometimes in a separate
wing or building . 
Several teachers stay with a group of
students over a period of 2 or more years , 
fostering trust and intimacy . 
It allows teachers to develop lessons that are
more compatible with learning objectives
and often include work-based learning
opportunities . The length of the class period , 
the school day , and even the school year can
be changed to support academic
achievement . 
They ensure that at least one adult knows
each student well . By meeting with 15–20
students , individually or in small groups , on
a regular basis over several years , adult
advocates can provide rapport , academic , 
and personal guidance while fulfilling the
role of the caring adult . 
Similar to adult advocate systems , they
organize adults to personalize the high
school experience and support academic
achievement , working with small groups of
students . 
It organizes groups of teachers across
departments so that the teachers share the
same students rather than the same subject . 
Teaming links teachers , who teach different
subjects , in a team that shares responsibility
for the curriculum , instruction , evaluation , 
and sometimes scheduling and discipline of
a group of 100–150 students . 
Observation
Placement helps ease the difficulties students
often encounter as they move from middle school
to high school . 
Similar to “ looping ,  ” this is a strategy often used
in elementary and middle schools but is found to
be equally effective in high school . 
Most easily done in smaller schools , it is often
referred to as “ block scheduling ,  ” and provides
extended class periods for in-depth and
experimental learning opportunities . Facilitating
tutorial opportunities as well as enrichment , 
lagging students can catch up while advanced
students can delve more deeply into
self-directed learning opportunities . 
One quarter of the nation ’ s students report being
concerned that they and their friends lack an adult
who talks with them about problems and
decisions . For the program to be successful , 
training for adult advocates and administrative
support for the advocate system are critical to its
success . 
Meeting times vary and are formal or informal as
well as one-on-one or in small groups . Their
purpose is to develop personal learning plans , 
and introduce students to career clusters , 
advising with course selection , and
postsecondary plans . 
Teams share the same planning period and
sometimes share a specific area of the school
building . Formerly found primarily in middle
schools , academic teaming is being used
effectively in high schools because it is another
way to personalize the learning environment and
enables a group of teachers to focus on the whole
student . 
SOURCE : Adapted from U . S . Department of Education .  ( n . d .  )  . Smaller Learning Communities . Retrieved August 11 , 2004 , from 
. 
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 877
Frymier , J .  ,  & Joekel , R .  ( 2004 )  . Changing the school learning
environment . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow . 
Gates Foundation .  ( 2004 )  . Research & Evaluation : Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation . Retrieved July 15 , 2004 , from

default . htm . 
Goldenberg , C .  ( 2004 )  . Successful school change . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Howley , C .  ,  & Bickel , R .  ( 2000 )  . When it comes to schooling
small works : School size , poverty , and student achievement . Randolph , VT : Rural School and Community Trust
Policy Program . 
Langer , J .  ( 2004 )  . Getting to excellent : How to create better
schools . New York : Teachers College Press . 
McClusky , N .  ( 2002 )  . Sizing up what matters : The importance
of small schools . Center for Education Reform . Retrieved
September 11 , 2002 , from . 
National Center for Restructuring Education , Schools , and
Teaching .  ( n . d .  )  . Retrieved August 11 , 2004 , from 
. 
Odden , A .  ,  & Archibald , S .  ( 2001 )  . Reallocating resources . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Raywid , M . A .  ( 1999 )  . Current literature on small schools . 
Charleston , WV : ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education
and Small Schools . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( n . d .  )  . Smaller learning communities . Retrieved August 11 , 2004 , from 
. gov / programs / slcp / strategies . html . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 2001 )  . An overview of smaller
learning communities in high schools . Retrieved June 19 , 
2002 , from . Gov / offices / OESE / SLCP / overview 
. html . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 2004 )  . Smaller learning communities ( SLC ) program : Discretionary grant application
packages . Retrieved August 11 , 2004 , from 
. gov / searchResults . jhtml . 
 RICE , JOSEPH MAYER
Joseph Mayer Rice ( 1857–1934 ) was born May 20 , 
1857 , in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . He earned a
degree in medicine from the College of Physicians
and Surgeons at Columbia University in 1881 . From
1887 until his death , he was an advocate for empirically set goals and scientific measurement in education . His concern for the health of children led him to
abandon his medical practice and travel to the Universities of Leipzig and Jena in Europe to study psychology and education . While there , he witnessed early
efforts at empirical research and Herbartism , an early
system of educational psychology . 
After his return to America , Rice shared his experiences in interviews published in Epoch , a weekly
newspaper , and Forum , a monthly magazine . At the
suggestion of his brother Isaac Leopold Rice , owner
of the Forum , Joseph conducted a survey of schools in
the United States and shared his findings with the
Forum . The period in which Rice lived and worked
was one of intense muckraking activity and competition among publishers . Education was uncharted
territory for investigative reporting , and its close connection to local politics made it an attractive choice . 
Rice visited schools in 36 cities and spoke with
teachers , school officials , parents , and school board
members . Starting in October 1892 , the Forum published a series of nine articles that galvanized public
attention to the condition of American public schools . 
Rice described the schools as mechanistic , the current
teaching methods as inefficient and stultifying , and
the treatment of the students in the classrooms as bordering on barbaric . 
Rice ’ s main contribution was his groundbreaking use
of empirical testing to determine if the current methods
of spelling , mathematics , and English were successful . 
He suggested changing the curriculum to make learning
more efficient . By integrating instruction in the social
sciences , science , grammar , composition , and penmanship , students would be challenged and stimulated to
learn better . While the Forum articles were still in publication , Rice completed a second tour to identify the
best schools and teaching practices . Masses of information were compiled over the next several years and provided the grist for several books . They included The
Public School System of the United States in 1893 , The
Rational Spelling Book in 1898 , Scientific Management
in Education in 1913 , and The People ’ s Government in
1915 . In 1897 , Rice became the editor of the Forum
until he left the magazine in 1907 . 
Rice was associated with the efficiency movement , 
but his efforts were directed toward the efficiency to be
gained in the classroom rather than in the administration . His main concern was always the children who
had to endure the enervating drill and practice found in
most schools . His suggestions were directed at ways to
energize the learning process , abolish wasted time , and
make learning productive if not fun again . 
—Christopher J . Fontenot
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; bureaucracy ; 
elementary education ; individual differences , in children ; 
measurement , theories of ; performance assessment ; 
research methods ; scientific management ; surveys and survey results ; testing and test theory development
878———Rice , Joseph Mayer
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 878
Further Readings and References
Kliebard , H . M .  ( 1995 )  . The struggle for the American
curriculum : 1893–1958 ( 2nd ed .  )  . New York : Routledge . 
Rice , J . M .  ( 1915 )  . The people ’ s government . Philadelphia : 
John C . Winston . 
Rice , J . M .  ( 1969 )  . The public school system of the United
States . New York : Arno Press . 
Rice , J . M .  ( 1969 )  . Scientific management in education . New
York : Arno Press . 
 RIGHT-WING POLITICS , 
ADVOCATES , IMPACT ON
EDUCATION
Advocates promoting right-wing or conservative
education policies and practices include think tanks , 
interest groups , business associations , news organizations , foundations , and politicians . Right-wing , conservative advocates are well organized , well funded , 
and often well coordinated , making them very influential in education policy formation . The rightward
swing of education policy since the Reagan administration is credited in large part to right-wing advocates . Their influence is generally considered to have
greatly polarized education policy making , such that it
is less research based and more values based , less driven by a cooperative distribution toward an accepted
public good and more by competing , narrow agendas . 
Advocates for right-wing education policies are
linked together in a web of supporting networks . By
coordinating their efforts , right-wing advocates make
their policies appear to come from a variety of independent actors , thereby magnifying their impact . The
Heritage Foundation is a prominent example of a
right-wing organization that advocates for conservative education policies . It is a think tank that began
promoting conservative education policies and practices through its booklet A New Agenda for Education
in 1985 . The foundation promotes its education
agenda through a multidimensional strategy that creates a need for education reform by broadcasting
alleged failures of public education while also distributing conservative policy solutions . The foundation
delivers its message simultaneously through studies , 
opinion pieces , newsletters , policy briefs , and its Web
site . These messages are sent to all who might be interested in their education positions , including the news
media , politicians , government agencies , businesses , 
and the general public . The foundation has been using
and perfecting this public relations system since the
early 1970s . 
The Heritage Foundation was a founding member
of the State Policy Network , a national coalition of
100 conservative advocacy organizations operating in
42 states . Members of the network use the foundation ’ s model of extensive , simultaneous public relations to influence state and local public policy , 
including education policy . The network creates a
national conservative influence on education policy
through coordinated state and local effects . 
The Heritage Foundation and the State Policy
Network are funded by conservative foundations that
use them to promote the privatization of public education and the inclusion of conservative curricula such as
abstinence-only sex education and school prayer . These
include the Olin Foundation , the Bradley Foundation , 
and the Coors family foundations . The entire conservative network is estimated to have spent $1 billion in
advocacy-related activities since the 1970s . 
The Heritage Foundation , as well as other right-wing
organizations , also support and promote the careers of
individual conservative politicians and bureaucrats . 
These right-wing organizations act as a lucrative waiting room , preparing up-and-coming conservatives for a
career in politics and allowing defeated conservatives
to continue to influence policy until their appointment
in the next Republican administration . Nina Shokraii
Rees , a former chief education analyst at the Heritage
Foundation , became an assistant secretary of education in the George W . Bush administration . Former
Secretary of Education William J . Bennett became a
distinguished fellow at the Heritage Foundation . 
Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich became a fellow
at the American Enterprise Institute , where Lynne
Cheney was an education scholar while Second Lady
of the United States . 
In general , right-wing advocates argue for the privatization of public schools , fundamentalist Christian
values in schools , the preparation of students as workers , and high-stakes standardized testing based on a
banking model of teaching and learning . A privatized
school system is built on the capitalist business principle that competition between schools will provide the
most effective education for students . Privatization
program ideas include vouchers , charter schools , 
tuition tax credits for private schools , and homeschooling . As the means of administering education is
based in business , so is the outcome . More emphasis is
Right-Wing Politics , Advocates , Impact on Education———879
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 879
placed on education productivity , preparing able
workers for a limited job market in a globally competitive marketplace , than on other possible outcomes like
social justice , personal development , and critical
thinking . To the extent that nonbusiness values are
emphasized , they are fundamental Christian viewpoints found in activities such as abstinence-only sex
education and school prayer , organized patriotism ( i . e .  , 
mandating the pledge of allegiance )  , and a curriculum
focused on American exceptionalism in the form of
White , male , Western content that emphasizes U . S . 
achievements with little or no acknowledgment of U . S . 
failures . These school activities are based in the largely
discredited ideas that intelligence is innate and unalterable , that individual learning is accurately measured
by standardized tests , and that knowledge is something
that is uncovered in its pure form by experts and then
poured by the teacher into the minds of the students . 
Right-wing organizations have successfully pursued
a populist divide-and-conquer strategy to make education policy more conservative . As American society has
become more diverse , right-wing advocates have often
rallied supporters around a few controversial issues , 
arguing that assistance to historically oppressed groups
is not only unnecessary but deprives the majority
White , Protestant population of its deserved share of
resources or its values . If poor students deserve Head
Start , then wealthy parents deserve more gifted programs . If humanists teach evolution , then fundamentalist Christians can demand intelligent design . Under the
influence of right-wing successes , education policy formation has become a marketplace of competing interests , where justice is the same assistance to all groups
regardless of their different needs and where one seeks
to win at all costs over one ’ s opponents . In the end , 
right-wing advocates have been leaders in forming the
current winner-takes-all marketplace of education policy formation in which conflict has become the norm , 
self-interest has become a noble ideal , and the notion of
developing an inclusive , research-based public good
across race , class , and need has been lost . 
—Eric Haas
See also Bible , as history ; charter schools ; choice , of schools ; 
Christian Coalition ; corporal punishment ; creationism ; 
ethnocentrism ; fundamentalism ; history , in curriculum ; 
homophobia ; intelligence ; Lemon test ; market theory of
schooling ; moral education ; morality , moral leadership ; 
politics , of education ; prayer in school ; privatization ; religion , in schools ; standardized testing ; values education ; 
values pluralism , in schools ; voucher plans
Further Readings and References
Anderson , G .  ,  & Pini , M .  ( 2005 )  . Educational leadership and
the new economy : Keeping the “ public ” in public schools . 
In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational
leadership ( pp . 216–236 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Emery , K .  ,  & Ohanian , S .  ( 2004 )  . Why is corporate America
bashing our public schools ? Portsmouth , NH : Heinemann . 
Evans , R .  ( 2004 )  . The social studies wars : What should we
teach the children ? New York : Teachers College Press . 
Poyner , L .  ,  & Wolfe , P .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2005 )  . Marketing fear in
America ’ s public schools : The real war on literacy . 
Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . 
Ravitch , D .  ( 2003 )  . The language police : How pressure groups
restrict what students learn . New York : Vintage Books . 
 RISK TAKERS , IN EDUCATIONAL
ADMINISTRATION
Decision-making theory regarding risk indicates that
there are risk takers and risk averters . Risk taking in
administration involves leaders ’ willingness to openly
share and be true to their values , ideas , and philosophy . Risk taking is key to personal , professional , and
organizational growth . Risk taking involves the
leaders ’ openness to trial and error—to being developed , stretched , and challenged . 
Research has validated a clear relationship between
risk-taking behavior and school success . Researchers
have noted that when principals , teachers , and other
staff members possessed strong inclinations for risk , 
they were more likely to experience positive growth . 
Leaders understand that risk-taking behaviors often
have a positive impact on others . The best leaders take
risks because they realize the affirming effect that
risk-taking behavior has on others . Compared to
bureaucrats who avoid taking risks , a point beyond
which a risk averter will not even engage a problem , 
leaders encourage risk taking . Taking risks also signals that there are elements of trust present in working
situations . Leaders are more willing to delegate tasks
to others when trust levels are high . 
A balance of risk taking and trust establishes an
environment conducive to learning . With the contention that schools exist to promote high levels of
learning , the conditions that give rise to risk taking
within working contexts in which trust is high are also
important to promote learning . 
—Jean M . Haar
880———Risk Takers , in Educational Administration
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 880
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; climate ; 
creativity , in management ; decision making ; Halpin , 
Andrew William ; human resource development ; management theories ; morale ; motivation , theories of ; productivity ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; Theory X , 
Theory Y ; work task measurement
Further Readings and References
Barth , R .  ( 2001 )  . Learning by heart . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Goens , G .  ( 2000 )  . Leadership and illusion . School Administrator , 57 ( 8 )  , 30–32 . 
Pellicer , L .  ( 2003 )  . Caring enough to lead . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
 RISLEY , TODD R . 
Todd R . Risley ( 1937– ) was among the behavioral scientists responsible for the development and refinement
of applied behavior analysis . He was a faculty member
in the Department of Human Development and Family
Life at the University of Kansas during the mid-1960s
to the mid-1980s . Along with Donald Baer , Montrose
Wolf , and R . Vance Hall , he studied those environmental variables that affected the lives of children , adults , 
and families within the ongoing context of their daily
lives . Risley ’ s work influenced the field of education
via ( a ) his work on the impact of early experiences in
the home environment on academic performance , vocational success , and the nature of life outcomes ,  ( b ) his
work in the areas of single-subject research design and
the development of research methods allowed for the
study of behavior in the context of their natural setting , 
and ( c ) his work related to positive behavioral support . 
For educational leaders , Risley ’ s work is important in
its melding of direct , systematic observation with contextual understanding of human behavior , allowing for
a greater depth of understanding of the environmental
influences on individual behavior . 
Risley ’ s work in the area of positive behavioral support involved an emphasis on addressing challenges
in the natural ecological context of their occurrence . 
Pragmatically , the environment in which the challenging behavior developed and was maintained was the
only place that sustainable solutions could be identified
and implemented . Risley also identified three levels of
behavioral interventions for positive behavioral supports :  ( 1 ) the behavior analytic level—in essence the
level at which the relationships between antecedents , 
behaviors , and consequences were analyzed and
arranged to bring about desirable outcomes ,  ( 2 ) the
contingency management level—in which consequences were structured to enhance the regular occurrence of target behaviors , and ( 3 ) the life arrangements
level—involving the emphasis on lifestyle and focusing
on quality of life as both an intervention and outcome . 
In the area of research , Risley coauthored the seminal article on the dimensions of applied behavior
analysis with Wolf and Baer , as well as a partner article with them 20 years later . This work defined the
direction and initial parameters of the field . However , 
Risley ’ s most significant contribution to the area of
educational research was the development of the
action research model . He pioneered a field-based
model in which research was conducted within the
context of the lives of families . Research problems
involved real persons , in real situations , with real problems . School-based action research has its foundation
in Risley ’ s ongoing professional work . 
Risley ’ s most notable work involved the effect of
early experiences on life outcomes , particularly that of
the impact of early experiences on language acquisition and proficiency . Years of research in this area led
to a seminal work on the development of language in
young children and those variables embedded in the
environmental structure , which directly influenced the
nature of an individual ’ s functional language ability . 
Risley ’ s results indicated that almost all the variance in
the measured intelligence and academic performance
of children was due to the amount of talking parents
did in the presence of their children . This research , in
book form , was later nominated for a Pulitzer Prize . 
Risley ’ s work has had and continues to have widespread influence on the field of education . The contextual focus and research methods he initiated allow
educators to examine and consider the wider expanse
of those environments and variables that affect those
served by the schools . 
—J . M . Blackbourn
See also Baer , Donald ; behaviorism ; conditioning theory ; 
Hall , R . Vance ; learning , theories of ; life span development ; 
psychology , types of ; research methods ; Wolf , Montrose
Further Readings and References
Hart , B . M .  ,  & Risley , T . R .  ( 1995 )  . Meaningful differences in
the everyday experience of young American children . 
Baltimore : Brookes . 
Risley , Todd R . ———881
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 881
Risley , T . R .  ( 2001 )  . Do good , take data . In W . T . O ’ Donohue , 
D . A . Henderson , S . C . Hayes , J . E . Fisher ,  & L . J . Hayes 
( Eds .  )  , A history of the behavioral therapies : Founders ’ personal histories ( pp . 223–242 )  . Reno , NV : Context Press . 
 ROGERS , CARL
The major contribution if Carl Rogers ( 1902–1987 ) to
the field of education was his perspective on psychological development as a process on individual growth
through personal understanding . His precepts related
to ( a ) warm , positive interactions between people ,  ( b ) 
motivation to learn as an internal process , and ( c ) personal readiness as the foundation of all learning have
greatly influenced the profession . Rogers was born in
1902 in Oak Park , Illinois . He originally was an agriculture major at the University of Wisconsin , but graduated with a BA in religion . He earned his doctorate in
clinical psychology from Columbia University in 1931 . 
Rogers served on the faculties of Ohio State University 
( 1940–1945 )  , the University of Chicago ( 1945–1957 )  , 
and the University of Wisconsin ( 1957–1964 )  . 
Rogers developed the theory of nondirective counseling . This theory is built on the “ actualizing tendency ,  ” which is the motivation present in every life
form to develop its potentials to the fullest extent possible . Within this principle is the concept of organismic valuing , or the fact that all organisms know what
is good for them . Therefore , persons have the answers
to all their problems and questions within themselves . 
The job of the counselor or therapist is to empathically reflect the client ’ s feelings , beliefs , and attitudes
in order to identify problem solutions for themselves . 
Rogers hypothesized that personal growth is facilitated when counselors are open in the relationship
with their client , that is , the counselor is genuine and
without “ front ” or “ façade .  ” Rogers used the term
congruence to describe this condition . By this he
meant that the feelings counselors are experiencing
are available to them , available to their awareness , that
they are able to live these feelings , be them in the
counseling relationship , and able to communicate
them if appropriate . 
The second essential condition in the relationship , 
according to Rogers , is that counselors are experiencing an accurate empathic understanding of their clients ’ 
private worlds and are able to communicate some of the
significant fragments of that understanding . To sense
the clients ’ inner world of private personal meanings as
if it were one ’ s own , but without ever losing the “ as if ” 
quality—this is empathy , and this seems essential to a
growth-promoting relationship . 
The third condition hypothesized by Rogers is that
growth and change are more likely to occur the more
that the counselor is experiencing a warm , positive , 
acceptant attitude toward what is in the client . This
condition is labeled unconditional positive regard . 
Rogers advanced the hypothesis that the relationship was more effective if this condition existed . He
believed that when this condition was present in the
encounter between counselor and client , constructive
changes in the client are more likely to occur . 
Rogers further hypothesized that actual changes in
behavior occurred only when the individual provided
the initiative to change . He felt that you could not
teach a person anything until that person was emotionally and psychologically ready to accept instruction , direction , or guidance . 
Rogers ’ s nondirective theory is an “ if-then ” theory . 
It involves no intervening variables . Although there
are speculations as to the way the relationships
between the conditions and the events that follow
them occur , the “ why ” is not a part of the theory . 
For educational leaders , Rogers ’ s theory provides a
foundation for the mentoring process , whether those
mentored are faculty or subordinate administrators . 
From Rogers ’ s perspective , leaders can easily solve
problems themselves by issuing instructions or dealing with them directly . However , for persons to grow , 
it is often necessary for leaders to be “ strategically
absent .  ” In such cases it can be difficult to watch those
one supervises struggle with a problem , but in
Rogers ’ s theory , this is how real growth and learning
occur . Such instances create opportunities for both
success and failure and allow those being mentored to
engage in personal examination to find the necessary
solutions . 
—J . M . Blackbourn
See also counseling ; esteem needs ; flow theory ; humanistic
education ; Maslow , Abraham ; motivation , theories of ; 
psychology , types of ; self-actualization
Further Readings and References
Milton , J .  ( 2002 )  . The road to Malpsychia : Humanistic psychology and our discontents . San Francisco : Encounter
Books . 
Rogers , C . R .  ( 1951 )  . Client centered therapy . Boston : 
Houghton Mifflin . 
882———Rogers , Carl
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 882
Rogers , C . R .  ( 1961 )  . On becoming a person . Boston : 
Houghton Mifflin . 
Suhd , M .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1998 )  . Positive regard : Carl Rogers and other
notables he influenced . Palo Alto , CA : Science & Behavior
Books . 
 ROLE AMBIGUITY
Role ambiguity occurs when people are unclear or
uncertain about their expectations within a certain
role , typically their role in the job or workplace . Role
ambiguity arises when the definition of the person ’ s
job is vague or ill defined . Workers may be unclear
regarding the goals , expectations , or responsibilities
associated with the performance of their positions . 
Unclear roles may involve expectations for behavior
or performance levels . In order to be proficient in their
role , people should be made aware of the responsibilities and obligations of that role , the actions necessary
to fulfill the role , and the effects that the role has
on various constituents , including the workers themselves , their coworkers , and the organization itself . If
employees are unaware of the expectations surrounding their responsibilities or performance , then they
may not be working on the things necessary to accomplish what is expected of them . 
Role ambiguity has been studied in four dimensions :  ( 1 ) goal / expectation / responsibility ambiguity ,  
( 2 ) process ambiguity ,  ( 3 ) priority ambiguity , and ( 4 ) 
behavior ambiguity . With goal / expectation / responsibility ambiguity , people are unsure of what they should
actually be doing within a particular role ; they are
unclear as to what expectations are included for fulfilling the position ’ s requirements . Process ambiguity
involves a lack of clarity regarding how a job or task
should be accomplished or how certain organizational
objectives can be met . Priority ambiguity implies that
a person does not know when tasks should be completed or which tasks are more important than others . 
Behavior ambiguity occurs when people are unaware
of how they should act in specific situations or what
behaviors are required in order to achieve personal or
organizational outcomes . Each dimension focuses on
the lack of clarity or understanding people experience
regarding their ability to be successful in a given role . 
Persistent or ongoing role ambiguity can result in a
number of problems for an employee . For example , 
role ambiguity has been associated with issues that
include job tension , anxiety , frustration , and burnout . 
Low levels of job satisfaction have also been associated
with role ambiguity . In fact , job satisfaction and job
performance have both been found to have an inverse
relationship with role ambiguity , meaning that as
ambiguity increases , job satisfaction and performance
actually decrease . 
Role ambiguity can be reduced or avoided in many
instances by a clear articulation of the expected behaviors and outcomes associated with a particular role . 
With its negative relationships to job satisfaction and
job performance , role ambiguity should be avoided
whenever possible . Interventions to alleviate role
ambiguity are often effective , more so than with other
role stresses , which indicates that the identification of
role ambiguity and its causes in the workplace at an
early stage is critical to the development of a healthy
organization and a productive worker . 
—Stacey Edmonson
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; attitudes
toward work ; behaviorism ; bureaucracy ; chain of command ; division of labor ; locus of control ; management
theories ; matrix organization ( the “ adhocracy ”  )  ; organizational theories ; productivity ; rational organization theory ; 
resource management
Further Readings and References
Hart , A .  ( 1994 )  . Creating teacher leadership roles . Educational
Administration Quarterly , 30 ( 4 )  , 472–497 . 
Lunenburg , F . C .  ,  & Ornstein , A . C .  ( 2004 )  . Educational
administration : Concepts and practices ( 4th ed .  )  . Belmont , 
CA : Wadsworth . 
Sawyer , J . E .  ( 1992 )  . Goal and process clarity : Specification of
multiple constructs of role ambiguity and a structural equation model of their antecedents and consequences . Journal
of Applied Psychology , 77 , 130–142 . 
 ROLE CONFLICT
Role conflict occurs when a person must adhere at the
same time to two or more conflicting or contradictory
sets of expectations . Fulfilling the expectations for
one role interferes with or prohibits fulfilling the
expectations for the other role ( s )  . Thus , the two roles
are incompatible and make it difficult , if not impossible , for the person to be successful in both settings . 
For example , role conflict frequently occurs in
persons who juggle career and family . The roles associated with a successful career may interfere with the
Role Conflict———883
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 883
roles associated with a quality family life . Long hours
at the office result in fewer hours available for family
activities , just as staying home with a sick child results
in missed meetings or less productivity at the office . 
When people are faced with expectations for more
than one role , they must choose which expectations to
fulfill ; thus , one set of expectations is necessarily left
unfulfilled , and people often feel stress or anxiety that
one of their roles is not being adequately carried out . 
Or the person may choose to partially fulfill both
roles , which yields problems in that neither role is
implemented successfully or completely . 
Role conflict is typically bidirectional , meaning
that both roles interfere with one another . In using the
previous example , a successful career can impede
family concerns , or family issues can impede the
needs of a successful career . 
Role conflict can appear in the form of time-based
conflict , strain-based conflict , or behavior-based conflict . Time-based conflict takes place when two or more
roles compete simultaneously for an individual ’ s time . 
The family versus work issue mentioned previously
demonstrates this type of conflict : a parent who needs
to pick up a child from school may be expected to
attend a meeting at that same time ; the two roles to
which the person is obligated require incompatible time
constraints . Strain-based conflict is a more relationship-based type of role conflict in which a person ’ s professional role conflicts with the personal role he or she
has with others , that is , a person who is elevated to a
supervisory position over coworkers who are his or her
friends . The roles of supervisor and friend are often
incompatible , thereby causing the person to experience
role conflict . Behavior-based conflict describes a situation in which the behaviors a person must exhibit in one
role are contradictory to the behaviors associated with
another role . For example , if a person who is a supervisor at work must be reserved and uncompromising in
the job place , these same behaviors in the home environment might cause conflicts with family members . 
Role conflict may negatively impact the effectiveness and productivity of workers in a variety of career
settings . It also has the potential to be detrimental to a
person ’ s home or family life . Because of these serious
consequences , reducing role conflict whenever possible or developing coping mechanisms for dealing with
role conflict are important considerations for leaders
in any field . 
—Stacey Edmonson
See also accountability ; behaviorism ; bureaucracy ; chain of
command ; compliance theory ; contingency theory ; critical
theory ; empowerment ; hierarchy , in organizations ; involvement , in organizations ; line and staff concept ; locus of
control ; role ambiguity ; scalar principle
Further Readings and References
Boyan , N .  ( 1988 )  . Describing and explaining administrative
behavior . In N . Boyan ( Ed .  )  , Handbook of research on educational administration ( pp . 77–97 )  . New York : Longman . 
Hammer , L .  ,  & Thompson , C .  ( 2004 )  . Work-family role conflict . Retrieved August 11 , 2004 , from 
bc_org / avp / wfnetwork / rft / wfpedia / wfpWFRCent . 
Marks , S . R .  ( 1977 )  . Multiple roles and role strain : Some notes
on human energy , time , and commitment . American
Sociological Review , 42 , 921–936 . 
 ROLE MODEL
Role models may be defined as individuals who are
worthy of imitation in some area of life . In educational
circles , a role model is at times used as a synonym with
the terms mentor or hero and at other times as a way
to describe a relationship that falls somewhere in
between the two terms . There is evidence that interacting with individuals defined as role models has an
effect on children ’ s perceptions and behavior . 
ADULTS AS ROLE MODELS
Children view adults—such as parents , teachers , principals , and ministers—as the most important role
models in their lives . Adults , then , serve as a visible , 
influential model for children . In connection to education , modeling and teaching life skills can serve as
the foundation for building academic achievers . 
One important responsibility of an educator is to
model active learning—by making his or her learning
visible , students come to see their own learning as
serious . Because of the influence of the position , the
responsibility of role modeling for principals is essential ; teachers , staff , parents , students , and community
members look to them as role models
STUDENTS AS ROLE MODELS
The value of students as role models has been identified as an influential resource for educating other
students . Models and programs have been developed
884———Role Model
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 884
that allow students to learn from each other . For
instance , the Peer Group Connection is a program that
trains seniors to serve as mentors to freshmen . The
seniors and their advisers are trained in human relations and facilitation skills . Research completed on
the program suggests that freshman grades , attendance , and behavior improve . In turn , senior peer
leaders acquire expanded interpersonal skills . 
Another example of a student role model program
is the Program for Women in Science and Engineering 
( PWSE )  . The program identifies college science and
engineering female students to present hands-on
activities at schools and career conferences and to
encourage women and underrepresented populations
to pursue careers within traditionally male-dominated
fields , like science , technological , engineering , or
mathematical fields of study . 
—Jean M . Haar
See also adult education ; collaboration theory ; empowerment ; 
esteem needs ; expectations , teacher and student cultures ; 
leadership , theories of ; mentoring ; professional development ; role conflict ; role theory ; supervision ; tutoring ; 
working conditions , in schools
Further Readings and References
Fiore , D .  ( 2004 )  . Introduction to educational administration : 
Standards , theories , and practice . Larchmont , NY : Eye on
Education . 
Nazzal , A .  ( 2002 )  . Peer tutoring and at-risk students : An
exploratory study . Action in Teacher Education , 24 ( 1 )  , 
68–80 . 
Program for Women in Science and Engineering . Retrieved
from www . pwse . iastate . edu / oncampus / ugrolemodels . html . 
Somers , C .  ,  & Piliawsky , M .  ( 2004 )  . Drop-out prevention
among urban , African American adolescents : Program
evaluation and practical implications . Preventing School
Failure , 48 ( 3 )  , 17–22 . 
Tournaki , N .  ,  & Criscitiello , E .  ( 2003 )  . Using peer tutoring
as a successful part of behavior management . Teaching
Exceptional Children , 36 ( 2 )  , 22–29 . 
 ROLE THEORY
For at least a generation of scholars and practitioners
of educational leadership , role theory stood as a fundamental component of social systems theory . Social
systems theory provided a structural-functionalist
view of the interactions and relationships between
people , their work , the organization , and its purposes
for their work . Role conflict studies focused on the
ways that people negotiated their own needs against
the requirements of their jobs or the expectations of
others , those in their role set , including complementary role holders . 
Although through the ensuing decades educational
leadership studies based on role theory seem to have
waned considerably , role theory expanded in other
social science disciplines . Social role theory as developed in the disciplines of sociology and industrial psychology explains gendered actions and relationships
between men and women , the ways they approach
work as well as differences in their managerial styles . 
Continued works in these disciplines demonstrate how
role models derive from social networks and group
dynamics . The influence of role on individuals
depends on role saliency . Role saliency represents the
strength of a role within the organization and provides
a structural-functional lever to organizations in
rewarding specific role enactments and role models . 
The ways that people interpret their place within a
group and organization depend on the dynamics of the
group interacting with personalities and personal
experiences . People inhabit roles in life from their
behavior within their families to their socialization
through school days , community groups and agencies , 
and their work groups . Educational leaders face
students , teachers , parents , and community members
whose interactions depend on their personal interpretations about the roles they hold socially , informally , 
and in formal , titled positions . School leaders must
understand the ways that people ’ s expectations and
behaviors derive from their socialization into social , 
group , and work roles . 
Despite the relevance of role theory to the group
and individual dynamics that shapes school leaders ’ 
work , recent educational research lacks mention of
role theory . Role theory suffers the taint of its association with the much-maligned social systems theory . 
Social systems theory suffered repeated attacks over
the past two decades for failing to provide a nuanced
insight into the dynamics of schools . Nevertheless , as
each person holds multiple social , personal , informal , 
and formal roles in the complex communities within
and surrounding schools , role theory can provide
insights into the ways that socialization works to
shore up as well as erode social support for education . 
—Jane Clark Lindle
Role Theory———885
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 885
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; attitudes
toward work ; behaviorism ; bureaucracy ; chain of command ; compliance theory ; contingency theories ; frame
theory ; governance ; hierarchy , in organizations ; leadership , 
distributed ; line and staff concept ; management theories ; 
organizational theories ; personnel management ; role ambiguity ; role conflict ; span of control ; staffing , concepts of
Further Readings and References
Eagly , A . H .  ,  & Johannesen-Schmidt , M . C .  ( 2001 )  . The leadership styles of women and men . Journal of Social Issues , 
57 ( 4 )  , 781–797 . 
Heck , R . H .  ,  & Hallinger , P .  ( 1999 )  . Next generation methods
for the study of leadership and school improvement . In J . F . 
Murphy & K . S . Louis ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of research on
educational administration ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 141–162 )  . San
Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Lieberman , A .  ( 2004 )  . Confusion regarding school counselor
functions : School leadership impacts role clarity . Education , 124 ( 3 )  , 552–558 . 
Shivers-Blackwell , S . L .  ( 2004 )  . Using role theory to examine
determinants of transformational and transactional leader
behavior . Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies , 
10 ( 3 )  , 41–49 . 
 RURAL EDUCATION
Rural education has been defined by a number of different criteria over the last half century . The National
Rural and Small Schools Consortium considers a district rural if inhabitants number fewer than 150 per
square mile or if the district is located in a county
where 60% or more of the population lives in communities of 5 , 000 or fewer . Other organizations and
government entities have applied either a 25 , 000 resident criteria to classify communities as rural , or some
have applied a more restrictive 2 , 500 resident restriction . Five terms were used by the U . S . Department of
Education ’ s Center for Education Statistics in 1987 to
define or imply rurality : rural , nonmetropolitan , small
town , small place , and school size . Rural and nonmetropolitan were identified as subsets for metropolitan status , as were suburban and urban . 
The National Center for Education Statistics 
( NCES ) reported that approximately 90 , 000 public
schools operate within the United States , of which
38 , 000 were located in rural areas or small towns in
1999–2000 . Schools in rural areas or small towns
account for about 42% of all schools in the nation , and
30% of all students . Characteristics unique to rural
areas include geographic isolation , small populations , 
and declining enrollments . 
According to an open-ended survey of 50 small
rural school superintendents , the most critical issues
facing their districts were funding inequities , meeting
the No Child Left Behind ( NCLB ) requirements , 
attracting and retaining highly qualified teachers , 
declining enrollments , along with implementation of
technology and distance learning . Most crucial were
funding issues , meeting the Adequate Yearly Progress
standard of NCLB and recruitment / retention of highly
qualified teachers . In the other pressing issues category were problems associated with declining enrollments and the need to provide vital learning resources
to students effectively through distance learning
FUNDING
Three decades of litigation and a considerable number
of studies document the inequities in educational
funding for property-poor rural schools . Persistent
dependence on local property tax revenues has perpetuated funding disparities among urban , suburban , and
rural districts . School districts with high-priced residential or commercial property have substantially
greater resources available to support education . In
the midst of this wealth of knowledge , state legislatures continue to rely on the property tax as a primary
tax base source for public schools , which ultimately
results in disproportionate funding for poorer rural
schools and specifically rural students . 
The overwhelming majority of states have been
unwilling thus far to abandon the property tax , though
more progressive states such as Michigan and
Wisconsin have met the challenge and overcome political fears to fund education with a more progressive
approach . As a result of continued taxpayer discontent
with local property taxes , the Michigan legislature
abolished local school property taxes in 1993 . A referendum was initiated to construct a system that would
replace the abolished system of school revenue generation . Michigan ’ s new finance approach approved in
1994 obtains revenue for funding education from a
variety of other sources . First , the state sales tax was
increased from 4% to 6% , and a statewide property tax
was enacted . Next , additional real estate transfer fees
were imposed and sin taxes were instituted or
increased . Finally , a new system of assessing property
and a state foundation grant formula for distributing
funds were formulated and enacted . 
886———Rural Education
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 886
Waves of litigation have been funneled through the
court systems in an attempt to provide a more effective
system of providing adequate and equitable funding to
public schools . Approximately one half of the litigation
has resulted in rulings for the property-poor plaintiff ; 
however , little to no funding equity has found its way to
these districts . School law firms and the courts are now
relying on the “ adequacy ” standard rather than “ equity ” 
to reflect a more progressive focus of funding all schools
and all children in a fair , adequate , and accountable
manner . State legislatures are sure to be confronted with
problems associated with funding schools in the future as
long as there is a continued reliance on the property tax
as a primary source of funding public schools . 
NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND
Superintendents of rural schools identify the requirements of NCLB as a major source of concern in the
schools and communities . Specifically , the Adequate
Yearly Progress ( AYP ) requirement of NCLB specifies
that states must develop objectives for improved
achievement of all students and for specific student subgroups that include English language learners ( ELL )  , 
special needs students , economically disadvantaged , 
and ethnic minorities . Assessment of AYP objectives
must be established at the school level and reported for
each subgroup of students . Rural and small schools are
in greater jeopardy of receiving the designation of “ in
need of improvement ” than are large schools , due to the
volatile nature of school-level reporting from year to
year . In schools where small numbers of students are
assessed in a grade level , averages are subject to significant variation from one test administration to another
and from year to year for reasons unrelated to overall
school performance . Robert Linn indicates that test
score volatility arises from two sources . First , variation
in the groups of students being tested each year can
cause fluctuations . Contributing factors may include the
attitudes and abilities of students in each cohort , student
mobility , or an influx of immigrants . Second , one-time
factors such as teacher turnover , a flu epidemic , or construction noise on the day of testing can also affect
scores . In districts with small student populations , these
differences can cause dramatic fluctuations in annual
average test scores . One solution or remedy to test score
volatility allowable under NCLB is to average test
scores over several years . A study by David Figlio in
2002 indicates that the stabilizing benefit of a 3-year
rolling average is greatest among smaller schools . 
HIGHLY QUALIFIED TEACHERS
A February 2005 personal interview study of small
rural school superintendents targeted the “ highly qualified ” teacher requirement of NCLB as one of the
most noteworthy concerns in their districts . The
highly qualified teacher requirement , though highly
relevant , has the propensity of intensifying the already
existing problem of attracting and retaining certified
teachers in rural communities . High-needs-area
teachers fully certified or with proper teaching credentials in special education , science , math , foreign
language , as well as bilingual / ESL , are already scarce
commodities in many rural schools . Greater demand
for these high-needs-area teachers is resulting in highstakes competition among schools . Salary levels may
reach a cost-prohibitive status for schools with scarce
financial resources , yielding a competitive disadvantage for the smaller property-poor rural schools . 
Recently , the difference between average rural teacher
salaries and other teacher salaries varied by state from
around $250 to as much as $10 , 400 . Small rural
schools that lack the financial resources to compete
with larger , more often richer , urban and suburban districts will likely have an inability to meet the NCLB
requirements of highly qualified teachers and staff , 
resulting in lower ratings and possible loss of vital
funding . 
Teacher compensation in rural schools is significantly less than their nonrural counterparts . Nationally , 
beginning teachers earn 11 . 3% less in rural schools
than entry-level teachers in nonrural districts . In addition , overall average teacher salaries are 13 . 4% higher
in the suburban and urban districts , and experienced
teachers in the nonrural areas ( those with master ’ s
degrees plus 20 years ) can expect in excess of 17 . 2%
more than their rural counterparts . Thus , rural districts
must compete for the highly qualified teachers with
more innovative approaches that may include advertising and recruiting blitzes concentrating on lower costs
of living , cheaper housing , along with resourceful
community support programs . Showcasing benefits
along with the perks of rural life , such as higher quality
learning environments and superior school climates , 
are essential to regaining a competitive edge for the
NCLB compliant teacher . 
DECLINING ENROLLMENT
Rural school superintendents identify decreasing
enrollment as one of the key issues in their districts . In
Rural Education———887
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 887
almost half of the 50 states , more than 50% of the rural
schools lost students between 1994 and 1997 . Global
shifts in environmental , economic , and social trends
have initiated radical changes in business , industrial , 
and agricultural organizations , leaving many rural
communities in a sedentary state . Once thriving communities with robustly profitable industrial and agricultural constituents are now left with high unemployment
and devalued economic resources . In the age of information and the emerging biotechnical age , the competitive edge to attract business and industry will
continually bypass rural areas for the more robust suburban and urban districts . All these changes in corporate America leave rural schools with an exodus of
residents , students , teachers , and administrators . As a
result of continuing paradigm shifts , major initiatives
are needed to revitalize America ’ s rural communities
and their innate resources . 
Research continues to support the educational
superiority of small-school over large-school systems . 
Though they are not a panacea , small schools continue
to exhibit higher achievement levels among students
with significantly fewer problems in the areas of discipline and school safety . Students in smaller schools
have a sense of belonging in the community and graduate at higher rates than their larger-school peers . 
Small schools and communities will need to emphasize their strengths in strong campaigns to attract
residents with school-age children in the future . 
Coalitions of highly active business / industry development councils should be formed to attract investment
in rural America to revitalize and sustain a strong rural
base in an effort to continue the legacy of high-quality
rural education . 
DISTANCE LEARNING
Advancements in technology and digital communications have led to innovations plus unprecedented
change in instructional delivery for many rural schools . 
Distance learning has evolved as a new strategy for
diminishing or lessening problems associated with
isolation or remoteness of rural schools . Professional
development of teachers and administrators , vital training of ancillary staff , and the delivery of comprehensive
curriculum can now be delivered via digital communications in a cost-effective environment . 
Distance learning research studies in rural schools
have resulted in mixed reviews and inconclusive evidence in assessing overall effectiveness . Inequalities
and differentiation in technological resources , hardware , software , and professional development of
teachers as well as ancillary staff provide extensive
data , suggesting that rural schools are inconsistent in
the application of advanced video conferencing and
Web-based technologies in the delivery of classroom
instruction . According to Phil Westfall , president of
the U . S . Distance Learning Association , the primary
goal of any distance learning program should be to
maximize both student achievement and student satisfaction . While there are certainly scenarios under
which virtually all distance learning technologies may
be appropriate , two-way interactive television or
video conference technology provides the best technology foundation for small and rural K–12 schools
to meet their needs to enhance curriculum offerings , 
stem the effect of teacher shortages , provide for ongoing teacher professional development , and meet the
requirements of No Child Left Behind . 
Distance learning provides rural schools with an
opportunity to provide students with a more inclusive
and comprehensive curriculum , along with advanced
academic courses , while maintaining the benefits of
small community educational environments . Critical
teacher shortages in the key areas of math , science , 
and foreign languages can be reduced through school
district collaborations , consortia , and connectivity . 
Nevertheless , it is imperative to consider the benefits , 
limitations , and variable effectiveness encompassed
within the emerging world of telecommunications and
distance learning . 
SUMMARY
Extensive research findings indicate that small
schools and districts graduate a higher percentage of
students , resulting in lower dropout rates . Rural
schools have continually exhibited a safer environment with fewer incidents of violence and vandalism , 
higher levels of parental involvement , and superior
attendance rates . Research and literature provide a
basis for concentration of attention on school size that
is particularly important in turning around low performance and giving poor and minority students the extra
boost that a community of caring , competence , and
high expectations offers . Finally , a more human scale
is a potent antidote to student alienation . While impersonal bigness may actually provoke disruptive behavior , small schools conducive to trust and respect tend
to defuse violence . 
888———Rural Education
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 888
In light of the fact that all small schools may not be the
pinnacle of educational excellence and may not emanate
solutions to all problems , they may possess some catalytic
ingredients for a comprehensive approach to improvement of student success . Specifically , in the case of high
schools , which have exhibited an impervious nature
to change , reduction of school size has progressively
emerged as a relentless reform effort . Though rural
schools may be in command of many issues plaguing
larger schools , they continue to face unique challenges
such as inequitable funding , recruiting and retaining
highly qualified teachers , declining enrollments , and
meeting the requirements of No Child Left Behind . In the
final analysis , the importance of rural schools to their
communities is significant , and the educational value of
retaining small , community-based schools is undeniable . 
—Robert L . Marshall and William A . Kritsonis
See also accountability ; boards of education ; capacity building , of organizations ; cultural politics , wars ; economics , 
theories of ; elementary education ; enrollment projections ; 
ethnocentrism ; finance , of public schools ; high schools ; No
Child Left Behind ; productivity ; school safety
Further Readings and References
Courant , P .  , Gramlich , E .  ,  & Loeb , S .  ( 1995 )  . Michigan ’ s
recent school finance reforms : A preliminary report . 
American Economic Review , 85 ( 2 )  , 372–377 . 
Declining enrollments : Silent killer of rural communities .  
( 2000 )  . Retrieved March 26 , 2005 , from 
. org / issues_and_insights / prof_dev / rural_small / decline_
6-16-00 . htm . 
Enliten Management Group .  ( 2003 )  . An interview with Philip
J . Westfall , PhD , president of the U . S . Distance Learning
Association : Thoughts & perspective on distance learning . 
Retrieved March 26 , 2005 , from 
useus / Enlitenment / Enlitenment_Jan . pdf . 
Figlio , D .  ( 2002 )  . Aggregation and accountability in No Child Left
Behind : What will it take ? Paper presented at conference sponsored by Thomas B . Fordham Foundation , Washington , DC . 
The Finance Project .  ( 1997 )  . Money matters : A guide to
financing quality education and other children ’ s services . 
Washington , DC : Author . 
Hobbs , V .  ( 2004 )  . The promise and the power of distance
learning in rural education . Retrieved March 26 , 2005 , 
from . 
Jimmerson , L .  ( 2003 )  . The competitive disadvantage : Teacher
compensation in rural America . Washington , DC : Rural
School and Community Trust . 
Kane , T .  , Staiger , D .  ,  & Geppert , J .  ( 2002 )  . Randomly
accountable . Education Next , 2 ( 1 )  . Retrieved March 26 , 
2005 , from ucationext . org / 20021 / 56 . html . 
Linn , R . L .  , Baker , E . L .  ,  & Betebenner , D . W .  ( 2002 )  . 
Accountability systems : Implications of requirements
of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 . Educational
Researcher , 31 ( 6 )  , 3–16 . 
Marshall , R .  ( 2005 )  . Critical issues in small rural schools : 
Superintendents ’ perspectives . Retrieved March 26 , 2005 , 
from 
sues . pdf . 
McRobbie , J .  ( 2001 )  . Are small schools better ? School size considerations for safety and learning . Retrieved March 26 , 2005 , 
from . 
National Rural and Small Schools Consortium .  ( 1986 )  . 
Definitions of rural , small , and remote schools . Bellingham : 
Western Washington University . 
Reeves , C .  ( 2003 )  . Implementing the No Child Left Behind
Act : Implications for rural schools and districts . 
Naperville , IL : North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory . Retrieved March 12 , 2005 , from http :  /  / 
www . ncrel . org / policy / pubs / html / implicate /  . 
Rural School and Community Trust .  ( 2003 )  . School size : 
Research-based conclusions . Retrieved March 26 , 2005 , from 
. 
Russell , T .  ( 1999 )  . The no significant difference phenomenon . 
Montgomery , AL : International Distance Education
Certification Center . Retrieved March 26 , 2005 , from http :  /  / 
www . nosignificantdifference . org / nosignificantdifference /  . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 1987 )  . The condition of education : A statistical report ( 1986 ed .  )  . Washington , DC : 
Center for Educational Statistics . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 2001 )  . Overview of public elementary and secondary schools and districts : School year
1999-2000 ( NCES Statistical Analysis Report )  . Retrieved
March 4 , 2005 , from . gov / pubs2001 / overview / 
table08 . asp . 
 RUSSELL , BERTRAND
Philosopher , educator , writer , and political activist , 
Bertrand Russell ( 1872–1970 ) is best known for his
work in mathematical and symbolic logic and in philosophy . His philosophy of education included strong
convictions on the need to teach critical thinking skills
to children . Russell was born in Wales into a politically liberal and educated family ; however , his parents
died when he was of preschool age . Raised by his
grandmother , Russell was educated privately and
attended Trinity College in Cambridge , England , 
where he received degrees in mathematics and the
moral sciences ( philosophy )  . 
Russell wrote over 90 books and hundreds of articles
during his lifetime . He wrote his first book , German
Social Democracy , in 1896 , and his first book on
Russell , Bertrand———889
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 889
mathematical logic and philosophy , The Principles of
Mathematics , in 1903 . From 1907 to 1910 , he worked
tirelessly with Alfred North Whitehead , culminating
with the publication of the first volume of Principia
Mathematica in 1910 . During this time , Russell also
began to express his radical and decidedly liberal
political views , and he ran unsuccessfully as a suffragist candidate for parliament in 1907 ( and in 1922 , 
1923 )  . In 1916 , he was convicted and fined for his
antiwar activities and was dismissed from his position
at Trinity College . In 1918 , he was convicted again
and spent 6 months in prison where he wrote Political
Ideals : Roads to Freedom and the widely acclaimed
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy in 1919 . 
Seven years later , Russell published On Education , 
in which he called for an education that would liberate
children from unthinking obedience to parental and
religious authority . With his second wife ( he married
four times ) and former student Dora Black , he established in 1927 the experimental Beacon Hill School
in West Sussex , England . The school highlighted
Russell ’ s belief that students should not be required to
follow a strictly academic curriculum . He believed that
students needed opportunities to develop what today
are commonly referred to as critical thinking skills . He
championed a belief that students needed to be trained
to form opinions , find solutions to problems , and to be
able to identify and question assumptions . The experimental school operated for 5 years and resulted in a
1932 book titled Education and Social Order . 
After that , Russell made a living as a writer , journalist , and lecturer . He created quite a stir in 1932
with the publication of Marriage and Morals , a book
espousing his views on free love . He taught at several
American universities from 1938 to 1944 . One appointment at City College , New York , was rescinded following public protests and a judicial decision stating
that he was morally unfit to teach at the college . 
Russell ceased to be a pacifist during the 1930s
with the rise of Hitler in Germany . As a result , his
fellowship at Cambridge was eventually restored . In
1950 , he was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature . 
In his later years , he was quite vocal and active in his
opposition to nuclear weapons . Russell became an
inspirational figure to many youth in the late 1950s
and 1960s as a result of his continued antiwar and
antinuclear protests . In 1961 , at the age of 88 , he was
imprisoned for a week in connection with an antinuclear protest . Until his death at the age of 97 , Russell
remained a visible and vibrant public figure . 
—George W . Griffin
See also Aristotle ; critical theory ; empiricism ; existentialism ; liberalism ; philosophies of education ; Plato ; research methods
Further Readings and References
Monk , R .  ( 1999 )  . Russell . London : Orion . 
Russell , B .  ( 1946 )  . History of Western philosophy . London : 
George Allen & Unwin . 
Russell , B .  ( 1957 )  . Why I am not a Christian . New York : 
Simon & Schuster . 
Russell , B .  ( 1960 )  . On education . London : Unwin . 
Russell , B .  ( 1988 )  . The problems of philosophy . New York : 
Prometheus Books . 
Russell , B .  ( 1998 )  . The autobiography of Bertrand Russell . 
London : Routledge . 
890———Russell , Bertrand
R-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 47 AM Page 890
 S-CURVE THEORY
The S-curve is a graphic of a frequency distribution
that visualizes growth and change . The growth of most
organisms follows an S-curve . Growth processes do not
simply reach a limit and then stop . Instead , they often
follow one of two configurations with respect to limits . 
The first is a pattern of exponential ( even superexponential ) growth up to a turning point and then a pattern of
slowing growth . The pattern exhibits a slow-slow-quickquick-slow progression : an S-curve . When a young tree
is very small , it tends to grow only a few inches each
year , but as time passes , it accelerates in both height and
girth , until it reaches its natural limit , declines , and dies . 
The second growth pattern also resembles an S-curve , 
but it extends the upward growth by tracing another
S-curve back down . The overall pattern becomes a
bell-shaped curve and may indicate the phenomenon
of overshoot and decline . An example might be population growth in many historic empires . The failing
empires outgrow their capacity to provide food or
energy and subsequently break down . 
These generic patterns of growth were adopted in
social science research to frame the diffusion of innovation theory . The French sociologist , Gabriel Tarde , 
carried out the original diffusion research in 1903 and
plotted the S-shaped curve . Modern diffusion research
is traceable to the 1943 study by two sociologists , 
Bruce Ryan and Neal Gross , of the diffusion of hybrid
corn among Iowa farmers . Everett M . Rogers , more
than any other individual , has been responsible for
synthesizing the theories and findings of diffusion
research and formulating a unified theory . Rogers discusses four prominent theories of diffusion . His rate
of adoption theory concerns us here . This theory
visualizes the pattern of the adoption of an innovation
as an S-shaped curve , with potential for stabilization
and / or ultimate decline . 
Figure 1 displays a typical S-curve for the adoption
of an innovation . The simple S-curve , however , is an
incomplete view of the process . It is more helpful to
think of the “ S ” in terms of Hughes ’ s second growth
pattern as the front half of a “ bell-shaped ” curve . The 
 “ S ” outlines the developmental stages of the change , 
but the process can easily revert at the “ turning point ” 
when operational or ideological doubt sets in . An
educational change process would start with innovators , often aided by formal change agents , and progress
through a period of acceleration and rapid growth when
the early and late majorities join the process , to a period
of saturation—stabilization or exhaustion—when only
the laggards remain to be converted . At this point , if a
school staff is able to reenergize the process—deal with
the increasing complexity and reinforce existing commitments—the innovation will likely succeed . If not , 
the process will shrink to safe levels or finally collapse . 
—James W . Keefe
See also at-risk students ; chaos theory ; ethos , of organizations ; 
instructional interventions ; leadership , theories of ; leadership
styles ; learning , theories of ; learning environments ; problem
solving ; psychology , types of ; psychometrics ; research methods ; standardized testing ; testing and test theory development ; 
underachievers , in schools ; validity and reliability ; variables
Further Readings and References
Goerner , S .  ( 2002 )  . Rethinking education in light of great
change . Retrieved September 7 , 2005 , from New Horizons
891
S
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 891
for Learning Web site , 
goerner . htm
Hughes , B .  ( 1999 )  . International futures : Choices in the face
of uncertainty . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . 
Rogers , E .  ( 1976 )  . New product adoption and diffusion . 
Journal of Consumer Research , 2 , 290–301 . 
Rogers , E .  ( 1995 )  . Diffusion of innovations ( 4th ed .  )  . New
York : Free Press . 
 SALARY AND SALARY MODELS
Salary is the monetary compensation workers receive
in return for their services ( salary is also called wage
earnings or pecuniary rewards )  . Workers often receive
additional benefits , such as medical coverage and / or
contributions to pension funds , but salary is the most
visible and tangible aspect of employee compensation . Salaries paid for jobs both across and within occupations are readily amenable to comparison ; therefore , 
salary is often used to assess the relative attractiveness
of different positions . 
Salary models represent alternative approaches to
the distribution of monetary compensation . Salary
models are usually based upon traditional economic
assumptions about worker behavior . Specifically , it is
assumed that a positive relationship exists between
income and effort and that employees will work harder
if they can earn more money . Examining the criteria
used by salary models to distribute employee wages
can help to explain what is of value to an organization . 
THE EVOLUTION OF SALARY
MODELS IN EDUCATION
Salary models in education have evolved from socalled boarding round approaches in the 1800s , 
which provided teachers room and board as a major
component of their compensation , to grade-based
models in the late 1800s and early 1900s . Grade-based
schedules differentiated salary primarily on the basis
of level of instruction ( paying higher salaries to secondary than to elementary teachers ) but were often
used to discriminate on the basis of gender and race
as well ( with higher salaries paid to men than women
and to White teachers than Black )  . 
The inequities of grade-based models were
addressed in the 1920s to 1940s with the widespread
adoption of the single or uniform salary schedule , 
which distributes additional wage increments among
teachers solely on the bases of longevity and advanced
training . Two characteristics distinguish one single
salary schedule from another : 
1 . The slope or steepness of the pay gradient ( i . e .  , how
quickly wages increase from the entry level to the top
step on the schedule ) 
2 . The magnitude of the increments paid for different
levels of advanced training ( i . e .  , how much a system
is willing to expend to encourage teachers to engage
in formal professional development ) 
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
OF THE SINGLE SALARY SCHEDULE
Using experience and advanced training as the primary criteria for wage differentials is considered relatively objective and easy to quantify without direct
supervision , thus the cost of administering a single
salary schedule is relatively low . Furthermore , paying
higher salaries to teachers with more experience and
training creates incentives for individuals to remain
within a school system , which should promote stability , and to continue to develop professionally , which
should promote better instruction and higher student
achievement . As a result of these perceived advantages , 
the single salary schedule remains the most commonly used salary model in the education . 
Nevertheless , the utility of paying teachers based
on criteria not directly related to performance or the
achievement of students has been challenged repeatedly , most notably in 1983 with the publication of A
Nation at Risk , which advocated the adoption of merit
892———Salary and Salary Models
Fragility Zone
Turning Point Greater Intricacy
Acceleration
Exhaustion / 
Limit
Regression
or Collapse
Figure 1 Innovation Adoption Curve
SOURCE : Adapted with permission from Goerner , S .  ( 2002 )  . 
Rethinking education in light of great change . New Horizons for
Learning Web site , available from 
trans / goerner . htm . 
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 892
pay salary models , which explicitly link teacher
performance to student performance , usually as measured by standardized achievement tests . 
Another concern about teacher salaries is that entry
wages in education typically lag behind those in other
professions requiring equivalent levels of educational
preparation ( e . g .  , accounting or engineering )  . It is
often argued that starting salaries in teaching need to
be increased if the profession is to become more competitive in attracting “ the best and the brightest .  ” 
ALTERNATIVE SALARY MODELS
Alternatives to the single salary model include : 
• Career ladders . Unlike the single salary schedule , 
which makes no differentiation regarding teacher
work at different points of a career , the career ladder
creates a staged profession that allows a teacher ’ s
responsibility , status , and salary to change markedly
over the course of a career . For example , as teachers
proceed through the steps of the career ladder in the
Cincinnati Public School , they can move from
Apprentice to Novice to Career to Advanced to
Accomplished teacher . Each step up the ladder
requires sustained high performance , which is accompanied by a higher salary and more responsibilities . 
• Merit- or performance-related pay . The use of merit
pay has a long but erratic history in American public
education . 
• Skill and competency based pay . Group performance
incentives . 
OTHER SALARY MODEL ADJUSTMENTS
The following adjustments , paid as either annual
bonuses added but not built in to the salary base or as
salary increments , can be made to any of the salary
models listed above : 
• Scarcity bonuses can be used to attract high-quality
teachers to low-performing schools or to attract
teachers with high-need subject expertise , such as
mathematics or science . 
• Attendance incentives are used to induce teachers to
improve their attendance by offering bonuses for perfect or near-perfect attendance . 
• Deferred salary leave plans ( DSLPs ) allow teachers
to voluntarily defer a part of their annual salaries for
a given number of years in order to self-fund a leave
of absence . For example , a participating teacher
would spread 4 years of salary over 5 years , working
the first 4 years at 80% of salary and then using the
accumulated deferred payments to self-fund a paid
leave during the fifth year . DSLPs have been used
widely in Canada since the late 1970s , but rarely in
the United States . 
—Stephen Jacobson
See also career stages ; classification of education ; differentiated staffing ; economics , theories of ; merit pay ; performance
evaluation systems ; personnel management ; staffing , concepts
of ; unions , of teachers
Further Readings and References
Chamberlin , R .  , Haynes , G .  , Wragg , E .  ,  & Wragg , C .  ( 2004 )  . 
Performance pay for teachers . London : Routledge . 
English , F .  ( 1984 )  . Merit pay : Reflections on education ’ s
lemon tree . Educational Leadership , 41 ( 4 )  , 72–79 . 
English , F .  ( 1992 )  . History and critical issues of educational
compensation systems . In L . Frase ( Ed .  )  , Teacher compensation and motivation ( pp . 3–24 )  . Lancaster , PA : Technomic . 
Frase , L .  ( 1992 )  . The effects of financial and nonfinancial
rewards : Program description and research results . In
L . Frase ( Ed .  )  , Teacher compensation and motivation 
( pp . 217–238 )  . Lancaster , PA : Technomic . 
Gratz , D .  ( 2005 )  . Lessons from Denver : The pay for performance pilot . Phi Delta Kappan , 86 , 569–581 . 
 SALES TAX
The most common tax levied on goods or services is
the sales tax applied at the retail level of transaction . 
Used primarily by the states , its popularity is relatively recent . As of 1931 , no state levied a retail sales
tax ( RST )  . Until that time , states had relied mostly on
property taxes , business taxes , excise taxes , and , in a
few states , income taxes . By the 1930s , however , state
revenue was under pressure , because of both the
Depression and a movement to transfer the property
tax to local governments . In 1932 , Mississippi adopted
a 2% retail sales tax as a replacement for a business
tax . Seventy years later , sales and use taxes ( taxes on
use when a customer buys out of state for delivery in
the state ) now account for about 32% of state government tax collections nationwide , trailing only the individual income tax as a source of revenue . They are
imposed by 45 states and the District of Columbia , as
well as over 7 , 500 local jurisdictions . 
While retail sales taxes are the most common tax
levied on goods and services , such taxation may take
a variety of forms . A general sales tax applies to all
Sales Tax———893
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 893
transactions at a specified level of economic activity , 
except for enumerated exemptions ( e . g .  , a sales tax
may apply to all sales at retail except food or medicine )  . A selective sales tax ( commonly called an excise
tax ) applies only to enumerated transactions ( e . g .  , retail
sales of tobacco products or liquor )  . A specific tax
applies only to the number of physical units bought or
sold ( e . g .  , a motor fuel tax may be 30¢ per gallon )  . An
ad valorem tax applies to the value of the good or service purchased ( e . g .  , a hotel tax may be 10% of the
hotel bill )  . A tax may apply every time a transaction
occurs ( multistage tax ) or only at one stage in the production and distribution process ( single-stage tax )  . 
The RST is an example of a single-stage tax and is
the preferred form of goods and services taxation for
several reasons . First , the tax paid by the consumer
will likely be the amount received by the government . 
Multistage and preretail taxes , in contrast , tend to
pyramid . Second , multistage taxes impact each market transaction , thereby favoring integrated firms 
( e . g .  , those that manufacture , wholesale , and retail ) 
with a lower tax . Third , the RST applies to the full
value of the product . 
EQUITY
It is often held that the RST imposes a regressive
burden because on average in any given year , those
with lower income spend a higher percentage of their
income than do higher-income households . However , a
growing research literature suggests that a single-year
snapshot of income and consumption overestimates
this regressivity . That is , over a lifetime , all income is
spent . By this reasoning , the burden of a uniform ( i . e .  , 
no exceptions ) consumption tax is comparable to the
burden of a flat-rate tax on labor income . The analysis
will change , of course , if particular goods are exempted from the tax . For example , the exemption of food
would make the tax more progressive . 
EFFICIENCY
The efficiency of the RST concerns its cost to the
economy . That is , does the RST raise revenue with a
lower cost to the economy than an alternative tax , such
as the income tax ? A pure , uniform RST does not tax
capital income and therefore does not distort individuals ’ and firms ’ decisions about saving and investment . 
An income tax , in contrast , does tax capital and thus
does distort these decisions . This comparison is
complicated , however , because the RST often involves
capital taxation by taxing business-to-business sales . 
The efficiency analysis of the RST is further complicated by the fact that its base is virtually never comprehensive , taxing few services and exempting various
goods on distributional and administrative grounds . In
light of the administrative and political realities of the
RST , observers generally assert that a broader tax base
taxed at a lower rate is more efficient than a more narrowly defined base taxed at a higher rate . 
STABILITY
Government functions continue during recessions
and may increase during such periods due to increasing social problems ( e . g .  , rising unemployment , 
crime )  . Revenue stability is particularly important for
state and local governments because they lack the borrowing capacity and money-creating powers of the
federal government . Some researchers have found that
general sales taxes are somewhat less stable than individual income taxes , probably because business
equipment purchases comprise a substantial share of
the general sales tax base . 
EXPORTING AND
FEDERAL DEDUCTIBILITY
A state may “ export ” a fraction of its RST burden
to nonresidents ( usually tourists ) if they buy products
when visiting . However , a more likely form of exporting
occurs via the deductibility of state taxes against federal
taxable income . The Tax Reform Act of 1986 eliminated
the deductibility of state sales tax , leading many
observers to predict a shift away from sales tax . Interestingly , this has not happened . A study done by Citizens
for Tax Justice in 1991 noted that between 1986 and
1991 , 26 states increased their sales tax , and only 2
reduced it . During the same period , 11 states increased
their personal income tax , while 28 reduced it . 
—Michael Addonizio
See also budgeting ; economics , theories of ; equality , in
schools ; equity and adequacy of funding schools ; finance , 
of public schools ; lottery systems ; property tax
Further Readings and References
Casperson , E .  ,  & Metcalf , G .  ( 1994 )  . Is a value-added tax
progressive ? Annual versus lifetime incidence measures . 
National Tax Journal , 47 , 731–746 . 
894———Sales Tax
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 894
Due , J . F .  ,  & Mikesell , J . L .  ( 1994 )  . Sales taxation : state and
local structure and administration ( 2nd ed .  )  . Washington , 
DC : Urban Institute Press . 
Lyon , A . B .  ,  & Schwab , R . M .  ( 1995 )  . Consumption taxes in a
life-cycle framework : Are sin taxes regressive ? Review of
Economics and Statistics , 37 , 389–406 . 
Mikesell , J . L .  ( 1995 )  . Fiscal administration ( 4th ed .  )  . 
Belmont , CA : Wadsworth . 
Slemrod , J .  ( 2003 )  . Michigan ’ s sales and use taxes : Portrait
and analysis . In C . L . Ballard et al .  ( Eds .  )  , Michigan at
the millennium . East Lansing : Michigan State University
Press . 
 SANCHEZ , GEORGE
A pioneering educator who worked tirelessly on behalf
of improving education for Mexican American
children , George I . Sanchez ( 1906–1972 ) first attended
school in Jerome , Arizona . Moving to Albuquerque , 
New Mexico , he completed high school there in 1923 . 
Becoming a school teacher in Yrisarri , New Mexico , 
he often had to travel by horseback to get to work . 
As a recipient from several eastern foundations , 
Sanchez received his M . S . in educational psychology
and Spanish from the University of Texas in 1931 . His
thesis was concerned with issues of validity on language
IQ tests in English for Spanish speaking children . 
Sanchez went on to complete his PhD at the University
of California at Berkeley . He returned to New Mexico , 
where he worked in the New Mexico State Department
of Education and became president of the New Mexico
Educational Association . Battling for improved tax support for schools , he began to acquire an understanding
of how to improve funding for public schools . 
Continuing his foundation work , he surveyed rural
schools in Mexico and African American schools in
the southern United States . He became the Minister
of Education in Venezuela for 1 year and returned to
become a nontenure-track faculty member at the
University of New Mexico from 1938 to 1940 . During
that time , he wrote Forgotten People : A Study of
New Mexicans . In 1940 , he was elected president of
LULAC ( League of United Latin American Citizens ) 
and became the first professor of Latin American
studies in the United States . However , he came up
against vested interests as a result of his advocacy of
improved funding in New Mexico , and he was not
going to obtain a full professor position at the
University of New Mexico . 
During this time , the University of Texas offered
him a full-professor position . In Texas , he worked with
LULAC , the Alianza Hispano-Americana , and other
organizations in pushing lawsuits for improved funding and for equal rights for Mexican Americans . He
worked to utilize the courts to establish better funding
and to fight segregation of Mexican American students
in the public schools . In the landmark case Delgado v . 
Gracy et al .  ( 1948 )  , he helped strike down segregated
schools for Mexican American students . He was instrumental in fighting for and winning several other critical
cases in the courts . He was honored by the University
of California at Berkeley Law School for his work in
improving education for Mexican American students . 
A special location in the U . S . Department of Education
is named after him . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also Chavez , Cesar Estrada ; immigration , history and
impact in education ; Latinos ; League of United Latin
American Citizens ; literacy , theories of ; Mendez , Felicitas
Further Readings and References
Calderon , M .  ,  & Minaya-Rowe , L .  ( 2003 )  . Designing and
implementing two-way bilingual programs . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Gaitan , C .  ( 2004 )  . Involving Latino families in schools . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Garcia , E .  ( 2005 )  . Teaching and learning in two languages : 
Bilingualism and schooling in the United States . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Gibson , M .  , Gandara , P .  ,  & Koyama , J .  ( 2004 )  . School connections : U . S . Mexican youth , peers , and school achievement . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Pedraza , P .  ,  & Rivera , M .  ( 2005 )  . Latino education . Mahwah , 
NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
Ybarra , R .  ,  & Lopez , N .  ( 2004 )  . Creating alternative discourses in the education of Latinos and Latinas . New York : 
Peter Lang . 
 SATISFACTION , IN
ORGANIZATIONS AND ROLES
In organizations and roles , satisfaction can be defined as
the degree of an individual ’ s affective orientation toward
his or her role in an organization or simply as the degree
to which an individual likes his or her role in an organization . Satisfaction is important because it affects a variety of individual and organizational outcomes . 
Satisfaction , in Organizations and Roles———895
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 895
An individual ’ s satisfaction with his or her role
in an organization affects that person ’ s physical and
mental well-being , overall quality of life , and satisfaction in roles outside the organization . Individuals who
are satisfied with their roles in organizations are generally physically and mentally healthier , experience
a higher quality of life , and are more satisfied with
their roles outside their organizations than individuals
who are not satisfied with their roles in organizations . 
Research has found in some occupations , low work
satisfaction is associated with alcohol abuse . 
Satisfaction also affects commitment , motivation , productivity or performance , absenteeism , and turnover . 
Individuals who are satisfied with their roles in organizations are generally more committed to their organizations , more motivated , and more productive within
their organizations than individuals who are not satisfied with their roles in organizations . For example , 
research indicates the job satisfaction of teachers is
positively associated with student achievement . All
things considered , the students of teachers with high
job satisfaction do better on standardized assessments
than do students of teachers with low job satisfaction . 
Individuals who are satisfied with their roles in organizations are also less likely to fail to show up or voluntarily leave their organizations than individuals who
are not satisfied with their roles in organizations . 
Absenteeism and turnover are costly and disruptive
to work organizations , as hiring , acclimating , and
training new employees require time and energy that
could otherwise be spent providing support to
employees and clients . 
Researchers have studied satisfaction within organizations since the early 1900s , especially with respect
to turnover . Many characteristics of roles in organizations have been identified as affecting the degree to
which individuals are satisfied with their roles , 
although the relevancy and relative strength of characteristics ’ effects on satisfaction can vary greatly by
occupation , education , personality , age , tenure , union
membership , marital status , sex , and other factors . The
following paragraphs describe some—but certainly
not all—of the characteristics that affect satisfaction
within organizations . 
Routinization is the degree to which a role is repetitive , and it negatively affects satisfaction . The more a
person ’ s role is repetitive , the less satisfied that person
is likely to be with that role . Research also indicates , 
in occupations like teaching , year-to-year routinization can affect satisfaction in the same manner that
daily or hourly routinization does . In other words , 
teaching the same subject the same way year after
year can negatively affect satisfaction among teachers
the same way that doing the same task hour after hour
can negatively affect satisfaction . 
Participation is the degree to which individuals exercise control within their organizations , and it positively
affects satisfaction . The more a person exercises control within his or her organization , the more satisfied
that person is likely to be with his or her role in the
organization . Instrumental communication is the
degree to which information about an organization is
transmitted by an organization to its members , and it
positively affects satisfaction . 
Distributive justice is the degree to which rewards
and punishments are consistent with an individual ’ s
input into an organization , and it positively affects satisfaction . Not to be mistaken for pay ( which , when
applicable , also positively affects satisfaction )  , distributive justice refers to the full set of rewards and
punishments that organizational members experience
and perceive . Distributive justice is the degree to
which individuals feel they are treated fairly in general , given their effort . 
Support is the degree of assistance or consideration given or expressed by others , and researchers have
consistently found support to have strong positive
effects on satisfaction . For example , many studies indicate administrative support is the most important
determinant of job satisfaction among K–12 teachers . 
The satisfaction of individuals in organizational roles
is also affected by the support individuals receive from
family members and friends outside organizations . 
Satisfaction in organizations is also affected by the
degree to which organizational members are afforded
the opportunity to develop skills and knowledge and the
degree to which members are afforded the opportunity
to be promoted within an organization . Increases in
opportunities to develop skills and knowledge and to
be promoted within organizations lead to increases in
satisfaction among members . 
The degree to which an individual ’ s role in an
organization matches his or her preconceived ideas
about organizational life is positively associated with
satisfaction . Individuals whose organizational roles do
not match the preconceived ideas they had about organizational life are generally less satisfied in their roles
than individuals whose roles match the preconceived
ideas they had . Of course , it is possible to be pleasantly surprised by a role that is better than previously
896———Satisfaction , in Organizations and Roles
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 896
imagined . However , both human nature and many
aspects of organizational life that are unnoticed or
unconsidered by outsiders ( including some of the
characteristics mentioned in the previous paragraphs ) 
cause most mismatches between preconceived ideas
and actual organizational life to lead to decreases in
satisfaction . 
—Eric J . Reed
See also behaviorism ; capacity building , of organizations ; 
class size ; collaboration , theory ; climate , school ; communities , types , building of ; conflict management ; creativity , 
in management ; empowerment ; esprit ( school climate )  ; 
esteem needs ; ethos , of organizations ; flow theory ; group
dynamics ; Halpin , Andrew William ; human resource development ; involvement , in organizations ; job security ; leadership effectiveness ; management theories ; Maslow , 
Abraham ; mentoring ; morale ; motivation , theories of ; performance evaluation systems ; personality ; politics , of education ; productivity ; rational organizational theory ; role
conflict ; satisficing theory ; stress , in school administration
Further Readings and References
Barth , R .  ( 2003 )  . Lessons learned . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Corwin Press . 
Frase , L .  ( 2005 )  . Refocusing the purposes of teacher supervision . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 430–462 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Giancola , J .  ,  & Hutchison , J .  ( 2005 )  . Transforming the culture
of school leadership : Humanizing our practice . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Pellicer , L .  ( 2003 )  . Caring enough to lead . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
Sergiovanni , T .  ( 2000 )  . The lifeworld of leadership . San
Francisco , CA : Jossey-Bass . 
Starratt , R .  ( 2003 )  . Centering educational administration . 
Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
 SATISFICING THEORY
Classical decision-making theory presumes decision
makers to be rational actors who seek optimal or maximum solutions . This model , also known as rational
choice , suggests that decision makers follow a linear
sequence to arrive at a solution : 
1 . Identify desired outcome ( s ) in light of the organization ’ s goals and objectives . 
2 . Consider all possible alternatives . 
3 . Consider the consequences of each alternative . 
4 . Select the alternative that will most likely result in
the desired outcome . 
Inherent in this model is the assumption that a decision maker is capable of knowing all possible solutions as well as all consequences and will consider
each equally . Herbert A . Simon , the originator of
satisficing theory , asserts that the classical decisionmaking model is an ideal rather than practical strategy . He suggests that inherent limitations within
organizations and decision makers themselves preclude the use of the pure rationality required by the
classical model . Rather , decision makers employ
bounded rationality . That is , they act rationally within
the constraints of external and internal limitations . 
These external limitations include , for example , the
multifaceted structure of organizations . This structural
complexity limits the information to which any one
person within the organization has access . Thus , with
only limited access to information , a decision maker is
precluded from considering all possible alternatives
or knowing all possible consequences of any alternative . Similarly , organizations tend to have multiple and , 
oftentimes , conflicting goals . Multiple or conflicting
goals may prevent any one solution from being “ best ” 
in that a particular solution may maximize one goal
while inhibiting another . Moreover , and perhaps more
important , because decision makers are human , they
have internal limitations that prevent them from
employing pure rationality . For instance , all humans
have unconscious biases that cause them to accept
some data while rejecting others . In addition , humans
have a limited cognitive capacity to manage complexity . As a result , humans attempt to simplify highly
complex situations . Again , this causes a decision maker
to ignore some data in favor of others . 
Therefore , because decision makers are constrained
by this bounded rationality , they are incapable of identifying the optimal solution . Rather , they search for
the first alternative that is at least minimally satisfactory . That is , they seek to satisfice . 
—Sarah W . Nelson
See also administration , theories of ; Barnard , Chester I .  ; 
behaviorism ; boundaries of systems ; bureaucracy ; cognition , theories of ; compliance theory ; conceptual systems
theory and leadership ; consideration , caring ; contingency
theories ; decision making ; organizational theories ; problem
solving ; Simon , Herbert
Satisficing Theory———897
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 897
Further Readings and References
Simon , H .  ( 1957 )  . Administrative behavior : A study of decision-making processes in administrative organization . New
York : Macmillan . 
Simon , H .  ( 1967 )  . Organizational decision making . Englewood
Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Tarter , C .  ,  & Hoy , W .  ( 1998 )  . Toward a contingency theory of
decision making . Journal of Educational Administration , 
36 ( 3 )  , 212–228 . 
 SCALAR PRINCIPLE
The scalar principle or scalar chain is based on a precept
of management , which reasons that the authority and
responsibility of leadership flows downward from top
management in an unbroken line , which includes every
worker in the organization . It coexists with the concept
of chain of command , which is the line of authority that
flows from the top of an organization down to rank-andfile members working within the organization . The concept of authority is associated with the right to direct
others , which is aligned with a formal appointment to a
particular supervisory job or title . According to some
experts , the terms scalar chain , line of authority , and
chain of command are used synonymously . 
The development of the scalar principle derives
from the classical principles of management theory
developed when Henri Fayol ’ s work was introduced
into the United States in the 1940s . Fayol , a French
manager , derived 14 principles of management . Fayol ’ s
approach to organizing included concepts such as lines
of authority , centralization , delegation , departmentalization , division of work , span of control , specialization
of jobs , unity of command , and unity of direction . Fayol ’ s
work was compatible with the work of Frederick W . 
Taylor , a pioneer in the field of scientific management
principles who linked organizational management
theory to the scientific principles of research . Fayol ’ s
precepts broadened Taylor ’ s principles in their focus on
the structured organizational process of management . 
Even though the scientific management and classical
theorists applied their theoretical constructs to business
organizations , their hierarchical principles were also
adopted and applied to schools . 
A classical organizational theorist would maintain
that when the scalar principle is applied properly , 
there is a clear reporting structure and embedded
within it , supervisory relationships , and a distinct
communication process . With a clear reporting procedure in place , each person in the organization knows
who to report to for direction in regard to work activities . The advantage in adopting the scalar principle
would be improved efficiency and coordination
through faster decision making and direction , which , 
in turn , would lead to effective performance within the
organization . When the scalar principle is applied to a
school district , the supervisory line of authority would
begin with the school superintendent or chief administrator and then flow downward accordingly , to the
assistant superintendents , principals , assistant principals , departmental chairpersons , teachers , and staff
personnel . This arrangement would be laid out visibly
in an organizational chart , which would indicate supervision in the various schools , divisions , and departments within the school system . 
The scalar principle could be applied within each
school unit or building starting with the chief administrator of that building and proceed downward to
every person or staff member assigned regardless of
the job or job description . It would be the responsibility of the chief administrator assigned to the unit or
building to coordinate work activities and establish
the lines of communication with the workers assigned
to these activities . If there are problems regarding performance , coordination , or unity , then responsibility
for those problem situations could also be traced
upward , along the chain of command , and back to the
chief administrator in authority over that division . 
The channel of communication is organized into
structured and delineated levels of communication , 
which are imposed up and down the chain of command . With a clear reporting structure in place , communication would be established only with individuals
above or below the indicated reporting level . A disadvantage of such a system would be that communication becomes restricted as each level communicates
only with a level in descending or ascending order . 
Currently , with widened avenues of communication
available through electronic means as well as an
increased prevalence in the formation of teams across
departments and divisions in business organizations
and across disciplines and grade levels in schools , 
communication processes have become less restrictive
and more open . As a result , the scalar principle may
have to be revised as technology and teaming impact
functional management processes and procedures . 
—Patricia Ann Marcellino
898———Scalar Principle
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 898
See also authority ; bureaucracy ; chain of command ; communications , theories in organizations ; division of labor ; functionalist theory ; goals , goal setting ; hierarchy , in organizations ; 
organizational theories ; rational organizational theory ; scientific management ; span of control ; staffing , concepts of ; 
working conditions , in schools ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Fayol , H .  ( 1949 )  . General and industrial management 
( C . Storrs , Trans .  )  . London : Sir Isaac Pitman . 
Mintzberg , H .  ( 1979 )  . The structuring of organizations . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Taylor , F .  ( 1947 )  . The principles of management . New York : 
Harper & Row .  ( Original work published 1911 ) 
 SCHEDULING , TYPES
OF IN SCHOOLS
The school schedule is the administrative mechanism
by which the instructional day is divided into manageable timeframes so that school personnel can deliver the
curriculum . An effective scheduling model maximizes
available instructional time for learning activities , 
empowers teachers with decision-making authority to
group learners for skills instruction , and provides
teachers with the flexibility and creativity to design and
deliver instructional methods that fully engage students
in the process of learning . Mastery of curriculum content for all learners is the goal of an efficacious scheduling model . 
The number of minutes allocated for instruction
within a discipline is a critical variable when considering curriculum mastery . Educators , therefore , must
consider issues related to curriculum breadth , depth , 
and balance when designing the school schedule because
mastery of curriculum standards is closely correlated
with the time spent on learning activities . For
example , requiring the curriculum to include a variety
of disciplines will expose the student to an array of
subjects ( thereby ensuring curriculum breadth ) yet
may provide insufficient time within the school day
for the in-depth instruction that is necessary for the
student to master any discipline . Conversely , limiting
the curriculum to a few core disciplines may ensure
that ample time is available for content mastery of
these core subjects , but the student may then not
receive a well-rounded education through instruction
in disciplines such as the arts and humanities . 
Curriculum balance also must be carefully considered
because instructional minutes will not be equally allocated for every subject . Greater time must be allocated
for the core disciplines than for elective or other
subjects , so that students can master the basic state
and local curriculum standards . 
Another consideration when designing the school
schedule is developmental appropriateness for the
learner at each grade level . Special attention and consideration should be given to easing transitions for the
student—from the home environment into the kindergarten setting , through each subsequent grade , and
when moving from one building level to another . For
example , kindergarten students would find an assignment with numerous teachers and classrooms to be
overwhelming ; at the other end of the spectrum , high
school seniors may consider being scheduled with
only one teacher for the entire instructional day as too
confining and boring . Because the developmental and
instructional needs differ for students at the elementary , middle , and high school levels , the remainder of
this entry will address effective scheduling arrangements at each building level . 
ELEMENTARY
At the elementary level , the one-teacher , self-contained
classroom generally is considered the preferred scheduling approach . Young children , particularly in the
early primary grades , have the opportunity to form a
close personal bond with one teacher , who is responsible for delivery of the core curriculum standards . 
The elementary teacher is provided with large , unencumbered blocks of time for heterogeneous wholegroup classroom instruction , with the flexibility for
homogeneous grouping and regrouping of learners for
skills instruction in curricular areas such as reading
and mathematics . The classroom teacher also is
empowered to reach decisions related to the amount
of allocated time that is necessary for curriculum mastery , dependent upon the subject area and the learning
needs of each individual student . 
Parallel scheduling often is used in elementary
schools , making large blocks of planning time available so that the regular classroom teachers can be
released from their instructional responsibilities for
either individual planning or to meet as members
of grade-level planning teams . Specialists in areas
such as music , art , physical education , computers , and
library / media rotate through the classroom groupings
Scheduling , Types of in Schools———899
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 899
during these periods , providing instruction to the
students in these subjects . 
MIDDLE LEVEL
The middle-level schedule should be responsive to
the developmental needs of the emerging adolescent , 
providing a personalized learning environment that
promotes supportive relationships among teachers and
learners . Interdisciplinary teaming is considered to be
the hallmark of effective middle-level schools , in which
small learning teams of teachers and students are created . Through the utilization of common planning periods , teaching teams design and deliver instruction in
the core disciplines in an interdisciplinary fashion so
that students can make connections across the curriculum . Advisory time also is provided within the schedule , ensuring that teachers and students can form close
personal relationships and providing an opportunity
to address issues related to the emerging adolescents ’ 
physical , cognitive , social , and emotional development . 
An effective middle-level schedule empowers the
teaching teams to collaboratively reach decisions related
to how instructional time is configured each day , and
the flexible interdisciplinary schedule is considered to
be the basic organizational framework of the exemplary
middle-level school . With this approach , teams may
choose to dedicate more time to selected subjects , providing instruction to core classes each day , on an alternating-day basis , or as needed . Teams may contain as
few as two teachers or as many as six or more , although
four- or five-person teams are the most commonly utilized . Typically , the core subjects ( language arts , reading , social studies , mathematics , science ) are contained
within the team block , and the remaining subjects ( the
elective or “ exploratory ” subjects ) are scheduled with
teacher specialists , either in exploratory blocks or in
daily 40- to 45-minute timeframes . 
Junior highs and middle schools that do not utilize
interdisciplinary teaming commonly utilize a disciplinary or departmentalized approach , employing
scheduling models typically mimicking high school
schedules . 
HIGH SCHOOL
Scheduling models at the high school level commonly fall into three varieties : daily-period models , 
block-scheduling formats , and combination or hybrid
models . Although a small number of high schools
have been experimenting with the use of interdisciplinary teaming in the lower high school grades , the vast
majority of high schools tend to maintain a disciplinebased approach to teaching and learning . 
Daily-period models typically divide the instructional day into uniform “ periods ” of approximately
45 to 55 minutes in length , and a school may choose to
schedule students into six , seven , eight , or more classes
each day . Daily-period schedules usually do not permit
cross-disciplinary teaching approaches , and each
subject area retains its distinct place within the instructional day . Although daily-period models were the
dominant high school format for much of the twentieth
century , this approach has been increasingly criticized
in the past 20 years . Critics assert that daily-period
models contribute to the fragmentation of the school
day , continue rigid reliance on the Carnegie unit , create
an impersonal learning environment , contribute to
teachers ’ overreliance on the lecture method , discourage the use of constructivist learning strategies , and
restrict efforts to deliver interdisciplinary instruction . 
Block-of-time models , or block scheduling , have
rapidly grown in popularity since the late 1980s . 
These formats often employ 80- to 95-minute timeframes or “ blocks ” for each course , and the two most
frequently used block models are the 4 × 4 semester
plan and the eight-block , alternating-day model . If
teachers use the instructional time effectively , proponents state that these approaches permit a more supportive learning climate , encourage the incorporation
of constructivist teaching strategies , and promote
enhanced teacher-student interactions . With the 4 × 4
semester plan , classes are scheduled into four instructional blocks of 80 to 90 minutes , which meet for only
one half of the academic year . The student enrolls in
four daily courses the first semester ( half ) of the year
and an additional four courses the second semester . 
The eight-block , alternating-day schedule permits the
student to complete eight classes on a 2-day cycle : 
Blocks 1 through 4 and 5 through 8 rotate every other
day throughout the school year . 
Combination or hybrid models attempt to incorporate features of both daily-period and block schedules , often because school faculties may decide that
some disciplines may more appropriately be delivered in a standard timeframe or to provide increased
900———Scheduling , Types of in Schools
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 900
variety and flexibility to the instructional day . For
example , an alternating-day model could include
daily periods 3 days weekly and blocks the remaining
2 days . Another hybrid approach might incorporate
blocks for morning classes ( either an alternating-day
or semester plan format )  , with daily-period classes in
the afternoons . 
Regardless of the scheduling model that is developed , school faculties should understand that any division of time is arbitrary . The schedule should empower
teachers with the flexibility to maximize their instructional time and provide opportunities for active student
engagement in learning . The schedule permits the
development of a personalized learning environment
that promotes improved student achievement . 
—Donald Gene Hackmann
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; classroom
management ; class size research ; curriculum guides ; discipline in schools ; grades , of students ; high schools ; infrastructure , of organizations ; individual differences , in
children ; instruction , survey of ; junior high schools ; learning , theories of ; learning environments ; middle schools ; 
organizational theories ; site-based management
Further Readings and References
Canady , R . L .  ,  & Rettig , M . D .  ( 1995 )  . Block scheduling : A
catalyst for change in high schools . Princeton , NJ : Eye on
Education . 
Hackmann , D . G .  ,  & Valentine , J . W .  ( 1998 )  . Designing an
effective middle level schedule . Middle School Journal , 
29 ( 5 )  , 3–13 . 
Queen , A .  ( 2002 )  . The block scheduling handbook . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Robbins , P .  , Gregory , G .  ,  & Herndon , L .  ( 2000 )  . Thinking
inside the block schedule . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin
Press . 
Williamson , R . D .  ( 1998 )  . Scheduling middle level schools : 
Tools for improved student achievement . Reston , VA : 
National Association of Secondary School Principals . 
 SCHOLASTIC APTITUDE TEST
The College Board SAT Program consists of the 
 “ SAT Reasoning Test ” and “ SAT Subject Tests .  ” The
SAT Reasoning Test is a 3-hour , 45-minute multiplechoice test that includes the Critical Reading section , 
the Math section , and the Writing section . Each
section is scored on a scale of 200 to 800 ; thus , the
perfect score for the test is 2 , 400 . The SAT Subject
Tests are 1-hour , multiple-choice tests in specific
subjects . These tests are achievement tests that measure knowledge of particular subjects and the ability
to apply that knowledge . Many colleges require or
recommend one or more of these tests for admission
or placement purposes . The Subject Tests include
Literature , U . S . History , World History , Mathematics
Level 1 , Mathematics Level 2 , Biology E / M ( Ecological or Molecular )  , Chemistry , Physics , French , 
French With Listening , German , German With
Listening , Spanish , Spanish With Listening , Modern
Hebrew , Italian , Latin , Japanese With Listening , 
Korean With Listening , and Chinese With Listening . 
Each individual test is worth 800 points . Some colleges require certain Subject Tests for admission or
placement ; others allow students to take tests of their
choosing . 
HISTORY
The SAT test was originally used by the College Board
to measure the level achieved by students for admission
purposes . The test first took root in the United States
during the early part of the twentieth century . At that
time , applicants for elite northeastern universities had to
sit for entrance examination at each of the institutions . 
In an effort to simplify the application process , the 12
top northeastern universities founded a new organization , the College Entrance Examination Board . Later , 
the board developed a new exam that contained mostly
multiple-choice questions : the Scholastic Achievement
Test ( SAT )  . In 1941 , after considerable development , 
the test was renamed Scholastic Aptitude Test . 
In 1947 , the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) 
was founded in Princeton , New Jersey . Since then , the
SAT test has been developed and administered by ETS
for the College Board , which is the owner of the test . 
After that time , the SAT test was widely used by universities and colleges around the country for admission purposes . 
With success of SAT came the success of SAT
coaching schools , for example , Kaplan and Princeton
Review . Under the pressure that a test that can
be coached cannot really measure innate aptitude , 
College Board changed the name in 1990 to Scholastic
Scholastic Aptitude Test———901
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 901
Assessment Test . In 1994 , the College Board further
announced that SAT was not an acronym any more , but
the actual name of the test . 
CHANGES TO THE SAT
In March 2005 , ETS first administered the SAT
Reasoning Test . The previous test ( known as the 
 “ SAT I : Reasoning Test ”  ) was criticized for not being
aligned enough with the high school curriculum . As a
result , the test was redesigned to enhance its relation
with current high school curriculum and to emphasize
skills necessary for success in college , including reading , writing , and math . 
Changes included renaming the “ Verbal Reasoning
Section ” of the test the “ Critical Reading Section .  ” 
Analogies questions were replaced by more questions
on short and long reading passages . 
In the Math Section , items from more advanced
math courses such as second-year Algebra were added
to the test , while quantitative comparison items were
eliminated . 
To highlight writing skills , the Writing Section , 
including an essay , was added to the test . Also , 
multiple-choice questions on grammar appeared in
the redesigned version . Because of all these changes , 
the length of the SAT Reasoning Test increased to
3 hours and 45 minutes , and the perfect score became
2 , 400 instead of the previous 1 , 600 . 
SAT ISSUES : ACHIEVEMENT
OR APTITUDE ? 
The aptitude test measures a person ’ s natural ability , 
while the achievement test measures knowledge
learned by the person . The SAT originated from the
intelligence test popular in the early twentieth century . 
The designer of SAT assumed that intelligence was an
inherited attribute that would remain unchanged over
one ’ s lifetime and that it could be measured . Also , 
individuals could be ranked by their intelligence
and assigned their places in society accordingly . Antitesters often ask the question : Assuming we can measure aptitude , do we want an educational system that
prizes hard work or a system that rewards inherited
genes ? They claim that achievement tests , such as
SAT Subject Tests , are better admission tests because
they measure what the students have accomplished
rather than what they start with . Comprehensive studies
by the University of California system also suggested
that SAT Subject Tests are better predictors of freshmen grade point average than the SAT Reasoning
Test . 
RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN SAT
Another argument charges that the SAT test is inherently biased against Blacks and Latinos , who score
worse on average than Whites . People against the SAT
claim that the racial gap emerged because most test
writers are Whites and culture biases are introduced
into SAT . The College Board fights back by saying
that most SAT items are reviewed by a large sample of
experts and test takers , so that any biased items will be
eliminated . 
The racial gap may also be explained by the socioeconomic status of the students . Although the College
Board says that coaching on average adds less than 40
points to the scores , there is an emerging consensus that
effective coaching can improve student SAT scores . 
Test prep itself had become a $400 million business
by 1999 . The racial gap may be attributed to different
family backgrounds , or , in other words , Whites score
higher on average on SAT than Blacks and Latinos
because they are in better school districts and can afford
coaching classes . 
—Xiaogeng Sun
See also achievement tests ; Asian Pacific Americans ; Black
education ; critical race theory ; cross-cultural education ; 
cultural capital ; cultural politics , wars ; determinism , sociocultural ; diversity ; grades , of students ; high schools ; individual differences , in children ; intelligence ; Latinos ; 
learning , theories of ; measurement , theories of ; minorities , 
in schools ; multiculturalism ; motivation , theories of ; 
resiliency ; social capital ; testing , testing and test theory
development ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Geiser , S .  ,  & Studley , R .  ( 2004 )  . UC and the SAT : Predictive
validity and differential impact of the SAT I and SAT II at
the University of California , In R . Zwick ( Ed .  )  , Rethinking
the SAT : The future of standardized testing in university
admissions ( pp . 125–153 )  . New York : RoutledgeFalmer . 
Kronholz , J .  ( 2004 , September 1 )  . SAT scores show little
improvement . Wall Street Journal , pp . D1 , D2 . 
Young , J .  ( 2003 )  . Researchers charge racial bias on the SAT . 
The Chronicle of Higher Education , 50 ( 7 )  , 34–35 . 
Zwick , R .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Rethinking the SAT : The future of
standardized testing in university admissions . New York : 
RoutledgeFalmer . 
902———Scholastic Aptitude Test
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 902
 SCHOOL DISTRICTS , 
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT
The American public school district is a unit of local
government with authority over education in a community or other geographic area . A district derives its power
from a statutory delegation of the state legislature , and it
is responsible for developing , implementing , and evaluating all aspects of the local educational program . As
such , school districts can be seen as an arm of state government established to ensure the rights and privileges
of a free education to its people . According to U . S . 
Department of Education statistics from 2001 , there are
almost 15 , 000 local school districts in the nation—ranging in number from a single school district in Hawaii to
nearly 1 , 200 districts in Texas . 
Under the U . S . Constitution and pursuant to its
reserved-powers clause , education is a responsibility
left to the states primarily . Because they are political
entities of the state , created for the express purpose of
helping the state discharge this responsibility , each state
legislature has the authority to create , modify , or abolish local school districts unless otherwise restrained by
its state constitution . State control over each local district is exercised through a policy-making agency ( usually known as the state board or state department of
education )  , while federal influence is experienced both
through direct grants for specific purposes ( e . g .  , No
Child Left Behind ) and through the Supreme Court ’ s
interpretations of various local school district practices
and effects . State legislators are hesitant to change
existing district boundaries and structures without voter
approval in the governmental unit , but local school districts often find themselves caught in a legal and political crossfire between federal court orders and local
community desires not in sympathy with such orders . 
The local school district is a descendant of the 
 “ common ”  ( public elementary ) school movement that
dominated the nineteenth century . Whether viewed as
charity schools that developed in the cities of the
industrial northeast , the ad hoc town schools of colonial New England , one-room schoolhouses of the
agricultural Midwest , or the southern schools run initially by the parish vestry and church wardens , each
prototype of the common school contributed in some
way to the modern notion of the local school district . 
Through various acts in the colonial states—such
as those enacted in Connecticut in 1776 and
Massachusetts in 1789—granting the right to elect
school trustees , levy taxes , and select a teacher , a
district system of education came to be established . 
Common school reformers later moved to force the
consolidation of small school units into larger standardized town systems , hoping to lessen sectarian religious practices in the schools .  ( In some states during
this “ city unification ” period in the 1840s and 1850s , 
legislation to encourage consolidation would pass , 
then be repealed as the dominant political party
changed , then passed again over a period of years .  ) In
the southern states , where the county was traditionally
viewed as the local unit of government , it was likewise adopted as the unit of school control . In the more
sparsely populated Midwest and West , district organization was suited to the geographic needs of the region : 
When some number of families lived near enough
together to make organization possible , they were permitted by early state laws in those regions to come
together and form a school district—no matter how
irregular the boundaries . 
While the common school movement put education fully in the arena of public policy , state system
centralizers and progressive urban reformers seized
upon this opportunity . A system composed of local
school districts provided an acceptable level of local
control that was politically necessary , while using
their own oversight and supervisory responsibilities to
encourage values they saw as more important , namely
free access to education , a modest equalization of
resources , the assimilation of a diverse population , 
and a more comprehensive system of education for the
developing economy . 
Because the district system worked well initially
in the New England colonial states and conditions that
supported the system were present in other parts of the
growing nation , the idea of the local school district
moved westward along with the migrating population . 
So while the responsibility for and control of education has been centralized at the state level in law and
in practice for over 200 years , the political subdivision
of the school district has been critical for states in
making the fulfillment of their responsibilities for
education manageable . 
There are three broad areas of responsibility that
local school districts must meet : implementing state
laws , rules , and regulations ; establishing policy in
areas not covered by the state ; and employing a superintendent to serve as chief executive officer . Specific
duties assigned to districts within state statutes can
include erecting school buildings , levying and
School Districts , History and Development———903
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 903
expending public funds , hiring staff , and providing
pupil transportation and food service . However , 
school districts typically have broad discretion in their
actions as exercised by the local board of education—
the governing body responsible within the provisions of
state law for operating a school district . The board
members are usually elected by popular vote ( or appointed in some large cities ) and are responsible directly to
the people of the separate school districts . 
Because they provide the most extreme example
of community control in government , school districts
can be seen as both the most common and most diverse
agencies of local government . The base of authority
that gives them discretion in the exercise of power , 
their “ closeness ” to the community , and their centrality as a social institution all contribute to the local
school district ’ s continuing importance as an instrument of school governance . 
This importance has been somewhat lessened over
the past decade as states and cities , in response to calls
for increased accountability , have permitted takeovers of
a school district—usually by the state education agency
or the mayor . Most of the recent district takeover laws
across the states focus on cases of fiscal mismanagement or breaches of academic accountability . Other
reformers emphasize the need for city-suburban or metropolitan relationships as a means of improving urban
school districts ( e . g .  , to address desegregation or special
education )  , though such arrangements may be viewed as
diluting the power and authority of the local system . 
Despite these trends , the typical school district
remains a largely independent entity and a uniquely
American contribution in extending state power to a
local governmental unit . 
—Randy J . Dunn
See also boards of education ; Chicago school reform ; collective
bargaining ; consolidation , of school systems ; Council of the
Great City Schools ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; finance ; governance ; Kentucky Education Reform
Act ; planning models ; politics , of education ; productivity ; 
rational organizational theory ; restructuring , of schools ; 
scalar principle ; state departments of education ; superintendency ; systems theory / thinking ; taxes , to support education
Further Readings and References
Bogotch , I .  ( 2005 )  . A history of public school leadership : The
first century , 1837–1942 . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 7–33 )  . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Sage . 
Carter , G .  ,  & Cunningham , W .  ( 1997 )  . The American school
superintendent . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Hess , G .  ( 1991 )  . School restructuring , Chicago style . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Kowalski , T . J .  ( 1999 )  . The school superintendent : Theories , 
practice , and cases . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Merrill . 
Steffy , B .  ,  & English , F .  ( 1995 )  . Radical legislated school
reform in the United States : An examination of Chicago
and Kentucky . In D . Carter & M . H . O ’ Neill ( Eds .  )  , Case
studies in educational change : An international perspective ( pp . 28–42 )  . London : Falmer Press . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 2002 )  . Digest of education
statistics . Retrieved August 30 , 2004 , from nces . ed . gov / 
programs / digest / d02 / list_tables2 . asp # c2_4
Wong , K . K .  ,  & Shen , F . X .  ( 2003 )  . Big city mayors and school
governance reform : The case for school district takeover . 
Peabody Journal of Education , 78 ( 1 )  , 5–32 . 
 SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT
MODELS
A school improvement model is a specific design or
framework for school reform that can be adopted by
schools . The interchangeable term school reform models also appears in the literature . A variety of school
improvement models exist , including externally developed models—created by organizations outside local
schools—and internally developed models—designed
by people within school organizations . These models
vary by purpose , featured design elements , degree of
specificity regarding the implementation of design elements , and extent of research that has been conducted
on the model ’ s effects specific to school conditions and
student achievement . 
HISTORY
While the history of education in the United States
displays a series of attempts at reform , the contemporary era has seen a degree of political intensity
brought to bear upon the reform agenda . The beginning of this period was marked by the rebuke to the
educational system delivered in the 1983 report
A Nation at Risk : The Imperative for Educational
Reform , and it continued with the National Governor ’ s
Summit in 1988 and with federal educational initiatives under the Bush and Clinton administrations . The
amplified federal interest in primary and secondary
schooling coincided with a growing private sector
involvement in education , resulting in a host of school
904———School Improvement Models
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 904
reform models that were developed independent of
specific schools and adopted by a limited number of
schools . 
The beginning of the twenty-first century has seen
a particular increase in the number of schools engaged
in improvement efforts , through both externally and
internally developed reform models , in response to the
enactment of No Child Left Behind Act ( NCLB )  , in
January of 2002 . Specifically , NCLB has increased
schools ’ accountability for results , focusing considerable attention on student achievement by establishing
the expectation that schools demonstrate yearly progress with all students and disaggregated subgroups of
students . These expectations are linked to logistical , 
financial , and public relational consequences that
intensify the need for school improvement . Increases
in the use of externally developed improvement models may in part be linked to the availability of federal
funding for the purchase and operation of comprehensive , research-based reform models . Such an inducement can be seen in the Comprehensive School
Reform Program . 
DESCRIPTION
Most external school improvement models are
comprehensive in nature , connect the school to external support structures , and require substantial financial commitments by the local schools for the
purchase of the improvement design , materials , and
assistance . Comprehensive designs offer a coherent
improvement approach by changing a constellation
of factors related to student learning , such as curriculum , instruction , assessment practices , leadership and
governance , resource allocation , student grouping and
scheduling , and professional development . While specific design elements vary by model , the use of design
teams to provide ongoing external assistance is a relatively consistent practice across models . Over time , 
reform models may become increasingly reliant on
local expertise and funding . 
Numerous issues have been associated with the
implementation of external reform models and their
effectiveness . Faculty resistance related to reform
implementation is well documented in the literature
and points to teacher participation in the selection and
approval of reform models as a critical factor for success . Implementing multiple facets of comprehensive
reform models simultaneously has also proven a challenge in many schools . Local adaptation of models
can impact the coherence of the original design , lessening its effectiveness . Overall , a synthesis of extant
research studies offers a mixed conclusion as to the
success of external reform models . 
Given the complexity of implementation , local
political and economic factors have discouraged
widespread adoption of external reform models . 
Instead , many schools continue to adopt a patchwork
of reforms . A growing body of literature calls for
coherent locally designed reform models , grounded in
evidence-based practices . Such reforms are guided
by a variety of school and student assessment mechanisms to pinpoint necessary reform areas . 
At the time of publication , the Northwest Regional
Educational Laboratory ( NWREL ) lists 26 wholeschool improvement models . Several of these models
are described in Table 1 . 
—Shelby Cosner
See also accountability ; adaptiveness of organizations ; alignment , of curriculum ; at-risk students ; behaviorism ; Black
education ; charter schools ; Chicago school reform ; choice , 
of schools ; decentralization / centralization controversy ; 
innovation , in education ; instruction , survey of ; Kentucky
Education Reform Act ; leadership , teacher ; learning environments ; management theories ; parental involvement ; 
principalship ; productivity ; professional learning communities ; school size ; site-based management ; tracking , of
students ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Beaudoin , M .  ,  & Taylor , M .  ( 2004 )  . Creating a positive school
culture . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Chadwick , K .  ( 2004 )  . Improving schools through community
engagement . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Gaiton , C .  ( 2004 )  . Involving Latino families in schools . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Goldenberg , C .  ( 2004 )  . Successful school change . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Goodman , J .  , Baron , D .  ,  & Myers , C .  ( 2005 )  . Constructing a
democratic foundation for school-based reform : The local
politics of school autonomy and internal governance . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 297–332 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE . 
Holland , H .  ( 2005 )  . Whatever it takes : Transforming American
schools . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Johnson , R .  ,  & Bush , L .  ( 2005 )  . Leading the school through
culturally responsive inquiry . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 269–296 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Langer , J .  ( 2004 )  . Getting to excellent : How to create better
schools . New York : Teachers College Press . 
School Improvement Models———905
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 905
McNeil , F .  ,  & Sammons , P .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Improving schools : 
The future of school improvement and effectiveness . New
York : Routledge . 
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory .  ( 2005 )  . Catalog
of school reform models . Portland , OR : Author . Retrieved
September 8 , 2005 , from log / index . shtml
Ward , R .  ,  & Burke , M .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Improving achievement
in low-performing schools . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin
Press . 
 SCHOOL PLANT MANAGEMENT
For centuries , education was envisioned primarily as
the process through which human beings interact and
improve their potential . Today , the importance of school
plants , where this interaction takes place , is widely
recognized . Education plants are no longer the shelters
for education ; rather , they are significant educational
inputs capable of enriching or impeding educational
outcomes . Recent studies showed that when a school ’ s
condition improved from one category to the next , 
for example , from poor to fair , students ’ standardized
achievement test scores rose an average of 5 . 45 percentage points , as noted by Maureen Edwards in 1991 . 
Today ’ s educational plants are no longer one-classroom
spaces . Parallel to the progress in educational programs and processes , school plants have become
complex settings acquiring substantial resources . 
Managing these plants effectively is an important function of educational leadership . However , school plant
management has been one of the most neglected areas
in educational leadership . 
Historically , funding school plants has been
considered the responsibility of local school districts . 
906———School Plant Management
Table 1 Examples of Externally Developed Comprehensive School Improvement Models
Model
Accelerated
Schools
America ’ s Choice
Atlas Communities
Coalition of
Essential Schools
Comer School
Development
Program
Core Knowledge
Modern Red
School House
Success for
All / Roots and
Wings
Primary Goal and Approaches
Improve achievement with all students at grade level by
the end of elementary ; focus on instruction that was often
reserved for gifted and talented . 
Improve achievement in core areas ; focus on identifying
and supporting students behind grade level in reading , 
writing , and math . 
Improve achievement by creating a pathway that connects
elementary , middle , and high school ; to support student
learning ; focus on 5 core strategies . 
Improve achievement by developing essential skills in core
content areas ; focus on total restructuring through 10
principles designed to enhance learning . 
Improve achievement by meeting the needs of the whole
child ; focus on total restructuring . 
Improve achievement by having all students gain access to
core knowledge ; focus on specified curriculum . 
Improve achievement by raising expectations and
individual ; education for all students ; focus on 6
principles . 
Improve achievement by helping all students to read ; focus
on prevention and intervention . 
Level
K–8
K–12
PK–12 
K–12
K–12
K–8
K–12
K–6
Developer
Henry Levin , Stanford
University
Pat Harvey , National
Center on Education and
the Economy
Harvard Project Zero and
others
Ted Sizer , Brown
University
James Comer , Yale
University
E . D . Hirsh , Jr .  , 
University of Virginia
Hudson Institute
Robert Slavin and Nancy
Madden , Johns Hopkins
SOURCE : Adapted from Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory .  ( 2005 )  . Catalog of school reform models . Portland , OR : Author . 
Available at log / index . shtml
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 906
While contribution by federal government and states
has been minimal , school districts have spent a steadily
decreasing proportion of their budgets on constructing
new buildings and maintaining and repairing increasingly deteriorating school facilities . In fact , maintenance and operations expenditures have become first
to be cut during the financial austerity , as noted by
Linda Frazier . Consequently , maintenance and operations spending for school plants have fallen 14% in
1920 to 9 . 6% in 1960 , to 6 . 7% in 1982 , to an 9 . 09%
in 1999 , and to all-time low of 7 . 4% in 2003 . 
The consequences of deferred maintenance of
school plants resulted in premature building deterioration , inadequate ventilation , insufficient access for
disabled students , poor heating and air-conditioning , 
insufficient security , crumbling roofs , nonfunctioning
toilets , increased repair and replacement costs , and
reduced operating efficiency of equipment , as noted
by the Center for Educational Statistics in 1999 and
Linda Frazier in 2001 . Recent studies show that 50%
of the school buildings in the United States were constructed before 1960 . While there are great variations
within each state , 25% of schools were built before
1950 , and 20% before 1940 . The average age of the
school building is approaching 50 years , according to
the American School and University in 1999 . An
Association of School Business Officials ( ASBO ) 
International study in 1999 indicated that 33% of all
school buildings in the United States are unsatisfactory . Twenty-five million students attend schools with
at least one unsatisfactory condition , such as leaky
roofs , asbestos , plumbing problems or lack of space . 
The General Accounting Office ( GAO ) conducted an
audit on the state of the public school facilities and
determined that the nation ’ s schools needed $112 billion in repairs in 1995 . National Center for Education
Statistics ( NCES ) found a need for $127 billion to
put school facilities into good condition in 1999 . A
National Education Association ( NEA ) study in 2000
documented that about $322 billion dollars is needed
for the unmet renovation , maintenance , repairs , and
technology needs of American public schools . 
Policymakers and educators have realized that
the construction , maintenance , and operations of
school plants involve substantial public funds . 
Therefore , effective management of school plants has
become an important factor in maximizing the utilization of scarce resources . Planning is the first and crucial step in effective school plant management . As
stated in a 2003 report by National Forum on
Education Statistics ( NFES )  , planning integrates a
wide range of facilities management components , 
including facilities , staff , users , work orders , scheduling , and compliance and regulatory issues . Planning
of school plant management enables administrators to
identify the needs , prioritize projects , and maximize
the utilization of available resources . In other words , 
planning of school plant management prevents school
leaders from falling victim to inefficiencies and missteps . The Planning Guide for Maintaining School
Facilities , compiled by NFES and ASBO in 2003 , 
offered a step-by-step planning guide of school plant
management to school leaders . 
An American Schools and Universities ( ASU ) 
study in 2002 showed that 70% of school plant managers use a manual system for the management of
their school plants . They often do not have data systems that support the complex and demanding responsibilities of decision making , planning , management , 
and funding of school plants . Even when school plant
data are maintained and available at the building and
district level , these data are not uniform and mostly
not available to state education agencies , as noted by
the NFES in 2003 . As noted by Joe Agron in 2004 and
Mike Kennedy in 2003 and 2004 , the need for a standard school plant data system utilizing computer technology is heavily recognized by the authorities and
the government agencies in the field . Computerized
school plant management systems let schools tap the
potential of technology to operate their systems and
equipment more efficiently , reduce energy consumption , manage inventory more accurately , keep track of
supplies and maintenance schedules , and save money . 
These systems can bring about greater efficiencies , as
written by Kennedy in 2003 . 
Kennedy noted in 2004 that in addition to taking
advantage of technology , literature offers valuable
strategies for effective school plant management , 
including ( a ) having a school plant database help
school leaders update the data on the status of school
plant and help their financial readiness for renovations , maintenance , and operations ;  ( b ) focusing preventive maintenance is another strategy that not only
prevents sudden and unexpected equipment failure but
also reduces the overall life cycle cost of the building ;  
( c ) schools can cut utility costs by installing more efficient equipment , such as low-flow toilets , showerheads , and faucets or , where allowed , urinals that do
not use water . Capturing rainwater for reuse and using
drought-resistant plants for landscaping will reduce a
School Plant Management———907
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 907
school ’ s water needs . Similarly , maintenance workers
who are vigilant about detecting and repairing leaks
can save significant amounts of water ;  ( d ) energy conservation and management is another strategy to increase
the efficiency of school plant management . In this
regard , the new lighting systems and heating and airconditioning units use less energy ; modern windows
are more efficient at keeping unwanted heat out of a
building in the summer and preventing cold from penetrating the building in the winter . Motion sensors and
timers allow schools to turn off lights automatically in
areas not in use . Design strategies that enhance the use
of natural light allow schools to lessen the need for
artificial lights to illuminate classrooms and other
spaces ;  ( e ) joint use of school facilities and opening
school buildings to community use is another strategy
to effectively manage school plants . Education buildings are the second-least-utilized facilities in the
United States—only churches are used less frequently . 
More and more people feel that schools should be
more available to serve the community beyond the limits of the traditional school day , as noted by ASU in
2002 ;  ( f ) outsourcing especially noninstructional services may be another way to increase the efficiency of
school management systems . Seventy-seven percent of
the school districts outsourced at least one service in
1999 , as noted by Agron in 2001 ;  ( g ) finally , schools
planning to build or renovate facilities can benefit by
opening up the planning process to include all those
affected : students , staff members , business leaders , 
and neighbors . By involving people early in the
process , planners can avoid design flaws that those who
actually will use the building can identify , as written
by Kennedy in 2004 . 
In ASU ’ s 2002 study , school plant managers stated
that they could improve their school plant management with a system that accurately measures , monitors , and bills the actual cost of facilities use ; reduces
the time that staff spends on scheduling facilities ; 
improves efficiency through better coordination with
various departments regarding after-hours facility
usage ; and improves community relationships while
increasing cost recovery . 
—Ibrahim Duyar
See also cost-benefit analyses ; economics , theories of ; enrollment projections ; finance , of public schools ; planning models ; resource management ; school safety ; school size ; state
departments of education ; strategic planning ; taxes , to support education ; workplace trends ; year-round education
Further Readings and References
Agron , J .  ( 2001 )  . Keeping it close to home : Privatization study . 
American School and University . Retrieved September 8 , 
2005 , from 
study_keeping / index . html
Agron , J .  ( 2004 )  . Small change . American School and
University . Retrieved July 2 , 2004 , from http :  /  / asumag 
. com / Maintenance / university_small_change
American Schools and Universities .  ( 2002 )  . Know-how : 
Facilities management . Retrieved December 1 , 2004 , from

index . html
Edwards , M . M .  ( 1991 )  . Building conditions , parental involvement , and student achievement in the D . C . public school
system . Unpublished master ’ s thesis , Georgetown
University . 
Frazier , L .  ( 1993 )  . Deteriorating school facilities and student
learning .  ( ERIC Digest No . 82 , ED356564 ) 
Kennedy , M .  ( 2003 )  . Machines that manage . American School
and University . Retrieved May 1 , 2004 , from http :  /  / asumag 
. com / Maintenance / university_machines_manage
Kennedy , M .  ( 2004 )  . Getting more for less . American School
and University . Retrieved September 8 , 2005 , http :  /  / asumag 
. com / mag / university_getting_less / index . html
Kennedy , M .  ( 2004 )  . Know-how : Facilities management . 
American School and University . Retrieved May 1 , 2004 , 
from agement_2 / index . html
U . S . Department of Education , National Center for Education
Statistics .  ( 2000 )  . Condition of America ’ s public school
facilities : 1999 ( NCES 2000-032 )  . Washington , DC : 
Author . 
U . S . Department of Education , National Forum on Education
Statistics .  ( 2003 )  . Facilities information management : A
Guide for state and local education agencies . Washington , 
DC : Author . Retrieved September 8 , 2005 , http :  /  / 
nces . ed . gov / pubs2003 / 2003400 . pdf
U . S . Department of Education , National Forum on Education
Statistics and the Association of School Business Officials
International .  ( 2003 )  . Planning guide for maintaining school
facilities . Washington , DC : Author . Retrieved September 8 , 
2005 ,  . gov / pubs / edpubs . html
U . S . General Accounting Office .  ( 1995 )  . School facilities : 
Conditions of America ’ s schools . Washington , DC : Author . 
U . S . General Accounting Office .  ( 2001 )  . School facilities : 
Construction expenditures have grown significantly in
recent years . Washington , DC : Author . 
 SCHOOL SAFETY
Although many opinions surround schooling ’ s purposes , the public shares a fundamental assumption
that U . S . students and teachers work in safe schools . 
908———School Safety
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 908
Despite persisting government reports stating students
experience more crimes en route to and from school
and also that teaching remains a safer public service
career than similar occupations , sensational acts of
school violence in the 1990s increased public concern
over school safety . School safety issues include the
following :  ( a ) physical plant and security accommodations ,  ( b ) schoolwide discipline and classroom management plans , and ( c ) curricular interventions . Most
schools and systems adopted all three measures . 
PHYSICAL PLANT AND SECURITY
The retrofitting of school plants to increase security
provided an immediate response to mass school
shootings in the 1990s . Schools made major investments in security technology , from video cameras to
weapons detectors . Law enforcement and security
officials reevaluated school grounds and erected
fences . Today , most schools restrict visitors to a single
entrance , and all other doors have refitted hardware to
prevent access but allow emergency egress . 
School security studies reveal that school staff ’ s
visibility provides the largest deterrent to crime . With
large school plants , schools hire their own security
personnel or form partnerships with local law enforcement . Even with these measures , research shows that
the status of teachers ’ relationships with students
forms the primary predictor of school safety . 
DISCIPLINE AND CLASSROOM
MANAGEMENT
Teachers ’ ability to create positive relationships with
students provides the cornerstone for all other studentadult relationships and strongly influences student-tostudent interactions in schools . Large class sizes and
high student-teacher ratios challenge teachers ’ ability
to ascertain and address every pupil ’ s expressed and
unexpressed needs . In addition , novice teachers report a
limited repertoire in dealing with diverse student populations ’ instructional and behavioral issues . Inappropriate
student behavior further erodes limited instructional
time . Some teachers refuse to address student behavioral problems because they view teaching as restricted
to dissemination of content knowledge and separated
from development of students ’ social skills . 
As a result , teacher organizations have negotiated
for and won exemptions from student supervision in
hallways , restrooms , playgrounds , and lunchrooms , 
leaving such venues to oversight by paraprofessionals
or volunteers . Some research shows that students interpret such division of labor as a hierarchy of power , 
and , in turn , show differential responses to the interventions of certified educators and noncertified school
support personnel . 
From the 1970s on , education entrepreneurs have
developed a variety of programs and packages for
teachers to adopt in maintaining classroom deportment . Many of these programs depend on the tenets of
behaviorism providing tangible rewards and sanctions
for individual student or group deportment . Most of
these programs do not adequately address diversity
among pupils ; that is , a classroom system may work
for the majority of students , but rewards may not be
adequately desirable for every student , and conversely , sanctions may not be substantial deterrents
for all students . Often , the small number of students
who resist these behavioral programs may be among
those who are most disruptive . Their failure to conform to behavioral programs may aggravate teacherstudent and student-student rifts . Most teachers refer
such problems to the school disciplinarian , typically
the principal , or to special programs . Too often removing the particular student allows the instructional environment to flourish for the teacher and remaining
students , but that student ’ s educational and social
needs may be exacerbated rather than remedied . 
Students ’ disciplinary referrals place them under
a schoolwide code of conduct . Some school systems
establish these codes , and others are school based . 
Typically , the codes provide a range of punitive measures , usually administered by the school principal or
an assistant principal . Usually , disruptive students
serve penance for breaking school infractions through
in-school or after-school detentions and out-of-school
suspensions ; and for drugs or weapons possession and
assaults , school boards can expel students from the
school system . 
Most of the schoolwide codes tolerate disruptive
class behavior and verbal disrespect by assigning time
to detention . School codes show little to no tolerance
for fighting , vandalism , drugs , and weapons infractions . Recent studies suggest students who feel victimized by other students and their teachers may
account for most incidents of fighting , vandalism , 
drugs , and weapons infractions . Further studies on
victims and bullies show that individual students may
play both roles at school , in the community , and at
home . 
School Safety———909
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 909
In some jurisdictions , criminal and civil laws
require school officials to file police reports or complaints for severe infractions involving assaults , drugs , 
or weapons . Such legal requirements place school personnel as well as students in untenable positions , as
educational law concerning confidentiality for students
can be more stringent than civil and criminal protections for juveniles . As illustrated in several sensational
1990s cases , school officials ’ actions in upholding
zero-tolerance laws demonstrated the conundrum of
how to educate individuals while protecting all students . 
Generally , discipline reports show that all students fare
poorly under punitive schoolwide codes . 
CURRICULAR INTERVENTIONS
Because teachers ’ abilities to develop and maintain
good relationships with and among their students is
the key to school safety , many schools turn to direct
curricular and instructional interventions . For many
children , schools represent their first experiences with
large groups of people . Teachers need to mediate new
experiences and teach students to cope with school . 
The purpose of curricula and instruction focused on
student behavior is to help students develop appropriate prosocial skills and self-awareness . 
Such curricula evolved from the values education
movement of the 1970s to the character education
movement of the 1990s . Both kinds of curricula created
controversy in some communities , as some groups viewed
the goals and objectives as subjective , at least , and tied
to specific religious doctrine , at worst . 
Conflict resolution curriculum and activities form
another curricular approach . Teachers or counselors
help students develop a variety of responses to verbal
or physical conflict . For older students , some curricula develop their skills in monitoring and resolving
each other ’ s disputes . Students form mock courts and
boards to air both sides of a dispute and mediate a resolution . Arguably , students ’ abilities to regulate themselves and each other represents a desirable outcome
for public education . 
—Jane Clark Lindle
See also accountability ; at-risk students ; bullying ; conflict
management ; curriculum , theories of ; discipline in schools ; 
dropouts ; drug education ; emotional disturbance ; law ; 
mainstreaming and inclusion ; mental illness , in adults and
children ; special education ; terrorism ; vandalism in schools ; 
violence in schools
Further Readings and References
Beaudoin , M .  ,  & Taylor , M .  ( 2004 )  . Breaking the culture of
bullying and disrespect , Grades K–8 . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Corwin Press . 
Duke , D . L .  ( 2002 )  . Creating safe schools for all children . 
Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Fishbaugh , M .  , Berkeley , T .  ,  & Schroth , G .  ( 2003 )  . Ensuring
safe school environments . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
Fontaine , N . S .  ( 2003 , May )  . Threats to the quality of school
safety data . Research in Education , 69 , 16–26 . 
Garcia , C . A .  ( 2003 )  . School safety technology in America : 
Current use and perceived effectiveness . Criminal Justice
Policy Review , 14 ( 1 )  , 30–54 . 
Glasser , W .  ( 1990 )  . The quality school : Managing students
without coercion . Scranton , PA : Harper & Row . 
Lee , C .  ( 2004 )  . Preventing bullying in schools . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Petersen , G .  ( 2005 )  . Student misbehavior and violence : A
reexamination of the enemy within . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , 
SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 463–482 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Schreck , C . J .  , Miller , J . M .  ,  & Gibson , C . L .  ( 2003 )  . Trouble
in the school yard : A study of the risk factors of victimization at school . Crime & Delinquency , 49 , 460–484 . 
Shoop , R .  ( 2004 )  . Sexual exploitation in schools : How to spot
it and stop it . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
 SCHOOL SIZE
School size as a factor influencing student experience
and educational success has been discussed by educational researchers for over 40 years . The primary
focus of the impact of school size has been at the secondary level , especially in regard to American high
schools . Initially , Roger Barker and Paul Gump
explored the topic of school size in their 1964 book , 
Big School , Small School , to understand its impact on
students ’ participation in school-related activities . 
More recently , school size is a subject of considerable
attention by researchers and school reform advocates
interested in the effect of smaller , personalized school
environments on students ’ academic success . While
reformers recommend moderate school sizes for new
secondary schools , data from the U . S . Department of
Education indicate that among American high schools , 
44% of central city schools tend to house upward of
900 students . 
In their study of the influence of school size on
student participation in a variety of school-related
activities , Barker and Gump were careful to distinguish
910———School Size
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 910
their research as not focusing specifically on academic achievement . In fact , the range of activities they
did study would be better described as “ extracurricular ,  ” yet their work carried implications for the
broader experiences students had in large versus small
schools . They found that in smaller schools , students
experienced more access to and a wider variability of
the different school-related activities investigated . 
This finding was somewhat counterintuitive , given
that larger high schools were in a better position to
offer a wider range of activities . However , the organizational nature of large schools lent themselves more
to what is referred to as “ specialization ” or participation in a relatively narrow set of activities with a particular subset of students . Thus , while large schools
had more offerings of activities , Barker and Gump
found that small schools enabled more students to participate in a greater variety of activities . They also
spoke to the question of optimality by recommending
that no school be so large that students become “ redundant ” or so numerous that their school-related needs
would go unaddressed . 
The breadth-versus-depth trade-offs inherent in
school size considerations were revealed in a number
of ways in the research that succeeded the Barker and
Gump study . For example , researchers such as James
Conant and Theodore Sizer were interested in investigating the benefits of large high schools , particularly
given the diversity of students attending such schools . 
It is in their work that more direct attention was paid
to the influence that school size might have on academic engagement and outcomes . They focused their
work on the “ comprehensive ” high school , which was
initially defined as a school that provided enough of a
variety of offerings to educate all of the students
attending the school . In reexamining this early work
by Conant , it is clear that the support for comprehensive high schools was premised on the assumption that
regardless of the educational path a student might
take , every student would have access to vocational and
academic offerings that would be of comparably high
quality . 
Personalization in large schools is a challenge , yet
it is a factor positively associated with student engagement and academic success . Given that many
American high schools remain large in their design
and structure , current efforts are under way to incorporate the positive aspects of a more personalized learning environment into existing large school structures . 
Through his studies of the American high school , 
Theodore Sizer provided some of the earliest analyses
of secondary schooling that influenced the development of more personalized educational settings , 
focused on teaching and learning that engaged
students ’ and teachers ’ minds . While his critique of
secondary schooling did not indicate an optimal size
for schools to ensure positive teaching and learning
environments , Sizer ’ s conceptualization of the problems of secondary schooling influenced others to look
more deeply at the relationships among students and
teachers that were implied by his emerging framework
of “ essential schools .  ” 
Deborah Meier continued to build upon Sizer ’ s
work in the creation of schools that embodied the
principles he developed ; however , her work did begin
to articulate the need for schools to remain small
enough to foster the types of working relationships
and structures implied by contemporary research on
secondary schools . Meier ’ s involvement in the development of such schools is the subject of her book , 
The Power of Their Ideas . Likewise , Linda DarlingHammond contributed to the understanding of the role
of teacher-teacher and teacher-student relationships
through her research on smaller secondary schools
and , in turn , has continued to contribute to contemporary thinking on the impact of school size on students ’ 
academic performance . 
School size as an equity issue emerged when the
realization was made that the students experiencing
the greatest challenges in their persistence and success
in school attended large schools , many within large
urban school systems . Indeed , the current policy and
reform environment now includes significant attention
on the impact of small schools ’ development in increasing the opportunities for academic success among
students of color , low-income students , and other
students previously underserved by large , impersonal
schools . This movement has been further supported
by the work of researchers such as Valerie Lee , who
has documented the impact of school size on student
outcomes over the past decade . While small school
size alone is by no means suggested to be the panacea
for reversing the negative trends seen in large , urban
school systems , the work of William Ayers , Nancy
Mohr , Evans Clinchy , and Meier suggests that small
schools offer students and teachers the opportunity to
create teaching and learning environments that are
more likely to produce positive educational outcomes . 
Of course , as Mohr pointed out in her discussions of
the pitfalls of small schools , an important consideration
School Size———911
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 911
is to distinguish small schools not as smaller versions
of large schools , but as alternative structures that carry
with them unique challenges that require serious
investments in staff development , complex roles , and
responsibilities distributed among all staff and interdependent professional relationships . In addition , 
Darling-Hammond recently outlined in her book 10
Features of Good Small Schools—Redesigning Schools : 
What Matters and What Works a discussion of the key
elements that promote the best that small schools
can offer , as well as the enabling conditions that are
required to ensure their success . As noted by these
researchers , the use of small schools to better serve
the equity needs of particularly urban school communities requires a reconceptualization of the organizational , policy , and school-community contexts to
realize their full potential . Several urban communities
throughout the country are currently involved in creating such new systems that seek to optimize the positive impact of small schools to better serve their
student populations . 
Many school systems are failing to keep pace with
educational facility needs because securing the funding and land requirements for new schools is a difficult undertaking . In addition , the call for multiple small
schools is countered by arguments for the economies
of scale associated with the construction of large
schools that can house greater numbers of students . 
Perhaps because of this challenge , the advocacy for
smaller schools has included the transformation of
large existing high school structures into interconnected schools within schools or multiple autonomous
small school units situated within one campus . It is
unclear whether states are incorporating small-school
considerations into their facilities planning efforts . 
Indeed , 2003 data from the U . S . Department of
Education indicate that among rural communities , 
51% of the high schools had enrollments of less than
300 students and 29% had enrollments of between
300 and 600 students . This compares to central
city high schools with 32% housing 900 or more
students . 
—Gloria M . Rodriguez
See also charter schools ; class size ; consideration , caring ; 
curriculum , theories of ; discipline in schools ; elementary
education ; high schools ; learning environments ; middle
schools ; politics , of education ; reform , of schools ; resiliency ; 
restructuring , of schools ; school improvement models ; 
school plant management
Further Readings and References
Ayers , W .  , Klonsky , M .  ,  & Lyon , G . H .  ( 2000 )  . A simple justice : The challenge of small schools .  ( Teaching for Social
Justice Series )  . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Barker , R .  ,  & Gump , P .  ( 1964 )  . Big schools , small schools : 
High school size and student behavior . Stanford , CA : 
Stanford University Press . 
Clinchy , E .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2000 )  . Creating new schools : How small
schools are changing American education . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Conant , J .  ( 1967 )  . The comprehensive high school . New York : 
McGraw-Hill . 
Darling-Hammond , L .  ( 2002 )  . 10 features of good small
schools—Redesigning schools : What matters and what
works . Stanford , CA : School Redesign Network at
Stanford University . 
Lee , V .  ,  & Smith , J .  ( 1994 )  . Effects of high school restructuring and size on gains in achievement and engagement for
early secondary school students . Madison , WI : Center on
the Organization and Restructuring of Schools . 
Lee , V .  , Smith , J .  ,  & Croninger , R .  ( 1997 )  . How high school
organization influences the equitable distribution of learning in mathematics and science . Sociology of Education , 
70 ( 2 ) 128–150 . 
Meier , D .  ( 1995 )  . The power of their ideas : Lessons for America
from a small school in Harlem . Boston : Beacon Press . 
Mohr , N .  ( 2000 )  . Small schools are not miniature large
schools : Potential pitfalls and implications for leadership . 
In W . Ayers , M . Klonsky ,  & G . H . Lyon ( Eds .  )  , A simple
justice : The challenge of small schools ( pp . 139–158 )  .  
( Teaching for Social Justice Series )  . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Sizer , T . R .  ( 1984 )  . Horace ’ s compromise : The dilemma of the
American high school . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . 
U . S . Department of Education , National Center for Education
Statistics .  ( 2003 )  . Indicator 30 : Size of high schools . 
The condition of education 2003 . Washington , DC : U . S . 
Government Printing Office . 
 SCHOOL-BUSINESS
PARTNERSHIPS
School-business partnerships are intended to encourage a cooperative relationship between a school and a
business or organization . An effective partnership is
ongoing and mutually beneficial to the school and the
business . In the early 1980s , businesses and schools
combined forces to address problems facing school
administrators , teachers , and students . The effort grew
through the 1990s . Seventy percent of all school districts now engage in some form of business partnership , and 76% of schools that partner collaborate with
912———School-Business Partnerships
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 912
small businesses . Schools and business are linked
more tightly in light of budget shortfalls and efforts
to meet high academic standards . Businesses engage
in arrangements with public schools including direct
donations , contributions toward instructional programs
and activities , and volunteer projects and mentoring . 
Partnerships contribute an estimated annual $2 . 4 billion and 109 million volunteer hours to schools . 
One area of emphasis in school business partnerships is effective school-to-work programs based on
strong partnerships between local schools and businesses . 
Businesses work directly with students and provide
career talks , job shadowing , mentoring , and apprentice
programs . The School-to-Work Opportunities Act of
1994 supported collaboration and partnerships between
schools and businesses . The act made funds available for
local partnerships to undertake the development of systems involving school-based learning activities and workbased learning activities as well as connecting activities . 
Partnerships have developed as long-term , sustainable programs through a collaborative process
between the business and education partners and in
cooperation with the National Association of
Secondary School Principals . NASSP recommends
that schools ( a ) choose companies that promote academics and learning ,  ( b ) assess the school ’ s needs ,  ( c ) 
determine the corporate motives ,  ( d ) do not make decisions in a vacuum ,  ( e ) consider the political climate , 
and ( f ) research the concepts being applied . 
Recent research indicated that schools benefited
through ( a ) increased school-to-career opportunities ,  
( b ) increased funds for schools ,  ( c ) parent involvement ,  
( d ) student scholarships , and ( e ) increased teacher
preparation . Businesses and communities benefited
through ( a ) increased collaboration ,  ( b ) increased
publicity ,  ( c ) improved recruitment for businesses ,  ( d ) 
better-prepared work force ,  ( e ) employee commitment , 
and ( f ) improved product development . Schools and
businesses see benefits in four general areas :  ( a ) human
capital development ,  ( b ) community development ,  ( c ) 
student achievement , and ( d ) financial impact . Mutual
benefit is also provided in three areas :  ( a ) philanthropy ,  
( b ) commerce , and ( c ) partnerships . 
Scholars have stressed four guiding principles that
define the “ ideal partnership ”  : 
1 . Foundation—build on shared values , mutual goals
2 . Implementation—integrate activities into both cultures , have a clear management process , and produce
measurable outcomes
3 . Continuity—provide support at highest level of each
organization , devise detailed internal and external
communication plans
4 . Evaluation—determine strengths , weaknesses , and
future directions
Some in both the education and business communities have concerns about school-business partnerships . Educators fear that businesses will influence
education to focus on labor force training and stress
only occupational skills that may not be useful for
career advancement of the students . Business partners
cite high expectations , unequal levels of partnership , 
and the political environment as elements that may
discourage business involvement . 
—Barbara Y . LaCost
See also budgeting ; business education ; capacity building , of
organizations ; collaboration theory ; communities , types , 
building of ; competition , forms of , in schools ; cost-benefit
analyses ; economics , theories of ; finance , of public
schools ; human capital ; human resource development ; 
internships ; management theories ; market theory of schooling ; site-based management ; social capital
Further Readings and References
Anderson , G .  ,  & Pini , M .  ( 2005 )  . Educational leadership and
the new economy : Keeping the “ public ” in public schools . 
In F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 216–236 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Emery , K .  ,  & Ohanian , S .  ( 2004 )  . Why is corporate America
bashing our public schools ? Portsmouth , NH : Heinemann . 
National Association of Secondary School Principals .  ( 2002 ) 
Guiding principles for school and business partnerships
Retrieved August 30 , 2004 , from partners . com / pdf / guiding_principles . pdf
Paris , K .  ( 1997 )  . Critical issue : Working in partnership with
business , labor , and the community . Retrieved August 30 , 
2004 , from sdrs / areas / issues / envrnmnt / stw / sw600 . html
Saltman , K .  ( 2000 )  . Collateral damage : Corporatizing public
schools–A threat to democracy . Lanham , MD : Rowman & 
Littlefield . 
 SCHOOLING EFFECTS
Research on the schooling effects has developed along
two broad lines . The first draws upon the theory of economic growth to assess the contribution of education
to economic development of nations . The second has
Schooling Effects———913
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 913
employed analytic methods based on microeconomic
theories to examine the effects of investments in
education on the size and distribution of individual
incomes . At the national level , education is seen as a
means to develop essential skills that are prerequisite for
reducing poverty , sustaining development , and empowering people through democracy . This understanding
has led all nations to devote considerable resources to
education from their budgets and gross national products . Education has been high on the political agenda of
every country at all developmental levels . At the individual level , people rank education of their children
highly when they are asked about their priorities in
life . Individuals invest in education because they expect
high personal earnings due to schooling . In this sense , 
schooling has both social and private benefits . Nations
invest in schooling for social benefits , and individuals
invest in schooling for private benefits of education . 
References to establishing an economic value for
both nations and individuals based on increased
productivity reflects several centuries of thought . This
line of thinking , however , began to be systematically
formulated in the theory of human capital . The theory
of human capital in the early 1960s presented a rationale that investment in human capital ( e . g .  , education
and health ) increases human productivity and thus
yields economic and social returns in just the same
way as investment in physical capital . 
Early macro- and micro-cost-benefit analyses of
schooling showed that not only is it profitable , but the
rate of return to schooling is as high as or even higher
than to physical capital . Furthermore , these studies
found that the private rate of return is consistently
higher than the social rate of return to schooling . It
should be noted that early studies of human capital
theory treated education as a purely economic activity . 
Cost-benefit analysis tended to look at benefits that
can be evaluated in monetary terms . Schooling is not
a purely economic activity , but has many other objectives , and its cost-benefit analysis can never provide
a complete understanding of its effects or benefits . In
fact , although early human capital studies showed
economic benefits of schooling , it has now proven difficult to document many of the indirect effects of
schooling as well as effects of schooling relative to
other factors . Conceptual and methodological problems are noted for the studies attempting to measure
all effects of schooling . 
The screening hypothesis theory and segmented
markets theory have offered different views on effects
of schooling . These two approaches have developed as
a reaction to the human capital theory . The screening
hypothesis , sometimes called “ filtering hypothesis ,  ” 
asserts that schooling does not improve productivity
by developing necessary knowledge and skills . It
merely identifies students with particular attributes , 
acquired either at birth or by virtue of family background . Schooling alone does not itself produce or
in any way improve those attributes . Schooling acts
merely as a filter to separate individuals who have
those particular attributes . Employers select individuals with higher schooling credentials because they
know that there is a concordance between the attributes
required at various levels of schooling and educational
attainment . In this sense , educational credentials function as a proxy for qualities that employers regard as
important . Employers use schooling credentials to
predict a certain level of job performance without , 
however , making any direct contribution to those
demanded attributes . The argument about employers
using educational credentials in selecting employees
has been widely supported by the economics of education literature . However , the argument regarding
schooling not having any effect on graduates ’ productivity has been refuted by the literature . The screening
hypothesis has helped to refine human capital theory . 
Human capital theory has now increasingly recognized
that schooling affects attitudes , motivation , and other
personal characteristics , as well as providing knowledge and skills . 
The theory of segmented markets asserts that labor
markets are fragmented into two self-contained submarkets or segments . In the primary segment , wages
are high , and working conditions are good . The secondary market , on the other hand , contains jobs involving low wages , low status , poor working conditions , 
and no opportunity for advancement . The segmentedlabor theory hypothesizes that good jobs are not randomly assigned to workers whatever their personal
characteristics . This hypothesis has been generally corroborated by the literature . Second , and more important , segmented-labor market theory asserts that there
will be very little mobility over time between these
well-defined job clusters . According to this hypothesis , 
schooling develops sets of attitudes and personality
characteristics satisfying the segmented-labor markets
and reinforces class differences between workers . This
hypothesis has been refuted in the literature . 
Both the screening hypothesis and segmentedlabor markets theories resulted in refined human
914———Schooling Effects
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 914
capital and effects of schooling . It is now recognized
that in addition to the cognitive effect , which was once
recognized by the early human capital studies as the
only schooling effect , schooling also has affective , 
psychological , and behavioral effects for individuals . 
Similarly , schooling has many social effects , also
called externalities , to society . The effects of schooling
upon society are exerted through the change it produces
in its graduates , who eventually become members of
the society . The social schooling effects may occur in
a variety of areas , including creativity , family planning
and child care , appreciation of arts , culture and learning , health service , political participation , understanding of social issues , acceptance of social change , and
a sense of common culture and social solidarity . Their
presence may influence the prevailing patterns of
interests , values , and behavior . 
The public ’ s displeasure concerning the outcome
of schools , along with the maturation of the schooling
effects literature , has shifted researchers ’ attention to
the quality of the educational inputs and the education
process at school level . Some studies have used school
effects and schooling effects interchangeably . In this
sense , researchers have studied effects of various
school characteristics on the educational performances
and educational development of children . Although
school effects gained momentum with effective
schools research , a literature review illustrates the lack
of consensus about both theory and methodology . 
School effects and schooling effects still differ in their
scope despite some overlapping areas . 
—Ibrahim Duyar , W . Keith Christy , and Orhan Kara
See also accountability ; budgeting ; economics , theories of ; 
feedback ; human capital ; organizational theories ; outputs , 
of systems ; planning models ; productivity ; quality control ; 
rational organizational theory ; resource management ; 
schooling inputs and outputs
Further Readings and References
Heyneman , S . P .  ( 1995 )  . Economics of education : Disappointments and potential . Prospects , 25 , 559–583 .  ( UNESCO , 
International Bureau of Education , Paris ) 
Jones , I .  , Gullo , D . F .  , Burton-Maxwell , C .  ,  & Stobier , K .  
( 1998 )  . Social and academic effects of varying types of
early schooling experiences , Early Child Development and
Care , 146 , 1–11 . 
Kroch , E . A .  ,  & Sjoblom , K .  ( 1994 )  . Schooling as human capital
or a signal : Some evidence . Journal of Human Resources , 
29 ( 1 )  , 156–180 . 
Wilson , K .  ( 2002 )  . The effects of school quality on income , 
Economics of Education Review , 21 ( 6 )  , 579–588 . 
World Bank .  ( 1999 )  . Education sector strategy : The human
development network . Washington , DC : Author . 
 SCHOOLS OF EDUCATION
The history of schools of education for the preparation of
educators in the United States has been influenced by a
number of factors , especially the continuous need for
professionally educated teachers to meet the growing
demands of the public schools in a self-governing nation . 
Early on , the founding fathers realized that the success of
this country was dependent on an educated citizenry and
this education was to be provided by a cadre of trained
teachers . In addition , the Industrial Revolution , mass
transportation and communication , educational methodology , and the rise of science all contributed to the establishment of a public system of education and exerted
even greater pressure on the need for formalized teacher
training . Thus , the movement to prepare professional
educators resulted in the establishment of formal schools
of education to better prepare the nation ’ s educators . 
TEACHERS ’ INSTITUTES
One of the earliest formal forms of teacher preparation is credited to Henry Barnard for the establishment of the first teacher institute , held in Hartford , 
Connecticut , in 1839 . Other states followed suit with
support from both commissioners of education and
those who authorized such teacher-training institutes . 
Typically held during the summer months , the emphasis was on methodology , while considerable emphasis
continued to focus on subject matter . In some ways , 
these institutes served to provide training for the vastly
growing numbers of teachers that surpassed the growing number of normal schools . Historians also point
out that the nature of these institutes created a forum
for teachers to come together to address issue , topics
and areas of concerns of their evolving profession
which , in some ways , served as forerunners of teachers ’ 
organizations and the growing emphasis on in-service
teacher education . However , these training institutes
served mostly the basic content needs of teachers for
elementary schools . A seminary for the preparation
of teachers was established in Concord , Vermont , in
1823 , by Reverend Samuel R . Hall . 
Schools of Education———915
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 915
NORMAL SCHOOLS
The evolving state-supported system of public education placed great demands on the need for qualified
teachers and insisted on individuals trained in more
than content knowledge but also in the so-called
science of teaching . In the early 1800s , both private
and publicly supported normal schools began to
appear in a number of states . The movement toward
this type of teacher training was influenced by the
writings of American travelers who had written extensively and convincingly about European normal
schools . Whereas prior to this development , private
seminaries , high schools , academies , and teacher
institutes served as places where potential teachers
could receive specialized training , in many ways , they
were giving over their functions and served as the
forerunners for the evolving normal schools . 
The first normal school was founded in Lexington , 
Massachusetts , in 1839 , due to the efforts of Horace
Mann and support from the state legislature . To better
meet the growing demand for qualified teachers , some
cities sponsored their own local training schools for
teachers , with county normal schools also being
established in some states as well . By 1898 , the
National Education Association ( NEA ) reported 166
state and 165 private normal schools in operation . 
During the period between the establishment of state
systems of public education and recovery from the
Civil War , normal schools were recognized all across
the nation as the place to train teachers , in particular
for positions in elementary schools . Teachers for high
schools were expected to get their training at the liberal arts institutions . However , the public-supported
normal schools for the preparation of teachers continued to grow , and most private normal schools
had disappeared by 1920 . Eventually , these public
institutions carried the designation “ state normal
school .  ” 
The normal school curriculum focused on the
practical “ nature of school keeping ” and what were
defined as the “ common branches of learning ,  ” such
as reading , spelling , writing , or arithmetic . Some
advanced studies such as algebra , philosophy , and natural history ; child development ; and the science and
art of teaching were eventually added . Most normal
schools also required practice teaching . The period of
study was typically 2 years and initially admitted
students who had only an elementary education . 
However , with the growth of public high schools , a
high school diploma for admission became a more
common practice in most normal schools , which was
further supported by a 1908 resolution drafted by the
Department of Normal Schools in the NEA , calling
for high school graduation as a prerequisite for admission . Along with the tremendous growth in public
4-year high schools and the growing body of knowledge about the science of teaching , by 1930 , most
normal schools had adapted a 4-year curriculum , and
the term normal school was slowly giving way to
teachers ’ college . In 1920 , there were 137 normal
schools and 46 teachers ’ colleges . By 1933 , the number
of state teachers ’ colleges had risen to 146 , with only
50 normal schools . However , the state teachers ’ colleges were soon to become multipurpose state colleges or state universities , granting both liberal arts
degrees and degrees in education , and these colleges
continued to be a major source of supply of teachers
for the nation ’ s schools . 
TRANSITION TO
SCHOOLS OF EDUCATION
Although there is no sharp demarcation between the
development of normal schools and schools of education , as stated above , after 1900 , state normal schools
began to transform themselves into teachers ’ colleges
or colleges of education . One of the first such schools
was established in 1889 , when New York College for
the Training of Teachers was chartered ; it eventually
became known as Teacher College in 1892 . By 1930 , 
most normal schools had become teachers ’ colleges , 
with the century-old term normal school disappearing
by 1940 . Within the first 20 years of the twentieth century , teachers ’ colleges began to convert into multipurpose state colleges , many dropping the term
teachers from their names , and began to grant liberal
arts degrees as well as undergraduate and graduate
degrees in education . This change marked the shift
from 2- or 3-year programs to 4-year teacher training
colleges and the requirement of an earned bachelor ’ s
degree to teach . 
Teachers ’ colleges brought about changes in curriculum as well with the liberal arts playing an increasingly important role in teacher preparation . In some
teachers ’ colleges , preparation for elementary teaching
required a longer stay than 2 years , with a bachelor ’ s
degree becoming the basic requirement for secondary
teaching . Although the professional practice aspect of
becoming a teacher was strongly emphasized in these
916———Schools of Education
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 916
new institutions , there was increased recognition of
teaching as a profession and the need to lay down an
adequate base in the theoretical foundations of teaching as well as the liberal and general education components of study . Another change was related to the
diversity of function and the need to prepare educators
for a variety of roles in public schools , such as counselors , superintendents , and principals . 
In the late 1800s , teachers ’ colleges were not the sole
institutions involved in the preparation of teachers . A
number of liberal arts colleges and universities made
provisions for the professional preparation of teachers , 
especially at the secondary level , by offering teacher
education courses and establishing chairs of pedagogy
and departments of education In 1890 , it was reported
that 114 colleges and universities , out of 400 , enrolled
students in teacher preparation courses . The pressures
for colleges and universities to expand efforts to prepare teachers found support in the fact that the need to
address an adequate supply of trained teachers for the
growing number of secondary schools had accelerated . 
This force contributed to the expanding number of
departments or schools of education within universities . As teacher preparation became more closely associated with all individuals who worked in the field of
education , resulting in the development of a number of
fields of specialization , diversification of preparation
programs and various patterns of organization within
schools of education evolved . These programs could
be found in institutions such as junior colleges , 4-year
state colleges , liberal arts colleges and departments or
colleges within universities . Compounded with growing needs for teachers , especially at the secondary
level , new functions within the schools , and the vexing
social problems education was forced to address , 
programs and departments to reflect this growing
diversification proliferated , adding to the complexity
of schools of education . 
UNIVERSITY SCHOOLS OF EDUCATION
Although some colleges and universities had offered
professional courses for teachers during the 1800s , 
actual schools or colleges of education within universities did not become firmly established until the first
half of the twentieth century . At the turn of the century , 
normal schools and teachers ’ colleges enrolled approximately 75% of prospective teacher candidates , with
the colleges and universities accounting for about 8% . 
However , between 1879 and 1910 , schools of education
had appeared in such institutions as the State
University of Iowa , the University of Chicago , Stanford , 
Harvard , Berkeley , Ohio University , and Yale . By
1915 , of the 600 colleges and universities in the
United States , over 300 offered courses in education , 
with the university department , school , or college of
education becoming the model type toward which
other institutions were moving . A survey of college or
university departments of education in 1915 revealed
that 40 state universities , 22 non-state universities , a
number of women ’ s colleges , and agricultural and
technical colleges had been established . Many started
with the appointment of a university chair in pedagogy , 
with the State University of Iowa credited with founding the first professorship in education in 1873 . These 
 “ pedagogy departments ” emerged into departments
and / or schools of education , thus attaining an organizational separation from other departments within the
institution . 
The curricular and organizational changes of these
departments of pedagogy and schools of education
within universities emphasized a greater focus on the
theoretical and philosophical aspects of teaching as
well as sociological and psychological foundations . 
A logical sequence became the mission of serving both
undergraduate and graduate education . In addition to
their role in preparing elementary and secondary
teachers , the preparation of other education personnel—
administrators , specialists , and college teachers—was
considered an essential function of the university
schools . They developed advanced degrees and certificate programs to address the emerging areas of specialization . As the demands of the public schools
increased , with the increased need for leadership and
other academic services such as counseling , recreation , vocational education , and health education , 
schools of education were adding courses and professors to represent these areas . Along with this market
demand came the recognition of the importance of
graduate education and the perceived prestige of their
schools of education . A number of institutions established PhD and EdD programs in education as well as
vast and comprehensive bureaus or centers of research . 
The first PhD was earned at Berkeley in 1897 , with
Ohio State University recognized as having established the first bureau for furthering educational
research . By 1930 , education schools produced some
of the highest numbers of doctorates awarded in the
country , and many schools of education had developed research units within their structures . At the
Schools of Education———917
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 917
same time , state departments of education looked
more and more to the universities to prepare the
needed educators and administrators for their schools
and to begin to address the vexing problems that
emerged from unprecedented growth . By midcentury
and since , schools of education , in their various forms , 
had earned the needed place in their universities . 
HISTORICAL ISSUES CONFRONTING
SCHOOLS OF EDUCATION
Given that schools of education are located within
the university structures of higher education , a conflict
began between the traditions of liberal education and
the growing traditions of professional education for
teachers . As schools of education expanded to meet
the changes of midcentury , how to meet the demands
for professionally trained teachers and for teachers
who have adequate liberal education and the scholarly
discipline and knowledge in their subject matter
resulted in controversies that find voice in current day
literature . Professors from the liberal arts and professors of education gained the impression that their
academic critics were opposed to a major occupation
with either professional training or with academic
knowledge of subject matter . The controversy resided
in two cultures within the institution of higher education fulfilling the mission of professional education
and the orientation of the research and inquiry culture
of the university . The participation of academic scholars in teacher preparation continues as a problem for
schools of education . 
Another set of issues that impacts schools of education is teacher certification and teacher examination . During the early years of public education , the
selection of teachers and the authority for their qualifications rested in the hands of selectmen and school
committees . Competency was limited to basic core skills
in reading , writing , arithmetic grammar , and geography . School committees from different communities
gave oral examinations , none of which were standardized and all of which reflected the local culture and
traditions . With the growth of county and state superintendents , these functions were eventually handed
over , leading to more formal state examining boards
being given the responsibility for examination and
certification . Eventually , this function became the sole
responsibility of the state as the certifying authority
for teacher certification , the responsibility being completely vested by legislative authority in the state
departments set up for teacher licensure . However , 
given the changing supply of qualified teachers , state
departments often modify their requirements to
respond to state needs . However , by the early part of the
twentieth century , certification was exercised by the
state by setting up state licensing agencies that certified
teachers based on a set of standards set through legislation or other authority of the state . As a result , schools
of education were required to establish programs that
would lead to certification . The issue remained as to
who had the greatest influence on setting standards—
teacher-represented groups or policy groups . 
Accreditation of institutional programs remains
another issue facing schools of education . Although
often voluntary at the national level , it is often compulsory at the state level . Prior to 1930 , there were no
standards for accreditation of teacher education . 
Regional accreditation of schools of education developed during the early part of the century , governed by
the American Association of Teacher Colleges 
( AACTE )  , founded in 1918 . In 1954 , AACTE turned
its accreditation function over to the newly formed
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education ( NCATE )  . In 1997 , a rival organization to NCATE
was formed , Teacher Education Accreditation Council 
( TEAC )  . While both groups profess to be focused on
outcomes , there are differences between the two based
on the extent to which prescriptions for specificity
pertain . The quality of teacher preparation remains a
key national issue . 
—Judith Aiken
See also American Association of Colleges for Teacher
Education ; Holmes Group ; leadership , teacher ; licensure
and certification ; Mann , Horace ; normal schools ; professional development ; professional learning communities
Further Readings and References
Anderson , A . W .  ( 1962 )  . The teaching profession : An example
of diversity in training function . In N . Henry ( Ed .  )  , 
Education for the Professions ( pp . 140–167 )  . Sixty-First
Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of
Education , Part II . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Clifford , G .  ,  & Guthrie , J .  ( 1988 )  . Ed school : A brief for professional education . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Darling-Hammond , L .  , Berry , B .  ,  & Thoreson , A .  ( 2001 , 
Spring )  . Does teacher matter ? Evaluating the evidence . 
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 23 , 57–78 . 
Elsbree , W . S .  ( 1939 )  . The American teacher : Evolution of a
profession in a democracy . New York : American Book
Company . 
918———Schools of Education
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 918
Giroux , H .  ( 1988 )  . Teachers as intellectuals : Toward a critical
pedagogy of learning . New York : Bergin & Garvey . 
Goodlad , J . I .  ( 1990 )  . Teachers for our nation ’ s schools . San
Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Goodlad , J . I .  , Soder , R .  ,  & Sirotnik , K . A .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1990 )  . Places
where teachers are taught . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Olson , L .  ( 2005 )  . Education schools use performance standards
to improve graduates . Education Week , 24 ( 36 )  , 1 , 20–21 . 
Richey , H . G .  ( 1957 )  . Growth of the modern conception of
in-service education ( pp . 35–66 )  . Fifty-Sixth Yearbook of
the National Society for the Study of Education , Part I . 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Shen , J .  ( 1999 )  . The school of education : Its mission , faculty , 
and reward structure . New York : Peter Lang . 
Woodring , P .  ( 1975 )  . The development of teacher education . 
In K . J . Rehage ( Ed .  )  , Teacher education ( pp . 1–24 )  . Seventyfourth Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of
Education , Part II . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
 SCIENCE , IN CURRICULUM
Science is paradoxical . It is both process and product . 
It also defies brief yet comprehensive definition . 
As process , it involves particular ways of knowing that
value reason , logic , observation , imagination , experimentation , and validation . As product , science is a
resultant body of knowledge about nature derived by
its practitioners and theorists using such consensual
ways of knowing . Science ’ s integration with mathematics and technology comprises what historians call
the scientific endeavor , a human project to understand
the natural world and the universe . 
In the school curriculum , science is one of the
four core academic subjects taught in Grades K–12 , 
along with English , mathematics , and social studies . 
Its importance as a core subject was once again validated in the 2001 No Child Left Behind Act , the current major federal law for K–12 education . In many
ways , the spirit of this law reflects changes in science
educational thought and subsequent curricular revision across the past two decades . 
In 1985 , the American Association for the
Advancement of Science ( AAAS ) launched its longterm K–12 science education reform campaign named 
 “ Project 2061 .  ” Because 1985 was also the year that
the ever-popular Halley ’ s Comet was visible from
Earth , the intent of using the year 2061 in the project ’ s
title was future oriented . That distant year , 2061 , was
to serve as a numerical reminder that the children
starting school in 1985 were likely to be alive to see
the predicted return of Halley ’ s Comet in 2061 . In
contrast to the many shortsighted , short-term science
education reform efforts of the past , Project 2061 was
to be both anticipatory and sustained , ever mindful
that today ’ s science curriculum would shape the quality of these youngsters ’ lives as they developed and
then matured during the twenty-first century—a
period of even more rapid scientific and technological
change . Thus , science teachers ’ and students ’ requisite
knowledge and skill bases ( i . e .  , the science curriculum ) needed to evolve in synchrony with accelerating
societal and knowledge evolution . 
In contrast to the past , the focus of the AAAS
reform effort was not on creating new scientists or
keeping the economic engines of technology humming or racing another country into space , but to populate the nation with scientifically literate citizens . It
was to be science for all—not just for the chosen few
who excelled . AAAS defined science literacy broadly , 
emphasizing the connections among carefully chosen
key ideas in the natural and social sciences , mathematics , and technology . Project 2061 ’ s primer on the
subject was Science for All Americans . This book set
forth national consensus-based recommendations
for what all students should know and be able to do in
science and technology by the time they graduated
from high school . It is accurate to say that almost all
K–12 science curricula in U . S . schools today have
their roots in this landmark document . A countervailing book , The Myth of Scientific Literacy , written
by physicist Morris H . Shamos , who contended that
striving for universal science literacy was a futile educational goal , failed to negate its influence , and the
scientific and science education communities rallied
around the themes of science for all and science literacy . They also endorsed the idea of setting national
science standards in such an egalitarian context . 
The second most influential publication of AAAS
was the book Benchmarks for Science Literacy , published in 1993 , which translated the science literacy
goals in Science for All Americans into learning goals 
( or benchmarks )  , demarcated within grade ranges ( or
grade bands )  , for Grades K–12 . AAAS drew upon and
cited exemplary science education research as justification for its decisions . The majority of today ’ s state
science curriculum framework documents have drawn
their content from the AAAS Benchmarks , as well as
from the National Research Council ’ s derivative yet
more expansive consensus document , the National
Science Education Standards . 
Science , in Curriculum———919
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 919
It is important to note that the National Science
Education Standards do not require a specific science
curriculum . A curriculum is a design for how content is
to be organized and taught in the classroom . The content
identified in the Standards can be organized and presented with varied emphases , and from multiple perspectives via many different curricula . However , state
departments of education now require that all science
classroom materials and experiences be aligned with
state and national standards—both in content and
process—and must reflect an appropriate developmental level and level of depth of the standard for a given
science grade level . Some states are even developing
more explicit documents called grade-level expectations ( GLEs )  , statements that define what all science
students should know and be able to do at the end of
a stated grade level , adding further definition and
specificity to the state / national content standards and
benchmarks . 
Paralleling the influence of the inclusive science
literacy and science standards movements are science
education research advances ( for example , the thousands of research studies worldwide on students ’ scientific thinking and their misconceptions about
important science concepts , principles , and theories ) 
that have led science curriculum evaluators to ask
questions such as these : 
• Constructivist learning theory : Do the curriculum
materials and experiences offer adequate opportunities for students to construct a sound procedural and
conceptual understanding of the standards-based
science content and to apply their new understanding
in both authentic and novel situations ? 
• Sociocultural learning theory : Is the science student
an integral part of a social group or ensemble
engaged in collaborative learning activities , and may
that social group change throughout the activity ? Is
this science learning activity informed by the individuals who comprise the social group ; yet does the
activity reciprocally inform the individuals within
the group ? Is this social learning activity mediated
by appropriate tools , language , people , symbols , 
signs , and actions ? 
• Inquiry-based instruction : Is the development of scientific inquiry abilities an explicit student learning
goal ? Are these to be learned directly , via student
investigations ? Will students ’ investigations lead to
deeper understanding and greater transfer of knowledge ? Can teachers select specific inquiry abilities
on which to focus and develop strategies to achieve
those outcomes ? 
To end on a cautionary note , despite all the progress
that has been made in reenvisioning K–12 science education , Paul Adams and Gerald Krockover ’ s research
indicated that contrary to their reformed preservice
teaching experiences , beginning science teachers often
implement traditional “ survival strategies ” instead of
the innovative instructional moves advocated by the
National Science Education Standards . James Ellis
wisely distinguishes between the intended curriculum , the enacted curriculum , and the assessed curriculum . Like a food product that moves from farm
to processor to distributor to consumer , each stage
along the way can impact quality negatively . Even if
the intended science curriculum meets criteria of
excellence , the enacted science curriculum and / or the
assessed science curriculum may misguide and misrepresent students ’ science learning . The challenge
for educational leadership is even greater than that
needed to protect the food chain : All three stages of
the science curriculum must be monitored for quality—
yet be continuously updated and upgraded , and remain
in sync . 
—James H . Wandersee and Renee M . Clary
See also achievement gap , of students ; achievement tests ; cognition , theories of ; curriculum , theories of ; international
education ; literacy , theories of ; math education ; multiculturalism ; National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher
Education ; No Child Left Behind ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Adams , P .  ,  & Krockover , G .  ( 1999 )  . Stimulating constructivist
teaching styles through use of an observation rubric . 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching 36 , 955–971 . 
American Association for the Advancement of Science .  
( 1989 )  . Science for all Americans . Washington , DC : 
Author . 
American Association for the Advancement of Science .  
( 1993 )  . Benchmarks for science literacy . New York : Oxford
University Press . 
American Association for the Advancement of Science .  
( 1997 )  . Project 2061 : Science literacy for a changing
future : Update 1997 . Washington , DC : Author . 
Atkin , J .  ,  & Black , P .  ( 2003 )  . Inside science education reform : 
A history of curricular and policy change . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Carin , A .  , Bass , J .  ,  & Contant , T .  ( 2005 )  . Teaching science as
inquiry . Columbus , OH : Charles E . Merrill . 
Mintzes , J .  , Wandersee , J .  ,  & Novak , J .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2000 )  . 
Assessing science understanding : A human constructivist
approach . Orlando , FL : Academic Press . 
920———Science , in Curriculum
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 920
National Research Council .  ( 1996 )  . National science education
standards . Washington , DC : National Academies Press . 
Wandersee , J .  , Mintzes , J .  ,  & Novak , J .  ( 1994 )  . Alternative conceptions [ misconceptions ] in science . In D . Gabel ( Ed .  )  , 
Handbook of research on science teaching and learning 
( pp . 177–210 )  . New York : Macmillan . 
 SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT
Scientific management refers to an organizational
management style developed in the early 1900s following so-called scientific concepts and emphasizing
a logical , standardized , and deterministic way to perform a task or carry out a work responsibility . It is still
today a strong tradition and dominant force in organizational development and leadership style . 
Before 1900 , the study of organizational behavior
and effective management focused on the structuring
and design of work and organizations , with the basic
organizational models being the military and the
Catholic Church . But with development of the factory
system came demands for new theories of management . This led to what came to be called scientific
management , followed by ideas embodied in what is
known as classical organizational theory and then to
the tenets identified as bureaucratic . School systems
as we know them today did not exist , so there was
little need for organizational models to use in education , 
but this changed as larger and more complex school
systems began to develop . 
Throughout their history , theories of management
and leadership in education have been strongly influenced by those developed to serve business and industry . This has had both positive and negative results , 
with those more negative in nature resulting from a
failure to recognize the unique purposes of public
education and the need for an educated and professional work force . To gain an understanding of this situation requires some attention to the development of
management and leadership theories outside the domain
of education . 
So-called scientific management emerged as a
field of study in the early twentieth century with the
theorizing of Frederick W . Taylor , a foreman at the
Bethlehem Steel Works in Pennsylvania . His observations about industrial efficiency and management
focused on manufacturing organizations and prescribed
effective structure of organizations and design of
management activities . Management was described as
a science , with managers and employees having
clearly specified yet different responsibilities . 
Taylor saw human problems as the major deterrent
to productivity and proposed the scientific selection
and development of the worker to overcome this obstacle . He developed a system to use a stopwatch to time
the physical movements that went into a type of work , 
such as pig iron handling , in order to identify the most
efficient movements to accomplish a particular task . 
Taylor ’ s main premise was that the old traditional ( that
is , nonscientific ) working methods had to be replaced
with a scientifically verified , objectively determined
set of duties , rules , and standards . Workers and managers had to be scientifically trained , since “ natural work ” 
was patently uneconomical and wasteful . His principles had the greatest impact when applied to increasing productivity on a relatively simple task . 
Taylor viewed the goal of management as efficiency , 
and standardization was the major means to achieve it . 
He was concerned with how to analyze tasks and work
methods , standardize them , and then control the workers so that these methods would be used consistently . 
Detailed objective analysis facilitated development of
standardized tools and methods . 
Scientific management theory sees work in organizations as similar to a machine or unthinking organism . 
This implies systems that are predictable , rational , and
deterministic . People are seen as cogs in the machinery , and the leader is an all-knowing machine operator . 
A good organization is , therefore , one that is efficient , 
hierarchical , highly centralized , planning oriented , 
highly regulated , highly organized , and tightly controlled . Productivity is the most vital measure of
success and effectiveness . It relies on deterministic
principles exemplified by the development of simple
schedules or plans or on larger , more encompassing
strategic plans . 
Taylor ’ s work in the area of scientific management
evolved into five principles of work design :  ( a ) shift
work responsibility to management ( managers plan and
design work , while workers implement )  ;  ( b ) use scientific analysis to devise precise worker actions ;  ( c ) select
the best workers for a given job ;  ( d ) train workers effectively ; and ( e ) monitor work and worker performance . 
Machine-like organizations move slowly and deliberately . They are highly rational , creating consistency
and maintaining stable environments . They are mass
production oriented . Differentiation of function and
specialization of task are primal , and communication is
straightforward and usually top-down . Communication
Scientific Management———921
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 921
tends to be slow , as levels of hierarchy need to be
traversed for decision making and problem solving to
occur . 
The machine organization positions the human
component at two very different extremes . Management
controls and subordinates are controlled . Conflict
between management and labor , including a mutual
mistrust , is almost inevitable . In addition , political conflict between those involved in different functions often
results , with power being sought to control resources . 
Taylor ’ s approach was followed by those of Henri
Fayol and others of the classical school of organizational management as they listed duties of a manager
and specified principles of management . Further developments by Max Weber led to the bureaucratic type of
theory , emphasizing order , system , rationality , uniformity , and consistency . 
Early management theorists , following various kinds
of evolution from Taylor ’ s basic principles , contributed
to many of today ’ s management and organizational
problems in education , as well as in most other kinds
of organizational activity . Focusing on organizations
from a rational or technical point of view tends to seriously reduce attention to human components . In addition , because of organizational size and complexity
and various political and human relations factors , the
constant and intimate cooperation between worker and
management called for by Taylor himself are often lost
or at least seriously depleted . 
The need for substantial rationality , allowing for
more reflection and self-organizing is largely missing
in the Taylor model . This is discouraged or even
negated by the careerism focus in the machine organization as individuals compete within a closed system . 
The emphasis on efficiency by Taylor and other
organizational theorists of the early twentieth century
strongly influenced early educational administration . 
These men relied on engineering principles , giving
little attention to human relations and the interactions
of social systems . Scientific management focused on
finding the one best way to accomplish a task and then
selecting and training the workers to follow this one
best way . The one best way could be found only by
experts studying the process “ scientifically ”  ( behavioristically and objectively )  . This created much
resentment among factory workers , even though they
tended to have little education . Is it any wonder that
attempts in school systems to establish teacher rating
and merit pay , for instance , have met with strong
resistance ? Such efforts have generally led to unproductive conflict and impaired or destroyed the leadership
potential of the school executives responsible for
inaugurating such policies . The current widespread
demand for “ accountability ,  ” management by objectives , strategic planning , and student testing would
appear to be a revival of Taylorism . 
Scientific management is certainly still in evidence . 
Managements , especially educational managers , are still
firm proponents of Frederick Taylor ’ s basic premises . 
Behaviorism and its offshoots dominate school administration , from the behavioral objectives , to the experimental models that are supported by the concept of
verification , to the statistical models that give it all an
appearance of “ objectivity .  ” For instance , Taylorism seems
to have been reincarnated in the form of Deming ’ s
TQM ( total quality management )  . 
Criticism of this current tendency to follow versions of Taylorism in school organization and administration is common , sometimes couched in the
philosophical language of modernism and postmodernism . Modernism refers to a broad acceptance of the
tenets of reason and logic as the paramount virtues
based on assumptions that reality is as it is perceived , 
that human language is a clear window through which
we observe the world , that context is not important , 
that the purpose of science is to engage in a search for
general laws that are exclusive of specific contexts , 
that logic should guide a search for truth , that truth is
discerned by its “ correspondence ” to the world we
see , and that what is true controls and predicts what
happens in this world ( which is a measure of its worth
and its “ truth-telling ” capability )  . 
Many recent educational reform efforts seem to
have strong connections to the above tenets of modernism . Reports like A Nation at Risk ( 1983 ) stressed
accountability in a setting that reaffirmed standardization , hierarchy , testing , centralization , and formalized
procedures aimed at management for efficiency and
productivity . New versions of scientific management
for American schools have included state-mandated , 
uniform approaches to teacher evaluation , supposedly
to produce increased scores on student tests , curriculum alignment to ensure that what will be tested will
be taught , the concept of “ best practice ,  ” and various
other “ scientifically proven ” programs and practices . 
Challenges ( often termed postmodern ) to the modernistic approach to developing ideas and practices in
education and educational administration suggest that
administrators must conceptualize and put into effect
a multitheoretical , broad-based array of research
programs that are not dependent on notions of “ right
science ” or “ right methods ” for their legitimization or
922———Scientific Management
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 922
sustenance , in short , to abandon the 100-year agenda
of modernistic science . This will require that both
researchers and practitioners accept the notion that there
are various ways to discover truth and that it is ever
changing and subject to context , interpretation , culture , 
and ambiguity . Many theories about learning , organization , and educational administration are worth considering and investigating in various ways . As they show
promise for constructive practice in schools , administrators must be ready and willing to go well beyond scientific management , beyond simply trying to improve the
status quo and create new theories to ground new forms
of practice , regardless of tradition , current pressures , 
and unavoidable uncertainties . Otherwise , little significant progress is likely to be made in overcoming the
many problems and weaknesses of current educational
theory and administrative practice . 
—Weldon Beckner
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; authority ; 
bureaucracy ; division of labor ; economics , theories of ; elementary education ; hierarchy , in organizations ; knowledge
base , of the field ; leadership , theories of ; management
theories ; planning models ; principalship ; superintendency ; 
Taylor , Frederick ; total quality management
Further Readings and References
Crow , G .  ,  & Grogan , M .  ( 2005 )  . The development of leadership thought and practice in the United States . In F . English 
( Ed .  )  , SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 362–
379 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . The postmodern challenge to the theory
and practice of educational administration . Springfield , 
IL : Charles C Thomas . 
Kanigel , R .  ( 1997 )  . The one best way : Frederick Winslow
Taylor and the enigma of efficiency . New York : Viking . 
Leithwood , K .  ,  & Duke , D .  ( 1999 )  . A century ’ s quest to understand school leadership . In J . Murphy & K . Louis ( Eds .  )  , 
Handbook of research on educational administration ( 2nd
ed .  , pp . 45–72 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Razik , T .  ,  & Swanson , A .  ( 2001 )  . Fundamental concepts of
educational leadership ( 2nd ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , NJ : 
Merrill Prentice Hall . 
Taylor , F .  ( 1911 )  . The principles of scientific management . 
New York : Harper . 
 SELF-ACTUALIZATION
Abraham Maslow ( 1908–1970 ) originated the concept
of self-actualization from his study of humanistic
psychology . This element of psychology focuses on
the well-being of people and purports that humans
are intrinsically good and have unrealized potential . 
When humans meet this unrealized potential , selfactualization occurs . 
In 1943 , while a professor at Brooklyn College , 
Maslow developed a keen interest in two mentors : 
anthropologist Ruth Benedict and psychologist Max
Wertheimer . He viewed them as being highly fulfilled
people and began extensive studies on understanding
their characteristics , habits , personalities , and abilities
as well as those of other adults who were similarly
exceptional . From those early studies , his theory of
the self-actualization arose . 
In “ A Theory of Human Motivation ,  ” Maslow characterized self-actualization as a motivational state that
comes forth when the more basic needs have been satisfied . He contended that all people are born with a set
of basic needs that they seek to fulfill . Once the lower
needs have been gratified , then the next set of higher
needs emerge and fulfillment of them is sought . Maslow
described the five basic needs in his “ Hierarchy of
Human Needs .  ” The first set of needs , physiological , 
include food , water , shelter , sex , and sleep . Second are
the safety needs , which include feelings of security , stability , dependency , protection , and freedom from fear . 
Third are the belongingness and love needs . Love , 
friendship , and affectionate relationships with others in
a family or group are characteristics at this level . The
fourth category of needs , the esteem needs , is classified
into two categories : self-esteem and esteem from others . 
Satisfaction of self-esteem needs leads to feelings of
self-confidence . Esteem from others leads to feelings of
recognition , attention , importance , dignity , or appreciation . The need for self-actualization is the final stage in
the hierarchy of human needs . Those who have reached
this stage are no longer motivated to gratify the needs
for safety , belongingness , love , status , and self-respect . 
Therefore , the individual is free to advance toward the
highest potential . 
Maslow believed that gratification of one need
leads to only a temporary happiness that is followed
by another higher level of discontent that involves the
individual being consumed with the desire for gratification at the next level of needs . When the individual
is dominated by obtaining gratification of a set of
needs , his or her motivation increases , and unmet
needs on the hierarchy cease to exist . Maslow felt that
people function best when they are striving for something lacking , when wishing for something they are
not in possession of , and when they are putting forth
energies to gratify that wish . 
Self-Actualization———923
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 923
Maslow described 18 characteristics of selfactualizing ( SA ) people in Motivation and Personality : 
1 . Realistic . Self-actualizing ( SA ) people have a more
efficient perception of reality and are comfortable
with it . They are able to distinguish the concrete
from the abstract , are able to see what is there rather
than their own wishes , and are logical and efficient . 
2 . Acceptance . They accept themselves , others , and the
natural world the way they are . They see human nature
as it is , do not experience guilt or shame , enjoy life
without regret or apology , and are without any
unnecessary inhibitions . 
3 . Spontaneity , simplicity , naturalness . SA people are
spontaneous in their inner lives , thoughts , and
impulses . They are not deterred by convention and do
not allow it to inhibit them from doing anything that
they consider to be important . 
4 . Problem centering . SA people focus on problems outside themselves . They are problem centered rather than
ego centered . They have a mission in life requiring
energy because it is the sole reason for their existence . 
5 . Detachment : The need for privacy . They are alone
but are not lonely . They find it easy to be aloof , 
reserved , calm , and almost serene . They are unflappable and retain dignity amid confusion . 
6 . Autonomy : Independent of culture and environment . 
SA people are not dependent on the external world
for their fulfillment . Rather , they rely on the inner
self for satisfaction . They are independent of others ’ 
love and opinions . 
7 . Continued freshness of appreciation . They have a
fresh appreciation of people and things . They appreciate and are inspired by the basic good in life and
view moment-to-moment living as thrilling . 
8 . Mystic ( peak ) experiences . SA people experience
episodes of feeling ecstasy , wonder , and awe . These
moments cause them to lose placement in time and
space while feeling that something extremely important and valuable has happened . These experiences
allow them to become transformed and strengthened
in their daily lives . 
9 . Gemeinschaftsgefuhl ( feeling of community , brotherhood )  . SA people have sympathy and affection for
all mankind and have a genuine desire to help the
human race . 
10 . Interpersonal relations . SA people prefer a few profound friendships to many superficial ones . They are
capable of greater love than others consider possible
11 . Democratic values and attitudes . They are able to
learn from anyone and are humble and friendly with
all regardless of class , education , political belief , 
race , or color . 
12 . Discrimination : Means and ends , good and evil . SA
people do not confuse means and ends . They enjoy
the present and the process of achieving a goal , not
just the result . They transform the most tedious task
into an enjoyable game . They are strongly ethical
and have their own inner moral standards . 
13 . Philosophical , unhostile sense of humor . They view
jokes as teaching metaphors , intrinsic to the situation
and spontaneous . They can laugh at themselves and
never engage in jokes that are hostile , superior , or
authoritative in nature . 
14 . Creativity . SA people have a special creativeness or
originality that carries over into everything they do . 
They are inventive and uninhibited . 
15 . Resistance to enculturation : Transcendence of any
particular culture . SA people have an inner detachment from culture . They are not driven by the rules
of society . They observe folklores but are not controlled by them . 
16 . Imperfections . SA people show many of the lesser
human failings ( stubbornness , vanity , ruthlessness , etc .  )  . 
17 . Values . SA people have a strong value system
because of a philosophical acceptance of self , human
nature , social life , physical reality , and nature . 
18 . Resolution of dichotomies . For SA people , polar
opposites merge into a third , higher phenomenon , as
if the two have united . For example , work becomes
play , desires are in accord with reason , and they
retain childlike qualities while remaining wise . 
Maslow felt that self-actualization is a characteristic
only in people who are approximately 60 years of age or
more and that everyone else is in the process of working
toward this goal ; they are moving toward maturity and
the discovery of the true self . Examples of those , in
Maslow ’ s judgment , who achieved self-actualization
include Abraham Lincoln , Thomas Jefferson , Albert
Einstein , Eleanor Roosevelt , and Jane Addams , among
others . He also identified several potential or possible
924———Self-Actualization
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 924
cases of those who were , at the time , developing in
the direction of self-actualization . Those included G . W . 
Carver , Ralph Waldo Emerson , Frederick Douglass , 
George Washington , Harriet Tubman , Pierre Renoir , 
Walt Whitman , and Benjamin Franklin . 
Maslow contended that not all highly successful , 
productive , and talented people reach self-actualization . He maintained that all people at birth have the
potential for self-actualization , but a majority are eliminated as a result of childhood experiences prior to
being given the opportunity to develop it . Early deprivation of any basic need , such as safety , love , esteem , 
or belongingness , inevitably damages or emotionally
cripples an individual in later adult life , which makes
it more difficult for self-actualization to occur . Maslow
emphasized that self-actualization is rare because most
adults are still seeking to satisfy those lower , unmet
needs . The healthy person , on the other hand , is motivated by the need to develop and self-actualize to his
fullest potential . Those who have reached self-actualization , as established by Maslow , are a fraction of the
total population ( less than 1% )  . They are the best possible of all humans . They are different from the average person and are understood by few . Maslow ’ s work
continues to be influential in educational leadership , 
though it has recently come under criticism related to
the notion that there is not necessarily a one-to-one
correlation between high self-esteem and job success . 
—Marie Byrd-Blake and Larry McNeal
See also behaviorism ; cognition , theories of ; egocentrism , 
theories of ; esteem needs ; flow theory ; hierarchical developmental models ; Maslow , Abraham ; metacognition ; motivation , theories of ; personality
Further Readings and References
Hoffman , E .  ( 1988 )  . The right to be human : A biography of
Abraham Maslow . Los Angeles : Jeremy P . Tarcher . 
Maslow , A . H .  ( 1943 )  . A theory of human motivation . 
Psychological Review , 50 , 370–396 . 
Maslow , A . H .  ( 1954 )  . Motivation and personality . New York : 
Harper & Row . 
Maslow , A . H .  ( 1962 )  . Toward a psychology of being . New York : 
Van Nostrand . 
Maslow , A . H .  ( 1970 )  . Motivation and personality ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
New York : Harper & Row . 
Milton , J .  ( 2002 )  . The road to malpsychia : Humanistic psychology and our discontents . San Francisco : Encounter
Books . 
Tribe , C .  ( 1982 )  . Profile of three theories : Erikson , Maslow , 
Piaget . Dubuque , Iowa : Kendall / Hunt . 
 SEMIOTICS
Semiotics ( from the Greek semeioun , meaning 
 “ signs ”  )  , also called semiology , is generally defined as
the systematic study of signs . The founding figures of
semiotics are the Swiss linguist Ferdinand Saussure 
( 1857–1913 ) and the American philosopher Charles
Sanders Peirce ( 1839–1914 )  . Working independently
and on different continents , Saussure and Peirce
contemporaneously arrived at models of meaning that
subsequent writers drew upon to develop semiotic
theories and practices . Of the two , Saussure ’ s work
has been more influential , serving as the basis for the
founding and development of structuralism (  “ structural semiotics ”  )  . Saussure ’ s work provided writers
from many disciplines—for example , Levi-Strauss in
anthropology , Frye in literature , Lacan in psychoanalysis , Foucault in history , and Metz in cinema—
with a method of analysis and a rich store of insights , 
terms , and concepts that could be used to analyze a
wide range of cultural texts and practices . 
It is well beyond the scope here to identify and
define the proliferation of terms and concepts derived
from the work of Saussure and Peirce : langue and
parole , paradigm and syntagm , connotation and denotation , chains of meaning , codes , encoding and decoding , modes of address , articulation , intertextuality , and
so on . However , a brief explanation of their basic
models of meaning is necessary . As a linguist , Saussure ’ s
main interest was in words as signs . In his model , the
sign consists of a signifier ( a word either spoken or
written ) and a signified ( the mental image or concept
that the word refers to )  . Most important in this model is
the arbitrariness of the sign , which is to say that there is
no inherent or necessary relation between the signifier
and the signified . For example , the word cat could just
as well have been tree , sky , boat , or any other word . 
Another aspect of the Saussurian model is that it analytically focuses only on the relation of signs with other
signs and methodologically brackets off the importance
of the relation of the sign with extralinguistic reality 
( i . e .  , the social world )  . By contrast , Peirce ’ s emphasis
on the social context is embedded in his definition
of a sign as “ something which stands to somebody for
something in some respect or capacity .  ” This emphasis
on the social context is also apparent in Peirce ’ s conception of three different kinds of signs : iconic ( a sign
that resembles in some way what it stands for , such as
a photograph )  ; the indexical ( a sign that is associated
somehow with what it is a sign of , like smoke with
Semiotics———925
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 925
fire )  ; and the symbolic ( signs that are arbitrarily or
conventionally connected to their referents , which mirrors Saussure ’ s conception of all signs )  . Of these two
models , Saussure ’ s was to become the dominant one
for decades after the posthumous publication of his
book Course in General Linguistics ( 1916 / 1974 )  . 
Terry Eagleton analyzed the work of the main
figures of the Prague school of linguistics ( founded in
1926 ) —the Russian Formalist Roman Jakobson and
the Czech linguist Jan Mukarovsky—as he traced
Saussure ’ s influence in the development of modern
linguistics and the founding of structuralism . Eagleton
explained that Jakobson and Mukarovsky developed
an analytic framework based on Saussurian linguistics : Poems were to be viewed as functional structures
in which signifiers and signifieds are governed by a
complex set of relations . These signs must be studied
in their own right , not as reflections of an external
reality . Saussure ’ s stress on the arbitrary relation between
sign and referent word and thing helped detach the
text from its surroundings and make of it an autonomous
object . As a result , there came about a gradual merging of the terms structuralism and semiotics with the
work of the Prague school . The word structuralism
itself indicates a method of inquiry , which can be
applied to a whole range of objects , while the term
semiotics denotes rather a particular field of study , 
that of systems that would in an ordinary sense be
regarded as signs , such as poems , bird calls , traffic
lights , or medical symptoms . 
This overlapping of structuralism and semiotics
is exemplified in key works by Roland Barthes , among
the most well-known contemporary semioticians . For
example , Barthes ’ s book Mythologies comprises 28
articles , written in the mid-1950s , that are exemplary
semiotic analyses of a variety of cultural texts , 
objects , and practices . John Fiske explained that what
Barthes called a “ myth ” was simply a story by which
a culture explains or understands some aspect of reality or nature and that a myth was a chain of related
concepts that worked together to create meanings that
made the myth seem natural and commonsensical
rather than socially constructed . For example , Barthes
treated phenomena such as a wrestling match , a
restaurant menu , children ’ s toys , a haircut , a magazine
advertisement , a film , and photographs as “ texts ” or 
 “ messages ” to be “ read ” for the “ myths ”  ( ideologies ) 
they attempted to naturalize . Works by John Fiske also
serve as examples of semiotic analyses of a wide
range of phenomena ( the shopping mall , the beach , 
Madonna , quiz shows , architecture , blue jeans , and
more )  . Fiske engaged in semiotic readings that
attempted to explicate how ideology is at work in
cultural texts , figures , and practices . Some have called
this ideological approach “ social semiotics ” to distinguish it from what they refer to as the “ traditional ” 
and “ mainstream ”  ( also “ structural ”  ) semiotics . 
Traditional semiotics likes to assume that the relevant
meanings are frozen and fixed in the text itself , to be
extracted and decoded by the analyst by reference to a
coding system that is impersonal and neutral , and universal for users of the code . In contrast , social semiotics cannot assume that texts produce exactly the
meanings and effects that their authors hope for . It is
precisely the struggles and their uncertain outcomes
that must be studied at the level of social action and
their effects in the production of meaning . 
—James Trier
See also classification of education ; cognition , theories of ; 
communication , theories in organizations ; conceptual systems theory and leadership ; constructivism , social ; critical
theory ; curriculum , theories of ; frame theory ; functionalist
theory ; heuristics ; hypotheses , in research ; interpretive
studies ; knowledge base , of the field ; language theories and
processes ; literacy , theories of ; paradigm ; postmodernism
Further Readings and References
Barthes , R .  ( 1972 )  . Mythologies . New York : Noonday Press . 
Fiske , J .  ( 1989 )  . Reading the popular . Boston : Unwin Hyman . 
Fiske , J .  ( 1989 )  . Understanding popular culture . New York : 
Routledge . 
Foucault , M .  ( 1972 )  . The archeology of knowledge . London : 
Tavistock . 
Frye , N .  ( 1957 )  . Anatomy of criticism . Princeton , NJ : 
Princeton University Press . 
Lacan , J .  ( 1968 )  . The language of the self : The function of
language in psychoanalysis . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins
University Press . 
Saussure , F .  ( 1974 )  . Course in general linguistics ( W . Baskin , 
Trans .  )  . London : Fontana / Collins . 
 SENIORITY , RULE OF
Under the rule of seniority , employees are granted
benefits and privileges based on length of service . The
rule of seniority is derived from many sources , most
significantly collective-bargaining agreements and
state statutes . 
926———Seniority , Rule Of
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 926
In the field of public education , the most important
benefit provided to senior employees is employment
protection during periods of layoff or reduction in
force . During times of layoff , an employee who has
less seniority will be released before an employee
with more seniority : in the common phrase ,  “ Last
hired , first fired .  ” Furthermore , laid-off teachers are
often called back to work or rehired in order of their
seniority . 
In addition to increased protection from layoffs , senior
employees typically receive higher salaries and greater
benefits , such as increased vacation time . Other benefits associated with seniority include but are not limited
to preference in assignments to particular buildings ; 
assignments to particular class sections , such as honors
sections ; assignments to particular classrooms , such
as larger classrooms or those with better lighting or
temperature control ; preferences in scheduling , such
as preferred preparatory periods ; and preferences in
assignments to extracurricular activities . Often senior
employees are given the responsibility of mentoring or
supervising their junior colleagues . 
Seniority-based systems reward longevity and loyalty , 
and this provides many benefits to both employers and
employees . Employees who have attained the benefits
of seniority are likely to remain with their employers , 
providing those employers with an experienced
workforce and decreasing the costs associated with
filling vacancies and training new employees . Junior
employees , who aspire to attain the rewards offered
by seniority , may choose to remain with their current employers . Seniority systems do have drawbacks , 
however . Most notably , many senior teachers exercise
their seniority rights to avoid assignments to particularly difficult classrooms or schools , where their skills
are most needed . In addition , some have argued rules
of seniority may serve as a barrier to diversity in the
workforce . 
Sometimes , employees who change employers
may be given credit for some ( or all ) seniority or time
in service accumulated in their former employment . 
In addition , the rule of seniority often poses difficulties during mergers of organizations , such as consolidations of school districts . Organizational mergers
present difficulties when employees lose seniority rights
to their new coworkers . 
Rules of seniority have been subject to two recent
legal challenges . In the first , the U . S . Supreme Court
considered the relationship between rules of seniority in collective-bargaining agreements and rights to
reasonable accommodation under the Americans
with Disabilities Act ( ADA )  . In U . S . Airways , Inc .  , v . 
Barnett ( 2002 )  , the Court stated seniority systems
may not , with rare exceptions , be modified or ignored
to provide an accommodation to an employee with a
disability . Second , the No Child Left Behind Act , 
according to many administrators , requires abandoning or modifying seniority rules , especially in schools
or districts that do not meet performance standards . 
—Thomas A . Mayes
See also American Federation of Teachers ; collective bargaining ; contracts , with teacher unions ; governance ; job security ; National Education Association ; reduction in force ; 
unions , of teachers
Further Readings and References
DeMitchell , T .  ( 2005 )  . Unions , collective bargaining , and the
challenges of leading . In F . English ( Eds .  )  , SAGE handbook
of educational leadership ( pp . 538–549 )  . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Sage . 
Gewertz , C .  ( 2004 , September 8 )  . Collective bargaining bumping up against No Child Left Behind law . Education Week . 
Lieberman , M .  ( 1997 )  . The teacher unions . New York : Free
Press . 
U . S . Airways , Inc .  , v . Barnett , 535 U . S . 392 ( 2002 )  . 
 SEXISM ( GLASS CEILING ) 
Most societies privilege men over women . That is , 
men are seen as inherently more valuable or worthy
than women . This assumption of women as “ less than ” 
men results in discriminatory treatment of women . For
instance , whereas males are traditionally granted positions of power and authority , females are expected to
assume lesser , more limited societal roles . Moreover , 
women are frequently denied basic liberties such as
property rights and access to education . In more extreme
cases , women are viewed as not only less than men , 
but less than human , and as such , women are the property of men who may subject them to demeaning and
abusive treatment . 
Until recent decades , the privileging of men over
women was seen as natural and , therefore , correct . 
Although early feminists , such as Elizabeth Cady
Stanton , attempted to raise awareness of women ’ s rights
issues in the United States as early as the 1840s , the
cause did not gain widespread support until the civil
Sexism ( Glass Ceiling ) ———927
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 927
rights movement of the 1960s . Through this movement , 
the unjust treatment of people of color and women was
exposed . And , just as the term racism rose from this
movement to describe the systematic oppression of
non-Whites , sexism emerged as a way to describe institutionalized discrimination against women . 
With the naming of sexism came greater social
awareness of women ’ s issues and the opportunity to
change society ’ s assumptions about the roles of women . 
This led to advancements for women in many arenas , 
including education , employment , and family planning . 
For example , women did not attend institutions of higher
education in significant numbers until the 1960s and
even then were only half as likely as men to graduate . 
Nonetheless , women currently earn the majority of bachelor and master ’ s degrees in the United States . Moreover , 
whereas women were once expected to work only out of
economic necessity , and then only in a limited number of
fields , today almost an equal percentage of women as
men are employed outside the home . Moreover , women
are employed in a wide variety of fields , including those
that historically were open only to men . 
Much of the credit for the advances of women is
given to the availability of reliable birth control . Prior to
the development of convenient and dependable methods
of contraception , women had little control over their fertility . As a result , untimely pregnancy often caused
women to abandon their pursuit of education or employment . Today , generally widespread access to contraception
allows women to delay both marriage and motherhood . 
In turn , women have greater opportunity to access education and employment . 
Despite recent advances for women , sexism and
gender discrimination continue , as evidenced in outcomes
of all measures . For example , throughout the world , 
women have less access to basic resources such as adequate shelter , health care , and nutrition . Moreover , even
in the economic sphere , an area often thought of as one
of great gains for women , gender inequity remains . For
instance , although women earn the majority of bachelor
and master ’ s degrees , men earn more PhD and firstprofessional degrees . Similarly , while women are
almost as likely as men to be employed , they earn only
three fourths of what men do . Moreover , women are
more likely to be employed in gender-segregated jobs
with fewer benefits and opportunities for advancement . 
Even when women enter fields with considerable
opportunity for promotion , they face gender discrimination in the form of an unseen yet real barrier to
advancement . While women may be able to overcome
the effects of gender discrimination to reach lower- or
midlevel positions , as they move up the organizational
structure , they face increasing resistance to their
advancement . Eventually , women reach a point beyond
which they are not allowed to advance . The point ,  
 “ the glass ceiling ,  ” is an invisible and unacknowledged
limit , which cannot be explained by differences in
job-related qualifications between men and women . 
Furthermore , the glass ceiling results in women rarely
having access to the uppermost levels of corporate and
government structures . Evidence of the glass ceiling
effect is found in demographic data for the largest U . S . 
business organizations . Ninety-five percent of seniorlevel managers of Fortune 1 , 000 industrial and Fortune
500 service companies are men . Moreover , in 2004 , 
only eight Fortune 500 companies were headed by
women , and only 10 . 6% of those on the boards of directors of these same companies were women . Within
institutes of higher education , which typically have
policies aimed at ensuring institutional equity , men
dominate the administrative and upper-professorate
ranks . Even in PK–12 schools , where the vast majority
of professionals are women , men continue to hold most
of the administrative positions . Given that the glass
ceiling exists even when job-related characteristics
such as education , experience , abilities , and motivation
are held constant , this phenomenon is best explained by
organizational beliefs and practices rather than by differences in the credentials of men and women . 
—Sarah W . Nelson
See also Addams , Jane ; Bethune , Mary McLeod ; Clark , 
Septima ; coeducation ; discrimination ; division of labor ; 
Dorsey , Susan Miller ; equality , in schools ; feminism and
theories of leadership ; Follett , Mary Parker ; gender studies , 
in educational leadership ; lesbian / gay / bisexual / transgender
issues in education ; Haley , Margaret ; Lawrence-Lightfoot , 
Sara ; Meier , Deborah ; role theory ; women in educational
leadership ; Young , Ella Flagg
Further Readings and References
American Association of University Women .  ( 2001 )  . Beyond
the “ gender wars ”  : A conversation about girls , boys , and
education . Washington , DC : Author . 
Blount , J .  ( 2005 )  . Fit to teach : Same-sex desire , gender , and
school work in the twentieth century . Albany : SUNY Press . 
Brown , K .  ( 2005 )  . Pivotal points : History , development , 
and promise of the principalship . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 109–141 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
928———Sexism ( Glass Ceiling ) 
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 928
Federal Glass Ceiling Commission .  ( 1995 )  . A solid investment : Making full use of the nation ’ s human capital . 
Washington , DC : U . S . Government Printing Office . 
Kowalski , T .  ,  & Brunner , C .  ( 2005 )  . The school superintendent : Roles , challenges , and issues . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , 
SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 142–167 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Shakeshaft , C .  ( 1999 )  . The struggle to create a more genderinclusive profession . In J . Murphy & K . Louis ( Eds .  )  , The
handbook of research on educational administration ( 2nd
ed .  , pp . 99–118 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
 SEXUALITY , THEORIES OF
Scholarship on sexuality quite frequently begins with a
set of definitions . This is a wise move in a field that is
rapidly expanding in the academy yet comparatively
underdeveloped in education . Given that the terminology is complex and much of it refers to concepts that
are not fixed , definitions are imperative . Gender , the
socially constructed roles , behaviors , and expectations
regarding what it means to be male and female , shifts
over time and between cultures and varies from person
to person . Sex is defined biologically , although this
concept cannot be reduced to a simple pairing of
chromosomes ; common variations exist between XX 
( female ) and XY ( male )  , and millions of intersexed
people are born with or develop physical ambiguities
that preclude sex classification on the basis of visual
inspection . Some people are transgendered ; their gender identity does not correspond to their biological sex . 
Sexual orientation is a state of being ; it has to do
with whom one is drawn to , emotionally and sexually . 
Heterosexual people are attracted to people of the
opposite sex , gay men and lesbians are attracted to
people of the same sex , and bisexual people are
attracted to people of the opposite sex and the same
sex . All people have a basic sexual orientation , 
whether or not they engage in sexual behavior . People
who are uncomfortable claiming a sexual orientation
identity are referred to as questioning . Many people
have reclaimed the word queer as a term of empowerment . Some use it primarily as an inclusive term for
all people who have a homosexual or bisexual orientation and for those who are intersexed or transgendered . Others use it to emphasize the complexity and
fluid nature of human sexuality and gender , to deconstruct the dominant belief in a heterosexual / homosexual
binary . 
The question of what determines one ’ s sexual orientation is as much ( if not more ) about politics and culture
as it is about science . Before the sexologists of the late
nineteenth century suggested that one ’ s sexual desires
were tied to an inherent characteristic , sexual behavior
was explained as an act of free choice . The dominant
culture classified homosexual behavior as a moral transgression generally , but an act of free choice nonetheless . 
Later , when sexologists such as Havelock Ellis theorized about women ’ s sexual desires for other women , 
their science attributed “ sexual inversion ” to genetics
even as concerns about the influence of feminism interpolated their writings . Throughout the twentieth century , scientists offered an array of psychological and
biological theories to explain sexual orientation , and
claims for tipping the scale toward “ nature ” or “ nurture ” 
headline newsmagazines still today . It is generally
accepted among scholars , however , that a multifactor
model is most accurate ; sexual orientation is quite likely
the product of biological disposition and environmental
factors and , some would add , free choice . 
Although same-sex desire is known to have existed
across centuries and cultures , the notion of homosexuality dates to the late nineteenth century . Throughout
the 1980s , historians debated whether or not same-sex
identity has existed across time . Essentialists argued
that people who loved people of their own sex have
always incorporated this aspect of their lives into their
sense of self and that they were conscious that their
sexual orientation set them apart from others . Social
constructionists countered that social forces shape
human identities ; that is , certain social conditions were
necessary before one could conceive of an identity
based on sexual orientation . To be sure , they argued , 
people are aware of particular human differences such
as sexual orientation or skin color , but these are not
always the basis for constructing one ’ s sense of self . 
Although some activists still call up the essentialist
argument for political purposes , in recent years , this
debate has subsided among historians . In the give-andtake of scholarly discourse , writers have clarified their
perspectives , moved from the extremes of the theoretical poles , and acknowledged some critical observations
in both theories . The social constructionist approach , 
fitting so well with the historian ’ s disciplinary practice
of setting events in their political-economic context , 
now provides the major theoretical framework for
scholarship in gay and lesbian history . 
Most of the lesbian / gay / bisexual / transgendered / 
queer ( LGBTQ ) scholarship and activism in the field
Sexuality , Theories Of———929
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 929
of education generated since 1990 is anchored in liberal theories that focus on the role of the public school
in sustaining a democratic , civil society . Scholars and
educators have done important work in arguing on
behalf of students ’ fundamental right to a safe , nurturing learning environment and , less successfully , for a
workplace free of discrimination for teachers and
administrators . In Nabozny v . Podlesny ( 1996 )  , the first
case of its kind to advance to trial , a U . S . federal court
examined the record of school-sanctioned violence in
the Ashland , Wisconsin , school district and found the
district guilty of gender and sexual orientation discrimination . Given the severity of antigay harassment in schools across the nation as documented by
the research of groups such as the Gay , Lesbian and
Straight Education Network ( GLSEN )  , it is clear that
liberal standards for tolerance and equity have yet to
be met . But advances are being made on this front , 
as indicated by students ’ well-founded application of
the Equal Access Act to the proliferation and defense
of gay-straight student alliances . Legal protections for
LGBTQ educators have lagged behind those just
beginning to surface for students ; however , the 2003
Lawrence v . Texas decision may prove a critical lever
in wrenching educational employment practices free
of discrimination based on sexual orientation . 
In addition to trying to secure the basic rights to
learn and to work in a safe and equitable school environment , liberal and critical theorists recognize the
importance of one ’ s right to know and thus argue for
the inclusion of issues of sexuality in the K–12 curriculum . Pragmatism underscores the liberal argument . If schools are to prepare students for life in a
democracy , the learning should include information
about all citizens . Children and adolescents already
encounter information ( and misinformation ) about
sexuality in American culture , and they are curious
about the topic ; it is the school ’ s responsibility to present accurate information about human sexuality . 
Educators from a range of theoretical perspectives
recognize that an intellectually honest curriculum
must include LGBTQ issues . Human sexuality is a
part of life and , therefore , a part of history , literature , 
arts , and sciences . Critical theorists emphasize the
connections between knowledge and power . They
argue that acknowledging issues of sexuality in the
curriculum and school structure will not only benefit
LGBTQ students and those who have LGBTQ family
members in the short term but also may lead to significant social transformation . For instance , homophobia is
closely tied to gender restrictions . As long as schools
reinforce limited notions of gender and heterosexist
assumptions , they shut off educational opportunities
for all students . 
Among critical theory scholars , queer theorists have
the most to say about the problems inherent in analyses
that focus nearly exclusively on victimization and oppression of LGBTQ people . They consciously reject the
essentializing tendency to see the school-student relationship as a fixed , oppressor-oppressed relation and claim
agency for both LGBTQ students and educational institutions . Queer legal theory , in particular , offers a framework
worthy of consideration by those seeking to go beyond
the most basic principles of protection . It is akin to feminist legal theory , critical race theory , and gay and lesbian
legal theory , but its multidimensionality curbs propensities of the other theories toward gender essentialism , heteronormativity , or racist and classist assumptions . Queer
legal theory challenges legal and social structures that
require LGBTQ people to hide or distort their identities in
exchange for full access to these systems . 
—Karen Graves
See also discrimination ; feminism and theories of leadership ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; Hay , Henry 
( Harry )  ; homophobia ; lesbian / gay / bisexual / transgender
issues in education ; multiculturalism ; queer theory
Further Readings and References
Barnard , I .  ( 2005 )  . Queer race . New York : Peter Lang . 
Halperin , D .  ( 2002 )  . How to do the history of homosexuality . 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Jordan , M .  ( 2005 )  . Blessing same-sex unions : The perils of
queer romance and their confusions of Christian marriage . 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Lawrence et al . v . Texas , 41 S . W . 3d 349 ( 2003 )  . 
Nabozny v . Podlesny , 92 F . 3d 446 ( 7th Cir .  )  ( 1996 )  . 
Renold , E .  ( 2005 )  . Girls , boys and junior sexualities . New
York : Routledge . 
Robinson , P .  ( 2005 )  . Queer wars : The new gay right and its
critics . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Shoho , A .  , Merchant , B .  ,  & Lugg , C .  ( 2005 )  . Social justice : 
Seeking a common language . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 47–67 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 SIMON , HERBERT
American polymath , intellectual virtuoso , and
Renaissance man are among the terms used to describe
930———Simon , Herbert
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 930
Herbert A . Simon ( 1916–2001 )  , whose pioneering
contributions to problem-solving and decision-making
processes of individuals and organizations won him
worldwide recognition . A professor of computer
science and psychology at Carnegie Mellon University
from 1949 until his death in 2001 , Simon described
himself as a mathematical , social , and behavioral scientist when he received the Nobel Prize for economics in 1978 . Yet his interests and accomplishments
spanned several fields , including political science , 
organizational theory , game theory , economics , public
administration , cognitive psychology , and artificial intelligence . Simon , though , stayed focused on the philosophy of physics and the use of computers for simulating
human cognition throughout his career . 
Simon was influenced strongly by his excellent
public school education in Milwaukee and ably supported at home by an electrical engineer father and
pianist mother . His interest in the social sciences was
stimulated by the psychology and economics books of
his uncle , Harold Merkel . Recognizing inherent internal cognitive limitations ( including knowledge , experience , self-interest , and power drives ) and external
social constraints of individuals , he advocated the
notion of satisficing , which describes the “ good
enough ” choices and decisions that people make . 
These limited rational choice-making abilities of individuals Simon called “ bounded rationality ,  ” indicating
that people are incapable of objectively processing the
overwhelming information and decision alternatives
available to them . 
A second concept that Simon used to characterize
bounded rationality was selective search , which decision makers use to explore alternatives . Both concepts , satisficing and searching , were founded on
the psychological theories of dynamic goal setting
and levels of individual aspiration , outlined by Kurt
Lewin . Simon ’ s explorations of human choice and
decision making in administration , which also incorporate his scientific inquiry into expertise and budgeting , provide the central theme in Administrative
Behavior . 
Simon ’ s passion for understanding how people
think and process information led him to write The
Sciences of the Artificial . Here , he made a compelling
case for teaching pattern recognition to all learners to
help them develop problem-solving strategies and
purposeful self-directed learning . With an abundance
of information available from people , print , media , 
and the Internet , Simon redefined knowledge as the
ability to find and use information and learning as
changes that allow systems to adapt and perform
better with repeated attempts . 
Simon ’ s autobiography , Models of My Life , provides a vivid description of his extraordinary life . 
His departmental Web pages , maintained at Carnegie
Mellon University , link to articles on how he enriched
the life of his colleagues ; his research in psychology , 
economics , philosophy of science , and computer
science ; and his publications from 1930 to 2001 . The
prolific Simon authored over 25 books and 1 , 000 articles . His legacy will continue to engage and challenge
researchers in a broad range of disciplines . 
—Nathan Balasubramanian and Rodney Muth
See also administration , theories of ; behaviorism ; cognition , 
theories of ; decision making ; economics , theories of ; feedback ; human capital ; organizational theories ; problem solving ; productivity ; psychology , types of ; satisficing , theory of
Further Readings and References
English , F .  ( 1994 )  . Theory in educational administration . New
York : HarperCollins . 
Simon , H .  ( 1996 )  . The sciences of the artificial ( 3rd ed .  )  . 
Cambridge : MIT Press . 
Simon , H .  ( 1997 )  . Administrative behavior : A study of decision-making processes in administrative organizations ( 4th
ed .  )  . New York : Macmillan . 
Willower , D .  ,  & Forsyth , P .  ( 1999 )  . A brief history of scholarship on educational administration . In J . Murphy & K . Louis 
( Eds .  )  , Handbook of research on educational administration ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 1–14 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
 SITE-BASED MANAGEMENT
Site-based management in schools was promoted in
the early 1980s as a way to decentralize and democratize educational policy making and to involve those
closest to the child and classroom in decisions . Sitebased approaches to management usually involve a
council , committee , or team made up of building
administrators , teachers , and parents at each school . 
Ironically , the effective schools research of roughly the
same period called for “ strong ” leadership in schools
in the form of a principal capable of “ turning a school
around .  ” However , trends in the field of business
administration called for devolving greater decision
making to workers through teams or “ quality circles .  ” 
Site-Based Management———931
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 931
While this devolution of decision making in business
was limited to relatively trivial decisions and was
largely viewed as a way to increase production rather
than to empower workers , it has become confused
in the minds of many with democratic management
that links shop floor democracy with broad forms of
empowerment that involve the right to organize
unions . 
Research on site-based management has shown
that bringing diverse stakeholders to the table is no
guarantee that power will be devolved or that students
will learn more . 
Betty Malen and Rod Ogawa studied shared governance arrangements in schools in Salt Lake City that
were set up with near-ideal conditions . All relevant
stakeholders were included and given broad jurisdiction , policy-making authority , parity protections , and
training provisions . Existing literature suggests that
such conditions should enable teachers and parents to
wield significant influence on significant issues . 
However , Malen and Ogawa found that although the
site councils were authorized policymakers , they functioned as ancillary advisors and pro forma endorsers . 
Second , while teachers and parents were granted parity , 
principals and professionals controlled the partnerships . Third , although teachers and parents had access
to decision-making arenas , their inclusion maintained , 
not altered , the decision-making relationships typically and traditionally found in schools . 
According to Malen and Ogawa ’ s findings , the
lack of parent and teacher influence was due to the fact
that principals ultimately controlled knowledge and
resources in the school , defended administrative “ turf ,  ” 
and viewed the councils as channels for dispensing
information , moderating criticisms , and garnering support . They were not viewed as arenas for redefining
roles , sharing power , or making policy . Teachers did
not challenge administrative authority because they
feared social and professional sanction , or else , as was
the case for many issues , they shared a common professional perspective with administration . Parents
tended to lack “ insider ” information and familiarity
and were unclear on the parameters of their power . 
They also shared many characteristics , and thus interests , with the teachers and principals ( i . e .  , middle class , 
Caucasian , and well educated )  . Furthermore , council
agendas were generally controlled by principals ( even
though the councils were chaired by parents ) and confined to safe issues . Institutional norms of propriety
and civility kept principals , teachers , and parents on
traditional turf and cast disagreements as personal
affronts , thus restricting discussion , suppressing conflict , and confining discussions to noncontroversial
matters . Finally , because district oversight of site council regulations and procedures was minimal , they were
often disregarded . Thus , the micropolitics of participation are such that even when participation is carefully
orchestrated , most often , power and influence remain in
the same hands . 
More current versions or shared governance , often
referred to as “ distributed leadership ” promote more
teacher-centered approaches to professional development , instructional leadership , and evaluation , such as
peer assistance and review ( PAR )  . Distributed leadership
also aims at “ involving ” parents and building “ partnerships ” with local communities , businesses , and social
service agencies . These are all attempts at expanding
leadership more widely and deepening the conversations
that can take place when schools move from bureaucratic
designs toward learning communities . However , while
teachers have acquired greater involvement through distributed leadership , much of this autonomy has been
curbed by current accountability measures and in many
cases mandated scripted instructional packages . 
Furthermore , current versions of site-based management have still failed to provide significant community
involvement . Emerging approaches to community
involvement in low-income communities include using
organized community groups to leverage influence and
build alliances with schools in order to pursue common
interests Greater community involvement encourages
stronger forms of democracy that view participation as
a basic right at all levels of the system . 
Gary Anderson developed a conceptual frame
that might aid in determining the degree of authenticity
of participatory practices in site-based management . 
This framework consists of five central questions :  
( a ) Participation toward what end ?  ( b ) Who participates ?  ( c ) What are relevant spheres of participation ?  
( d ) What conditions and processes must be present
locally to make participation authentic ?  ( e ) What conditions and processes must be present at broader institutional and societal levels to make participation
authentic ? Addressing issues of authenticity promises
to bring greater clarity to why schools engage in sitebased management . Ideally , more democratic management can be both a means to more humane and
productive organizations as well as an end in itself . 
—Gary L . Anderson
932———Site-Based Management
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 932
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; 
Chicago school reform ; decentralization / centralization
controversy ; decision making ; division of labor ; Kentucky
Education Reform Act ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , 
participatory ; leadership effectiveness ; management theories ; 
principalship ; school districts , history and development
Further Readings and References
Anderson , G . L .  ( 1999 )  . Toward authentic participation : 
Deconstructing the discourse of participatory reforms . 
American Educational Research Journal , 35 , 571–606 . 
Brown , K .  ( 2005 )  . Pivotal points : History , development , and
promise of the principalship . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE
handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 109–141 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Burrello , L .  , Hoffman , L .  ,  & Murray , L .  ( 2004 )  . School leaders
building capacity from within . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Corwin Press . 
Goodman , J .  , Baron , D .  ,  & Myers , C .  ( 2005 )  . Constructing a
democratic foundation for school-based reform : The local
politics of school autonomy and internal governance . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE handbook of educational leadership 
( pp . 297–332 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Malen , B .  ,  & Ogawa , R .  ( 1988 )  . Professional-patron influence
on site-based governance councils : A confounding case
study . Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 10 , 
251–270 . 
 SIZEMORE , BARBARA A . 
Called by her contemporaries “ the complete educator ,  ” 
Barbara Ann Sizemore ( 1927–2004 ) spent 57 years in
education , from classroom teacher , high school principal , and professor to college dean . She was an activist , 
a practitioner , and an outspoken realist , challenging
both Whites and Blacks with her passion and pursuit
of what she believed to be the truth . 
Dr . Sizemore was born in 1927 in Chicago , Illinois , 
and spent her early years in Terre Haute , Indiana . At 16 , 
she graduated from high school and went to Northwestern University , where she studied Latin , graduating
with a BA in classical languages in 1947 and an MA in
elementary education in 1954 . She worked in the
Chicago Public Schools from 1947 through 1972 as a
classroom teacher and high school principal . She earned
her PhD in educational administration from the
University of Chicago in 1979 . When she was appointed
to the superintendency of the Washington , D . C .  , public
schools , she was the first African American woman to
become the leader of that troubled school district . Her
leadership there was tumultuous and lasted only from
1973 to 1975 . Many believe that Dr . Sizemore ’ s vision
was far ahead of the times . As always , she displayed a
commitment to community involvement and the establishment of high standards . 
After leaving the nation ’ s capitol , Dr . Sizemore
became a professor at the University of Pittsburgh
from 1977 to 1992 , even serving as chair of her department . She specialized in performing research on highachieving schools serving mostly African American
students , and she wrote about how they had accomplished their tasks when so many other schools were
failing . In 1992 , Dr . Sizemore became the inaugural
dean of the School of Education at DePaul University , 
in Chicago . She continued her role as activist-scholar
and assisting low-performing schools to become high
performing . She was a keen observer of sociopolitical
trends , and her final book , Walking in Circles : The
Black Struggle for School Reform , documents how
African Americans were turning back to some of the
same remedies they had earlier abandoned . She has
been portrayed as having a “ take no prisoners voice ” 
and exemplified “ the power of the lived agenda .  ” Her
idea that the change agent had to have a platform of
power to confront power was based on her insight into
social systems change , closely paralleling those of the
great Chicago community activist Saul Alinsky . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also Bethune , Mary McLeod ; Black education ; civil rights
movement ; Coppin , Fanny Jackson ; critical race theory ; critical theory ; cultural politics , wars ; curriculum , theories of ; 
diversity ; Du Bois , W . E . B .  ; equality , in schools ; intelligence ; 
minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; parental involvement ; underachievers , in schools ; Washington , Booker T .  ; 
women in educational leadership ; Woodson , Carter G . 
Further Readings and References
Lee , C .  ( 2004 , November )  . In memoriam : Remembering
Barbara Ann Sizemore ( 1927–2004 )  . Educational
Researcher , 33 ( 8 )  , 37 . 
Sizemore , B .  ( 2005 )  . Walking in circles : The Black struggle for
school reform . Chicago : Third World Press . 
 SKINNER , B . F . 
B . F . Skinner ( 1904–1990 ) was one of the most important
influences in education . His work with reinforcement
Skinner , B . F . ———933
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 933
schedules provides a foundation for effective instruction . His work on the development , elimination , and
control of behavior is reflected in both instructional
and administrative procedures . In addition , his analytical approach to the understanding of behavior underpins practices in all areas of education . 
Skinner was born in 1904 in Susquehanna , Pennsylvania . As an undergraduate , he attended Hamilton College
and majored in English . Skinner later attended Harvard , 
receiving his PhD in psychology in 1931 . Following
graduation , he spent 5 years in a postdoctoral position with Crogier Laboratory and 3 as a junior fellow 
( Harvard ’ s most prestigious position for a young scholar )  . 
From 1945 to 1948 , Skinner was chairman of the
Psychology Department at Indiana University . In 1948 , 
he returned to Harvard , where he remained until his
retirement . He is one of only three behavioral scientists
to have received the President ’ s Medal of Science . He
has been referred to as the “ most-well-known psychologist since Freud .  ” Skinner has become more closely
identified with “ behaviorism ” or “ behavioral psychology ” than any other individual . 
In his studies of reinforcement schedules , Skinner
provided findings that had a regularity and specificity
that rivaled those of any physical scientist . Skinner
demonstrated that particular schedules of reinforcement generated characteristic and replicable learningresponse curves . In essence , he found that steady rates
of learning ( a desirable condition ) could be established and maintained via intermittent schedules in
which the delivery of reinforcement varied according
to an average rate and therefore was unpredictable to
the subject . Fixed schedules , defined by reinforcement delivery according to a specific time interval or
number of responses , resulted in rates of learning exemplified by pauses in the learning curve . 
Skinner also studied the effect of reinforcement
on “ shaping ” up or developing new behaviors in
his subjects . His concept of continuously reinforcing
successive approximations of a target behavior was
employed in a variety of studies involving developing
novel behaviors in animals . 
Skinner ’ s assumption that all behavior is purposeful
and subject to the laws of behaviorism implies the
possibility of behavioral control . Skinner preferred the
term control , as the development and management of
behavior involved control of either ( or both ) antecedent
and consequent events . He consistently argued that the
study of behavior was based on the consideration of
how it ( the behavior ) was related to antecedents and
consequences . For educational leaders , Skinner ’ s work
is relevant in that both conditions are often amenable to
manipulation . Therefore , the control of others ’ behavior 
( e . g .  , students , teachers , parents ) becomes more easily
achieved and predictable . 
In the study of behavior , Skinner held that a functional analysis was the most appropriate approach . By this , 
he meant an analysis of observable and measurable behavior based upon the antecedent-behavior-consequence
relationship . His work and writing in this area became
the foundation of applied behavior analysis . 
Skinner ’ s perspective and focus on observable
behavior under conscious control , learning , behavior
change , and the development of new behaviors is of
particular interest to educators . His theory is particularly relevant to special education , child development , 
and classroom management . 
—J . M . Blackbourn
See also behaviorism ; child development theories ; classroom
management ; differentiation of stimuli ; discipline in
schools ; feedback ; knowledge base , of the field ; learning , 
theories of ; measurement , theories of ; rational organizational theory ; scientific management ; schooling effects ; 
special education ; supervision ; theory movement , in educational administration ; variables
Further Readings and References
Cyert , R .  ,  & March , J .  ( 1963 )  . A behavioral theory of the firm . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Fielding , M .  ( 2005 )  . Quality behaviour management in
schools . New York : Routledge . 
Owen , R .  ( 1987 )  . Organizational behavior in education . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Skinner , B . F .  ( 1953 )  . Science and human behavior . New York : 
Macmillan . 
Skinner , B . F .  ( 1964 )  . Behaviorism at fifty . In T . W . Wann ( Ed )  , 
Behaviorism and phenomenology : Contrasting bases for
modern psychology ( pp . 79–97 )  . Chicago : University of
Chicago Press . 
 SOCIAL CAPITAL
Like other forms of capital , such as financial capital , 
social capital refers to the available resources upon
which an individual or a community can draw . In
the case of social capital , the resources are formed
by people ’ s networks and relationships . The two main
theorists of social capital as applied to education are
934———Social Capital
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 934
James Coleman and Robert Putnam . Coleman ’ s work
stems from his 1966 report , which indicated that
family background accounts for student achievement
more than variations in schools do . His subsequent
work comparing the greater success of private school
students to that of public school students expanded
the role of family background to include all the social
resources available to a student . The greater success of
students in religious private schools was attributable
to the overlapping , cross-generational social networks
provided by the partnerships among families , church , 
and school . Coleman defined these partnerships as
social capital , which pertained to the norms , the
social networks , and the relationships between adults
and children that were of value for the child ’ s growing
up . Social capital existed within the family but also
outside the family , in the community . Within the family , 
social capital depended upon the strength of parents ’ 
relationships with their children . Coleman found , for
example , that even when controlling for parents ’ socioeconomic status , dropout rates for high school students
were lowest when there were two parents , only one
sibling to share parental attention , and mothers who
expected their children to attend college . Thus , a family ’ s
social capital increases children ’ s socioeconomic success , or the children ’ s human capital . Outside of the
family , social capital depends upon people ’ s sense of
obligation and reciprocity , like quid pro quo , within a
community . 
Putnam ’ s work in 2000 concentrated on the social
capital sustained by communities , arguing that social
capital helped people resolve collective problems , created trust which made transactions less costly , and
fostered positive character traits such as tolerance and
empathy . Based on measures such as the number of
per capita social organizations and turnout in presidential elections , he developed a social capital index
for each state . He then correlated that index with
the Annie E . Casey Foundation ’ s Kids Count index , 
which included measures such as the teen birthrate
and percentage of children in poverty . States ranked as
high in social capital were also high on the Kids
Count Index and had higher scores on standardized
tests . He argued that greater social capital indicated
that parents and communities were more involved
with their schools . Again , this involvement was independent of socioeconomic status . 
Additional research on social capital has indicated
that it is positively related to student success . As an
example at the family level , in 1995 , F . F . Furstenberg
and M . E . Hughes measured social capital with 
 “ within family ” constructs , such as involvement with
an extended family , and “ family links to community ,  ” 
such as quality of school . They found that both of
these constructs were positively related to students ’ 
socioeconomic success , even when controlling for
family socioeconomic status . 
In 2001 , Glenn Israel , Lionel Beaulieu , and Glen
Hartless reported that social capital in both the family
and the community were associated with educational
achievement , and they argued that states should work to
strengthen the capacity of families as well as schools , 
perhaps by means of parental education programs . 
Anthony Bryk , Valerie Lee , and Peter Holland complemented Coleman ’ s work with religious schools by
finding that Catholic school students were more successful partly because of the relationships between
school , family , and church . Public schools can also foster social capital . Mary Driscoll and Charles Kerchner
asserted that school leaders should be aware of how
to create social capital within their schools . They suggested that administrators create programs to involve
parents and include parents in site-based management
programs . School leaders can change structures and
scheduling to foster social capital by means of small
schools , schools within schools , teaming , and looping . 
A number of school reforms ( e . g .  , the Coalition for
Essential Schools and the Small Schools movement ) 
have attempted to formalize these kinds of structures . 
Administrators can also encourage positive teacher
and student interactions . In 2001 , R . G . Croninger and
V . E . Lee investigated the role that teachers played in
providing students with social capital , based on
teachers ’ reports about whether they ’ d talked with
students about school or other items and on students ’ 
reported beliefs about how much their teachers
support their school success . Powerfully , they noted
that if these two forms of social capital provided by
teachers were present , the probability of students ’ 
dropping out decreased by half and that these effects
were most powerful for at-risk students . 
At least one educational effort has attempted to
institutionalize social capital by building its capacity
from the beginning . An evaluation of the first 4 1 / 2
years of a Chicago foundation ’ s creation of a neighborhood learning network focused on one of the foundation ’ s goals , to establish social trust between school
principals , neighborhood leaders , and the foundation . 
While this effort was successful , the partners ’ 
attempts to build trust by being flexible led to less
Social Capital———935
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 935
clarity about goals , norms , and priorities , which led to
lack of focus and accountability . The researchers suggested that structures that promote elements of social
capital , such as trust , may exclude structures that
promote a coherent vision and accountability . 
Research on social capital thus provides support
for strong relationships between schools and the
families and communities they serve , as well as for
strong relationships between students and staff within
schools . 
—Joanne M . Marshall
See also at-risk students ; class , social ; community relations ; 
cultural capital ; dropout ; human capital ; parental involvement ; social context ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Bryk , A . S .  , Lee , V . E .  ,  & Holland , P . B .  ( 1993 )  . Catholic
schools and the common good . Cambridge , MA : Harvard
University Press . 
Coleman , J . S .  ( 1966 )  . Equality of educational opportunity . 
Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Health , Education , 
and Welfare . 
Croninger , R . G .  ,  & Lee , V . E .  ( 2001 )  . Social capital and dropping out of high school : Benefits to at-risk students of
teachers ’ support and guidance . Teachers College Record , 
103 , 548–581 . 
Driscoll , M . E .  ,  & Kerchner , C . T .  ( 1999 )  . The implications
of social capital for schools , communities , and cities : 
Educational administration as if a sense of place mattered . In
J . Murphy & K . S . Louis ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of research on
educational administration : A project of the American educational research association . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Furstenberg , F . F .  ,  & Hughes , M . E .  ( 1995 )  . Social capital and
successful development among at-risk youth . Journal of
Marriage and the Family , 57 , 580–592 . 
Israel , G . D .  , Beaulieu , L . J .  ,  & Hartless , G .  ( 2001 )  . The influence of family and community social capital on educational
achievement . Rural Sociology , 66 ( 1 )  , 43–68 . 
Putnam , R . D .  ( 2000 )  . Bowling alone : The collapse and
revival of American community . New York : Simon & 
Schuster . 
 SOCIAL CONTEXT
Social context is the broad framework for understanding that learning occurs in a specific constellation
of personal interactions and effects . There are two
aspects of social context in schools : literacy is the key
to unlocking a world of interaction , while at the same
time interaction within school is the key to unlocking
the world of literacy . 
There are several social purposes for schools in
terms of preparing students for civic life and to transmit a knowledge base ( cultural literacy )  , but in terms
of social learning theory , school simply provides
a context for a student to make meaning of the experience . Schools try to establish effective learning
environments within classrooms in order to increase
achievement and therefore opportunities for students
to change themselves and their contexts . Educational
leaders are therefore interested in analyzing and
improving the social context within schools , while
understanding the students ’ contexts outside of school
and the school ’ s context . In addition , as seen in state
and national standards , all educators are expected to
understand the diversity of student background and
how to structure an optimal learning environment that
includes positive rapport . The goal is to control negative and distracting student behavior that would intimidate other students from participating in the
discussions necessary to develop ideas . 
Social context is a key factor in current ideologies of
teaching and learning . Behaviorist models of learning
identify social context as external influences on motivation and perception in an effort to codify predictable
human behavior using the scientific method . Classroom
management is often equated with discipline policies
for controlling bad behavior with consequences and
incentives , based on behavior modification principles . 
William Glasser considered this approach coercive and
recommended a quality-schools approach that included
metacognition . In contrast , there are several critical
theories , in that they assume the context will continuously change and that human response is therefore not
completely predictable . Few educators embrace the
most radical constructivism that argues that all knowledge is socially constructed , that is , exists only in as
much as society agrees on it . 
The more practical ideology of sociopsychological constructivism considers social context not only
influential but also essential for learning because
knowledge is constructed by the individual who is
compelled to find personal meaning in experience . 
The developmental theories of Jean Piaget and Lev
Vygotsky emphasized the importance of interacting
with objects and people . John Dewey maintained that
school is not a preparation for life , but it is life . This
emphasis on the relevance of study to the student ’ s
real world was a major component of the Progressive
936———Social Context
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 936
movement , based on his philosophy , which began
with child study . 
Another branch of constructivism , reconstructionism , regards schools as the vehicle for improving the
social order . An early example was William James , who
not only popularized the new field of psychology but
also worked tirelessly for peace , and George Counts , 
who dared schools to attempt social reform . This legacy
may be seen in a current concept of the ideal social
context in school : a community of learners wherein all
members—students , faculty , staff , families—are deliberately and continuously expected to change for the
better as individuals and as a culture . In the last half of
the twentieth century , greater scrutiny of social context
for students traditionally marginalized due to minority
status resulted in legislation , such as Public Law 94-
142 and Title IX of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act ( ESEA )  , and court cases , such as Brown
v . Board of Education ( 1954 )  , to address equity of
access . Schools are therefore the child as well as the
change agent of social context . 
Despite the ideals behind the federal mandates and
incentives , there remain strong local cultures that
resist adjusting the social context . There is a strong
and vocal segment of American society that seeks to
limit the school ’ s role in defining the social context by
narrowing the focus to acquisition of essential knowledge and skills , which clearly favors students of
advantaged backgrounds . The recent reenactment of
ESEA , also known as the No Child Left Behind
Act , emphasized the achievement of “ adequate yearly
progress ” in academic objectives and the use of researchbased methods to achieve them . In the high-stakes
aftermath , many educators report a trend away from
community involvement and holistic projects that are
associated with social context goals . 
Technology is another important factor in current
social context . Students with cell phones are able to
instant message ( IM ) their friends in every possible
context , thus extending their private networks and
limiting the scope of a teacher to develop a cohesive
community of learners within the classroom . By the
same token , instant and mass communication make it
possible to monitor and analyze student performance
to an astonishing degree that , ideally , can inform
instructional decisions to meet the needs of individual
differences . At the same time , mass communication
has created a more cohesive culture with shared entertainment experiences that include models of society . 
There is an active strand of educational inquiry regarding
the optimal means to foster an online learning community that replicates or improves on the face-to-face
interaction possible on campus ; a similar conversation
concerns the advantage of interactive instructional
methods even in large lecture classes , using handheld
devices to signal opinion or comprehension for immediate assessment of the class ’ s learning . Finally , the
publication of assessment data has created a national
social context in response to reforms such as the No
Child Left Behind Act , which eliminates the autonomy and isolation that has obscured the differences in
social context among school environments . 
Narrative studies , such as Dan Lortie ’ s Schoolteachers , and theoretical works , such as C . S . Lewis ’ s
Abolition of Man , have inspired thoughtful analysis of
school context . A related concept is the hidden curriculum , which includes not only what students are
failing to learn as a result of the school environment
but also what unintended life lessons are being constructed by the students ’ efforts to find meaning in
their everyday lives . For example , it is highly ironic for
students to learn about democratic principles in an
environment governed authoritatively ; it is similarly
paradoxical for teachers to promote collaboration
among their students if the faculty , as a result of policies and proximity , are marginalized from decisions
and isolated in their experiences . The sad conclusion
of John Gatto , an award-winning teacher , is that no
matter how good the teachers or how progressive the
texts , it is the structure of the school system that is
the dominant factor in a child ’ s education , teaching
them to obey without question , give the answer that is
expected , do only what is demanded , and conform at
all costs . He has since left public schools and now
champions homeschooling , a practice widely criticized
for its limited social context . 
John Goodlad ’ s body of work combined qualitative and quantitative data to establish an authoritative
voice in the area of school effects research . The effort
to identify effective teaching practice is confounded
by external validity limitations , that is , the difficulty
in generalizing findings to new contexts . The great
variety of interacting social context factors were a
challenge to the neat experimental designs considered
most valid ; the simplest demographic data ( i . e .  , age , 
gender , ethnicity ) became routine in order to establish
similarity in samples . Kurt Lewin ’ s field theory provided a framework for considering social context ; his
other contribution was action research , widely embraced
by schools to evaluate an educational innovation in the
Social Context———937
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 937
local context . Systems theories , including Bowen ’ s
family systems and Urie Bronfenbrenner ’ s ecological
model , consider microsystems , mesosystems , and
macrosystems to understand a dynamic interaction . The
emerging field of ecopsychology focuses on stressors
to systems . 
With more sophisticated statistical procedures , it is
now possible to consider multiple factors simultaneously , and a more nuanced portrait may be described . 
In its landmark 1997 report , the National Center for
Education Statistics found the social context ( i . e .  , language , socioeconomic status , and family structure ) 
was significantly correlated with school success and , 
incidentally , minority status . High-poverty schools
reported less parent involvement , more disruptive and
aggressive behavior , and greater absenteeism , creating
a less effective learning environment . The physical context , such as the building , materials , and equipment , are
actually indicators of social context , for they are highly
correlated with economic resources and the education
level of the community . Poverty is therefore a more
complex construct than a student qualifying for
free or reduced lunch , the most common measure of
socioeconomic status . Much more difficult to measure is the composite of factors creating the learning
environment . 
Ultimately , social context figures in the nature versus
nurture debate . The early field of psychology developed into social psychology and sociology with an
assortment of theories addressing the nature of people . 
Alfred Adler departed from Freud ’ s drive-dependent
psychoanalytic approach to suggest the influence of
teaching and also the importance of a social interest ; 
his student , Carl Rogers , proposed client-centered
therapy , which encouraged a learner-centered pedagogy . These theories have greatly influenced schools , 
ranging from models of comprehensive counseling 
( school-based interagency collaborations ) to cooperative learning groups . In fact , there is no educational
innovation with a broader and more authoritative
research base than cooperative learning ; in sum , personal and cognitive adjustment as well as learning
environment tend to be positively influenced by its use . 
One component of cooperative learning is the direct
instruction of social skills needed for successful cooperation . There are many programs designed for schoolwide intervention to foster a healthy climate and
incidentally manage behavior . Information is provided
not only about social contexts but also in social skills
to successfully navigate them . This is sometimes
categorized as guidance curriculum , but is lately
appearing in state academic standards in areas such as
communication , social studies , and health . Failure to
engage in the social fabric of the school was given in
explanation of the Columbine High School massacre , 
in which two boys opened fire at a Colorado high
school , prompting efforts nationwide to prevent isolation and malaise that could result in violence . 
Social context is important not only in how students
learn but also in the scope and sequence of the curriculum . Hilda Taba ’ s expanding horizons model organized investigations of the world , beginning with the
child ’ s family , then proceeding to ever-larger circles
of influence . The social context of the school therefore
includes controlling negative and distracting student
behavior that would intimidate other students from
participating in the discussions necessary to develop
ideas , and deliberate efforts to coordinate the students ’ 
life experiences in and out of school . 
—Naomi Jeffery Petersen
See also behaviorism ; character education ; classification of
education ; classroom management ; cognition , theories of ; 
egocentrism , theories of ; esteem needs ; ethnocentrism ; 
hierarchical developmental models ; intelligence ; learning
environments ; literacy , theories of ; mental illness , in adults
and children ; metacognition ; motivation , theories of ; 
psychology , types of ; schooling effects ; self-actualization ; 
social psychology
Further Readings and References
Bandura , A .  ( 1997 )  . Self-efficacy : The exercise of control . New
York : Freeman . 
Bronfenbrenner , U .  ( 1977 )  . Toward an experimental ecology
of human development . American Psychologist , 32 , 
513–531 . 
Dewey , J .  ( 1907 )  . The school and society . Chicago : University
of Chicago Press . 
Dewey , J .  ( 1922 )  . Human nature and conduct : An introduction
to social psychology . New York : Modern Library . 
Gatto , J .  ( 1991 )  . Dumbing us down : The hidden curriculum of
compulsory schooling . New Society . 
Glasser , W .  ( 1992 )  . The quality school : Managing students
without coercion . New York : Harper & Row . 
Goodlad , J .  ( 1983 )  . A place called school . New York : 
McGraw-Hill . 
Lee , V .  ( 2000 )  . Using hierarchical linear modeling to study
social contexts : The case of school effects . Educational
Psychologist , 35 , 125–142 . 
Lewis , C . S .  ( 1947 )  . The abolition of man : Or , reflections on
education with special reference to the teaching of English
in the upper forms of schools . New York : Macmillan . 
938———Social Context
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 938
Lortie , D .  ( 1975 )  . Schoolteachers : A sociological study . 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Ornstein , J .  ( 2002 )  . Teaching and schooling in America : 
Pre- and Post-September 11 . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Wertsch , J .  ( 1985 )  . Vygotsky and the social formation of mind . 
Boston : Harvard University Press . 
 SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Social psychology is a branch of psychology concerned with the social behavior of human beings , how
humans influence and are influenced by each other , 
and how personal beliefs affect perception and create
a subjective reality . It is a field that applies scientific
methodology to explain and understand how human
behavior is influenced by the actual , imagined , or
implied presence of other persons . 
Unlike behaviorism , which is rooted in the microobjectivist , functionalist paradigm , social psychology
finds its foundation in the interpretivist , subjectivist
model . Group dynamics , conflict resolution , causal attributions , cognitive dissonance , interpersonal relationships , 
nonconformity , organizational environments , attitudes , 
stereotypes , and prejudice are all of concern and interest
to social psychologists . Social psychologists attempt to
understand how the relationships between the above
concepts impact human functioning . 
Kurt Lewin is generally considered the founder of
the discipline of social psychology . He developed field
theory based on the position that human behavior was
purposeful and a function of internal ( individual ) and
external ( environmental ) forces . Lewin employed the
process of force field analysis to better understand the
goal-directed and restraining forces that influence individual behavior . This process was adopted as a means
for understanding and explaining organizational behavior by Dr . W . Edwards Deming and is still employed as
a continuous improvement , managerial , and leadership
tool . Lewin ’ s work formed the basis for much of what
is considered “ best practices ” related to group dynamics and organizational behavior . 
Other noted social psychologists were Gordon
Allport , who studied stereotypes , prejudices , and attributions , and Art Combs , who focused on individual
perception and phenomenology . Allport ’ s work had a
significant impact on conflict resolution and interpersonal relationship development . Combs ’ s research has
recently come to the forefront and forms the foundation for the “ dispositions ” movement in teacher
education . His work has long influenced research in
the area of teacher / administrator perceptions . 
Albert Bandura , through his social learning theory , 
attempted to bridge the gap between social learning
theory and behaviorism . His position was that while
behavior change was affected by antecedents and consequences , observation of the behavior of others and
the consequences associated with that behavior was the
primary means by which human learning occurred . In
addition , reinforcement in such social learning situations was primarily vicarious rather than direct . The
process of modeling and imitation with associated
natural communities of reinforcement ( naturally
occurring reinforcers ) was seen as the basis for human
development . Bandura also felt that internal cognitive
processes , rooted in both the social structure and
mind , were employed to mediate between and connect
antecedents , behaviors , and associated consequences . 
Educational practices such as the emphasis on effective
role models , mentoring , field-based practica / internships , 
and “ shadowing ” have their foundation in Bandura ’ s
social learning theory . 
Social psychology has had a significant impact on
education , particularly educational leadership and
administration . Teacher perceptions of specific instructional practices , the nature of the postevaluative conference , and leadership effectiveness all have their
foundation in social psychology research . Administrator
methods for managing personnel , resolving organizational conflict , selecting new faculty , and designing
school organizations are also tied to this research . 
Social psychology has allowed professional educators to extend their study and understanding beyond
observable and measurable behaviors into the subjective areas of feelings , perceptions , values , and attitudes . 
In essence , social psychology has allowed educators to
examine and address those salient features of schools
and schooling that relate to persons as both individuals
and group members . Social psychology currently
seems to be evolving in a macrosubjectivist , humanistic
direction . Basically , contemporary social psychology
focuses on the connections that make up our interrelated social fabric . It is becoming a blend between psychology and sociology in which the impact of events , 
institutions , culture , community , social class , race , and
gender on thought , perception , and behavior is the primary focus . This position supports a developing perspective among social psychologists that human
behavior is significantly rooted in individual factors
and less deterministic than previously thought . 
Social Psychology———939
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 939
Social psychology has long been an integral part of
the field of education . Its new direction is more in line
with emerging postmodern and humanistic trends in
educational leadership and administration . Given this
feature , the field of social psychology is likely to exert
a greater influence on schools and schooling in the
coming century . 
—J . M . Blackbourn , J . Larry Tyler , and Conn Thomas
See also action research ; administration , theories of ; attitudes ; 
behaviorism ; cognitive dissonance ; group dynamics ; 
Hawthorne Studies , The ; human resource development ; 
learning , theories of ; mentoring ; networking and network
theory ; peer interaction / friendships ; personnel management ; psychology , types of ; satisfaction , in organizations
and roles ; satisficing theory ; social relations , dimensions
of ; supervision
Further Readings and References
Allport , G .  ( 1958 )  . The nature of prejudice . New York : 
Doubleday . 
Bandura , A .  ( 1977 )  . Social learning theory . Englewood Cliffs , 
NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Bush , T .  ,  & Middlewood , D .  ( 2005 )  . Leading and managing
people in education . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Lewin , K .  ( 1935 )  . A dynamic theory of personality . New York : 
McGraw-Hill . 
Ogawa , R .  ( 2005 )  . Leadership as social construct : The expression of human agency within organizational constraint . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 89–106 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 SOCIAL RELATIONS , 
DIMENSIONS OF
Education has seen substantive change over the past
century . A school community consists of students , 
teachers , administrators , building personnel , parents , 
community agencies , businesses , district personnel , 
legislators , and governmental agencies . Despite their
complexity , effective social relations are grounded in
strong relations . Successful partnerships are a two-way
street , where all comprehend they have something to
learn . There are at least five sources that schools must
contend with : parents and community , technology , corporate connections , government-related policy , and the
wider teaching profession . The challenge for schools is
to figure out how to make their relationships with them
productive . 
Parents are important stakeholders ; communication
is vital if the relationship is to be a powerful bridge
between home and school . When families are actively
involved in schools , teachers learn more about the
students and are better able to provide educational
services for them . Schools that are able to reach out and
become partners with families , teachers , and parents
can create common ground that bridges differences and
creates mutually supportive practices in the home and
school . The relationships among a school ’ s faculty , 
students , and parents are crucial . Schools can also connect with the community through educational programs
for adults , collaborations with community-based recreation and youth service organizations , and partnerships
with health care and social service agencies . 
Schools need to make choices about how they will
use their time with computers . The biggest weaknesses in the use of new technologies are pedagogical
and strategic , however ; supporters of partnerships
between education and the working world need for
schools to develop skill sets more suited for the demands
of the information age . 
The business world can be a valuable community
partner . If schools are to benefit , they must know what
they are doing . Those who work in internally collaborative schools are less vulnerable and so more open to
forming outside relationships . When businesses see
families involved in local activities , they may be more
likely to give back to the community themselves . 
Government policy has also become increasingly
demanding . As a result of the sweeping changes
enacted by legislation like No Child Left Behind , the
move to standards-based teaching and learning is
alive ; consequently , schools must pool resources from
governmental agencies so that services are effectively
provided to students and their families . 
Educators must find ways to step out into wider
learning networks , for schools and universities to form
partnerships in which teacher education and school
improvement are pursued in tandem , and for government
and union leaders to go beyond the dance of despair that
often ends up demoralizing the best of our teachers . 
Social relations will always be threads that interlay
within our schools . The critical component is how leaders
respond and in some contexts embrace the factors in an
effort to continue in the quest to educate all children well . 
Trust holds together any coalition built among schools , 
businesses , government , and the community . 
—Curtis Cain
940———Social Relations , Dimensions Of
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 940
See also adult education ; collaboration theory ; communities , 
types , building of ; computers , use and impact of ; continuing education ; cultural capital ; cultural politics , wars ; 
global cultural politics ; governance ; group dynamics ; 
human capital ; involvement , in organizations ; life span
development ; multiculturalism ; networking and network
theory ; organizational theories ; parental involvement ; partnerships , interagency ; social capital
Further Readings and References
Beveridge , S .  ( 2004 )  . Children , families , and schools : 
Developing partnerships for inclusive education . New York : 
Routledge . 
Chrispeels , J .  ( 2004 )  . Learning to lead together : The promise and
challenge of sharing leadership . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Maurrasse , D .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . A future for everyone : Innovative
social responsibility and community partnerships . New
York : Routledge . 
Pflaum , W . D .  ( 2004 )  . The technology fix : The promised
reality of computers in our schools . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . 
Stephen , W .  ,  & Vogt , W .  ( 2004 )  . Education programs for
improving intergroup relations : Theory , research , and
practice . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Tileston , D . W .  ( 2004 )  . What every teacher should know about
the profession and the politics of teaching . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
 SOCIAL STUDIES
In 1992 , the National Council for the Social Studies 
( NCSS ) defined social studies as an integrated study of
social sciences and humanities to promote civic competence of citizens of a culturally diverse and democratic society in an interdependent world . More broadly
defined , it is the preparation of students in the knowledge , skills , and values that will lead to active participation in their society . This understanding of social
studies as a multidisciplinary activity that integrates a
diversity of content and skills to promote democratic
participation is only one position in the ideological
debate over the teaching of the social sciences . 
Differing positions are typically summarized as the
social studies versus the single-discipline approach . 
The latter subject-centered view ranges in focus from
the study of social science in the form of history and
geography as separate disciplines , to the inclusion of
other disciplines , such as anthropology , psychology , 
economics , political science , and sociology . The commonality of this view is that each discipline is taught
separately from the others , and students will benefit
from the rigor and methods of each discipline . 
Social studies can be civics centered in its primary
concern with the development of an individual and
social understanding of interrelated content and values
that lead to citizenship development . Or it can be issues
centered in that students critically explore specific
issues that can relate to their own personal development
and the resolution of social problems . Single-discipline
proponents argue that without concentrated study of
the disciplines , students fail to learn the important facts
that promote traditional understandings of the American
culture and society . Social studies proponents demur
and insist that to understand the complexity of human
activity and to develop active democratic participation , 
students need to study all aspects of past and current
human activity in a multidisciplinary manner that is
authentic and relevant to their lives . 
The study of social science has been and continues
to be a thorny political football . In the 1890s , through
the study of social science , populists sought to create
individuals who would participate in mass movements
that challenged the power of organized wealth . On the
other hand , corporate interests sought to promote citizens who would be loyal to the existing social order in
which their wealth and position were embedded . 
In the early twentieth century , faced with the
increasing national diversity due to immigration , various national committees and commissions , such as
the Committee of Ten and the National Education
Association ’ s Committee of 1916 , promoted the organization of social studies into separate disciplines
by grade level to facilitate immigrant assimilation into
the dominant American culture . 
Progressive educators , such as John Dewey , argued
against this curriculum in favor of student-centered
curriculum that would require students to become
active researchers in a multidisciplinary context . In
1958 , the single-discipline approach was formally
promoted by the federal government in the New
Social Studies , which eventually failed due to the
inability of teachers to implement this expert-driven , 
top-down curriculum approach . In the liberalism of
the 1960s , social studies was promoted as multidisciplinary inquiry with students as researchers ; however , 
this movement also failed to gain general acceptance . 
With the conservative restoration of the 1980s , the
content , skills , and values promoted in social studies
became centralized through the standards and
accountability movement . In response to the call for
Social Studies———941
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 941
standards , professional organizations , such as the NCSS , 
developed issue-centered , multidisciplinary standards . 
When they were issued in 1994 , various conservative
groups and proponents of the single-discipline
approach quickly attacked them . Opposition ranged
from their focus on multiculturalism and globalism to
their use of critical thinking skills that could contest what
were deemed traditional American values and historical interpretations . This debate highlighted the different
views on what constituted citizenship . On one hand , 
some individuals defined citizenship development as the
transmission of established culture and values through
the teaching of traditional interpretations of American
history and culture . Others defined citizenship as the
development of critically reflective individuals , who , 
informed by multidisciplinary study and critical thinking
skills , would take informed social action . In this view , 
students would study the nature of race , gender , and
social class oppression in American society . Of course , 
central to this ongoing debate is the purpose of social
studies education , which can focus on the reproduction of
traditional societal and cultural knowledge and values or
focus on the development of critically informed , responsible , and politically active citizens . 
How social studies is taught reflects this ongoing
tension between the two views . If citizenship transmission is the focus , then social studies pedagogy is
designed to provide students with the correct knowledge , skills , and values and subsequently test them to
determine if they acquired the correct information . 
Conversely , if the focus is on developing reflective
inquiry , personal development , and social criticism , 
then students are required to critically inquire through
their own research into social phenomena . In this
case , assessment is multiple , authentic , and formative . 
The pervasive use of textbooks also tends to transmit
standardized curricula . Some individuals argue that
since textbooks in many states are adopted as statewide
textbooks and are scrutinized by interest groups for
content and values , publishers tend to promote content
and values that maintain traditional , dominant culture . 
In line with their desire to develop critically conscious
student researchers , social studies proponents promote
the use of locally developed curriculum and instructional materials . 
Both of these pedagogical positions have significant implications for the role of the social studies
teacher . In a top-down transmissional curriculum , 
teachers may be required to use “ teacher-proof ” materials
that minimize their influence over the social studies
curriculum . In a critical social studies curriculum , 
teachers actively implement locally developed curriculum , promote student critique of commercial materials , and act as skilled facilitators of student research . 
In this approach , teachers are aligned with a Deweyian
perspective on pedagogy and act as social researchers
who facilitate their students ’ production of knowledge
and their critique of social values . In critical social
studies pedagogy , teachers focus on the goals of a
democratic society , promote these values through curriculum and instruction , integrate student experiences
into the curriculum , facilitate student critique of how
power operates within the contemporary social context , and require students to understand the historical
context of contemporary social issues . 
—Raymond A . Horn Jr . 
See also civics , civic education ; critical theory ; cross-cultural
studies ; cultural politics , wars ; curriculum , theories of ; 
democracy , democratic education and administration ; 
dialectical inquiry ; diversity ; global cultural politics ; immigration , history and impact in education ; liberalism ; 
minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism
Further Readings and References
Evans , R .  ( 2004 )  . The social studies wars . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Parker , W .  ( 2002 )  . Teaching democracy . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Ross , E .  ( 2001 )  . The social studies curriculum : Purposes , 
problems , and possibilities . New York : SUNY Press . 
Shapiro , H .  ,  & Purpel , D .  ( 2005 )  . Critical social issues in
American education . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
Shaver , P .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2001 )  . Handbook of research on social studies teaching and learning . New York : Macmillan . 
Steiner-Khamsi , G .  , Torney-Purta , J .  ,  & Schwille , J .  ( 2002 )  . 
New paradigms and recurring paradoxes in education for
citizenship . New York : Peter Lang . 
 SPAN OF CONTROL
Span of control is a concept that refers to the number
of people that a manager supervises . In the private sector , the typical span of control ranges from 1 : 5 to 1 : 25 . 
The current trend is to increase the span of control to
increase efficiency , levels of worker involvement , and , 
in many cases , productivity . For example , from 1992 to
1994 , Chrysler Corporation changed from an average
of one supervisor for every 25 hourly workers to one
942———Span of Control
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 942
supervisor for every 45 hourly workers . If the total
number of employees in an organization is held constant , then the span of control relates to the number of
hierarchical levels of supervision within the organization . If the span of control is large , then the number of
levels will be less and a flat organization will result . 
High spans of control tend to decrease cost of supervision , increase employee empowerment , reduce bureaucracy , and promote efficient decision making . Flat
organizations have better lines of communications but
have fewer opportunities for advancement . 
On the other hand , if the span of control is small , then
the number of levels will increase and a tall organization
will develop . Low spans of control are associated with
control of employees and top-down management . A tall
organization is appropriate if close supervision is required , 
mistakes are costly , or new employees are a constant
occurrence . Small spans of control allow supervisors
to invest time in high-leverage activities ( e . g .  , strategic
planning , organizational change , and problem solving )  . 
However , tall organizations can be highly bureaucratic and
discourage initiative . In the private sector , management
actively seeks to establish a balance between level of
supervision needed , productivity , and efficiency . 
Because building-level leadership is very complex
and demanding , a principal should strive to maintain
an appropriate span of control . However , schools have
high spans of control and flatter structures ; in part , 
these characteristics exist because of legislatively funding formulas . In public education , the span of control is
driven by school finance laws and the corresponding
funding equations . In most state funding equations , the
key component is the number of students enrolled in
the district . Most states provide money to fund a ratio
of teachers to students and administrators to teachers ; 
thus , the basic span of control is determined by the
states and not the leadership team of the schools . 
Given the financial restrictions common in public
schools , principals must seek to develop alternatives
to low spans of control . A capable , experienced staff
needs much less direct supervision than new teachers
do . Effective programs include teacher teams , teacher
empowerment , and effective staff development . 
Teacher teams have been used to increase teacher
autonomy and decision making . Developing procedures to share the power within a building can be very
empowering for teachers , and this sharing can
improve the role of both teachers and principals . 
—Bill Thornton
See also administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; chain of
command ; efficacy theory ; governance ; hierarchy , in organizations ; leadership , theories of ; loss of position ( school
principal )  ; management theories ; matrix organization ( the 
 “ adhocracy ”  )  ; organizational theories ; rational organization
theory ; role conflict ; role theory ; scalar principle ; table of
organization ; working conditions , in schools
Further Readings and References
Meier , K .  ,  & Bothe , J .  ( 2003 )  . Span of control and public organizations : Implementing Luther Gulick ’ s research design . 
Public Administration Review , 63 ( 1 )  , 61–70 . 
Robbins , S . P .  ( 2001 )  . Organizational behavior . Upper Saddle
River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
 SPEARMAN , CHARLES
Charles Spearman ( 1863–1945 ) is the originator of
the two-factor intelligence theory , the father of factor
analysis , and a pioneer of the classical test theory . 
Spearman was born to a well-known family in London . 
After he graduated from Learmington College , he
joined the British army and became a much-decorated
officer in Burma and India . While in the army , he
developed his interest first in philosophy and later in
psychology . He earned his PhD with Wilhelm Wundt
from the University of Leipzig , in Germany , in 1906 . 
From 1907 to 1931 , he worked at University College , 
London , first as a reader in experimental psychology
and then as a professor of mind and logic . He conducted
psychological research for the army during the First
World War . After his retirement as an emeritus professor
from University College , he traveled and taught in the
United States , India , and Egypt . He received several
honors in Britain , Germany , and the United States . 
In 1904 , Spearman published “ The Proof and
Measurement of Association Between Two Things ,  ” in
the American Journal of Psychology . In this article , 
Spearman proposed that the correlation between two
variables could be weakened by errors of measurement . 
To restore the true relationship between variables p and
q , Spearman invented the attenuation correction
formula : 
rpq = rp′q′ / √ ( rp′p′ * rq′q′ )  , 
meaning that the true correlation coefficient between
p and q equals the observed correlation coefficient
Spearman , Charles———943
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 943
divided by the square root of the product of the reliability coefficients of variables p and q . Using this formula , Spearman calculated the correlations between
various measures of mental abilities obtained at the
time and identified an overall mental ability or general
intelligence . This concept of general intelligence , or 
 “ g ,  ” became the focus of his second article ,  “ General
Intelligence Objectively Determined and Measured ,  ” 
which was published in the same year . In this landmark article , Spearman proposed that the “ g ” factor
underlies all human abilities . In addition to this “ g ,  ” 
there is a second level of specific factors , or “ s ,  ” that
account for the differences among various specific
abilities . Any act of human intellect is a function of
both the “ g ” and “ s ” factors . In his development of
the two-factor intelligence theory , Spearman became
the pioneer of a new statistical procedure , namely
factor analysis . His concepts about true score and
measurement errors became the basis of the classical
test theory . His interest in statistics also led him to
develop the Spearman rho , a correlation coefficient to
be used when a sample size is small and data are in
rank order . He is also accredited with the SpearmanBrown prophecy formula , which predicts test reliability based on the size of a test . Spearman ’ s
influence in the fields of psychology and education
can still be felt today , especially through his twofactor intelligence theory . Other works published by
Spearman include “ The Nature of Intelligence and
the Principles of Cognition ”  ( 1923 )  ,  “ The Abilities
of Man : Their Nature and Measurement ”  ( 1927 )  ,  
 “ Creative Mind ”  ( 1930 )  , and “ Psychology Down the
Ages ”  ( 1937 )  . 
—Yuankun Yao
See also achievement tests ; behaviorism ; cognition , theories
of ; intelligence ; measurement , theories of ; psychology , 
types of ; testing and test theory development ; validity and
reliability ; variables
Further Readings and References
Lee , S .  ( 2005 )  . The encyclopedia of school psychology . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Spearman , C .  ( 1904 )  . General intelligence objectively determined and measured . The American Journal of Psychology , 
2 , 201–293 . 
Williams , R .  , Zimmerman , D .  , Zumbo , B .  ,  & Ross , D .  ( 2003 )  . 
Charles Spearman : British behavioral scientist . Human
Nature Review , 3 , 114–118 . Retrieved September 10 , 2005 , 
from 
 SPECIAL EDUCATION
Special education is an integral component of the public
education system . It includes the collective means by
which children and youth with disabilities are provided
an appropriate public education . Though special education as a professional practice has existed over a century , 
only in the past 30 to 40 years has it assumed a position
of prominence and relevance in our schools . 
The history of service to persons with disabilities
extends back to the eighteenth century . Early attempts at
humane treatment were initiated by Philippe Pinel and his
student Jean Itard in their work with the mentally ill . Their
methods of treatment were widely known , accepted , and
employed in both Europe and North America . 
Dr . Benjamin Rush , the father of modern psychiatry , applied and extended the work of Pinel and Itard
in the United States after the Revolutionary War . Rush
developed the concept of moral therapy ( based on
Pinel ’ s philosophy of “ moral treatment ”  ) and public
education and support of children and youth with
behavior problems . This was the initial suggestion
that individuals with disabilities were due the same
educational rights and privileges as other children . 
Samuel Gridley Howe and Edward Seguin continued the growth and expansion of intervention programs for persons with disabilities in the nineteenth
century . In 1832 , Howe established Perkins School for
the Blind in Boston and worked for the establishment
by Massachusetts of the first state-supported school
for persons with mental retardation in 1859 . Upon
the initiation of these two programs , the state of
Massachusetts became the pioneer and leader in serving persons with disabilities . However , public school
intervention programs became a reality only after the
first compulsory attendance laws were passed in the
late nineteenth century . 
Seguin immigrated to the United States in 1850
to work with Howe at the Perkins School . He later
worked as an administrator in state schools for the
mentally retarded . Seguin ’ s belief that persons with
mental retardation were capable of meaningful learning led him to develop the first special education programs to focus on the development of self-help skills
and vocational abilities . 
While much of the history of special education has
focused on the contributions of individual professionals , since 1950 ( the date of the founding of the
Association for Retarded Citizens )  , the field ’ s history
944———Special Education
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 944
has revolved around legislation and litigation . In 1963 , 
President John F . Kennedy signed the first federal legislation to solely address the needs of persons with
disabilities : PL 88-164 : The Mental Retardation
Facilities and Community Mental Health Centers
Construction Act . This law : 
• Provided for the construction of community mental
health centers
• Provided for the construction of research centers
and facilities relating to mental and developmental
disorders
• Provided for the training of teachers and other professionals to work with persons with disabilities
• Provided for research and demonstration projects
related to the education of persons with disabilities
The prime result of this legislation was the establishment of University Affiliated Programs ( UAP ) at
major research institutions across the nation . These
UAPs conducted research and trained the professionals that significantly enhanced services to persons
with disabilities . 
A second legislative act that had a lasting impact
on special education in the public schools was PL 93-
112 ( Section 504 )  : The Civil Rights Provision of
the Vocational Rehabilitation Amendments of 1973 . 
Basically , Section 504 declares that no individual can
be denied access solely on the basis of a disability to
any program or activity that receives federal funds . 
Section 504 opened the doors of vocational and trade
schools for students with disabilities as well as setting
the stage for mainstreaming and inclusion . 
The most significant legislation related to special education . PL 94-142 : The Education for all Handicapped
Children Act , was passed in 1975 . PL 94-142 was
designed to : 
• Ensure that all persons with disabilities were provided with a free , appropriate public education in the
least-restrictive environment
• Ensure that the rights of persons with disabilities and
their families were protected through due process
• Ensure the effectiveness of educational efforts
concerning persons with disabilities
All the policies and procedures of PL 94-142 must
be adhered to by local education agencies and monitored by state education agencies under the supervision of the U . S . Office of Education . PL 94-142
includes seven mandates : 
1 . Free Appropriate Public Education ( FAPE )  : This
means that all education and related services must
be provided to a student with a disability at public
expense and that these services must be appropriate
to the student ’ s individual needs . 
2 . Age Requirements : This mandates that schools must
serve all persons with disabilities between the ages
of 3 and 21 . 
3 . Due Process : These are the procedural safeguards
that are guaranteed to persons with disabilities and
their parents with regard to identification , evaluation , 
and educational placement . 
4 . Least-Restrictive Environment ( LRE )  : This means
that persons with disabilities are to be educated in the
environment that affords them the opportunity to
develop at the optimum level and most closely approximates a normalized learning environment . 
5 . Individual Education Program ( IEP )  : This is mandated as a document that must be developed annually
and reviewed periodically to ensure that each individual ’ s needs are being met . 
6 . Nondiscriminatory Evaluation : This means that a
person with disabilities must be given diagnostic and
evaluation instruments that do not discriminate along
racial or gender lines , in a manner that follows equitable procedures ( the referral to placement process )  . 
7 . Zero Reject : This means that local education agencies cannot refuse to serve any person with disabilities within their jurisdiction . 
PL 94-142 also outlined the various disabilities
that were eligible to be served under the legislation . 
The reauthorization of PL 94-142 as PL 101-476 : The
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA ) 
included a revision and expansion of the disability categories . These categories include : 
• Autism :  “ a developmental disability significantly
affecting verbal and nonverbal communication and
social interaction , generally evident before age 3 , that
adversely affects a child ’ s educational performance .  ” 
• Deaf-blindness : a condition where students exhibit 
 “ concomitant hearing and visual impairments , the
combination of which causes such severe communication and other developmental and educational
needs that they cannot be accommodated in special
education programs solely for children with deafness
or children with blindness .  ” 
• Deafness : a hearing impairment that is so severe
that the child is impaired in processing linguistic
information through hearing , with or without
Special Education———945
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 945
amplification , that adversely affects a child ’ s educational performance . 
• Emotional disturbance : a constellation of characteristics involving inappropriate interpersonal relationships , 
feelings , behaviors , unhappiness , or depression over
a long period of time and to a marked degree
that are not due to intellectual , sensory , or health
factors . 
• Hearing impairment : an impairment in hearing , 
whether permanent or fluctuating , that adversely
affects a child ’ s educational performance but that is
not included under the definition of deafness . 
• Mental retardation : significantly subaverage general
intellectual functioning , existing concurrently with
deficits in adaptive behavior and manifested during
the developmental period , that adversely affects a
child ’ s educational performance . 
• Multiple disabilities : when a child exhibits more than
one major type of disability that results in a need for
special education services that cannot be delivered in
one of the impairment areas alone ( e . g .  , a child who
is mentally retarded and blind )  . 
• Orthopedic impairment : students who exhibit congenital anomalies or some type of physical disability , 
such as clubfoot , missing limbs , poliomyelitis , cerebral palsy , and fractures . 
• Other health impairment : limited strength , vitality , or
alertness due to chronic or acute health problems . 
These difficulties are severe enough to impact educational performance . 
• Specific learning disability : difficulties in learning 
( often reading or math ) that cannot be accounted for
by any other disability . 
• Speech or language impairment : a communication
disorder , such as stuttering , impaired articulation , a
language impairment , or a voice impairment , that
adversely affects a child ’ s educational performance . 
• Traumatic brain injury ( TBI )  : students who have
acquired a brain injury due to “ physical force , resulting in total or partial functional disability or psychosocial impairment ” that stems from closed or open
head trauma and is not due to congenital issues or
injuries induced by birth trauma . 
• Visual impairment : an impairment in vision that even
with correction adversely affects a child ’ s educational performance . The term includes both partial
sight and blindness . 
With this revision , language was changed to reflect
a “ people first ” orientation , autism and traumatic
brain injury were added as disability categories , rehabilitation counseling and social work were added as
related services , and transition services were added as
a direct service intervention for those covered by the
act . IDEA was amended in 1997 and went through a
second reauthorization in 2004 . 
Litigation also has had a significant effect on the
operation of special education programs in the public
schools . Among those court cases involving persons
with disabilities and having the greatest impact on
schools and schooling are : 
• Honig v . Doe ( 1988 )  : The U . S . Supreme Court
affirmed the “ stay put ” provision of PL 94-142 and
held that schools were limited to 10 days of suspension in relation to students with disabilities and that
exceeding this limit denied such students their right
to a free , appropriate public education . The court
further rejected the “ dangerousness ” concept as an
exemption to the “ stay put ” provision . 
• Board of Education v . Rowley ( 1982 )  : In this case , the
U . S . Supreme Court defined the term “ appropriate
education ” contained in PL 94-142 . The court held
that the state satisfies this requirement via personalized instruction and adequate support services . 
• Irving ISD v . Tatro ( 1984 )  : In this case , the U . S . 
Supreme Court held that certain medical services
were covered by PL 94-142 as related services if they
allowed students with disabilities to be placed in less
restrictive educational environments and that failure
to provide such services violated the equal access
provision of Section 504 in the Rehabilitation
Amendments of 1973 . 
• Timothy W . v . Rochester School District ( 1989 )  : In
this case , the U . S . First District Court held that under
PL 94-142 , all children with disabilities must be provided with a free , appropriate public education that
meets their individual , unique needs and that the
ability to benefit from such services was irrelevant . 
• Daniel R . R . v . Texas State Board of Education 
( 1989 )  : The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in
this case that schools need not mainstream all
students with disabilities without regard for whether
the regular education setting provides the leastrestrictive educational environment or meets the
condition of “ appropriateness ” as defined in the
Rowley case . In essence , the court held that placement decisions must be made on a case-by-case
basis grounded in each student ’ s unique individual
needs . 
• Oberti v . Clementon Board of Education ( 1993 )  : In
this case , the First District Court of the United States
held that school districts must make a “ reasonable
effort ” to include students with disabilities in the regular classroom environment and to ensure that to as
great an extent as possible , such environments are of
educational benefit to these students . 
946———Special Education
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 946
• Florence County School District 4 v . Carter ( 1993 )  : 
The Supreme Court of the United States found that
parents who unilaterally withdraw their children
from a school district that provides an inappropriate
education ( as defined by PL 94-142 and the Rowley
case ) and place that child in an alternative program
that meets the child ’ s unique , individual needs are
entitled to the reimbursement of their costs by the
original school . 
One of the most important aspects of special education in the public schools stems from the requirement in
PL 94-142 that students with disabilities be provided
with a “ continuum of alternative educational placement
options .  ” This requirement is based upon the premise
that the nature of the least-restrictive educational environment differs on an individual basis and that a range
of possible place options is necessary to increase the
chances that an appropriate environment can be identified for each student . Educational professionals have
proposed and implemented a cascade model of educational services in which the levels interface . 
In this model , students are placed in the program
that seems to best meet their unique educational needs . 
In many instances , the placement option selected
serves as an environment in which those skills critical
to moving to a less restrictive educational environment
are taught and refined . Once the student has mastered
those requisite skills for a less restrictive environment , 
he or she is moved to that environment and the instructional process begins anew with a new target environment . In some cases , students with disabilities fail
to succeed in settings that are believed to be their
least-restrictive educational environment . In such cases , 
students are moved to a more restrictive environment to
better address their individual needs and to teach the
skills necessary to return to their initial placement . 
Instructional methodology and practice in the field
of special education focuses on addressing four areas
of student learning . These are : 
1 . Acquisition : the initial learning of the information , 
process , or procedures that is the target of instruction
2 . Proficiency : the mastery of the information , process , 
or procedure that is the target of instruction
3 . Maintenance : the ongoing functional use of the
information , process , or procedure that was previously taught
4 . Generalization : the ability to use the information , 
process , or procedure in novel ways or situations
All areas of instruction must be planned for and
included in the IEP . The ultimate goal of all special education is to allow the student to live a life that is as independent of supports as possible . Therefore , the development
and mastery of specific skills and the generalization of
those skills to the “ real world ” are of prime importance . 
Special education , like all areas of professional
endeavor , has been marked by specific milestones that
have moved professional practice forward and fundamentally changed the manner in which persons with
disabilities are served . Those milestones for special
education include : 
• Applied behavior analysis
• Normalization
• Learning strategies
• Vocational transition and career education
• Early childhood intervention
Each of these perspectives has had a significant , 
positive impact on the philosophy and practice in the
field of special education . 
Special Education———947
Mild
Disabilities
Severe
Disabilities
Move as quickly
as feasible
Move only
when necessary
Least Restrictive
Cascade of Speical Education 
Delivery Options
Regular classroom with accommodations , 
modifications , and / or support services
regular classroom + resource room
special class with part time inclusion
full time special class
special day school
homebound instruction
residential schools
hospitals and treatment centers
Most Restrictive
⎤
⎤
⎤
⎤
⎤
⎤
⎤
⎤
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 947
Applied behavior analysis , or the application of the
principles of behaviorism to “ real-world ” problems of
social importance , has been a mainstay of effective
intervention programs for persons with disabilities for
over 40 years . From the development of academic
skills , to classroom management techniques , to facilitating community / vocational integration , applied
behavior analysis has been instrumental in improving
the lives of persons with disabilities . Techniques such
as task analysis have allowed teachers to break down
complex skills to their constituent parts . Combining
the task-analytic process with the techniques of chaining and positive reinforcement have facilitated the
development of self-help skills ( feeding , toileting , 
dressing , tying shoes , selecting appropriate clothing , 
etc .  )  ; vocational skills ( making change , taking orders
for food , cleaning tables , etc .  )  ; and community skills 
( buying a drink from a vending machine , shaking hands
with people one meets , riding a bus to work or home , 
ordering and eating in a restaurant , etc .  ) in persons
with the most severe mental disabilities . Through the
behavior analysis of those contingencies that exist
naturally in “ real-world ” environments and programming these contingencies into instruction , teachers
have been able to ensure that these skills are maintained in settings outside of the schools and are generalized to new settings . 
Normalization is a concept that has had one of the
most positive impacts on persons with disabilities over
the past 30 years . Developed by Wolf Wolfensberger , 
normalization is essentially using culturally normative means to create or maintain culturally normative
behaviors and characteristics . The application of the
principle of normalization to the education of persons
with disabilities had a significant , positive impact on
their quality of life . The use of community-based
group homes for persons with disabilities reduced the
population of residential institutions by 80% between
1975 and 2000 . The application of the principle of normalization resulted in training programs for persons
with disabilities that emphasized vocational and community adjustment skills . This resulted in an increase
in the number of individuals with disabilities who were
contributing to the good of society . Normalization , 
with its emphasis on integrating individuals with disabilities into society to as great an extent as possible , 
was the foundation for today ’ s inclusion ( mainstreaming ) movement in the public schools . 
Learning strategies , content enhancement , and
the strategic instruction model are among of the most
notable innovations in the field of special education . These approaches were pioneered and refined by
Gordon Alley and Don Deshler from 1972 to the present . Based on the research of Ann Brown and Judith
Flavel on metacognition , learning strategies refers to
an instructional approach in which the academic content serves as the vehicle to teach persons with disabilities how to decode , store , retrieve , and use the
information included in textbooks and instructional
activities . Learning strategies are basically techniques
in which the student is taught how to identify pertinent
information in a text or a lecture , communicate an
interest in classroom activities nonverbally to teachers
and peers , and effectively address test questions to
demonstrate their knowledge . The philosophical foundation of the learning strategies approach is to help the
student become an independent learner . The Kansas
University Center for Research on Learning has validated 32 different learning strategies to address student
behaviors , ranging from test-taking skills , to note-taking skills , to listening skills , to organizational skills for
class materials . The learning strategies approach has
been extended to address the needs of persons without
disabilities yet at risk for academic failure . 
Another notable innovation in special education was
the development and implementation of vocational
transition / career education programs for persons with
disabilities . Initially developed by Oliver Kolstoe and
refined by D . E . Brolin and Gary Clark , these programs addressed the life span needs of persons with
mild to moderate disabilities . These programs targeted
secondary students with disabilities and provided
them with information concerning social , academic
and physical job requirements , working conditions , 
and job stability . This program led to progressively
longer internship job placements during the student ’ s
high school career , so that those skills taught could be
practiced in the work setting , and was combined with
individual vocational adjustment counseling . For this
reason , these programs were often described as 
 “ work-study ” programs . The goal of the vocational
transition / career education programs was to ensure
that all students in the program had a viable employment option upon graduation . 
Early childhood intervention for persons with
disabilities emerged from the work of Harold Skeels , 
Samuel Kirk , Benjamin Bloom , Joseph Hunt , and B . 
M . Caldwell . Based on the premise that the impact
of disabilities could be minimized via intensive early
intervention and experiences , early childhood special
948———Special Education
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 948
education has become a critical component in the
delivery of appropriate services to individuals with
disabilities and their families . Research has indicated
that structured , positive early experiences and stimulation can reduce or minimize the physical , affective , 
and cognitive impact of disabilities . A lack of such stimulation or training can result in a cumulative deficit
that is difficult to remediate during the school years
and often persists over the life span . 
Early intervention programs are designed to
address the needs of both children with obvious disabilities and those who are simply “ at risk ” for developing a disability in the future . Early intervention
programs also established innovations such as direct
involvement of parents via training and consulting and
the integration of children with and without disabilities in educational settings . In the first instance , the
training of parents in those skills critical to optimum
child development essentially addressed the need to
ensure that a child ’ s “ natural , first teacher ” is one of good
quality . Parents who understand their child ’ s needs
and how to meet those needs can provide continuous , 
appropriate intervention for their child in the home
environment . In terms of the integration of children
with and without disabilities in the same early childhood classroom , the focus was on providing models of
age-appropriate , normal behaviors to those children
with disabilities . Drawing from Wolfensberger ’ s concept of “ normalization ” and Bandura ’ s social learning
theory , these “ normal models ” were essentially utilized as standards for children with disabilities to
copy . The teacher could then reward any attempts of
these children to imitate age-appropriate developmental skills . 
The philosophy and practice of special education is
currently undergoing an upheaval due to the influence
of the work of W . Edwards Deming , Thomas M . 
Skrtic , and , increasingly , the perspective of postmodernism . Each of these influences has caused special
education professionals to think , reflect , and consider
the nature of the assumptions and beliefs upon which
their field is founded . 
Deming ’ s influence has been most profound in his
focus on quality and emphasis on systems and systems
thinking . For Deming , educational organizations are
systems that must be understood before reform efforts
can be successful . These systems are designed to produce a given product . In his “ Experiment With the Red
Beads ,  ” Deming demonstrated that inflexible systems
in which change was superficial produced a consistent
rate of defective products ( much like the persistent
dropout rate in our schools )  . These defective products
must either be discarded or repaired . From Deming ’ s
perspective , special education is a subsystem in the
schools where “ repair work ” is done . However , 
Deming warns about the nature of repair work in that : 
• Repair work is twice as costly as doing something
right the first time . 
• The proposed repairs are seldom accomplished . 
This perspective and its associated problems well
describe the nature of many special education programs and the outcomes for students with disabilities
in our schools . Students with disabilities experience
more academic and disciplinary problems than those
without disabilities , they are more likely to be excluded
from traditional educational programs and placements , 
and they are more likely to experience a wide range of
social problems over the life span . 
Skrtic has examined the nature of special education
practice and philosophy within the context of school
culture and organization via the framework of critical
pragmatism . Skrtic holds that the critique of modern
knowledge requires a reconsideration of the basic assumptions of the field of special education . Specifically , he
questions whether special education itself is a rational
system and is critical of the proposition that disabilities
are usefully understood as pathological conditions . 
Skrtic further holds that the historical traditions that
underpin the knowledge base in special education differ
significantly from those that underpin elementary and
secondary education . Rather than being an alternative
program model for persons who possess disabilities , 
Skrtic holds that special education emerged primarily to
contain and conceal the failures of conventional elementary and secondary education practice . In addition , 
should educational systems attempt to become more
inclusive and democratic , an adhocracy or learning
organization must necessarily develop . Professional culture and practice in special and general education would
mirror the adhocracy ’ s focus on innovation , personalization , and inclusion through collective problem solving . The adhocracy configuration is the inverse of the
bureaucratic organizational structure of public schools , 
which focuses on the standardization of practice . Skrtic
proposes the nonfoundational approach of critical
pragmatism for dealing with the paradox of special education and establishing true personalization and innovation of practice in our education systems . 
Special Education———949
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 949
Much of Skrtic ’ s work involves the contradiction
between the contextual nature of disability and conventional special education practice and how the
field ’ s inclusive ideal is stymied by its own theory
of knowledge and the manner in which schools are
structured . A related perspective influencing special
education , postmodernism , also relies on contextual
understanding and how the social construction of
knowledge influences professional philosophy and
practice . The conflict in the profession of special education revolves around the challenge that postmodernism presents to its modern tenets . Many special
education professionals fear that the postmodern
perspective involves a rejection of those practices that
have been validated as effective and that it represents
a retreat from the scientific , empirical approach to disability studies . The postmodernists counter that this
objectivist , functionalist approach is neither objective
nor effective and that an alternative perspective that
examines professional biases and conventional practices is necessary for the field to advance . This debate
will inevitably continue and influence philosophy and
practice in the field . 
Currently , the field of special education is a prominent component of the public education system . The
majority of the federal monies that are provided to the
public schools are targeted for special education . As
schools become more inclusive in nature , it is anticipated that the field will grow concurrently and that
philosophy and practice will change to meet the new
demands of educating all children in a unified system . 
—J . M . Blackbourn , James S . Payne , 
J . Larry Tyler , James Mann , and G . Franklin Elrod
See also behaviorism ; child development theories ; deaf education ; Deming , W . Edwards ; disabilities , of students ; discipline in schools ; discrimination ; early childhood education ; 
emotional disturbance ; giftedness , gifted education ; individual differences , in children ; intelligence ; learning , 
theories of ; learning environments ; mainstreaming and
inclusion ; mental illness , in adults and children ; psychology , types of ; parental involvement ; performance assessment ; psychometrics ; resiliency ; schooling effects ; staffing , 
concepts of ; state departments of education ; tutoring ; 
underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Alley , G . R .  ,  & Deshler , D .  ( 1979 )  . Teaching the learning
disabled adolescent : Strategies and methods . Denver , CO : 
Love . 
Bartlett , L .  , Weisenstein , G .  ,  & Estcheidt , S .  ( 2002 )  . Successful
inclusion for educational leaders . Upper Saddle River , NJ : 
Pearson . 
Blackbourn , J .  , Patton , J .  ,  & Trainor , A .  ( 2004 )  . Exceptional
individuals in focus . Columbus , OH : Merrill . 
Blackbourn , J .  , Tyler , L .  , Vinson , T .  , Thomas , C .  ,  & Elrod , G .  
( 1999 )  . Social studies for students at risk for academic
failure . Journal of At-Risk Issues , 6 ( 1 )  , 20–23 . 
Bloom , B .  ( 1964 )  . Stability and change in human characteristics . New York : Wiley . 
Caldwell , B .  ( 1970 )  . The rationale for early intervention . 
Exceptional Children , 36 , 717–726 . 
Deming , W .  ( 1993 )  . The new economics for industry , government , 
and education . Cambridge : MIT Center for Advanced
Engineering Study . 
Hunt , J .  ( 1966 )  . Intelligence and experience . New York : 
Ronald Press . 
Skeels , H .  ( 1942 )  . A study of the effect of differential stimulation on mentally retarded children : A follow-up report . 
American Journal of Mental Deficiency , 46 , 340–350 . 
Skeels , H .  ( 1966 )  . Adult status of children with contrasting
early life experiences : A follow-up study . Monographs
of the Society for Research on Child Development , 31 ( 3 , 
Serial No . 105 )  . 
Skeels , H .  ,  & Dye , H .  ( 1939 )  . A study of the effects of differential stimulation on mentally retarded children . Proceedings
and Addresses of the American Association on Mental
Deficiency , 44 ( 1 )  , 114–136 . 
Sitlington , P . L .  , Clark , G .  ,  & Kolstoe , O .  ( 2000 )  . Transition
education and services for adolescents with disabilities 
( 3rd ed .  )  . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Skrtic , T .  ( 1991 )  . Behind special education : A critical analysis
of professional culture and school organization . Denver , 
CO : Love . 
Skrtic , T .  ( 1991 )  . The special education paradox : Equity as the
way to excellence . Harvard Educational Review , 61 ( 2 )  , 
148–207 . 
Skrtic , T .  ( 1995 )  . Disability and democracy : Reconstructing 
( special ) education for postmodernity . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
U . S . Department of Health , Education , and Welfare .  ( 1969 )  . 
The six-hour retarded child . Washington , DC : U . S . 
Government Printing Office . 
Wolfensberger , W .  ( 1972 )  . The principle of normalization in
human services . Toronto , Canada : National Institute on
Mental Retardation . 
 SPENCER , HERBERT
A pioneering English sociologist and popularizer in
the United States of Social Darwinism , Herbert
Spencer ’ s principal contribution to education came
in his influential 1860 book , Education : Intellectual , 
950———Spencer , Herbert
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 950
Moral , and Physical , in which he coined the curriculum question ,  “ What knowledge is of most worth ?  ” 
and proposed categories of life activity that comprised
the sources of educational objectives . Born in Derby , 
England , Spencer ( 1820–1903 ) received his elementary education at home and at day school . His secondary education involved study mostly of scientific , 
mathematical , and political subjects with little attention
to foreign languages or the classics . Spencer received
no university education . Upon completing his formal
education , Spencer became a civil engineer for the
railway , a position he held until 1846 . After a disillusioning stint in radical politics , Spencer tried his hand
at inventing and at journalism , the latter including
work on the staff of The Economist , before becoming
a freelance writer . His major works include Social
Statics ( 1851 ) and Synthetic Philosophy ( 9 volumes , 
1862–1896 )  . After 1860 , book sales provided him
financial independence . Despite his prolific intellectual work , Spencer had no university affiliation . 
Well-known tenets of Spencer ’ s educational
thought include a critique of academic formalism or 
 “ ornamentation ”  ; an emphasis on education as practical preparation for life ; the five categories of life activity ( personal health , making a living , child rearing , 
citizenship , leisure )  ; the importance of science , as both
knowledge and method , in the curriculum ; and the now
famous curriculum question ,  “ What knowledge is of
most worth ?  ” Spencer ’ s educational thought , however , is best understood in the context of his Social
Darwinism . Spencer argued , for example , that because
the development of mind follows the inexorably slow
evolutionary process , education can only help humans
adapt to existing circumstances and that , therefore , formal education can never significantly impact human
progress . In addition , Spencer adamantly opposed statesupported schooling on the grounds that it fostered
conformity , encouraged unquestioning acceptance of
authority , smacked of totalitarianism , unjustifiably
separated taxpayers from their property , and , by supporting those who cannot afford formal education on
their own , undermined natural selection . Instead , 
Spencer supported private education . 
What influence did Spencer ’ s educational thought
have in the United States ? Some American educators
derived ideas from Spencer in ways consistent with
his original work . William Graham Sumner , for example , 
favored electives and science as components of the
curriculum , doubted the possibility of social progress
through education , and opposed public secondary and
higher education . Similarly , David Snedden conceived
of education as a matter of fitting students into extant
social and economic circumstances . Other American
educators departed significantly from Spencer ’ s social
and educational theory . Both Lester Ward and John
Dewey held that unlike the rest of the natural world , 
humans benefited from the ability to control the environment through the exercise of intelligence and that
therefore education , especially publicly supported
schools , should function as a vehicle of human progress
and social improvement . Policy proposals , as well , 
both derived and departed from Spencer ’ s theory . The
1893 Committee of Ten report restricted secondary
education to a select few adolescents and accorded
science parity with literary subjects , but embraced
subject matter for its disciplinary , not its practical , 
value . The 1918 report of the Commission on the
Reorganization of Secondary Education favored a
practical preparation for life and categorized educational aims into areas of life activity much like those
proposed by Spencer but , unlike Spencer , endorsed
universal state-supported secondary education as a
means of individual and social growth . 
—William G . Wraga
See also curriculum , theories of ; philosophies of education
Further Readings and References
Cremin , L .  ( 1962 )  . The transformation of the school : 
Progressivism in American education , 1876–1957 . New
York : Knopf . 
Egan , K .  ( 2002 )  . Getting it wrong from the beginning : Our
progressivist inheritance from Herbert Spencer , John
Dewey and Jean Piaget . New Haven , CT : Yale University
Press . 
Peel , J .  ( 1978 )  . The social and political thought of Herbert
Spencer . Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
 STAFFING , CONCEPTS OF
Arguably the most important administrative task
accorded to educational leaders and administrators is
staffing schools and school districts with the qualified
teachers , administrators , and support staff required to
deliver a quality educational program . Stated another
way , staffing is the process whereby organizations
acquire the human talent needed to accomplish the
organization ’ s goals and mission . Staffing includes two
Staffing , Concepts Of———951
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 951
subprocesses that overlap to a considerable degree : 
recruitment and selection . Recruitment encompasses all
activities conducted by the organization to generate initial pools of qualified applicants for position vacancies . 
Selection includes those activities used by the organization to reduce a pool of applicants down to a group of
highly qualified finalists and , ultimately , the preferred
job candidate who will receive a formal job offer . 
Although staffing potentially impacts virtually every
aspect of school and school district operations—from
instruction in the classroom to leadership at the school
and school district levels—many individuals charged
with carrying out the staffing function operate under
two false assumptions . The first false assumption
is that qualified applicants for position vacancies
will always be available in sufficient numbers . With
respect to the supply of qualified educational personnel , the United States entered the twenty-first century
with a well-documented shortage of classroom
teachers and a less-well-understood emerging shortage of qualified applicants for administrator positions , 
especially the position of school principal . Retirements
among the post–World War II baby boom generation
are resulting in large numbers of position vacancies of
all types , and this trend will continue for the foreseeable future . With respect to the supply of teachers , 
researchers such as Richard Ingersoll note that a
teacher retention problem also exists as a long-term
staffing trend and is exacerbating the already-critical
teacher shortage . Teachers in very large numbers
exit the profession within their first 5 years on the job , 
thus contributing to a shortage of qualified classroom
instructors . The shortage is especially acute in certain
locations ( e . g .  , inner city schools and small rural
school districts ) and in certain academic disciplines
such as mathematics , science , foreign languages , and
special education . Other researchers , such as Diana
Pounder , note there may also be a shortage of qualified applicants for principal vacancies with the vast
majority of individuals who are principal certified but
not yet in the job , failing to apply for vacant positions , 
possibly because the job is too demanding and stressful in today ’ s environment of high-stakes accountability and school reform . These trends suggest the supply
of teachers and administrators is not ensured for
decades to come and educational administrators will
have to make a concerted effort to generate adequate
pools of qualified applicants for position vacancies or
lose in the competition to hire qualified educational
personnel . 
The second false assumption is that employees of
the hiring organization are the sole decision makers in
the staffing process . To the contrary , it is important for
hiring organizations to realize staffing is a dual decision-making process , with both representatives of the
hiring organization and job applicants making decisions regarding whether or not the staffing process
will continue to a successful conclusion . People doing
the hiring make the decisions to retain individuals in
the applicant pool after initial screening , invite applicants to interview for the job , and make a job offer to
the preferred job candidate . 
However , simultaneous with the above organizational decision making , job applicants make decisions
critical to successful staffing , such as the decisions to
apply for the job , accept an interview for the position
vacancy , and accept the job if offered . All organizational decisions and applicant decisions must be
affirmative or the staffing process will fail . Educational
personnel specialists are well-advised to adopt the
above dual decision-making perspective , focused on
applicant as well as organizational needs . Maurer and
his associates articulated the perspective best in their
formulation of recruitment-as-job-marketing theory . 
This theory posits staffing as being analogous to consumer product marketing . According to recruitment-asjob-marketing theory , the hiring organization ( vendor ) 
operates in a competitive labor market ( product market ) 
and offers jobs ( products ) to potential job applicants 
( customers ) with the hope the finalist for a position
vacancy will accept a job offer ( purchase the product )  . 
The proponents of recruitment-as-job-marketing theory
advise personnel administrators to embed the above
perspective in staffing operations or risk the best job
candidates opting out of the hiring process because the
hiring organization ’ s staffing practices are less attractive than those of other similar organizations competing
for the services of the same labor pool . 
In addition to the staffing philosophy schools and
school districts adopt , there are other staffing factors—
external and internal to the organization—to consider . 
As Herbert Heneman and his associates noted , external factors ( e . g .  , economic conditions , labor markets , 
unions , employment law ) impact staffing . Internal to
the organization , educational administrators should
manage staffing as an integral component of both
long-term and short-term planning and strategy formulation . Technically , staffing involves analyzing the
knowledge , skills , and abilities ( KSAs ) required for
each educational position and specifying the identified
952———Staffing , Concepts Of
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 952
KSAs and associated job duties in formal job descriptions that will serve as the basis for subsequent hiring
procedures . Further operational steps in the staffing
process include establishing a manpower plan with
measurable hiring objectives and creating the recruitment and selection programs and practices needed to
accomplish the objectives specified . 
Administrators performing staffing at the school
and school district levels are most likely to succeed if
they recognize , as noted earlier , staffing is a dual decision-making process , and develop recruitment practices ( e . g .  , job postings , position advertisements , 
recruitment Web sites , recruitment brochures , recruitment videos , job fair interviews , central office interviews , school site interviews ) that are attractive to
potential job applicants and , therefore , maximally
effective in generating adequate pools of qualified
applicants . Only when an adequate applicant pool
exists can the hiring organization implement subsequent selection practices ( e . g .  , applicant file screening , 
selection interviews , job candidate site visits , formal
job offers ) that meet established staffing objectives . 
—Paul Winter
See also administration , theories of ; class size ; collective bargaining ; contracts , with teacher unions ; enrollment projections ; human resource development ; job descriptions ; 
leadership , teacher ; loss of position ( school principal )  ; 
management theories ; personnel management ; principal
succession ; reduction in force ; unions , of teachers
Further Readings and References
Heneman , H .  , Judge , T .  ,  & Heneman , R .  ( 2000 )  . Staffing organizations ( 3rd ed .  )  . New York : Irwin McGraw-Hill . 
Ingersoll , R .  ( 2001 )  . Teacher turnover and teacher shortages : 
An organizational analysis . American Educational Research
Journal , 37 , 499–534 . 
Maurer , S .  , Howe , V .  ,  & Lee , T .  ( 1992 )  . Organizational recruiting as marketing management : An interdisciplinary
study of engineering graduates . Personnel Psychology , 45 , 
807–833 . 
Pounder , D .  ,  & Merrill , R .  ( 2001 )  . Job desirability of the high
school principalship : A job choice theory perspective . 
Educational Administration Quarterly , 37 , 27–57 . 
Pounder , D .  ,  & Young , I .  ( 1996 )  . Recruitment and selection of
educational administrators : Priorities for today ’ s schools . 
In K . Leithwood ( Ed .  )  & A . W . Hart ( Section Ed .  )  , The
international handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 279–
308 )  . Netherlands : Kluwer . 
Winter , P .  ( 1996 )  . Recruiting experienced educators : A model
and a test . Journal of Research and Development in
Education , 29 , 163–171 . 
Winter , P .  ( 1997 )  . Educational recruitment and selection : A
review of recent studies and recommendations for best
practice . In L . Wildman ( Ed .  )  , Fifth NCPEA yearbook 
( pp . 133–140 )  . Lancaster , PA : Technomic . 
Young , I .  ,  & Castetter , W .  ( 2004 )  . The human Resource function in educational administration ( 8th ed .  )  . Upper Saddle
River , NJ : Merrill . 
 STANDARD SETTING
The quest to set educational standards has become
ubiquitous in North America and abroad . In many
jurisdictions , ambitious standards have been set for
student achievement , school effectiveness , teacher
professionalism , and administrator competence . In
jurisdictions where such standards are not yet in
place , the standard-setting agenda is being moved
forward expeditiously , often in order to comply with
legislated requirements . As the movement to set educational standards gains traction and momentum , a
spirited and an increasingly partisan debate has grown
in both scholarly and practitioner journals as well as
in the popular press . The participants in this debate
include those who would make existing standards still
more encompassing and consequential , researchers
who seek to understand the many and sometimes
unintended effects that standards have had , and those
who aggressively dispute both the content of and the
benefits claimed for educational standards . 
Despite this debate , the movement to set and
enforce standards appears entrenched in the mood of
the times . The arguable but seemingly widely held
view that the educational enterprise is both lacking
in accountability and facing a crisis in quality has
heightened the hope that standard setting will restore
responsibility and purpose to the public schools . A
brief review of the origin and development of concerns with educational accountability and quality permits a fuller appreciation of how each has contributed
to the current appetite for standard setting . 
A primary source of the perception that education
is not sufficiently accountable to its many and diverse
publics is the distance that citizens feel separates them
from the once familiar institution of the school . With
the industrialization , urbanization , and globalization
emblematic of the twentieth century , the locally governed and consensually administered community
schoolhouse has been replaced by multifaceted , organizationally unwieldy , and , to an increasingly wary
Standard Setting———953
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 953
lay public , remote institutions made both inscrutable
and impenetrable by the adoption of bureaucratic structures and practices . In the opinion of many , public
education has steadily become less public and more
the domain of professional insiders , putative experts , 
and self-serving interests . As the educational enterprise becomes vaster , costly , and complex , an intensifying sense of estrangement threatens the trust , 
transparency , and respect traditionally associated with
the neighborhood school . Such an environment makes
understandable the broadly shared desire for a
renewal of educational accountability to be achieved
through the setting of clear and objective standards . 
The wish to make schooling a more publicly
comprehensible venture is given added urgency by the
perception that educational quality has eroded significantly and that this erosion has had a deleterious
effect upon national security and prosperity . When
international events and economic worries have called
national confidence into question , the adequacy of
existing educational institutions and practices has routinely been challenged . The emblematic historical
event that cemented the relationship between national
security and educational practices was the October
1957 launch of the satellite Sputnik by the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics . 
The successful launching of Sputnik propelled
modern western nations , most consequentially the United
States , into a period of existential uncertainty and educational doubt . The national security threat posed by a
technologically superior and inimical superpower was
widely interpreted as both a critique of and a challenge
to American education . Accordingly , a prominent aspect
of President Eisenhower ’ s response to Sputnik was
educational . The National Defense Education Act , 
which would direct more than a billion federal dollars
into support for higher education , was signed into law , 
and additional federal monies were provided for the
revamping of mathematics , science , and language programs in America ’ s schools . 
A similar shock to national well-being and hence
to educational sufficiency would be delivered by the
emergence of once economically dependent nations as
full-fledged , robust , and innovative global economic
competitors . The transformation of Germany and
Japan from nations vanquished in World War II into
industrial powerhouses capable of challenging the
economic hegemony of the United States inaugurated
a period of prolonged national consternation . This
malaise continues as still other nations previously
regarded as marginal test America ’ s economic mettle
with increasing success . The suspected linkage between
a worsening economic situation and a decline in academic quality has been buttressed in the popular
imagination by equally troubling educational news . 
In the United States and Canada , challenges to both
national complacency and economic prosperity have
been sharpened by seemingly unremitting comparisons
of educational achievement in which North American
students fare less well than many of their international
counterparts . But unflattering international rankings—
especially in math and science test comparisons—were
not the only source of unsettling news concerning educational achievement . In the United States , a precipitous drop in scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test
over three decades , beginning in the 1960s , raised
new doubts concerning the caliber of the best and the
brightest who were destined for higher education . The
National Assessment of Education Progress test funded
by the federal government indicated not only that these
declines were real but also that they extended downward in the K–12 system . 
The cumulative sense that schools had fallen out of
touch with public sentiment and that they had failed
to adequately fuel national ambitions , and the growing
suspicion that they were performing poorly led to
widespread calls for educational accountability . 
Perhaps the most notable , visible , and galvanizing of
these calls was contained in A Nation At Risk : The
Imperative for Educational Reform , the 1983 report of
the National Commission on Excellence in Education—
a commission appointed by President Ronald Reagan ’ s
Secretary of Education , T . H . Bell . Created because
of Bell ’ s sensitivity to the widespread public perception that something was remiss in the nation ’ s educational system , the commission would among its many
recommendations call for a national system of standardized student achievement tests , more rigorous
college and university admissions standards , and
academic and aptitudinal competency standards for
those who would teach in the nation ’ s schools . Key
recommendations of the commissioners thus underscored the practical utility of translating a growing
sense of apprehension about educational accountability and quality into a call for setting educational
standards . 
Perhaps ironically , the educational community ’ s
time-honored penchant for self-criticism would fortify
the push for standard setting . The literature of
deschooling , which unabashedly argued and continues
954———Standard Setting
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 954
to argue that schooling practices inevitably retard the
development of the educated person , became surprisingly popular among those most suspicious of educational institutions and the interests that control them . 
Another impassioned , if arguably misguided , critique
of education came in the form of Alan Bloom ’ s book
The Closing of the American Mind , published in 1987 . 
The fact that Bloom ’ s book would be republished in a
mass market paperback edition within a year , bearing
the subtitle How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and Impoverished the Souls of Today ’ s Students , 
is an index of how widespread and dour public disillusionment with education had become . 
Also published in 1987 , E . D . Hirsch ’ s book
Cultural Literacy : What Every American Needs to
Know became a beacon , particularly for parents who
felt that the educational system had replaced curricular
specificity with obscurantist rhetoric . In addition to
enumerating specifically what the culturally literate citizen should know , Hirsch linked possession of this
knowledge to a larger agenda that included social
equity , community building , and raising the quality of
national life . Sharply critical of what he regarded as the
laissez-faire attitude progressivists had taken toward
content learning , Hirsch concluded his book with an
abundant and unambiguous list of items that constituted
the core knowledge with which culturally literate
Americans should be conversant . Hirsch had not only
advocated educational standards ; many felt that he had
also provided a convincing demonstration of how standards could be sensibly and expeditiously set . 
The movement to make standards the preferred
medium through which educational accountability could
be realized and educational quality ensured gained
political momentum in the United States through the
work of the National Governors Association . The association ’ s 1986 calls for accountability would be moved
forward into the 1990s by the administration of
President George H . W . Bush , which called upon states
to voluntarily set standards and measures for educational achievement . President Clinton , who as governor
of Arkansas had been a key advocate for setting measurable educational goals , extended the Bush initiative
by signing 1994 legislation that compelled states to set
standards and to create the means through which
progress toward their accomplishment could be monitored . Although compliance was uneven , the agenda to
achieve educational accountability and quality through
standard setting evoked public support and , therefore , 
had become politically advantageous . 
Figuring prominently in the 2000 presidential elections , the growing public desire to achieve educational
accountability and quality led President George W . 
Bush to champion the No Child Left Behind Act 
( NCLB )  , which received bipartisan support . Under
Bush ’ s signature and with Democratic support rallied
by Edward Kennedy , the self-identified liberal senior
senator from Massachusetts , NCLB would become
law in January 2002 , less than 4 months after the
nationally unnerving terrorist attacks of September
11 , 2001 . Once again , in a time of national crisis , attention would be focused on America ’ s schools . 
Incorporating the argument set out by Hirsch that
standards can be effective tools for achieving equity and
social justice , the NCLB legislation challenged the
nation ’ s schools to deliver a comprehensive education to
all students . The quality of this delivery would be monitored by a regimen of annual standardized tests beginning in Grade 3 . Aggregated test results would be
translated into a public ranking of individual schools , 
and those students who found they were attending a
poorly performing school would have the right to transfer to a school that was either meeting or exceeding
standards for student achievement . Schools that perform
poorly over a 5-year period are subject to district determined restructuring . By transforming tests of individual
student achievement into measures of school effectiveness , NCLB had made schools rather than students the
primary focus of standard setting and assessment . 
Although how standards are to be set and enforced
remain points of contention , there is a still larger and
arguably more significant set of questions concerning
how standards will be used and the purposes standards
will serve . Regardless of whether the standards that
would advance educational accountability and quality
are to be applied to people or to institutions , the question of how standards are to be used remains largely
unanswered and vexing . But when standards are used
exclusively to identify and discipline poorly performing students , teachers , and schools , they may not only
do little to advance improvement , they may also speed
decline and inequity , not to mention iniquity . 
Like all criteria and measures , standards and the
assessments they engender are thoroughly human and
hence fallible conventions that have significant individual and institutional impact . If standards are to
be an aid to authentic educational improvement , their
ultimate uses as well as their content , immediate
applications , and actual effects demand continuous , 
careful , and pragmatic documentation and analysis . 
Standard Setting———955
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 955
The considerable energies that are being devoted
to the many ongoing arguments about the crafting and
application of standards for academic achievement
leave largely unaddressed thornier questions concerning broader issues of educational purpose . The
assumption that students , teachers , and schools are
to be measured solely by intellectual accomplishment
disregards the fact that schools simultaneously serve
multiple and not infrequently contradictory purposes . 
In 1986 , Charles Perrow provided a pointed reminder
that confusion of purpose , whether intentional or inadvertent , can stymie the setting of standards that are
genuinely useful : because to establish standards one
had to know the real goals of the organization . The
struggle to articulate the goals of real schools that exist
in specific places and are peopled by diverse and selfdirected individuals is an inexorably messy , conflicted , 
and interminable process . It is understandable , then , 
that the promise of standard setting to bring final and
definitive resolution to what is necessarily a complex , 
incessant , and exacting struggle concerning educational purpose is as tempting as it may be misleading . 
Finally , the standard setting movement invites the
criticism that education is once again making the mistake of turning too much to industry for models and
ideologies of practice and administration . With some
updating , Raymond Callahan ’ s classic and unrelenting
critique of the educational administrators who in the
early years of the twentieth century looked to business
practices , particularly to Frederick Winslow Taylor ’ s
scientific management , speaks critically to the contemporary project to set educational standards . Perhaps
Callahan would not be surprised that a number of
American schools have sought and received certification as ISO 9000 organizations—organizations that
prize quality achieved through uniformity of product
and define accountability as customer satisfaction
secured through managerial control of process—by the
industrially focused International Organization for
Standardization . Education , as Christopher Hodgkinson
argues , may ultimately and appropriately share very
little with its industrial neighbors who possess unambiguous technologies and who exercise tight control
over inputs , outputs , and employees . 
To see mystery embodied in thoroughly human
beings as a virtue that distinguishes the school from
other organizational types is not to dismiss the quest
for accountability and quality . It is , on the contrary , to
see this quest as inflected by the particular characteristics and values of the school that give unique context
and existential significance to the current debate on
standard setting . The press to develop standards
through which experience and outcomes would be
rationalized and regulated may ultimately matter less
than the opportunity presented by the current debate
about standard setting to reconsider what citizens can
reasonably expect of their educational institutions and
what these institutions can reasonably expect of citizens . If the attempt to set comprehensive educational
standards does nothing more than to motivate an
informed and often deferred conversation about educational purpose and collective social aspirations , it
will be an issue that has nudged education forward . 
—Martin Barlosky
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; curriculum , 
theories of ; educational equity ; expectations , teacher and
student cultures ; goals , goal setting ; learning environments ; 
measurement , theories of ; A Nation at Risk ; National
Assessment of Educational Progress ; No Child Left
Behind ; performance assessment ; philosophies of education ; psychometrics ; Scholastic Aptitude Test ; standardized
testing ; testing and test theory development
Further Readings and References
Barlosky , M .  ( 2003 )  . In search of leadership standards : Quest
or quagmire ? Some philosophical and practical reflections . 
Leadership and Policy in Schools , 2 ( 1 )  , 47–64 . 
Barth , R .  ( 2001 )  . Learning by heart . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Bloom , A .  ( 1988 )  . The closing of the American mind : How
higher education has failed democracy and impoverished
the souls of today ’ s students . New York : Simon & Schuster . 
Callahan , R .  ( 1962 )  . Education and the cult of efficiency . 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
English , F .  ( 2003 )  . Cookie-cutter leaders for cookie-cutter
schools : The teleology of standardization and the de-legitimization of the university in educational leadership programs . Leadership and policy in schools , 2 ( 1 )  , 27–46 . 
Hirsch , E .  ( 1988 )  . Cultural literacy : what every American
needs to know . New York : Vintage . 
Hirsch , E .  ( 1996 )  . The schools we need and why we don ’ t have
them . New York : Doubleday . 
Horne , R .  ( 2004 )  . Standards primer . New York : Peter Lang . 
International Organization for Standardization .  ( 2004 )  . 
Introduction . Retrieved August 1 , 2004 , from http :  /  / www 
. iso . org / iso / en / aboutiso / introduction / index . html
National Commission on Excellence in Education .  ( 1983 )  . A
nation at risk : The imperative for educational reform . 
Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Education . Retrieved
August 1 , 2004 , from . gov / pubs / NatAtRisk / 
intro . html
National Defense Education Act .  ( 2001 )  . Columbia
Encyclopedia ( 6th ed .  )  . New York : Columbia University
956———Standard Setting
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 956
Press . Retrieved July 1 , 2004 , from 
. com / 65 / na / NatlDefe . html
Perrow , C .  ( 1986 )  . Complex organizations : A critical essay . 
New York : Random House . 
Popham , J .  ( 2005 )  . America ’ s “ failing ” schools . New York : 
Routledge . 
Schrag , P .  ( 2003 )  . Final test : The battle for adequacy in
America ’ s schools . New York : New Press . 
Stein , S .  ( 2004 )  . The culture of education policy . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
U . S . Department of Education .  ( 2002 )  . No Child Left Behind
Act of 2001 . Retrieved June 1 , 2004 , from 
. gov / policy / elsec / leg / esea02 / index . html
 STANDARDIZED TESTING
A standardized test uses certain procedures to reduce
errors of measurement . It is usually developed by a
group of content experts and psychometricians . The
former ’ s responsibility is to ensure that the test items
adequately sample important content areas of the
subject tested . The latter ’ s work is to select items with
the appropriate difficulty and discrimination levels . 
The experts and psychometricians also work together
to avoid item bias or test bias . A standardized test also
uses standardization to reduce errors during the test
administration and scoring processes . Standardization
of test administration includes the use of uniform testing time , procedures , and testing environment . People
responsible for test administration usually go through
special training to ensure the uniformity of the administration process , a prerequisite for the fair comparison
of test scores . Standardized tests also use machines
for scoring objective items such as multiple-choice
questions . For subjective items such as essay questions , special training is used to ensure an adequate
degree of agreement between different raters rating
the same items . The training also helps a scorer to
apply the scoring rubrics in a consistent way during
the scoring period . 
TYPES OF STANDARDIZED TESTS
A standardized test is often norm referenced . In other
words , the purpose of a standardized test is to compare student test performance to that of a representative student group , or the norm . Students in the norm
group are selected based on their demographic background and academic status . Every few years , the
norm group is updated so that the results of the representative group are kept current and meaningful . 
Comparison of student test results against the norm is
usually accomplished through the use of standardized
test scores . One norm-referenced test score is the
percentile rank , which stands for the percentage of
students a student outperforms in the norm group . 
Standardization is considered imperative when there
is a need to make comparison of student performance
against the norm . The counterpart of a norm-referenced
test is a criterion-referenced test . Instead of comparing student performance against other students , a
criterion-referenced test uses external criteria or standards as the point of reference , usually local or national
performance standards . A more recent term for this
type of test is standards-based assessment . To facilitate the understanding of test scores , different performance levels are designed that correspond to different
ranges of scale scores . For instance , students who
answer most of the items on a subject test correctly
will receive very high scale scores ; they also receive
an “ Excellent ” score in terms of their performance
level . On the other hand , students who answer a minimal yet an acceptable number of items may receive a
barely passing scale score , hence a “ Basic ” score in
terms of performance level . It is possible for a test to
be both norm referenced and criterion referenced . For
instance , most statewide tests that are being used
serve both the purpose of comparing students against
each other and comparing their performance against
state performance standards . 
Standardized tests may also be divided into
achievement tests and aptitude tests . The former is an
assessment of what students have learned or achieved
over a period of time , while the latter is a measure of
students ’ potential for future success in academic
achievement . It is possible , however , for an achievement test to be used as a measure to predict student
future performance . For instance , the subject tests
of the Scholastic Achievement Tests ( SAT ) measure
what students have learned in a number of key subject
areas . The tests are used to predict if students will succeed in future studies in those areas . On the other
hand , the SAT Reasoning Test is an aptitude test that
is used to measure student future success in college . 
Related to aptitude test is the intelligence test , a test
used in and outside of education to measure a person ’ s
mental ability in general as well as specific areas . One
example is the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children ( WISC )  . 
Standardized Testing———957
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 957
HISTORY
The history of standardized testing may be traced back
to the Chinese civil service testing that started more
than 2 , 000 years ago , when certain standardization
procedures were regularly used in test administration
and scoring . The pioneering work of modern testing
occurred in the late 1800s , when the emergence of
laboratory or experimental psychology opened a new
venue to measurement . Interest in human intelligence
was on the rise at the time , due to the need to differentiate an increasing number of students in terms of their
academic potential and the need to differentiate people
for clinical or employment purposes . The first formal
testing was made possible by the publication in 1905
of the Binet-Simon scales of mental ability , a joint
effort of Alfred Binet and Théophile Simon . In 1916 , 
the test was revised by Lewis Terman of Stanford
University to become the first American intelligence
test , the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale , whose
fourth edition is widely used today . Around the same
time , Charles Spearman made significant contributions
to the field of measurement by his theory of measurement error and reliability and the theory of general
intelligence . World War I brought a period of significant advancement in measurement in the United
States , where a number of psychologists worked in the
army to develop measurements for military purposes . 
This period saw the first large-scale testing instruments , such as the Army Alpha , used for the measurement of a person ’ s verbal ability . During and after the
war , the instruments that were developed measured
aspects of human behavior such as verbal and nonverbal ability , personality , attitudes , and values . The early
1920s saw the birth of the first major instrument to
measure academic achievement , the Stanford Achievement Test . The Wechsler-Bellevue Intelligence Scale , 
another major intelligence test , came into being in
the 1930s . Around the same time , Louis L . Thurston
refined factor analysis , a statistical procedure originally developed by Charles Spearman , and developed
the theory of multiple intelligences . Thurston ’ s work
helped to bring about the emergence of a large number
of instruments during World War II for the measurement of distinct mental abilities related to military services . The cognitive taxonomy developed by Bloom
and his colleagues in the 1950s furthered the efforts at
measuring a variety of human ability and personality . 
This was a time when assessment in psychology and
education became widespread and testing became a
big business . It was also a time when people became
aware of potential inappropriate use of tests and the
impact of such uses on the society . The late 1960s and
early 1970s saw the birth of the National Assessment
of Educational Progress ( NAEP )  , a federal attempt at
measuring student achievement and progress across
the nation . The release of the report A Nation at Risk
in the 1980s spurred a nationwide effort to increase
accountability in the nation ’ s education system . A
direct result of the public expectation for educational
accountability was the movement toward more challenging academic standards and the development of
standardized tests to measure outcomes against those
standards . The 1990s saw a spread of state developed
high-stakes assessments across the nation . Around the
same period , developments in computer technology
and modern measurement methods , such as item
response theory , made possible computer adaptive testing ( CAT )  , which adapts a test to the examinee ’ s specific performance level . Along with CAT , alternative
forms of assessment that used few objective items
came into existence , including performance assessment and portfolio assessment . Another development
in the 1990s is the increasing use of alternative assessment format for students with disabilities . The No
Child Left Behind Act ( NCLB ) represented a recent
commitment at the federal level in educational
accountability . It is expected that standardized testing
at both the national and state levels will continue to
grow in scope . 
USE
Standardized tests are used widely in education . As
mandated by NCLB , every state has a testing program
in place to measure student achievement and progress
in important content areas . Student test results often
form the basis for government agencies and the public
to determine the effectiveness of a school system . 
NCLB has set up very specific criteria in terms of
achievement and progress a school needs to make
within a given period . Schools that fail to perform
adequately or make sufficient progress within a period
may be required to go through restructuring . Teachers
and principals are often evaluated by the results of
state-mandated tests . Poor test results may cause
teachers or principals to lose their jobs . For the
students , state test results become the primary basis
for decisions in program placement , grade promotion , 
or graduation from high school . The NAEP is used
958———Standardized Testing
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 958
both at the national level and more recently at the state
level to monitor student achievement and progress . 
What is unique about the program is that results are
reported for individual students . As a result , neither
students nor teachers are held directly accountable for
unfavorable test results . Aside from being used for
accountability purposes , a standardized test such as
a statewide test may be used by teachers for instructional improvement purposes . Some of the wellknown commercial tests may be used by a school
district specifically for this kind of purpose . The
results of such tests enable teachers to compare their
students ’ achievement to that of the nation . At the
same time , the tests yield specific diagnostic information in terms of the strengths and weaknesses of the
students in different content strands of a subject area . 
There are also standardized tests particularly designed
for determining the eligibility of a student for more
advanced studies . The American College Test ( ACT ) 
and the Scholastic Aptitude Test ( SAT )  , for example , 
are both used as college entrance exams that assess the
potential of high school graduates to succeed in college . Standardized tests may also be used as a basis
for awarding diploma or licensure . For instance , many
states have currently in place a high school exit exam , 
the result of which is used as the sole basis for awarding the high school diploma to a senior . The General
Educational Development ( GED ) testing program is a
standardized test used to provide adults with an opportunity to receive an alternative high school diploma . 
In the teaching profession , the Praxis series are used
to determine if a student is eligible to enter a teacher
education program or the teaching profession . 
While most tests are administered to groups of
students , there are also individually administered
standardized tests that are used for a variety of purposes . For instance , the Wechsler Individual Achievement Test is a standardized achievement test that is
administered individually to students . The Wechsler
Intelligence Scale , on the other hand , is an individually administered intelligence test . These tests are particularly useful when there is a need to test only a few
students in a school , especially to identify a small
number of students who have difficulty in their learning or students who may be eligible for placement in
gifted / talented programs . 
Despite the wide use of standardized tests , there
are various kinds of criticisms toward such tests . One
criticism often directed at national standardized tests
is the irrelevance of the standards to the local schools . 
Because of the diversity across the nation in terms of
content standards , it is a real challenge for a national
standardized test to use items that cover every state or
district ’ s standards . A second criticism is about the
inappropriate use of statewide test results . Some of the
decisions that are made based on test results are , 
according to the critics , not justified . Should teachers
be responsible for the failure of their students to meet
certain achievement goals ? There are more factors
involved that affect student achievement than just
teaching . Another criticism directed at standardized
tests is their overuse of multiple-choice questions that
often test lower levels of cognitive learning . Such use
also encourages teachers to teach to the test rather
than helping them focus on the important instructional
objectives . Although attempts are being made to
include more performance-based items , it seems more
effort is needed in this area so that the test can reflect
a student ’ s real academic performance . 
—Yuankun Yao
See also accountability ; at-risk students ; Binet , Alfred ; Cattell , 
Raymond ; diversity ; Education Testing Service ; individual
differences , in children ; intelligence ; item response theory ; 
literacy , theories of ; minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; National Assessment of Educational Progress ; No
Child Left Behind ; performance assessment ; productivity ; 
psychology , types of ; psychometrics ; quantitative research
methods ; Spearman , Charles ; testing and test theory development ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Cohen , R . J .  ,  & Swerdlik , M . E .  ( 2002 )  . Psychological testing
and assessment : An introduction to tests and measurement . 
Monterey , CA : CTB / McGraw-Hill . 
Haladyna , T .  ( 2002 )  . Essentials of standardized achievement
testing . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Jones , L . V .  ,  & Olkin , I .  ( 2004 )  . The nation ’ s report card : 
Evolution and perspectives . Bloomington , IN : Phi Delta
Kappa Education Foundation . 
Linn , R .  ( 2000 , March )  . Assessments and accountability . 
Educational Researcher , 29 ( 2 )  , 4–16 . 
Phelps , R .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2005 )  . Defending standardized testing . 
Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
Popham , W . J .  ( 2002 )  . Classroom assessment : What teachers
need to know . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Spearman , C . E .  ( 1904 )  . General intelligence objectively
determined and measured . The American Journal of
Psychology , 2 , 201–293 . 
Yeh , S .  ( 2001 )  . Tests worth teaching to : Constructing statemandated tests that emphasize critical thinking . 
Educational Researcher , 30 ( 9 )  , 2–11 . 
Standardized Testing———959
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 959
 STATE DEPARTMENTS
OF EDUCATION
The state department of education is the major state
agency responsible for the overall planning , delivery , 
and evaluation of educational programs and services . 
It typically operates under the direction of either the
governor or a state board of education , which , in turn , 
appoints a chief state school officer to administer the
agency . In 14 states , the chief state school officer is
elected directly by the population . 
The large majority of the states ’ departments of education use that same nomenclature to designate the agency , 
but some state departments may also be referred to by any
number of related titles : state board of education ( e . g .  , 
Illinois )  , department of public instruction ( e . g .  , North
Carolina , Wisconsin )  , or some other name ( e . g .  , Utah
State Office of Education , Minnesota Department of
Children , Families , and Learning )  . Certain states ( e . g .  , 
Missouri , Tennessee ) draw a special distinction between
the state department of education as the agency that
administers education policy and the state board of education as the governmental body that oversees that agency . 
The traditional function of the early state departments of education was fairly innocuous , limited to
the collection and dissemination of education statistics . More recently , however , state departments have
had to grow in scope and function to include such
responsibilities as accrediting schools , certifying
teachers , allocating funds , monitoring compliance
with state and federal laws , and conducting research . 
By reason of this expansion of their duties , the aggregate number of employees of the 50 state education
departments has risen over the past years , with some
agencies employing in the thousands . 
In their history of modern school reform , the influence of the state education agency has declined over
the past 50 years . In the post-Sputnik era from the late
1950s through the early 1970s , the state agency and the
chief school officer played a dominant role in shaping
public education policy . However , starting in the 1980s
and continuing through to the present , other groups—
including governors , business leaders , the media , and
federal policy makers—have staked their own claims
in driving the educational reform movement . 
Still , the role of the state department of education
remains an important one in the American system of
public school governance . While their prominence in
providing direction for the reform movement may
have waned over the past two decades , their leadership
for reform implementation is crucial . That education
remains primarily a state function under the reservedpowers clause of the U . S . Constitution ( the varied
interests driving reform efforts have tended to coalesce
at the state level ) and federal involvement in education—indeed , from the 1981 Education Consolidation
and Improvement Act up through the No Child Left
Behind Act passed in 2002—are all factors that present states with a broad number of options in determining how to spend education funds . For these reasons
and others , state departments of education will continue
as key players in educational governance and reform . 
State departments of education in particular and
state systems of education in general have evolved in
incremental fashion as the result of a variety of constitutional and legislative provisions in each of the states . 
The constitutions of the newly formed states from the
first half of the nineteenth century were reflective of a
changing philosophy of the citizenry toward education . 
There was a growing recognition of the need for public
schooling , and the nascent state constitutions served to
push that endeavor from a private or religious matter
toward a state system of education . State school codes
then developed progressively in the state legislatures , 
leading to variation across state systems , differences
often due to economic and population differences
between the states and the regions . 
The first superintendency in the United States was at
the state level in New York in 1812 . A similar process followed in other states—albeit with some interruptions in
the continuity of the office for about half of the states—
to the point that nearly all states had some state department in place by 1880 . State boards came into
prominence on the heels of the early state superintendents—Massachusetts being the first in 1837—and neither were given any significant power .  ( According to
Harry Gehman Good , Americans in those days still
recalled the memory of the tyranny of George III and disdained all executive power , whether wielded by the governor or the lowly school superintendent of the state .  ) 
In these early superintendencies , the modern state
department of education had its origins . But from
those distant beginnings , the historical tradition of the
state agency having relatively little political power or
influence has remained . In their six-state study of educational policy elites , Catherine Marshall , Douglas
Mitchell , and Frederick Wirt ranked 18 policy influencers , finding surprising consistency in the composite ranking of the states . They displayed their findings
960———State Departments of Education
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 960
as concentric circles of influence , with the following
labels : Insiders , Near Circle , Far Circle , and Forgotten
Players . 
The Insiders shared constitutional authority in
making laws , while the Near Circle consisted largely
of school professional organizations . The Far Circle
group was viewed as having some influence on certain
topics or issues but was not seen as vital to educational policy making in the states . Of the four actors in
the Far Circle , the state board / state department of education was most prominent . Others have observed that
they are only marginal policy actors in the educational
arena . This regularity in the low standing of the policy
impact of the state agency speaks to the residual effect
of their founding and history . 
Today , every state has a department of education , 
and any differences in power and focus among the
agencies themselves have moderated significantly
from their early days , in part due to the common challenges that all states have been required to address . 
While some state departments exercised strict and
explicit control over local schools early on , others 
( notably in the plains and across the South ) allowed the
locality to exercise broad discretion in providing education to its children . Though vestiges of those differences remain , the fact that all states must now deal with
policy problems such as desegregation , special education , financial distress , and the like have made their
departments of education more alike than different . 
In that sense , certain fundamental problems are
shared by state departments of education as they go
about the business of implementing state education
policy goals and programs . Shifting expectations exist
for state departments of education as continuing
demands for reform , especially in the form of heightened academic standards and erasing the achievement
gap , place burdens on them that their traditional operating style has difficulty addressing . This circumstance
has led to calls for a reframed leadership from the state
education agency and recommendations for improvement in policy implementation and program delivery . 
Reform measures centered within or emanating
from the state department of education will not likely
be viewed as meaningful at the school district level
unless they are responsive to local needs and within the
capacity of the local school district to successfully
carry out . Ignoring local school district context is not
an effective strategy for state departments of education
to utilize in implementing systemic reform initiatives . 
Rather than employing a unitary response pattern , 
local school districts make sense of state education
department-initiated change in vastly different ways . 
James Spillane ’ s study of local educational practice and state instructional policy illustrates that local
policy-making initiatives can actually undermine a
state ’ s systemic reform strategy . As more robust and
coherent policies and practices are established at the
state level in support of ambitious reform outcomes , 
more occasions are therein provided for school district
policy making , especially in states where there is a
strong history of local control . Because local policy
making is inherently more responsive to local district
context , capacity for reform at the district level often
surpasses that of the state education agency . 
To counter these difficulties , it is increasingly recognized that state departments of education need to
revise their missions and structures if they are to have
any relevance for school reform and improvement . An
examination of the organizational charts of many of
the state education agencies shows they have frequently been organized around the administration of
discrete programs and the disbursement of their funding ; likewise , the department ’ s mission was primarily
to ensure that program budget amounts were expended
and services were delivered . In the view of Wirt and
Michael Kirst , the fundamental problem of state departments of education is that they have been organized
around their many categorical grant programs but that
new educational quality standards will require a 
 “ cross-cutting ” integration that links teaching , learning , management , funding , and assessment . 
Overall , the organizational structure of the state
departments has been focused around budgets , audits , 
and program compliance . The modern evolution of state
departments of education around program grants has
created agencies characterized by organization “ silos ” 
and a concomitant system of processes and procedures
that support a narrow view of each of the program areas . 
The evolutionary development of state departments
of education will need to encourage cross-program and
cross-organizational analysis and response . This may
force a reconsideration of the mission and goals of the
state agencies in ways that will increase a department ’ s
flexibility in accommodating local school district needs
and state policymakers ’ demands in meaningful ways . 
The current structure of the typical state department , 
which is presently customized tightly around its various
program areas , will likely require the development of
new service delivery models that can meet the needs of
the particular accountability mandates within a state . 
State Departments of Education———961
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 961
Toward this end over the past decade , about 30
state departments of education have looked at some
sort of restructuring to foster innovation and better
address large policy goals ( e . g .  , reducing the achievement gap ) as opposed to individual program outcomes 
( e . g .  , Title I reading scores )  . The actions of a number
of state departments of education in particular are
illustrative of this transition to a new way of doing
business for these agencies . 
The Kentucky Department of Education was abolished and reconstituted as part of the Kentucky
Education Reform Act . Texas repealed a third of its
state education code and restructured its state department around six broad functions . Minnesota abolished
its department of education in favor of a new department of children , families , and learning—with the goal
of coordinating the full range of social and educational
services available to children and their families . The
Ohio Department of Education reinvented the state
education agency around a collection of five broadly
conceived , cross-functional service delivery centers 
( e . g .  , Center for Students , Families and Communities ; 
Center for the Teaching Profession )  . North Carolina
has been battling to decentralize its state board of
education for the entire span of the last 10 years . 
Educational historians remind us the development
of state departments of education ( as well as the office
of the state superintendent ) was crucial to the hierarchical structure adopted by educational organizations
in general . They are outgrowths of the common school
movement , the purpose of which was to secure a uniform system of common schools . 
The mandates and demands for accountability emerging from the modern era of school reform are more complex and require a wider range of policy responses and
program innovations than could have been imagined during the common school era . More important , local
school districts expect some variation in treatment by the
state agency to better match the unique characteristics
and needs of their communities . Thus , the roles , structures , and functions of state departments of education
will continue to evolve to support a refined notion of
shared responsibility between the local district and the
state agency for school change and improvement . 
—Randy J . Dunn
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; consolidation , of school districts ; Council of Chief
State School Officers ; curriculum , theories of ; Department
of Education ; Education Commission of the States ; elections , 
of school boards , bond issues ; governance ; innovation , in
education ; Interstate School Leaders Licensure Consortium ; 
Kentucky Education Reform Act ; management theories ; 
Mann , Horace ; No Child Left Behind ; organizational
theories ; politics , of education ; restructuring , of schools ; 
rural education ; school districts , history and development ; 
school improvement models ; standardized testing
Further Readings and References
Apple , M .  ( 2003 )  . The state and the politics of knowledge . 
New York : Routledge . 
Books , S .  ( 2004 )  . Poverty and schooling in the U . S . Mahwah , 
NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
Good , H .  ( 1962 )  . A history of American education . New York : 
Macmillan . 
Lunenburg , F .  ,  & Ornstein , A .  ( 2004 )  . Educational administration : Concepts and practices ( 4th ed .  )  . Belmont , CA : 
Wadsworth . 
Marshall , C .  , Mitchell , D .  ,  & Wirt , F .  ( 1989 )  . Culture and education policy in the American state . London : Falmer . 
Spillane , J .  ( 1996 )  . School districts matter : Local educational
authorities and state instructional policy . Educational
Policy , 10 ( 1 )  , 63–87 . 
Spring , J .  ( 2001 )  . The American school : 1642–2000 . Boston : 
McGraw-Hill . 
Steffy , B .  ,  & English , F .  ( 1994 )  . Wild card educational reform
in Kentucky . In C . Finn & H . Walberg ( Eds .  )  , Radical education reforms ( pp . 51–74 )  . 
Wirt , F . M .  ,  & Kirst , M . W .  ( 1997 )  . The political dynamics of
American education . Berkeley , CA : McCutchan . 
 STEWARDSHIP
Stewardship involves the use of one ’ s own time , 
energy , and resources . A person ’ s stewardship goes
beyond physical and into cognitive , aesthetic , and personal matters . Resources vary in type and quantity , but
each individual is ultimately responsible to make profitable use of what he or she has been given . Stewardship
directly affects people . Thomas Sergiovanni said that
stewardship taps into people ’ s emotions , appeals to
their values , and responds to their connections with
others . 
STEWARDSHIP AND LEADERSHIP
Stewardship responsibilities are at the heart of the
administrator ’ s role . Stewardship represents an act of
trust . People and institutions entrust a leader with specific obligations and duties with the expectation that
962———Stewardship
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 962
the leader will fulfill and perform the obligations and
duties on their behalf . Stewardship also involves the
leader ’ s personal responsibility to manage his or her
life and affairs with consideration for the rights of
other people and for the common welfare . 
Stewardship also involves placing oneself in service
to the organization ’ s ideas and ideals and to others
who are committed to their fulfillment . Stewardship
acknowledges and accepts all members of the school
as community and all those who are served by the
community . Parents , teachers , and administrators share
stewardship responsibility for students . Students also
are involved in stewardship responsibility for the
school as a learning community . 
STEWARDSHIP AND
SERVANT LEADERSHIP
Robert Greenleaf , recognized for developing the concept of “ servant-leadership ,  ” contends that true leadership evolved from those whose main motivation was
to help others . Stewardship and servant leadership
assume a commitment to serving the needs of others . 
Other common characteristics include ( a ) use of openness and persuasion rather than control ,  ( b ) commitment to the growth of people ,  ( c ) appreciation for the
fact that people have an intrinsic value beyond their
visible contributions ,  ( d ) a commitment to listening to
others in order to identify the will of the group ,  ( e ) an
understanding and empathy of others ,  ( f ) commitment
to “ healing ” relationships—recognizing and helping
others maintain a positive spirit ,  ( g ) establishing group
and self-awareness ,  ( h ) reliance on persuasion rather
than a position of authority ,  ( i ) ability to maintain dayto-day tasks while nurturing the larger view of possibilities , and ( j ) ability to foresee the likely outcome of
a situation . Stewardship and servant leadership are
based on the responsibility of nurturing the personal , 
professional , and spiritual growth of others . 
There are a number of areas where the principles
of servant leadership are being applied :  ( a ) servantleadership as an institutional philosophy and model
with the focus on the group-oriented approach to analysis and decision making as a way to improve the institutions and society ,  ( b ) servant-leadership as a pivotal
role in the theoretical and ethical framework of boards
of directors and trustees as a way to reanalyze their
approach to their roles focusing more on asking “ Whom
do we serve ?  ” and “ For what purpose ?  ”  ( c ) servantleadership and its role with community leadership
organizations as a way to build a true sense of
community ,  ( d ) servant-leadership and experiential
education as a way to strengthen service learning ,  ( e ) 
servant-leadership and its use in formal and informal
training programs as part of a conceptual framework
for leadership and management models , and ( f ) servantleadership and its use in programs that address personal
growth and transformation as a way to encourage individuals to take advantage of opportunities to serve and
lead others . 
—Jean Haar
See also administration , theories of ; attitudes toward work ; 
capacity building , of organizations ; collaboration theory ; 
consideration , caring ; diversity ; great man theory ; human
resource development ; leadership effectiveness ; leadership
styles ; management theories ; mentoring ; morality , moral
leadership ; organizational theories ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; self-actualization ; supervision ; women in
educational leadership
Further Readings and References
Greenleaf , F .  ( 1977 )  . Servant leadership . New York : Paulist
Press . 
Sergiovanni , T .  ( 1992 )  . Moral leadership : Getting to the heart
of school improvement . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Sergiovanni , T .  ( 2000 )  . Leadership as stewardship . In The
Jossey-Bass reader on educational leadership . San
Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Todd , S .  ( 1994 , July / August )  . Stewardship : Helping the gifted
help themselves . Gifted Child Today , pp . 32–35 , 42 . 
 STRATEGIC PLANNING
The pace of change in organizations is accelerating . 
Consequently , high-performing organizations or units
within them attempt to engage in planning , designing , 
and managing their own desired future rather than
simply reacting and responding to changes imposed
on them by the environment . Strategic planning is
believed to be an important aspect of organizational
health , and processes outlined to complete this task
are thought to be unifying for the organization . 
Strategic planning may be defined as a disciplined
effort to produce fundamental decisions about possible
actions that will frame what an organization is , what
it does , and why it does it . Whether an organization
chooses to select a process developed by a consultant
or they opt to design their own process , it should be
Strategic Planning———963
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 963
compatible with the culture of the organization . While
there is no standardized method for engaging in strategic planning , there is some consensus about what constitute key tasks of the process . The leader of the unit
involved in strategic planning should appoint a coordinator ( s ) for the process , and together they should select
a representative steering committee . The steering committee members will serve as leaders of the small
groups , who will facilitate the selected and / or designed
process . The unit leader can write a charge to the steering committee that outlines the ultimate expectation of
what is to be accomplished and the time frame for
completion of the strategic-planning document . 
A broadly participative process should be selected or
designed that will allow stakeholders or constituents in
multiple locations to be involved . Teleconferencing and
videoconferencing , in addition to small groups , should
be utilized as tools to facilitate broad participation in
the planning process . Broad participation and having
input into the planning process elevates commitment 
( or buy-in ) to the outcome and the eventual , long-range
plans that emerge for the planning unit . A 3- to 5-year
plan for the future defines the life of the plan . 
Reviewing , revising , or writing the mission
statement of the planning unit should be a precursor
activity for strategic planning , because unless an organization honestly knows who it is , whom it serves , and
why it exists , the strategic-planning process may
outline great plans that do not meet the needs of the
stakeholders . 
The planning coordinator ( s ) and the steering committee can work together to design or select a process
that will meet the needs of the organization . At least
two approaches exist to identify themes that will provide the organizational direction in planning for the
future : a strengths , weaknesses , opportunities , and
threats ( SWOT ) analysis or a strategic-issues focus . 
The SWOT analysis can involve people both inside
and outside the organization , while a strategic issues
approach involves interviewing the people within the
organization to determine what the themes are for the
unit . Either approach has its positives and negatives , 
but both will generate information the organization
should consider in creating its strategic plan . 
Before the first meeting with unit constituents , the
planning coordinator ( s ) and the steering committee
should agree on the definition of terms they will use in
small group meetings . This will ensure the internal
cohesiveness of the final document . Focusing on the
outline of the final document will be time well
invested , prior to beginning small-group work . At a
minimum , the outline of the final document should
include : goals or themes ( what we want to do )  , action
plans ( what will be done )  , steps for implementation 
( how it will be done )  , an accountability assignment 
( who will do it )  , date for completion ( when it will be
done )  , and the project budget ( what it will cost ) for
implementing the action plan to achieve the goal or
theme for the planning unit . Establishing a timeline
for completing each phase of the planning process
will prescribe the beginning and end of deliberations . 
Adding an evaluation date subsequent to implementation to review the effectiveness of the goal or
action plan also signals the critical importance of the
planning process to the nature of the educational unit . 
Setting an evaluation point in the future represents
a proactive expectation that strategic planning is an
ongoing process that seldom ends , once begun . Revising
and updating become a continuous cycle . 
If the steering committee communicates frequently
and substantively with all members of the organization ( including clerical and custodial staff )  , even those
who are unable to fully participate in a small discussion group will be apprised of the progress and direction resulting from the planning process . Involving
classified staff in appropriate planning groups will
encourage their assistance in implementation and also
garner their ideas to improve the organization . 
When the final strategic-planning document is
compiled , the members of the unit should have an
opportunity to discuss the contents , including providing a written reaction form . This form allows even a
reticent person in the organization with an avenue to
affect the outcome of the planning process , and it
offers the steering committee specific alternative suggestions for the final document . 
In addition to developing and conducting the planning process , the unit leader and the steering committee
need to identify the appropriate route for approval of
the final document . Once approval of the strategic plan
is secured , a monitor ( individual or small group ) for
implementation may be appointed . To assure the fulfillment of the desired future , the monitor can be instructed
to report progress on achieving the goals , themes , or
action plans that are outlined in the document . 
A planning unit that has undertaken a continuous
quality improvement journey can adjust the strategicplanning document to meet this objective by making
one slight change to the process . Because benchmarking
and data-driven decision making are intimate partners
964———Strategic Planning
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 964
within organizations engaged in quality processes , if
key performance indicators ( KPIs ) are added to the
goals or action plans in the document , this provides a
means through which data can be examined and documented for change . KPIs are essential for tracking
qualitative progress over time and establishing improvement trends . 
The final strategic-planning document should
always be considered a dynamic and changing plan , 
akin to building a bridge while it is being walked on . 
Critics of strategic planning indicate that strategic
change is mostly ad hoc and irregular and can ’ t be
accurately predicted . Much of what passes for “ strategic ” is simply financial forecasting in disguise and
therefore works against the organization being flexible when changes are required . Finally , the legacy of
strategic planning is scientific management and represents an unusual effort to control things when such
control is also illusory . Strategic planning results in a
perpetuation of the status quo because only that is
actually known . 
—Mary Drushal
See also adaptiveness of organizations ; collaboration theory ; 
communications , theories in organizations ; democracy , 
democratic education and administration ; finance , of public
schools ; leadership , participatory ; management information
systems ; organizational theories ; performance evaluation
systems ; planning models ; problem solving ; quality control ; 
rational organization theory ; scientific management
Further Readings and References
Alvino , K .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1995 )  . Strategic planning : A human
resource tool for higher education . Washington , DC : 
College and University Personnel Association . 
Bryson , J .  ( 1995 )  . Strategic planning for public and nonprofit
organizations : A guide to strengthening and sustaining
organizational achievement . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Carnoy , M .  ( 1999 )  . Globalization and educational reform : 
What planners need to know . Paris : UNESCO . 
Dolence , M .  , Rowley , D .  ,  & Lujan , H .  ( 1997 )  . Working toward
strategic change : A step-by-step guide to the planning
process . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
French , W .  , Bell , C .  ,  & Zawacki , R .  ( 2004 )  . Organization
development and transformation : Managing effective
change . Boston : McGraw-Hill . 
Kaufman , R .  , Herman , J .  ,  & Watters , K .  ( 1996 )  . Educational
planning : Strategic , tactical , operational . Lancaster , PA . 
Technomic . 
Mintzberg , H .  ( 1994 )  . The rise and fall of strategic planning . 
New York : Free Press . 
 STRATIFICATION , 
IN ORGANIZATIONS
Stratification in organizations generally refers to the
difference in status between higher and lower levels in
an organization ’ s hierarchy , which are also connected
to and represented by differences in salary , prestige , 
privileges , and mobility among position occupants
SOCIAL SYSTEMS : THE BASIC
BUILDING BLOCKS OF ORGANIZATIONS
Stratification occurs as organizations increase in size 
( the one-room school had only two levels : teacher and
students )  . The underlying mechanism is that as people
interact in organizations , they inevitably develop subgroups called social systems , that is , any two or more
people interacting meaningfully . As a matter of fact , a
small group of five people generates 22 different social
systems . Social systems comprise the basic building
blocks of organizations . Obviously , then , as organizations
increase in size , so do the number of their social systems . 
In 1938 , Chester I . Barnard was an early observer who
noted that the informal systems , that is , the social systems , have considerable impact on governance and on the
processes that organizations must develop to function . 
With the increase of social systems comes
increased stratification , since humans have limited
spans of control ; that is , being able to handle a number
of subordinates reporting directly to a supervisor . At
lower levels , spans can be larger than at higher levels . 
The implication of this is that with increased complexity and size comes greater hierarchical structure , 
greater stratification . 
MINTZBERG ’ S PULLS
Henry Mintzberg ’ s logo ( see Figure 1 ) provides
intriguing insights into the impact of stratification on
the functioning of organizations . In 1979 , Mintzberg
identified five basic structural configurations in complex organizations . The Strategic Apex comprises
those running the operation ( top management )  , while
middle management ( principals and assistant principals ) is considered the Middle Line . The Operating
Core in school organizations would be teachers , while
computer experts , budgetary , and other analysts compose the Technostructure . Last , Support Staff consists
of secretaries , custodians , aides , and similar personnel . 
Stratification , in Organizations———965
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 965
Figure 2 , depicting Mintzberg ’ s five organizational 
 “ pulls ,  ” provides insights into the dynamics of complex
organizations , certainly borne out by empirical evidence . 
All five basic social systems work to maximize their
power , control , influence , and autonomy . The Strategic
Apex clearly is interested in controlling , with their efforts
focusing on pulling to centralize decision making . 
Middle Line managers generally try to maximize their
autonomy in decision making , thus striving to Balkanize . 
The Operating Core struggles to control its own destiny
by pulling to professionalize , as is evident in the decadeslong efforts of both teachers and nurses to professionalize .  ( Recently , we have seen the National Board for
Teacher Certification established for teachers as evidence of high levels of professional accomplishment .  ) 
As for the Technostructure , this social system pulls
to standardize work processes , which can be seen by
computer experts insisting on using the same models
of computers everywhere , or in standardizing high
school scheduling in districts with several high schools . 
Last , to gain influence and control , Support Staff press
to collaborate . 
By using Mintzberg ’ s insights into organizational
structure and pulls , we can describe , analyze , and predict a considerable range of behavior , thereby flushing
out hitherto hidden and puzzling agendas relating to
stratification and other organizational phenomena . 
STRUCTURALISM AND BUREAUCRACY
While we are indebted to Frederick Taylor for the
construct of scientific management , the construct of
structuralism entered into the United States when
translations of Max Weber ’ s works became available . 
Weber ’ s work provided the concept of bureaucracy , 
and for him , the distinctive characteristics of bureaucracy included the following :  ( a ) a clear-cut division
of labor to permit specialization ,  ( b ) positions organized into a hierarchical authority structure ,  ( c ) a formally established system of rules and regulations ,  ( d ) 
an impersonal orientation on the part of officials , and 
( e ) career employment in the organization . Clearly , 
bureaucratic organization is the main model supporting a structuralistic approach to organizations , and its
components of division of labor and a hierarchical
authority structure are the twin supports for organizational stratification . 
COUNTERING APPROACHES : 
DECENTRALIZATION
While centralizing and decentralizing comprise two
ends of a continuum , decentralizing approaches to
organizations flatten out the hierarchy , thus reducing
hierarchical levels and , therefore , stratification . Some
966———Stratification , in Organizations
Operating Core
Middle
Line
Technostructure
Strategic
Apex
Support
Staff
Figure 1 The Five Basic Parts of Organizations
SOURCE : Mintzberg , H .  ( 1979 )  . The Structuring of
Organizations . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice-Hall . Reprinted
with permission . 
Pull to Collaborate
Pull to Standardize
Pull to Centralize
Pull to
Balkanize
Pull to Professionalize
Figure 2 Five Pulls on the Organization
SOURCE : Mintzberg , H .  ( 1979 )  . The Structuring of
Organizations , 1st edition ( p . 20 )  . Reprinted with the permission
of Pearson Education , Inc .  , Saddle River , NJ . 
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 966
critics have claimed that hierarchical bureaucracy was
paralyzing American education . Others promoted the
individual school as the unit to focus on for school
improvement efforts . Site-based management , the
small-schools movement , and the Small Learning
Communities movement , the latter particularly supported by the National Association of Secondary
Schools , have begun to press for and to develop professional support for decentralizing efforts . 
—Arthur Shapiro and Steve Permuth
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; Barnard , 
Chester I .  ; bureaucracy ; chain of command ; Chicago
school reform ; differentiated staffing ; hierarchy , in organizations ; line and staff concept ; management theories ; 
matrix organization ( the “ adhocracy ”  )  ; span of control ; 
power ; organizational theories ; systemic reform
Further Readings and References
Barnard , C . I .  ( 1938 )  . The functions of the executive . 
Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . 
Gerth , H .  ,  & Mills , C .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1946 )  . From Max Weber : Essays
in sociology . New York : Oxford University Press . 
Lunenberg , F . C .  ,  & Ornstein , A . C .  ( 2000 )  . Educational
administration : Concepts and practices ( 3rd ed .  )  . Belmont , 
CA : Wadsworth . 
Mintzberg , H .  ( 1979 )  . The structuring of organizations . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
National Association of Secondary School Principals .  ( 2004 )  . 
Breaking ranks II : Strategies for leading high school
reform . Reston , VA : National Association of Secondary
School Principals ; Providence , RI : Education Alliance , 
Brown University . 
Razik , T .  ,  & Swanson , A .  ( 2001 )  . Fundamental concepts of
educational leadership ( 2nd ed .  )  . Upper Saddle River , 
NJ : Merrill Prentice Hall . 
Taylor , F .  ( 1911 )  . The principles of scientific management . 
New York : Harper & Row . 
Vecchio . R . P .  ( 1994 )  . Organizational behavior ( 3rd ed .  )  . 
Orlando , FL : Dryden Press . 
 STRAYER , GEORGE D . 
A leading figure in school administration at Teachers
College , Columbia University , George D . Strayer , 
along with Robert M . Haig , is best known as the originator of the Stayer-Haig plan , which has served as the
basic formula for states to make general grants of aid
to school districts on an equalized basis . 
Strayer ( 1876–1962 ) started his long career in education with an interest in classroom teaching , specifically
in the area of mathematics , and he coauthored a popular
arithmetic textbook series of the time . However , he came
to be regarded as a founding light in the new field of educational administration . An alumnus of Columbia , he
studied at Teachers College at a time when it was the heralded breeding ground and center of a new , empirically
based , progressive educational philosophy . As head of
the division of field studies at Teachers College for over
20 years ( 1921–1942 )  , Strayer also served as director
of the Division of Organization and Administration of
Education at Teachers College from 1937 to 1942 . His
national reputation led to service with numerous
respected organizations , among these the presidency of
the National Education Association . 
Along with Columbia professors Paul Mort and
N . L . Engelhardt , Strayer was influential in the creation
of the school survey movement . Their studies of school
systems across America , conducted through Strayer ’ s
field studies unit , provided the groundwork for many of
the recommendations that helped shape administrative
practice in the first half of the twentieth century . From
this basis , then , Strayer came to be seen as a national
authority on school administration and finance . 
Professor Strayer , though , probably gained his
greatest renown for work that literally established the
field of school finance . Richard King , Austin Swanson , 
and Scott Sweetland noted that Strayer , partnering
with Robert Haig , first devised a plan to share educational costs between states and localities through the
use of what is still known today as the foundation formula . According to their model , Strayer and Haig envisioned that each school district would levy a uniform
local property tax rate sufficient to meet education
costs only in the most property-wealthy school system ; 
the state would then make up the difference between
this foundation level and what could be raised locally
in each of the other districts . 
Under a strict Strayer-Haig formula , as utilized
presently , the state specifies a dollar amount per student
that all school districts must receive to guarantee a minimally adequate education . The state then guarantees the
difference between the amount raised locally using some
qualifying tax rate and the guaranteed expenditure level . 
As part of this groundbreaking work in 1923 , 
Strayer and Haig were first to address the need to
equalize resources across school systems within a state
to provide an education program for every student that
at least met some minimal standard . Previously , general
Strayer , George D . ———967
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 967
state aid to schools had been solely in the form of flat
grants without regard to district fiscal capacity—the
Strayer-Haig formula remedied this primary defect of
the dominant flat grant system for funding schools . 
—Randy J . Dunn
See also budgeting ; cost-benefit analyses ; efficacy theory ; equity
and adequacy of funding schools ; finance , of public schools ; 
management theories ; National Education Association ; organizational theories ; taxes , to support education
Further Readings and References
King , R .  , Swanson , A .  ,  & Sweetland , S .  ( 2003 )  . School
finance : Achieving high standards with equity and efficiency ( 3rd ed .  )  . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Kowalski , T .  ,  & Brunner , C .  ( 2005 )  . The school superintendent : Roles , challenges , and issues . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , 
SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 142–167 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Strayer , G .  ,  & Haig , R .  ( 1923 )  . The financing of education in
the state of New York : Report of the educational finance
inquiry commission ( Vol . 1 )  . New York : Macmillan . 
 STRESS , IN SCHOOL
ADMINISTRATION
Stress intrigues and plagues the practitioner and researcher
alike . Popular writers and academic researchers have
added extensive literature in the past decades to the study
of occupational stress . Internationally , over 100 , 000
books , journals , and articles have dedicated their attention
to the phenomenon of stress . While the early writings
tended to be anecdotal in nature with little substantive
connect to empirical evidence , the past three decades
have seen refined interest from researchers . 
Researchers from the disciplines of medicine , psychiatry , clinical psychology , and behavioral sciences
have undertaken studies to understand the phenomena
of stress and coping . The research on stress in schools
has examined several levels of stress , including the
nature of stress , types and sources of stress , responses
to stress , and the consequences of stress . 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
In 1976 , Joseph McGrath first explained stress as a
four-stage , closed-loop process , beginning with situations
in the environment perceived by the individual , to
which the individual selects the response , resulting in
consequences for both the individual and situations , 
which closes the loop . Each of the four stages is
connected by linking process of cognition appraisal : 
decision , performance , and outcome . 
Other models or conceptual frameworks represent
hybrids , elaborations , or extensions of the McGrath
model . The four stages postulated by McGrath have
served as sound building blocks over the past three
decades for research on administrator stress . The
administrative stress cycle , built on McGrath ’ s foundation , has four stages . The first stage is a set of
demands , or stressors , placed on administrators . In
1984 , Walter Gmelch and Boyd Swent studied 1855
principals and superintendents and discovered four
factors of administrative stress . Over 45 research studies have replicated this study and have found similar
types of stress . The first source , role-based stress , is
perceived from administrators ’ role-set interactions
and beliefs or attitudes about their roles in schools . 
The second source , task based stress , arises from the
performance of day-to-day administrative activities , 
from telephone and staff interruptions , meetings , writing memos and reports , to participating in school
activities outside of the normal working hours . The
third source , boundary-spanning stress , emanates
from external conditions , such as negotiations and
gaining public support for school budgets . Boundaryspanning stress appears to be unique to the field of
school administration . Conflict-mediating stress is
the fourth source . This type of stress arises from the
administrator handling conflicts within the school
such as trying to resolve differences between and
among students , resolving parent and school conflicts , 
and handing student discipline problems . 
The second state consists of perceptions or interpretation of the stressors by administrators . Those
who perceive demands as harmful or demanding will
create stress within their lives and approach their work
with intensity . Certain personality types , such as Type
A behavior , accentuate the stress and create conditions impacting the health of administrators . 
The third stage of the cycle presents choices to the
administrators . If they perceive the stressors to be
harmful , threatening , or demanding , they will respond
to them physiologically or psychologically . Most
data-based studies have investigated sources of stress 
( Stage 1 )  , while fewer have addressed how educators
cope with their job pressures . However , the general
literature on coping is significant in volume and
diverse in attention and addresses popular and academic concerns as well as conceptual , theoretical , and
empirical investigations . 
968———Stress , in School Administration
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 968
The fourth stage of stress cycle , consequences , 
takes into account the long-range effects of stress . The
consequences can lead to headaches , ulcers , illnesses , 
or disability . There appear to be three dimensions of
burnout : emotional exhaustion , depersonalization , and
feelings of low personal accomplishments . All three
factors of burnout are significantly associated with the
factors of stress , for all levels of school administration , particularly between emotional exhaustion and
task-based stress . 
In conclusion , within the leadership ranks , the superintendent is often popularly identified as the administrator most susceptible to stress and disease . This exclusive
assumption , however , remains open to question . Principals
suffer more severe stress from conflict and time pressures
than superintendents do . On the other hand , superintendents experience excessive stress from trying to negotiate
with multiple clients in the school system . 
—Walter H . Gmelch
See also administration , theories of ; attitudes toward work ; 
conflict management ; consideration , caring ; creativity , in
management ; flow theory ; human resource development ; 
leadership effectiveness ; mentoring ; politics , of education ; 
principalship ; role conflict ; satisfaction , in organizations
and roles ; self-actualization ; superintendency ; working
conditions , in schools ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Brock , B .  ,  & Grady , M .  ( 2002 )  . Avoiding burnout . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Gmelch , W .  ( 1982 )  . Beyond stress to effective management . 
New York : Wiley . 
Gmelch , W .  ,  & Chan , W .  ( 1994 )  . Thriving on stress for success . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Gmelch , W . H .  ,  & Swent , B .  ( 1984 )  . Management team stressors and their impact on administrators ’ health . Journal of
Educational Administration , 2 , 293–205 . 
McGrath , J .  ( 1976 )  . Stress and behavior in organizations . 
Chicago : Rand McNally . 
Torelli , J .  ,  & Gmelch , W .  ( 1993 )  . Occupational stress and
burnout in educational administration . People and
Education , 1 , 363–381 . 
 STRUCTURAL
EQUATION MODELING
The complex analysis of quantitative data in much
contemporary education research and evaluation is
conducted using structural equation models ( SEM )  , 
also referred to as covariance structure analysis , 
covariance structure modeling , or analysis of covariance structures , which permit the simultaneous prediction of several outcome variables . Generally , this form
of data analysis is undertaken using specialized statistical software , including the Statistical Analysis
System ( SAS , particularly PROC CALIS )  , EQS , 
M-PLUS , LISREL , and AMOS . SEM is appropriate
when causal interpretations are desired , measuring
the effects of exogenous variables ( e . g .  , student demographic characteristics or parental socioeconomic status ) on endogenous ( dependent , or outcome ) variables , 
such as student achievement , and the effects of
endogenous variables on other endogenous variables . 
SEM analyses can be conducted for a single group ( for
example , all eighth-grade students in a district ) or for
subgroups to be able to make comparisons in model
characteristics across groups ( for example , comparing
model results for male and female eighth graders )  . 
In SEM , one equation is estimated for each dependent ( endogenous ) variable using predictors that can
be exogenous ( independent ) or endogenous in another
equation . The model estimates both the direct effects of
independent variables on the endogenous variables and
the indirect effects of independent variables mediated
through other endogenous variables . Variables may be
either observed , that is , already present in the data set , 
or latent , in which case the variable is constructed as
a linear combination of observed variables through a
process of confirmatory factor analysis . This combination of traits separates SEM from other linear models
methods—simple and multiple regression and correlation , analysis of variance , analysis of covariance , and
multivariate analysis of variance and covariance—and
from other methods of simultaneous equation estimation used commonly in econometrics and related disciplines . SEM frequently is referred to as causal
modeling , because it is used to rule out alternative
explanations through complex combinations of variable
paths . However , like other linear models methods , SEM
results are sensitive to problems associated with lack of
normality ( particularly kurtosis )  , missing data , and outliers . Furthermore , it is highly debatable whether causation in the experimental science sense is achieved . 
The most fundamental form of SEM is path analysis , in which all variables are observed and none are
latent . An example from research on undergraduates
at a research-extensive large Midwestern land grant
institution is shown in Figure 1 , where “ ACT / HSR ” 
denotes the average of standardized values for ACT
Structural Equation Modeling———969
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 969
composite score and high school rank ,  “ %male ” is the
percentage of a learning team who are male ,  “ best
practice ” denotes the mean factor score for student
perceptions of the extent to which the learning team
experienced best practices ,  “ peer mentor ” represents
the mean factor score for student and learning community coordinator evaluation of team peer mentors ,  
 “ firstgpa ” is mean first-year cumulative grade point
average for the team ,  “ LC satisfaction ” is mean learning team student satisfaction with their learning community experience , and “ retsopho ” measures the
percentage of students in each learning team persisting to the second fall semester . 
This is a reduced version of the “ saturated ” model
in which all possible paths are estimated . The reduced
model has the important properties that all of the
reported paths are statistically significant and that even
with some paths deleted due to their nonsignificance , 
the reduced model does an excellent job of reproducing
the sample covariances among the variables . The model
fits exceptionally well ( χ2 = 1 . 393 , df = 9 , p =  . 998 , 
n = 390 )  . Of the five dependent variables in the model , 
the best fit , measured by squared multiple correlations , 
is for first-term GPA ( R2 =  . 585 )  , and the worst fit is
for peer mentor evaluation ( R2 =  . 020 )  . Other dependent variables had intermediate squared multiple
correlations ( R2 =  . 377 for learning community satisfaction ,  . 195 for retention to the sophomore year , and 
. 071 for experience of best practices )  . A wide array of
other fit statistics is available . 
In this model , direct effects were significant from
%male to evaluation of peer mentors ( β =  . 142 , CR 
= 2 . 303 ) and learning community satisfaction ( β =  . 145 , 
CR = 2 . 913 )  . β is the standardized regression weight
and CR is the critical ratio , defined as the unstandardized parameter estimate divided by the standard error
of the unstandardized parameter estimate . A larger
value of β and a higher CR value indicate a stronger
970———Structural Equation Modeling
AST / HSR
best practice
Firstgpa
retsopho
Peer mentor 
. 59 
. 21 
. 20
e1
e4
e2
e5
e6 
. 13 
. 14 
. 10 
. 24 
. 02 
. 40 
. 34 . 22 
. 69 
. 28 
. 07
− . 14
− . 14 LC
Satisfaction
% male 
. 38
Figure 1 Effects of Learning Team Characteristics on First-Year Undergraduate Retention : Evidence From Structural
Equation Models
SOURCE : Shelley , M .  , Huba , M .  , Epperson , D .  , Cook , M . Zhang , B .  ,  & Hoekstra , P .  “ Effects of Learning Team Characteristics on
First-Year Undergraduate Retention : Evidence From Structural Equation Models .  ” Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association , April 11–15 , 2005 , Montréal , Canada . Reprinted with permission . 
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 970
model component . There also are significant direct
effects from ACT / HSR to experience of best practice 
( β =  . 126 , CR = 2 . 043 )  , first-term GPA ( β =  . 693 , CR 
= 20 . 085 )  , and retention to the sophomore year ( β =  
. 193 , CR = 2 . 902 )  . Significant direct effects also are
found from experience of best practice to first-term
GPA ( β =  . 282 , CR = 6 . 146 ) and to learning community satisfaction ( β =  . 339 , CR = 6 . 265 )  , from evaluation of peer mentors to experience of best practices 
( β =  . 235 , CR = 3 . 646 ) and learning community satisfaction ( β =  . 398 , CR = 7 . 626 )  , from first-term GPA
to retention to the sophomore year ( β =  . 213 , CR 
= 3 . 188 )  , and from learning community satisfaction to
first-term GPA ( β = −0 . 144 , CR = −3 . 219 ) and retention to the sophomore year ( β =  . 221 , CR = 4 . 060 )  . 
Total effects in the model can be decomposed into
direct and indirect components , with some effects
entirely direct , others entirely indirect , and others a
mixture of direct and indirect . For example , in the
path model , the effects of male on best practices experience , ACT / HSR on Item 58 , evaluation of peer mentors on firstgpa , %male on retention , evaluation of
peer mentors on retention , and best practices experience on retention , are entirely indirect . Most other
effects are entirely or largely direct . 
One major complication with SEM is that it works
best with large samples , which are not always available . SEM requires the simultaneous estimation of
a substantially larger number of parameters than is
needed for most applications of other linear models
methods , and it is recommended to have 5 to 10 observations per estimated parameter . A SEM model with
only a few variables can have complex path coefficients that add up to a surprisingly large number of
estimated parameters and hence require large data sets . 
—Mack C . Shelley
See also empiricism ; factor analysis ; frame theory ; hierarchical developmental models ; item response theory ; networking and network theory ; quantitative research methods ; 
research methods
Further Readings and References
Bollen , K .  ,  & Long , J .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1993 )  . Testing structural equation models . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . 
Jöreskog , K .  ,  & Sörbom , D .  ( 1996 )  . LISREL 8 : Structural
equation modeling with the SIMPLIS command language . 
Chicago : Scientific Software International . 
Jöreskog , K .  ,  & Sörbom , D .  ( 1996 )  . LISREL 8 : User ’ s reference guide . Chicago : Scientific Software International . 
Schumacker , R .  ,  & Lomax , R .  ( 2004 )  . A beginner ’ s guide
to structural equation modeling . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence
Erlbaum . 
Shelley , M .  , Huba , M .  , Epperson , D .  , Cook , M .  , Zhang , B .  ,  & 
Hoekstra , P .  ( 2005 , April 11–15 )  . Effects of learning team
characteristics on first-year undergraduate retention : 
Evidence from structural equation models . Paper presented
at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational
Research Association , Montréal , Canada . 
 STUDENT TEACHING
Student teaching is the capstone experience of a preservice teacher ’ s preparation program . Student teaching is intended to provide preservice teachers with
supervised , extended experiences in real classroom
settings and the opportunity to be assessed in relation
to their strengths and weaknesses as prospective
teachers . While student teaching has traditionally
been viewed as a capstone experience , it is increasingly seen as an initial rather than a terminal learning
opportunity with schools , districts , and state departments of education looking at the role of induction
and mentoring as a much-needed , job-embedded
extension of the student teaching experience . 
The nature of the student teaching experience varies
greatly among teacher education programs . The length
of a student teaching placement can vary from 5 weeks
to 2 semesters . Typically , a student teacher is assigned a
cooperating or supervising teacher at a school site , and
a university supervisor makes periodic visits to observe
the student teacher in practice . The typical student
teaching assignment requires the student teacher to
spend about half of the student teaching placement
teaching , with the remaining time spent observing and
participating in classroom or school-level activities with
experienced teachers . 
Typically , the student teacher ’ s responsibility in the
classroom increases during the course of the student ’ s
placement in the school . The student teacher sometimes
has the opportunity to participate in all aspects of a
teacher ’ s work in a school ( e . g .  , parent conferences , 
supervisory duties , committee or grade-level teamwork ) 
and to meet and confer with other school personnel that
support the teacher in the classroom ( e . g .  , counselors , 
administrators , academic area curriculum and instructional specialists , special education teachers )  . 
Traditionally , preservice teachers had little real experience with schools until the student teaching experience
Student Teaching———971
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 971
in their senior year . In the late 1980s and early 1990s , 
some universities experimented with the concept of a
professional development school where the research
knowledge of the university was integrated with the
practical knowledge of K–12 classroom teachers to
enhance the preservice teacher ’ s preparation for the real
world of the classroom . In some cases , student teaching
was increased from one semester to two and included
intensive supervision and guided reflection by public
school teachers or clinical faculty rather than faculty
from the university . The student teaching experience
sometimes involved working with two different cooperating teachers at two different grade levels . 
The role of the cooperating teacher cannot be underestimated in the development of the preservice teacher . 
The ability of the cooperating teacher to observe
instruction , communicate with preservice teachers
about strengths and weaknesses observed , and guide
the novice teacher in selecting teaching , learning , management , and assessment approaches to address problems that may surface is key to the preservice teacher ’ s
progress . For this reason , some universities have
required cooperating teachers to take training in clinical
supervision to strengthen their ability to observe
instruction , communicate their observations , and help
the preservice teacher explore and reflect on experiences using appropriate adult learning principles . 
To better prepare preservice teachers for the
student teaching experience , teacher education programs are requiring field experiences in school sites
early and throughout preservice teachers ’ preparation
programs . Disparities between preservice teacher
preparation and the reality of the requirements of the
actual job of teaching are key contributors to novice
teachers ’ leaving the profession . Early field experiences that increase preservice teachers ’ responsibilities in the classroom are seen as possible ways to
reduce the effects of these disparities . Early in the preservice teacher ’ s introduction to real classrooms , the
preservice teacher may take the role of observer or
paraprofessional . Then the preservice teacher may
work as a tutor or classroom monitor . Next , the preservice teacher may work as a teaching assistant . Such
early and sustained field experiences aid preservice
teachers in making a final decision about entering the
teaching field and increase the likelihood of their successful transition to the student teaching experience . 
An important component of student teaching is
the development of the preservice teacher ’ s ability to
reflect critically on teaching practice and experiences
in the classroom . Journal writing and the reflective
teaching log are common means of promoting reflection during the student teaching experience . Journal
writing helps student teachers begin the process of critiquing and guiding their own professional practice . 
Reflective teaching logs provide opportunities for the
preservice teacher to describe the daily sequence of
classroom events , select a single classroom episode to
explore , analyze the reason for selecting the episode
and what was learned from it , and consider the possible future implications of what was learned . 
Several states have developed performance-based
standards for what preservice teachers should know
and be able to do when they exit a preservice teacher
preparation program . The basic assumption underlying the movement toward performance-based standards is that performances require preservice teachers
to demonstrate learning in authentic settings and
reflect the complexity of the teacher ’ s real life role in
today ’ s school classrooms . Standards established by
the National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher
Education ( NCATE ) and the Interstate New Teacher
Assessment and Support Consortium ( INTASC ) 
reflect this trend . 
—Judith A . Ponticell
See also clinical supervision ; mentoring ; National Council for
the Accreditation of Teacher Education ; normal schools ; 
schools of education ; teacher recruitment and retention
Further Readings and References
Heller , D . A .  ( 2004 )  . Teachers wanted : Attracting and retaining good teachers . Alexandria , VA : Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development . 
Parkay , F . W .  ,  & Stanford , B . H .  ( 2004 )  . Becoming a teacher 
( 6th ed .  )  . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Wentz , P . J .  ( 2001 )  . The student teaching experience : Cases
from the classroom . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Merrill
Prentice Hall . 
 SUBJECTIVISM , IN THEORY
Subjectivism is the philosophical notion that knowledge is mediated through individual human bias . It is
an epistemological perspective that questions the possibility of absolute truth and a knowable world . This
perspective implies that theory and research inquiry are
shaped by subjective knowledge . This epistemological
972———Subjectivism , in Theory
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 972
stance emerged in the twentieth century due to philosophical doubts about the ideal of an objective , knowable world . For example , literary theory suggests that
language is an abstract concept in the sense that the
signs ( words and symbols ) used to represent objects
and ideas are independent of their referents . Thus , language and discourse do not come out of the interplay
between subject and object , but are imposed on the
object by the subject . The object or idea , then , makes
no contribution to the creation of meaning making , 
and meaning does not come through an interaction
with the object and is not bound by any correlation
with an absolute . 
Subjectivism stands in contrast to the two other
primary epistemological perspectives : objectivism and
constructionism . Modernist theory rests on objectivist 
( positivist and postpositivist ) epistemological assumptions that suggest that there are generalizable , universal and static truths about reality that are waiting to be
discovered through scientific inquiry . Sociology of
knowledge perspectives rest on constructionist epistemological assumptions that assume that all knowledge
is socially constructed , thus , knowledge is created
through the social interaction between humans and
the evolving social world they construct over time . 
Subjectivism offers a sharp divergence from objectivist
and constructionist views of knowledge , since it
evolved out of structuralist , poststructuralist , and postmodern thought . These perspectives view truth as
ambiguous , relative , fragmented , particular , and discontinuous . Subjectivist epistemological assumptions
are central to understanding structural , poststructural , 
and postmodern thought and challenge the possibility
of objective knowledge contained in objectivism and
constructionist assumptions that a shared truth can be
created through social interaction . 
Subjectivist epistemology has implications for how
knowledge is viewed and how research is conceived . 
In an era when standards and scientifically based
research are heralded as the key to improving education , subjectivism suggests that research is value laden
and raises questions about the possibility of objective
research . Rather than understanding reality in any true
sense , subjectivism suggests that research knowledge
is always partial , biased , and particular . In its purest
form , this perspective further posits that subjective
assumptions are always embedded in the theories used
to shape research questions and inquiry . Thus , seemingly “ objective ” research questions are shaped by
subjectivity , so claims of “ truth ” are really subjective
interpretations mediated by the personal bias of
researchers . 
—Cynthia Gerstl-Pepin
See also aesthetics , in education ; affective domain ; arts education ; character education ; constructivism ; creativity , 
theories of ; cultural politics , wars ; deconstruction ; egocentrism , theories of ; esteem needs ; ethnocentrism ; flow
theory ; humanistic education ; objectivity ; paradigm ; 
philosophies of education ; semiotics
Further Readings and References
Achinstein , P .  ( 2002 )  . Subjective views of Kuhn . Perspectives
on Science , 9 , 423–432 . 
Crotty , M .  ( 1998 )  . The foundations of social research : 
Meaning and perspective in the research process . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Papastephanou , M .  ( 2005 )  . Can subjectivity be salvaged ? 
Common Knowledge , 11 ( 1 )  , 136–159 . 
 SUICIDE , IN SCHOOLS
Student suicide refers to self-inflicted termination of
one ’ s life . Student suicide may also be categorized as
accidental deaths . Student suicide in the United States
has increased from 3% per 100 , 000 in 1960 to approximately 9% per 100 , 000 persons from the age of 5 to
24 in 1992 . For the age group between the ages of 15
to 24 years old , suicides have gone from 5% to 13%
per 100 , 000 persons . Next to homicides and accidents , 
suicides represent the third leading cause of death for
youth in the United States . Homicides have gone from
5 . 9% per 100 , 000 in 1960 in the age group of 5 to 24
years of age to 22% in 1992 . According to the National
Center for Educational Statistics , deaths by accident , 
suicide , or homicide are collectively identified as violent deaths . They are considered measures indicating
that youth bear a burden of problems that compete
with schools for their attention . They represent the
most extreme responses to larger and deeper social
problems among a state ’ s or a nation ’ s youth . 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SUICIDE VICTIMS
Suicide is categorized as a health and safety issue along
with poor diet , reckless sexual activity , lack of exercise , 
drug and alcohol abuse , eating disorders , school violence , 
physically or sexually abused children , and peer-to-peer
Suicide , in Schools———973
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 973
sexual harassment . While suicide is an issue that
affects students from wealthy , middle-class , and poor
communities , certain groups are more prone than
others ; however , characteristics change over time . 
Prior to 1980 , African Americans were less likely than
Whites to commit suicide ; however , between 1980 and
1996 , the suicide rate among African Americans doubled . Nationally , the suicide rate for White males has
nearly tripled since 1950 . American Indians , because
of alcoholism , rural isolation , and fewer services , are
more likely to take their own lives . Also at heightened
risk are gay and lesbian youth and students with learning disabilities . Gender and suicide methods for adolescents nationally are similar . Boys tend to commit
suicide at a higher rate than girls do . They also tend to
use guns more than girls do . Girls tend to seek intervention to reduce suicidal impulses . According to the
National Center for Educational Statistics , 47% of
suicides are committed in the home with a parentowned gun , 10% in another residence , and 10% on a
public road . 
ADMINISTRATOR RESPONSIBILITIES
Suicides present unique challenges to school administrators . The alarming increase in completed suicides
means that assistant principals who are responsible for
student discipline will come in touch with completed
or attempted suicides . For every completed suicide , an
estimated 7 to 10 others are attempted . 
One suicide in a school may lead to other suicides . 
Suicide clustering may be a copycat act or response
to news reporting . Clustering is a by-product of youth
suicide and a challenge for school administrators and
counselors . School administrators play an important
role in suicide prevention through early detection of
risk factors , warning signs of depression , and student
programs . Depression , anger , anxiety , drug abuse , 
hopelessness , reduced academic performance , learning problems , or interactions among factors are predictors of suicidal behavior . Schools can address
issues of depression , coping , problem solving , and
stress management . While administrators must be
proactive , they must also use good judgment in selecting preventions to assure that prevention programs do
not induce suicide in a delicate teen . Boys who commit suicide may not exhibit these factors in the same
way as do girls and may be misdiagnosed . There are
some typical circumstances , attributes , and behaviors
that are useful for administrators , teachers , social
service providers , counselors , physicians , and other
adults in contact with adolescents . 
—Augustina Reyes
See also adolescence ; at-risk students ; bullying ; child development theories ; climate , school ; cognition , theories of ; 
discipline in schools ; discrimination ; diversity ; emotional
disturbance ; esprit ( school climate )  ; expulsion , of students ; 
learning environments ; lesbian / gay / bisexual / transgender
issues in education ; mental illness , in adults and children ; 
motivation , theories of ; parental involvement ; personality ; 
queer theory ; resiliency ; sexuality , theories of ; underachievers , in schools ; violence in schools
Further Readings and References
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention .  ( 2005 )  . 
Available online at 
Centers for Disease Control .  ( 1996 )  . Youth suicide prevention
programs : A resource guide . Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Health and Human Services , National Center for
Injury Prevention and Control . 
Centers for Disease Control .  ( 2005 )  . Program in suicide prevention . National Center for Injury Prevention and Control . 
Available online at 
. htm # 2
Francis , B .  ,  & Skelton , C .  ( 2005 )  . Reassessing gender and
achievement . New York : Routledge . 
Renold , E .  ( 2005 )  . Girls , boys , and junior sexualities . New York : 
Routledge . 
Reyes , A .  ( 1999 )  . How school leaders help students be healthier
and safer in the new millennium . Texas Study of Secondary
Education , 9 ( 1 )  , 16–21 . 
 SUPERINTENDENCY
Over the past one-and-a-half centuries , superintendents have been the persons vested with the greatest
individual responsibility for the welfare of local , intermediate , and state school systems . Their jobs have
required managing the political complexities of taxsupported institutions , facilitating intensely bureaucratic processes , possessing keen wisdom and
understanding of intertwined social subcultures that
comprise school communities , providing leadership
for the persons who work and study in schools , and
demonstrating expertise in curricular and instructional
matters . In short , the demands of the job have been
staggeringly complex . That complexity likely will
increase into the future . 
974———Superintendency
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 974
Not only have the demands of the work shifted , but
the path to the superintendency has changed sharply
since the first superintendents assumed their duties in
the mid-1800s . During these early years , schoolmasters with little professional experience or preparation
could be tapped for the work , particularly in small , 
rural districts . In contrast , the persons who become
superintendents now have served as teachers for an
average of 6 or 7 years before moving into their first
administrative positions , typically principalships or
assistant principalships . Those who work in large districts usually move into central office positions before
finally assuming the superintendency . In smaller districts , individuals tend to leap directly from principalships / assistant principalships to superintendencies . 
Before assuming superintendencies today , administrative aspirants typically engage in extensive graduate
study to obtain advanced administrative credentials . 
Another important change in the path to the superintendency is that the promotional path used to wind
through the aspirant ’ s home district . Currently , however , over two thirds of superintendents have been
hired from outside their current districts . 
Despite changes such as these , the demographic
characteristics of superintendents as a group have
remained remarkably stable over time . Men have held
between 87% and 97% of all superintendencies during
the twentieth century . Nearly all male superintendents
have been married . Though accurate historical data
describing the number of persons of color holding
superintendencies does not exist , persons of color probably have accounted for no more than 1% of all superintendents at any given time . And most superintendents
have been middle-aged . Some of this demographic data
has been collected on a semiregular basis first by the
Department of Superintendence of the National Education Association ( NEA )  , then later by the American
Association of School Administrators ( AASA )  . It is worth
noting that the demographic homogeneity of superintendents today stands in stark contrast with the evergrowing diversity of school communities . 
The matter of who serves as superintendent may be
shifting subtly during the early years of the twentyfirst century , however . For example , the proportions of
women and persons of color in the position are growing in some regions such as the Northeast and South . 
The range of acceptable leadership styles may be
expanding as well . The nature of the work itself has
changed along with technologies facilitating internal
communication , curriculum and instruction , information
management , testing and measurement , and public
relations . Future directions for the superintendency no
doubt will be grounded both in how the position has
evolved as well as emerging social conditions . 
School superintendents and supervisors first served
in urban areas when women began teaching in large
numbers during the mid-1800s . Because men were
chosen for these administrative positions , some
observers conclude that sex segregation was part of
the design of schoolwork . School board members
believed that male administrators assured female
teachers ’ safety , especially from the threat supposedly
posed by adolescent male students . The presence of
male administrators in schools and districts also preserved a gender symmetry that typically existed in
White , middle-class homes with male heads of household who represented family interests to the community and women minding domestic affairs while
submitting to male authority . The substantially higher
salaries required for newly created district administrative positions were funded through savings achieved
by hiring relatively less expensive women teachers . 
Other needs factored into the initial decision to hire
school superintendents or supervisors . During the
early- to mid-1800s , school board members , particularly in rural districts , each managed particular
aspects of creating and maintaining schools . Some
hired teachers . Others built or maintained the physical
facility . School board members built desks , bought
instructional materials , and inspected the quality of
teaching . As districts grew , however , the task of managing schools quickly exceeded what lay board
members could undertake without compromising
their primary wage-earning activities . Consequently , 
they hired superintendents to act on their behalf . 
Counties and states also added superintendencies
to their structures . State superintendencies were created to serve two primary functions . First , states , such
as those in the Northeast , initially established state
school offices so that all school-related matters could
receive some central oversight . Horace Mann ( secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education , 
1837–1848 ) and Henry Barnard ( secretary of the
Board of Commissioners of Common Schools in
Connecticut , 1838–1842 , later serving as the first
federal commissioner of education ) each effected
reforms , largely through the collection and dissemination of information about schools . They chose this
route to service because otherwise they were empowered with little funding or real authority for managing
Superintendency———975
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 975
schools . Persuasion remained their most formidable
means of shaping policy and practice . Second , some
states and territories , particularly those in the
Midwestern and Western regions , required state
school officers to manage land set aside by law for
schools . School land that was sold generated revenue
to be distributed for educational purposes . State superintendents managed this business , ensuring that intermediate districts received their proportional share . 
Intermediate ( or county ) superintendencies were
established mainly during the mid- to late-1800s . 
Persons holding these positions received funds and
resources from offices of state superintendents . 
Intermediate superintendents subsequently distributed
such resources to local districts . They also adjudicated
boundary disputes that arose all too frequently among
adjoining local districts . In addition to these responsibilities , intermediate superintendents assumed a wide
variety of other duties , depending on the state . Some
intermediate superintendents performed roles remarkably similar to those of local superintendents , traveling between schoolhouses , inspecting instruction , 
organizing professional development activities for
teachers , and overseeing the use of resources . Others
worked primarily in their county offices , mainly handling bureaucratic matters . Because intermediate
superintendents managed the distribution of public
funds , they tended to be elected , rather than
appointed , officials . Women teachers began to campaign for and win county superintendencies as the
women ’ s suffrage movement gathered strength during
the late nineteenth and early twentieth century . By
1930 , women accounted for as many as 27% of all
intermediate ( county ) superintendents . 
Local superintendents initially did not manage
the financial affairs of their districts directly . Elected
school board members customarily provided direct
oversight of school funds . However , as schools and
districts grew in size and complexity during the late
1800s , boards eventually ceded fiscal authority to
school superintendents . School board size also
decreased over this time , shrinking from as many as
several hundred board members in some urban school
districts to as few as a handful . Obviously , as board
size decreased , board members relinquished much of
the direct oversight they previously had provided for
routine school administrative functions . In the end , 
superintendents assumed substantially greater authority for managing schools as board members simultaneously relinquished it . The increase in the authority
of the superintendency made it more desirable for
educators seeking executive pay , duties , and status . 
As the superintendency evolved , a number of talented individuals attained the position and provided
remarkable organizational skill , capacity for institution
building , and broad intellectual leadership . Men such
as William Torrey Harris ( superintendent of St . Louis
Schools and later commissioner of education of the
U . S .  )  , a Transcendentalist and leading exponent of
Hegelian philosophy , pursued educational leadership
as a means of enacting educational reform . These early
superintendents established curricula grounded both in
practical skills and broad liberal knowledge . They systematized the hiring and training of large numbers of
teachers and other school workers , often establishing
institutions to prepare teachers such as normal schools
or institutes . They led campaigns for the initial construction of school buildings . They wielded significant
influence in shaping local political and bureaucratic
mechanisms for daily management of schools , processes
eventually reified as those recognizable today . Some
urban superintendents created districts where there
had been none and in the process enabled the public
education of vast numbers of children
Despite clear successes , however , the growing field
of school administration also attracted public criticism . Newspapers hastened to point out inefficiency
or corruption in school practices . Even one wellregarded public champion of educational leadership , 
Charles Francis Adams Jr .  , sternly cautioned members
attending the NEA annual meeting in 1880 that superintendents must become more professional and less
pseudointellectual or mindlessly bureaucratic in their
focus , or otherwise risk irrelevance . Within two decades
of what later was regarded as a seminal address to the
field , one that demanded the professionalization of the
superintendency , higher-education institutions such
as Stanford , the University of Chicago , and Teachers
College of Columbia University had created graduate
programs specifically to prepare high-quality candidates for school executive positions . Stanford ’ s
Ellwood Cubberley not only created a remarkably
successful graduate program but also wrote numerous
texts that , in time , became essential scholarship of the
rapidly emerging field . During the early decades of
the twentieth century , these and a few other elite educational administration preparation programs had
become centrally important in producing superintendents for the most desirable school districts around the
country . 
976———Superintendency
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 976
Then , in the years following the 1920 enactment of
national women ’ s suffrage , the increasingly powerful
members of the NEA Department of Superintendence
endeavored to upgrade the status of the profession
once again , this time by deemphasizing the political
nature of the work and instead stressing the need for
experts prepared in rigorous , reputable programs . 
These reform efforts were interrupted by the social
and financial turbulence of the Depression , followed
shortly afterward by the upheaval of World War II . The
years following World War II , though , saw unprecedented activity aimed at improving the status of school
administration , particularly the superintendency . 
Hundreds of colleges and universities hastened to
establish or improve their educational administration
preparation programs . Thousands of veterans with G . I . 
Bill benefits in hand enrolled in these programs . 
Several new organizations formed during these early
cold war years to address the quality of the educational
administration profession . 1947 saw the establishment
of the National Conference of Professors of Educational
Administration , an organization tasked with assessing
the theory and practice of the field . The Cooperative
Program in Educational Administration was founded to
improve the quality of educational administration preparation programs and collaboration with practitioners . 
This venture , generously supported by the Kellogg
Foundation and joined by the AASA , the National
Council of Chief State School Officers , and a number of
other organizations , sought to establish rigorous requirements for credentialing programs . In 1956 , the Kellogg
Foundation supported the formation of yet another
group , the University Council for Educational Administration ( UCEA )  . This organization endeavored , in addition to improving administrative practice , to stimulate
quality research and its dissemination . To this end , the
UCEA produced Educational Administration Quarterly
and Educational Administration Abstracts , journals that
continue to influence the field . 
Although the years following World War II brought
impressive agreement on ways to improve professional practice and ensure that educational administrators were prepared in quality programs , the
resulting reforms produced some unintended consequences as well . School superintendents as a group
reached a peak of demographic homogeneity . AASA ’ s
10-year studies of the superintendency indicate that
exceedingly few persons of color served as superintendent during these years . Men accounted for the vast
majority of superintendents , married ones at that . As
the civil rights movement gained strength in the 1950s
and 1960s , then as the Women ’ s Liberation movement
launched in the 1970s , the matter of who held the
most important local school offices around the
country became hotly contested . These rights movements and the rapid increase in the nation ’ s diversity
stood as tests for a field that seemingly had resisted
racial , ethnic , and gender diversity in its own ranks . In
the face of this stubborn demographic discrepancy
between the highest-ranked school officials and the
school communities they served , persons of color and
women initiated a variety of legal challenges from the
1950s through the 1980s , demanding that systematic
discrimination against students and all school workers—including administrative aspirants—on account
of race , ethnicity , and sex be eliminated . School
boards responded to pleas for more diverse administrators by including women and persons of color in
applicant pools but typically not hiring them in appreciable numbers . Needless to say , the selection of chief
school officers who demographically resemble the
communities they serve remains an important concern
for districts around the country . Not only would this
represent improved fairness in access to the superintendency , but it also would increase the likelihood that
the primary decision makers in schools understand
well the students and families they serve . 
The 1990s and early years of the twenty-first century
have brought a host of new challenges to the already
gargantuan task of superintending school districts . The
role of the federal government in regulating schools has
shifted substantially with No Child Left Behind , which
requires strict forms of accountability in return for federal funding . Many states have implemented increasingly strict standards for students , teachers , schools , and
districts , which often are assessed through high-stakes
testing . At the same time , state and local governments
have suffered serious budget shortfalls , in many cases
allocating lower levels of funding to schools . Stretching
resources even further , many districts have experienced
rapid student enrollment growth . 
Despite these significant challenges , survey results
published in The 2000 Study of the American School
Superintendency indicate that two thirds of all superintendents would choose their current profession
again . Over half report “ considerable ” fulfillment in
their work . Of superintendents completing the survey , 
69% stated that their boards had given them “ excellent ” evaluations . Though national media reported in
the early years of the twenty-first century that a dire
Superintendency———977
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 977
shortage of qualified superintendent candidates
loomed on the horizon , an ever more diverse pool of
credentialed and experienced school leaders appears
ready for a turn at the helm of the nation ’ s school districts . Whether these leaders are to be prepared in
schools of education through accredited programs is
being increasingly contested by right-wing think
tanks and business-sponsored forums that are seeking
to create alternative routes to the superintendency . 
—Jackie M . Blount
See also administration , theories of ; American Association of
School Administrators ; boards of education ; bureaucracy ; 
Council of Chief State School Officers ; Council of the Great
City Schools ; Cubberley , Ellwood ; elections , of school
boards , bond issues ; feminism and theories of leadership ; 
governance ; Harris , William Torrey ; hierarchy , in organizations ; Interstate School Leaders Licensure Consortium ; leader
effectiveness ; leadership styles ; licensure and certification ; 
management theories ; morality , moral leadership ; No Child
Left Behind ; organizational theories ; politics , of education ; 
power ; resource management ; school districts , history and
development ; Sizemore , Barbara A .  ; systems theory / thinking ; 
University Council for Educational Administration ; values of
organizations and leadership ; women in educational leadership ; workplace trends ; Young , Ella Flagg
Further Readings and References
American Association of School Administrators ( 1952 )  . The
American school superintendency . Washington , D . C : 
Author . 
Blount , J .  ( 1998 )  . Destined to rule the schools : Women and the
superintendency , 1873–1995 . Albany : SUNY Press . 
Broad and Thomas B . Fordham Foundation .  ( 2004 )  . Better
leaders for America ’ s schools . Washington , DC : Author . 
Brunner , C .  , Grogan , M .  ,  & Bjork , L .  ( 2002 )  . Shifts in the discourse defining the superintendency : Historical and current
foundations of the position . In J . Murphy ( Ed .  )  , The educational leadership challenge : Redefining leadership for
the 21st century ( pp . 211–238 )  . Chicago : University of
Chicago Press . 
Cambron-McCabe , N .  , Cunningham , L .  , Harvey , J .  ,  & Koff , R .  
( 2004 )  . The superintendent ’ s fieldbook : A guide for leaders
of learning . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
English , F .  ( 2004 )  . Learning “ manifestospeak ”  : A metadiscursive analysis of the Fordham Institute ’ s and Broad foundation ’ s manifesto for better leaders for America ’ s schools . 
In T . Lasley ( Ed .  )  , Better leaders for America ’ s schools : 
Perspectives on the manifesto ( pp . 52–91 )  . Columbia , MO : 
UCEA . 
Glass , T .  , Bjork , L .  ,  & Brunner , C .  ( 2000 )  . The study of the
American schools ’ superintendency , 2000 . Arlington , VA : 
American Association of School Administrators . 
Hoyle , J .  , Bjork , L .  , Collier , V .  ,  & Glass , T .  ( 2004 )  . The superintendent as CEO . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Kowalski , T .  ( 2004 )  . The ongoing war for the soul of school
administration . In T . Lasley ( Ed .  )  , Better leaders for
America ’ s schools : Perspectives on the manifesto ( pp . 
92–114 )  . Columbia , MO : UCEA . 
Kowalski , T .  ,  & Brunner , C .  ( 2005 )  . The school superintendent : Roles , challenges , and issues . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , 
SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 142–167 )  . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Tallerico , M .  ( 2000 )  . Gaining access to the superintendency : 
Headhunting , gender , and color . Educational Administration
Quarterly , 36 , 18–43 . 
 SUPERVISION
Supervision can be traced throughout the evolution of
education in the United States from the enactment of
the 1642 “ ye olde deluder Satan Act ” to the present
reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act of 1965 , known as the No Child Left
Behind Act of 2001 . 
The earliest forms of educational supervision were
tied to religious control and then to secular interests , 
traced to the provisions in the Massachusetts Act of
1642 , which required New Hampshire parents and
masters to teach children reading , citizenship , and religion as a way to promote religious freedom , capital laws , 
as well as social harmony . Supervision was defined
largely by religious leaders , with laymen ensuring that
teachers were religiously orthodox , loyal to the civil
government , and morally responsible . 
From approximately 1642 to 1875 , schools began to
take form , and supervision was characterized by observance of the school plant , pupil discipline , and teaching
process by laymen and professionals in mostly rural
schools . Common schools emerged as a way to increase
efficiency while accommodating swelling school
enrollments , with free secondary schools surfacing in
the 1820s and 1830s , in which supervision was a periodic visit made by the superintendent of schools . 
Following the end of the American Revolution 
( 1783 ) and the Civil War ( 1865 )  , with supervision
removed from religious control , board members with
titles such as “ acting visitor ,  ”  “ school clerk ,  ” and 
 “ superintendent of schools ” conducted supervision . 
Referred to as a “ surrogate circuit rider ,  ” the superintendent enlisted assistants when geographical distance
and the number of schools exceeded the ability to
978———Supervision
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 978
inspect , and the focus of supervision was not on
instruction and its improvement , but rather on dismissal of incompetent teachers given their lack of
preparation . 
Schools flourished in the nineteenth century at an
unprecedented rate , and superintendents could not
adequately supervise . Supervision by others , namely
the “ principal teacher ” and then later by curriculum
specialists , evolved due to the emergence of graded
schools , new subject areas introduced to the curriculum ( science , music , art , physical education )  , and
compulsory education laws . Principals were the main
supervisors and were expected to train teachers with
new materials and techniques that had been adopted . 
Paralleling the American Industrial Revolution , 
supervision became bureaucratic . In this setting , 
supervision was concerned with ( a ) exacting implementation of rules and regulations ,  ( b ) emphasis on
centralized control , and ( c ) harsh conformance to
hierarchical notions of school management . Teachers
were considered factory workers and had little role in
making independent judgments about their work . The
supervisor served as a surrogate factory foreman . The
model employed was distinctly inspection oriented . 
The efficiency movement paralleled progressivism in
which John Dewey believed schools needed to promote
the development of democratic principles , experience
should serve as the basis for education , and as a field , 
supervision struggled to define itself due to the complexities of the process being undemocratic and coercive . 
From the late 1880s to approximately the late 1940s , two
related trends in supervision emerged : democratic supervision and human relations supervision . 
This period has been characterized as one in which
supervision emerged as a function of a democratic setting in which the human factor was finally recognized
as something to be considered while striving for efficient , productive instruction . 
In the 1930s and 1940s , shifts in supervision began
with an increased emphasis on teachers ’ participation
and shared responsibility for instructional improvement . The human relations movement and the work of
Elton Mayo proffered that the productivity of workers
could be increased by meeting their social needs at
work , providing them with opportunities to interact
with each other , treating them decently , and involving
them in the decision-making process . In this setting , 
teachers were viewed as whole persons in their own right
rather than as packages of needed energy , skills , and
aptitudes to be used by administrators and supervisors . 
Changes occurred in supervision in that inspection gave
way to cooperative conference , discussion , and mutual
planning by teachers and supervisors as they faced
the learning problems of students and sought better
materials , methods , and goals for the teaching process . 
However , the human relations trend in the field of
supervision did not endure , because inadequate attention was given to independent human reasoning . 
The decades spanning from 1950 to approximately
1970 included supervisory focus on human resource
development and organizational change . Most notably
before the launching of Sputnik in 1957 , the teaching
workforce of the 1950s was underprepared , with as
many as half of the elementary teachers not holding
college education . Supervision in this era was more
concerned with inspection , poorly planned , and
imposed on teachers , whereas modern supervision was
cooperative , included others beside supervisors , and
focused more on teacher needs . Methods such as the
clinical supervision model emerged primarily through
the work of Morris Cogan and Keith Goldhammer . 
In the 1960s and 1970s , the supervisor was envisioned as an “ organizational change agent ” who drew
on social system theory and the business management
literature . The field of supervision was influenced by
the human resource development movement in business and industry . Supervision emphasized creating the
conditions of successful work as a means of increasing
a person ’ s satisfaction and self-esteem . Supervision
was influenced , for example , by Douglas McGregor ’ s
Theory X and Y model . Supervisors who exhibited
Theory Y behaviors were more concerned with promoting individual worth and dignity and worked under
the assumption that organizational goals could be met
through the mutual work of teachers and supervisors
and that supervisors could build trust and authentic
human relations if there was a shared vision for the
work needed to deliver the instructional program . The
work of others such as Frederick Herzberg promoted
job enrichment , empowerment , and self-direction . 
During the 1960s until the early 1980s , supervisors
relied primarily on the clinical supervision model that
consisted of a preobservation conference , a classroom
observation , and a postobservation conference . This
trend signaled a shift away from single classroom
observations made as inspection to a multiprocess
system in which supervisors could work with teachers
in cycles throughout an extended period . Supervisory
practices began to shift in the 1980s with trends such as
developmental supervision , differentiated supervision , 
Supervision———979
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 979
and peer coaching . This shift was important in that
differentiated and developmental models of supervision moved the processes away from inspectional
practices that regarded all teachers as identical to
practices that promoted teacher responsibility for
growth and development . 
Carl Glickman altered the model of clinical supervision by adding a developmental element in which the
type of supervision used by a school leader with
teachers would be based on the experience levels and
needs of the individual teacher . Glickman ’ s conception
of instructional supervision was that supervisors
needed to work with teachers to determine their conceptual levels and to match supervisory interactions 
( nondirective , collaborative , and directive ) within these
levels of development . Glickman believed that a supervisor might better serve his or her staff by responding
to individual needs instead of using a single , uniform
approach and that supervision should focus on function
and process rather than on role or position . The crux
of developmental supervision is that a supervisor ’ s
responsibility is to select the model or technique that
had the greatest growth potential for the person . 
In the 1980s , Alan Glatthorn developed another
stream of supervisory thought : differentiated supervision . As an approach , differentiated supervision provides teachers with options about the kinds of
supervision and evaluative services they receive , 
because not all teachers need the same degree of assistance or direct assistance from an administrator . 
Supervision continues to be differentiated through
methods as such peer coaching , action research , and
the portfolio . Differentiated and developmental supervision acknowledged and relied on teacher involvement , giving rise to teacher voice while supporting
reflection , open dialogue , and self-directed learning—
all prerequisites of effective adult learning strategies . 
Concurrently in the 1980s , the report A Nation
Prepared signaled a heightened sense of accountability that continues with federal legislation such as the
No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 . The field of supervision from the 1990s to present has encountered
entanglements with accountability and teacher professionalism that indicate that a new era , neoscientific
management , has evolved , in which supervisors revert
to impersonal means such as checking daily lesson
plans or visiting classes daily to inspect teaching , controlling what they do . 
The intents and purposes of supervision throughout its earliest inception have created conflicts ( e . g .  , 
supervision vs . evaluation , supervision vs . inspection )  , and several authors have argued that the field of
supervision has continued to exist in a state of uncertainty . Some have called for supervision to be abolished or referred to as something else . Others , 
however , have indicated that supervision plays a pivotal role in school improvement and that the professionalization of teachers can be enhanced through
supervisory efforts . 
—Sally J . Zepeda
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; capacity building , 
of organizations ; career development ; career stages ; clinical education ; conflict management ; consideration , caring ; 
creativity , in management ; curriculum , theories of ; division
of labor ; human capital ; human resource development ; 
innovation , in education ; involvement , in organizations ; 
leader effectiveness ; leadership styles ; management
theories ; McGregor , Douglas ; motivation , theories of ; networking and network theory ; organizational theories ; personnel management ; politics , of education ; principalship ; 
supervision ; Theory X , Theory Y
Further Readings and References
Burton , W .  ,  & Brueckner , L .  ( 1955 )  . Supervision ( 3rd ed .  )  . 
New York : Appleton-Century Crofts . 
Butts , R .  ,  & Cremin , L .  ( 1953 )  . A history of education in
American culture . New York : Henry Holt . 
Cogan , M .  ( 1973 )  . Clinical supervision . Boston : Houghton
Mifflin . 
Dewey , J .  ( 1889 )  . The school and society . Chicago : University
of Chicago Press . 
Glanz , J .  ( 1998 )  . Histories , antecedents , and legacies of school
supervision . In G . Firth & E . Pajak ( Eds .  )  , Handbook of
research on school supervision ( pp . 39–79 )  . New York : 
Macmillan . 
Glatthorn , A .  ( 1984 )  . Differentiated supervision . Alexandria , 
VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development . 
Glickman , C .  ( 1981 )  . Developmental supervision : Alternative
practices for helping teachers improve instruction . 
Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development . 
Glickman , C .  , Gordon , S .  ,  & Ross-Gordon , J .  ( 1998 )  . 
Supervision of instruction : A developmental approach ( 4th
ed .  )  . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . 
Goldhammer , R .  ( 1969 )  . Clinical supervision : Special methods for the supervision of teachers . New York : Holt , 
Rinehart & Winston . 
Herzberg , F .  ( 1964 )  . The motivation-hygiene concept and problems of manpower . Personnel Administration , 27 ( 12 )  , 3–7 . 
McGregor , D .  ( 1960 )  . The human side of enterprise . New
York : McGraw-Hill . 
980———Supervision
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 980
Pajak , E .  ,  & Arrington , A .  ( 2004 )  . Empowering a profession : 
Rethinking the roles of administrative evaluation and
instructional supervision in improving teacher quality . In
M . A . Smylie & D . Miretzky ( Eds .  )  , Developing the
teacher workforce ( pp . 228–252 )  . 103rd Yearbook of the
National Society for the Study of Education . Chicago : 
University of Chicago Press . 
Zepeda , S .  ( 2002 )  . Linking portfolio development to clinical
supervision : A case study . Journal of Curriculum and
Supervision , 18 ( 1 )  , 83–102 . 
 SUPREME COURT , 
UNITED STATES , KEY
CASES IN EDUCATION LAW
The key U . S . Supreme Court cases are classified by area , 
highlighting the role that the Court has played in shaping
American education and policy . Overall , the Court has
left few aspects of public education untouched . 
EQUAL EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
Race , Ethnicity , Funding
Brown v . Board of Education of Topeka , Kansas 
( Brown I )  ( 1954 ) not only addressed race but also
opened the door for developments in civil rights and
equal educational opportunities culminating for all . In
Brown I , the Court ruled that de jure segregation in
public schools on the basis of race deprived minority
children of equal educational opportunities in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment . A year later , in Brown v . Board of
Education of Topeka , Kansas ( Brown II )  ( 1955 )  , the
Court began dismantling segregated school systems as
part of a 50-year battle and more than 30 cases in this
important area . 
On the related matter of ethnicity , in Plyler v . Doe 
( 1982 )  , the Court held that under the Equal Protection
Clause , Texas could not deny a free public school education to undocumented school-aged children whose
parents were from Mexico . A year later , in Martinez v . 
Bynum ( 1983 )  , the Court rejected a challenge to constitutionality of a residency requirement that denied
tuition-free admission to public schools to minors who
lived apart from their parents if they were in districts
primarily to obtain free education . The Court declared
that “ A bona fide residence requirement , appropriately
defined and uniformly applied , furthers the substantial
state interest in assuring that services provided for its
residents are enjoyed only by residents .  ” 
In San Antonio Independent School District v . 
Rodriguez ( 1973 )  , parents challenged a state ’ s system
of funding , based on the value of taxable property in
local school districts , as unconstitutional in that it violated the Equal Protection Clause since it resulted in
disparities in per pupil expenditures based on wealth . 
Ruling in favor of the state , the Court held that the
system neither discriminated against a definable class
of poor people on the basis of wealth nor impermissibly interfered with a fundamental right or liberty . In
rejecting the equal protection claim , the Court unambiguously declared that education is not afforded
Constitutional protection . 
Special Education
Board of Education of the Hendrick Hudson
Central School District v . Rowley ( Rowley )  ( 1982 ) 
was the first Supreme Court case involving special
education . In Rowley , the Court interpreted the
Education for All Handicapped Children Act , now the
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA )  , 
as providing a floor of opportunities rather than being
a vehicle to maximize a child ’ s potential . The Court
ruled that an appropriate education met the IDEA ’ s
procedures and did produce educational benefits for
a child . Insofar as the Court was convinced that the
child received “ some educational benefit ” without a
sign language interpreter , the Court maintained that
she was not entitled to one even though she might
have achieved at a higher level had officials provided
her with such assistance . 
In Honig v . Doe ( 1988 )  , a dispute over disciplining
students with disabilities , the Court refused to write
in a “ dangerousness ” exception into the IDEA . The
Court thus affirmed that the IDEA ’ s stay-put provisions prohibit educators from unilaterally excluding
students with disabilities from school for dangerous or
disruptive conduct that was a manifestation of their
disabilities while review proceedings took place . The
Court added that officials could impose normal , nonplacement-changing procedures , including temporary
suspensions for up to 10 school days for students who
posed immediate threats to the safety of others . 
Most recently , in Cedar Rapids Community School
District v . Garrett F .  ( 1999 )  , the Court held that the
IDEA required the school board to provide and pay for , 
regardless of cost , a full-time nurse while a quadriplegic
Supreme Court , United States , Key Cases in Education Law———981
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 981
student was in school , since his medical condition
needed constant monitoring . This decision expanded
in Irving Independent School District v . Tatro ( 1984 )  , 
wherein the Court decided that a procedure such as
catheterization that can be performed by a school
nurse or trained layperson is a required related service
under the IDEA . 
Gender
Franklin v . Gwinnett County Public Schools ( 1992 ) 
was the first Supreme Court case to address sexual
harassment in a school setting . In Franklin , the Court
ruled in favor of a former high school student who
sued her school board for monetary damages under
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972
because officials failed to take proper action when she
informed them that one of her male teachers coerced
her into engaging in sexual relations . 
In Gebser v . Lago Vista Independent School District 
( 1998 )  , the Court rejected a claim filed by a student in
Texas against her school board after she had a sexual
relationship with a teacher . In light of the board ’ s
promptly taking corrective actions in firing the teacher
and acting to have his teaching license revoked , the
Court held that it was not liable under Title IX unless
administrators in positions of authority were notified
of the situation but failed to act . 
Davis v . Monroe County Board of Education ( 1999 )  , 
a case from Georgia , set the standards for peer-to-peer
sexual harassment . The Court ruled that a school
board can be liable for peer-to-peer sexual harassment
only if educators , who have substantial control over
the students and the context within which the harassment occurred , are deliberately indifferent to harassment of which they have actual knowledge that is so
severe , pervasive , and objectively offensive that it
deprives the victim of access to the educational opportunities or benefits . 
STUDENT RIGHTS
Student Speech and Expression
Tinker v . Des Moines Independent Community
School District ( Tinker )  ( 1969 ) arose when junior and
senior high school students challenged their being
suspended for refusing to remove the black armbands
they wore to protest American involvement in Vietnam . 
The Court ruled in favor of the students , noting that
wearing armbands as a form of passive , nondisruptive
protest was the type of symbolic act that was protected by the First Amendment . The Court reasoned
that since school officials lack absolute power and that
pupils do not surrender freedom of speech rights when
then enter the school building , limits can be placed on
the extent to which educators may regulate student
speech . The Court ruled that absent a reasonable
expectation of disruption of normal school activities , 
educators could not infringe upon students ’ constitutional right to freedom of expression . 
In Bethel School District No . 403 v . Fraser ( 1986 )  , 
the Court restricted Tinker in holding that school officials in Washington state could discipline a student for
violating school rules by delivering a lewd speech at
a school assembly . The Court distinguished the speech
from Tinker , where the armbands were a passive , 
nondisruptive expression of a political position rather
than a lewd and obscene speech , totally lacking in any
political viewpoint , at a student election that was delivered to an unsuspecting captive audience . 
Hazelwood School District v . Kuhlmeier ( Hazelwood )  
( 1988 ) arose when a principal in Missouri deleted two
articles , one on teenage pregnancy , the other about
divorce , from a newspaper that was written and edited
by members of a journalism class that was part of
school ’ s curriculum . The Court reasoned that educators may exercise editorial control over student speech
in school activities as long as the control of the overall educational process is at stake . 
Discipline / Due Process
Goss v . Lopez ( Goss )  ( 1975 ) is the leading case on
the due process rights of students in public schools
who face short-term disciplinary suspensions . Goss
was filed on behalf of high school students in Ohio
who challenged their being suspended without hearings for a variety of infractions . Ruling in favor of the
students , the Court explained since a short-term suspension was not a minimal deprivation of their right to
an education , they could not be excluded from school
for up to 10 days unless they received at least notice
of the charges against them and had an opportunity to
respond . Furthermore , aware of educators ’ need to
maintain a safe and orderly learning environment , the
Court asserted that there was no reason to delay the
time between giving notice and students ’ responses . 
The Court also noted that students who pose a continuing danger or who are disruptive can be removed
982———Supreme Court , United States , Key Cases in Education Law
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 982
immediately but must be provided with due process as
soon as is practicable . 
Fourth Amendment
In New Jersey v . T . L . O .  ( 1985 )  , after a 14-year-old
student , identified as “ T . L . O .  ”  , and a friend were
accused of violating school rules by smoking cigarettes in a lavatory of their high school , they were
questioned by a teacher . When questioned by the assistant principal , he opened T . L . O .  ’ s purse , discovered
that she had cigarettes , removed them , and accused her
of lying . In a second search , he found cigarette rolling
papers , some marijuana , a pipe , plastic bags , a substantial quantity of $1 bills , an index card that
appeared to be a list of students who owed T . L . O . 
money , and two letters implicating her in dealing marijuana . After a trial court adjudicated T . L . O . delinquent , the state Supreme Court reversed in her favor . 
On further review , the Supreme Court reversed in
favor of the state . Finding that the Fourth Amendment ’ s
prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures
applies to public school officials , the Court devised a
two-part test to evaluate the legality of a search : Was
the action justified , and was the search limited to the
scope of the original interference ? According to the
Court , a search is ordinarily justified at its inception
when school officials have reasonable grounds to suspect that a search of a student will uncover evidence
that the pupil has violated or is violating either school
rules or the law . As to scope , the Court held that a
search is permissible if its goals are reasonably related
to its objectives and is not excessively intrusive in light
of the age and sex of a student and the nature of an
infraction . 
Ten years after T . L . O .  , the Supreme Court revisited the Fourth Amendment in a dispute over drug
testing of student athletes in Oregon in Vernonia
School District 47J v . Acton ( 1995 )  . In Acton , the
Court applied a three-part balancing test in upholding
the policy . First , conceding that students have a lesser
expectation of privacy than ordinary citizens , the
Court reasoned that student athletes experience diminished privacy since they are subject to physical examinations before becoming eligible to play and dress in
open areas of locker rooms . Second , the Court pointed
out that urinalysis was minimally intrusive since it
was coupled with safeguards that allowed little
encroachment on students ’ privacy . Third , given the
perception of increased drug use , the Court agreed
that there was a significant need for a policy to eliminate drug use and that the one in place was an effective means for doing so . Seven years later , in Board of
Education of Independent School District No . 92 of
Pottawatomie v . Earls ( 2002 )  , the Court applied Acton
in upholding a board policy that required all middle
and high school students to consent to urinalysis testing for drugs before participating in extracurricular
activities . 
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
Free Speech
In Pickering v . Board of Education of Township
High School District ( Pickering )  ( 1968 )  , a teacher in
Illinois challenged his being fired for sending a letter
to a local newspaper containing an erroneous critique
of a board ’ s allocation of funds for educational and
athletic programs and proposals to raise revenue for
these items . The Court held that the First Amendment
protects the free speech rights of public employees
who address matters of public concern , adding that
absent proof that they knowingly or recklessly make
false statements on such matters , their speech is protected by the First Amendment . 
The Court subsequently refined the Pickering balancing test into a three-step process ( Mt . Healthy City
School District Board of Education v . Doyle , 1977 ; 
Connick v . Myers , 1983 )  . First , public employees must
show that their speech was protected . Second , 
employees must prove that the protected speech was a
substantial or motivating factor in the adverse
employment decision . Third , employees must demonstrate that employers would have taken the adverse
employment action even if they had not engaged in
the protected activity . 
Due Process
In Cleveland Board of Education v . Loudermill 
( 1985 )  , the Court clarified the minimum requirements
of constitutional due process that must be afforded
before boards can dismiss tenured teachers who have
property interests in their jobs . Specifying that teachers
are entitled to some kind of hearing prior to being discharged , the Court noted that such informal pretermination hearings need not be elaborate , since teachers
could present their cases at posttermination hearings . 
—Charles J . Russo
Supreme Court , United States , Key Cases in Education Law———983
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 983
See also accountability ; affirmative action ; Bible , as history ; 
Black education ; church-state issues ; civil rights movement ; 
coeducation ; critical race theory ; desegregation , of schools ; 
disabilities , of students ; discipline in schools ; discrimination ; 
diversity ; equality , in schools ; extracurricular activities ; 
Latinos ; law ; Lemon test ; minorities , in schools ; politics , of
education ; prayer in school ; state departments of education ; 
special education ; state departments of education ; taxes , to
support education ; tracking , of students ; voucher plans
Further Readings and References
Bethel Sch . Dist . No . 403 v . Fraser , 478 U . S . 675 ( 1986 )  . 
Board of Educ . of the Hendrick Hudson Cent . Sch . Dist . v . 
Rowley , 458 U . S . 176 ( 1982 )  . 
Board of Educ . of Indep . Sch . Dist . No . 92 of Pottawatomie v . 
Earls , 536 U . S . 822 ( 2002 )  . 
Brown v . Board of Educ .  , I , 347 U . S . 483 ( 1954 )  . 
Brown v . Board of Educ .  , II , 349 U . S . 294 ( 1955 )  . 
Cedar Rapids Community Sch . Dist . v . Garrett F .  , 526 U . S . 66 
( 1999 )  . 
Cleveland Bd . of Educ . v . Loudermill , 470 U . S . 532 ( 1985 )  . 
Connick v . Myers , 461 U . S . 138 ( 1983 )  . 
Davis v . Monroe County Bd . of Educ .  , 526 U . S . 629 ( 1999 )  . 
Franklin v . Gwinnett County Pub . Schs .  , 503 U . S . 60 ( 1992 )  . 
Gebser v . Lago Vista Indep . Sch . Dist .  , 524 U . S . 274 ( 1998 )  . 
Goss v . Lopez , 419 U . S . 565 ( 1975 )  . 
Hazelwood Sch . Dist . v . Kuhlmeier , 484 U . S . 260 ( 1988 )  . 
Honig v . Doe , 484 U . S . 305 ( 1988 )  . 
Irving Indep . Sch . Dist . v . Tatro , 468 U . S . 883 ( 1984 )  . 
Martinez v . Bynum , 461 U . S . 321 ( 1983 )  . 
Mt . Healthy City Sch . Dist . Bd . of Educ . v . Doyle , 429 U . S . 274 
( 1977 )  . 
New Jersey v . T . L . O .  , 469 U . S . 325 ( 1985 )  . 
Pickering v . Board of Educ . of Township High Sch . Dist .  , 205
391 U . S . 563 ( 1968 )  . 
Plyler v . Doe , 457 U . S . 202 ( 1982 )  . 
San Antonio Indep . Sch . Dist . v . Rodriguez , 411 U . S . 1 ( 1973 )  . 
Tinker v . Des Moines Indep . Community Sch . Dist .  , 393 U . S . 
503 ( 1969 )  . 
Vernonia Sch . Dist . 47J v . Acton , 515 U . S . 646 ( 1995 )  . 
 SURVEYS AND
SURVEY RESULTS
Surveys provide school personnel and educational
researchers an avenue through which a large number
of people can be accessed for feedback or information . For example , often school personnel conduct
needs assessments to plan effective student , teacher , 
or parent educational programs . In this situation , 
every member of the population of interest can be
given the opportunity to provide input through the dissemination of surveys . Educational researchers also frequently employ surveys to learn about how specific
variables , such as leadership belief systems , are applied
in the “ real world .  ” This knowledge of the practical
application of theory informs both educational policy
and instruction in higher education , which may influence
practice at the public school level . Because decisions
about policy and practice are made from survey results , 
consideration must be given to the representativeness of
both the survey content in relation to the topic addressed
and the sample in relation to the population . 
One disadvantage of using surveys is the lack of
control over who does or does not respond . Due to this
lack of control , the survey responses may not represent those of the whole group for whom the survey
was intended . Suppose , for instance , that a survey was
used to gather information about teachers ’ professional development needs . If only 5% of the teachers
return the survey , the professional development activities offered based on the survey results could easily
represent the needs of a select group of teachers rather
than most or all teachers . 
Alternatively , the response rate may be very high , 
but items on the survey presented a narrow range of
professional development possibilities , which is a content coverage or representativeness issue . Potentially , 
the activities offered as a result of the survey responses
would be minimally useful to teachers in their efforts
to increase educational effectiveness . Issues related to
content and sample representativeness make it essential to develop or use surveys and design survey
research to maximize return rates and ensure that items
contain all facets of the topic of interest necessary to
make valid inferences from the scores or information
obtained . 
When developing or evaluating existing surveys , 
particular attention must be given to the content representativeness issues to be sure that they provide the
needed information . The survey content is often
derived from goals and objectives or relevant theory . 
If the goal is to find out about teachers ’ professional
development needs in teaching reading , a search of
the literature is needed to identify “ best practices ” in
teaching reading , and the content of the survey should
represent these best practices . Assuming a good
response rate , the professional development activities
offered as a result of the survey should validly reflect
the skill development needs teachers feel they have in
relation to teaching reading and will also reflect teaching
984———Surveys and Survey Results
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 984
practices that show real promise , as evidenced by the
research , for improving students ’ reading ability . 
In research , surveys are often used to gather information about beliefs , attitudes , values , or knowledge . 
For example , a researcher may gather information
from school administrators about their beliefs related
to effective teaching practices . The survey developer
must consult the research and theoretical literature in
order to identify effective teaching practices to ensure
that survey items appropriately reflect these practices . 
If the content of items does not represent all facets of
effective teaching ( content underrepresentation ) or if
items are written that are not representative of teaching practices ( content irrelevance )  , inferences made
from the scores may not be valid . 
Experts can help evaluate the content of surveys . 
For example , reading teachers might be employed to
assess the content of a survey designed to gather information about best practices in reading . In addition , 
experts can assess clarity of items . Clarity is an important consideration because even if the content is
appropriate , poorly written items can yield inaccurate
results , in which case inaccurate inferences are made . 
Items must be easily understood , simply written , and
written in a language and at a reading level that is suitable for the respondent . In addition to experts , statistical procedures are used to help the survey user or
developer assess the validity and reliability of inferences made from the instrument ’ s scores . The reader
is referred to articles in this volume on validity and
reliability in tests and factor analysis for more information about these statistical procedures . 
Sample representativeness is also an important issue
to consider . Unless the administrator or researcher has
access to the whole population of interest , drawing a
sample that accurately represents the population must
be undertaken . A sample of convenience may well
accurately represent the population . However , sample
demographics ( gender , socioeconomic status , ethnic
background ) should be assessed to ascertain the demographic match between the sample and population . If it
is found that the convenience sample does not well
represent the population , the administrator or researcher
may want to use a stratified sampling method in which
the sample is chosen based on the demographics of the
population . For example , if twice as many females as
males are needed , the sample chosen should contain
this proportion of females to males . 
Dissemination to a sample representative of a
population does not guarantee that the respondents
who return the survey will represent the population well . 
Every effort should be made to maximize the return
rate in order to increase the likelihood that the sample
will be a representative one . A cover letter that captures the interest of the respondent and multiple
contacts to encourage completion of the survey are suggested . In addition , return rates are likely to be higher if
the survey is attractive , professional in appearance , 
and not too long . 
In addition to content and sample representativeness , the researcher must consider the logistics related
to distribution of the survey . Though an advantage of
survey methods is that a large number of people can
be accessed , the printing , formatting , and dissemination of a survey can be costly and / or time consuming . 
Interviews may be conducted face-to-face or by telephone . Phone interviews , of course , can be expensive , 
and face-to-face and telephone interviews both take
much time . Assuming addresses are readily available , 
mailing surveys is less time-consuming but may still
be costly . If a budget does not allow for the cost of
mailings on top of the printing and formatting costs , 
administrators may want to pursue dissemination
options . Electronic dissemination is economical if
confidentiality is not an issue and if the electronic
format allows for a representative sample . Also , 
researchers and administrators might take advantage
of scheduled meetings such as conventions or professional conferences . 
When using or designing surveys , the researcher or
administrator must be cognizant of issues that can
affect the validity of inferences made from results . If
the information is important enough to gather in the
first place , then it logically follows that it is important that the information be accurate . Due to limited
space , many survey research design topics were not
addressed ( e . g .  , item writing , response formats , analysis and interpretation , and reporting results )  , and
topics presented were not detailed enough to act as a
guide to those utilizing survey methods . The reader
who plans to gather information via surveys is encouraged to make use of resources that provide detailed
information about survey research methods . 
—Margaret E . Ross
See also attitudes ; behaviorism ; Delphi technique ; effect
size ; empiricism ; factor analysis ; feedback ; halo effect ; measurement , theories of ; quantitative research methods ; questionnaires ; research methods ; validity and reliability ; 
variables
Surveys and Survey Results———985
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 985
Further Readings and References
Biemer , P . Groves , R .  , Lyberg , L .  , Mathiowetz , N .  ,  & Sudman , 
S .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2004 )  . Measurement errors in surveys . San
Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Chambers , R .  ,  & Skinner , C .  ( 1999 )  . Analysis of survey data . 
San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Creswell , J .  ( 2003 )  . Research design . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Dillman , D .  ( 2000 )  . Mail and Internet surveys : The tailored
design method ( 2nd ed .  )  . New York : Wiley . 
Fink , A ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2003 )  . The survey kit ( 2nd ed .  )  . Thousand
Oaks : Sage . 
Groves , R .  , Biemer , P .  , Lyberg , L .  , Massey , J .  , Nicholls , W .  ,  & 
Wakesberg , J .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2001 )  . Telephone survey methodology . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
 SYSTEMIC REFORM
A system is a group of parts that operate together and
influence the operation of the whole . The characteristics of a system are properties of the whole and not of
the parts . Human bodies , schools , factories , buildings , 
airplanes , and automobiles are examples of familiar
systems . School reform is like that . Many schools are
not unified systems , but collections of parts ( programs ) 
that have been brought together at different times for
differing reasons . They were never designed to work
together . They just happened that way because of periodic accretions or unchallenged tradition . Schools , like
all systems , operate according to the first principle of
systems thinking : Structure influences behavior . A system functions in a certain way because of its structure . 
In a very real sense , a system causes its own behavior . 
The systemic structure of a school is the pattern of
relationships among the key components of its organization . Most schools function in traditional ways
because their structures make it difficult to operate in
any other way . Systemic renewal requires that the system be changed at all levels ( school , district , state )  . 
Many models have been proposed for school
renewal and reform , each with its own assumptions
about change and related set of strategies , each with
its own strengths and weaknesses . Marshall Sashkin
and John Egermeier describe four broad strategies for
change that have flourished in varying degrees over
the past 50 years . These strategies are as follows : 
1 . Fix the parts by transferring innovations : Help principals be better leaders and teachers better instructors
and school curricula more effective by developing
and transferring specific innovations to schools ( like
the “ county agent ” model in agriculture )  . 
2 . Fix the people by training and developing professionals : Provide preservice and in-service training
programs for principals and teachers . 
3 . Fix the school by developing the organization ’ s capacity to solve problems : Focus on changing the organization ’ s culture by collecting data to identify and solve
problems and evaluate which solutions really work . 
4 . Fix the system by comprehensive restructuring : Move
beyond approaches to adopt / adapt the best of innovative programs , staff development , and organizational
strategies to redesign the structure of the total school
in a comprehensive and interconnected way . This
fourth approach to change and renewal is often called
systemic reform because it is concerned with deliberately designing and linking all the various structures
within the school and connecting externally with
state , district , and community agencies . 
Renewal efforts by the Coalition of Essential
Schools provide an excellent example of the systemic
reform strategy . David Conley also has proposed a
framework of restructuring in 12 dimensions and 3
subsets that meets many of the demands of systemic
reform . James Keefe and Eugene Howard have developed a comprehensive school improvement process
for the National Association of Secondary School
Principals and the Learning Environments Consortium
International that offers a comprehensive model of
systemic reform planning . The process begins with
the formation of a school management / design team that
is charged with conducting awareness , commitment , 
and development activities , working to create a school
learning organization and leading the staff in collecting
school data and conducting a literature search on
current educational trends . The school staff then
defines the basic components of the school design—
mission and vision statements , culture and climate
statements , and student goals and outcomes—and the
key systemic components of the design : curriculum
specifications ; instructional strategies ; school structure
and organization ; leadership , management , and budgeting procedures ; staffing and staff development provisions ; communication and political structures ; school
resources , physical plant and equipment specifications ; 
and the evaluation plan . The process culminates in an
action plan , task force formation and coordinated activity , and ongoing review and evaluation . 
—James W . Keefe
986———Systemic Reform
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 986
See also budgeting ; curriculum audit ; Chicago school reform ; 
culture , school ; ethos , of organizations ; evaluation ; Fullan , 
Michael ; goals , goal setting ; innovation , in education ; 
J-curve theory ; Kentucky Education Reform Act ; management information systems ; needs assessment ; organizational
theories ; paradigm ; partnerships , interagency ; planning
models ; problem solving ; resource management ; restructuring , of schools ; S-curve theory ; school districts , history
and development ; school improvement models ; school
plant management ; systems theory / thinking
Further Readings and References
Bartunek , J .  ( 2003 )  . Organizational and educational change . 
Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
Conley , D .  ( 1993 )  . Roadmap to restructuring : Policies , practices , and the emerging visions of schooling . Eugene , OR : 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational Management . 
Day , D .  , Zaccaro , S .  ,  & Halpin , S .  ( 2004 )  . Leader development
for transforming organizations . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence
Erlbaum . 
Fullan , M .  ( 2001 )  . The new meaning of educational change . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Gaynor , A .  ( 1998 )  . Analyzing problems in schools and school
systems . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
Keefe , J .  ,  & Howard , E .  ( 1997 )  . Redesigning schools for the
new century : A systems approach . Reston , VA : National
Association of Secondary School Principals . 
Keefe , J .  ,  & Jenkins , J .  ( 2000 )  . Personalized instruction : 
Changing classroom practice . Larchmont , NY : Eye on
Education . 
Sashkin , M .  ,  & Egermeier , J .  ( 1993 )  . School change models
and processes : A review and synthesis of research and
practice . Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Education , 
U . S . Government Printing Office . 
Thurston , P .  ,  & Ward , J .  ( 1997 )  . Improving educational performance : Local and systemic reforms . St . Louis , MO : 
Elsevier . 
Wardman , K .  ( 1994 )  . From mechanistic to social systems
thinking ( A digest of a talk by Russell L . Ackoff )  . The
Systems Thinker , 5 ( 1 )  , 1–4 . 
 SYSTEMS THEORY / THINKING
Systems thinking is a thought process that considers
the interconnections and reactive relationships among
the parts of a system . It considers that component
parts of a complex system are interacting and are interdependent ; therefore , small actions at one level are
evaluated to determine potential significant impacts at
various levels across the whole organization . Systems
thinking seeks to understand all meaningful effects on
the whole organization , rather than the effects on a
division , a department , or a school . 
As an example , systems thinking would seek to
understand the impact of a decision to delay starting
times by 1 hour and the effects on all parts of the
district ; the process would look beyond a subset of
school that might potentially benefit . The systems discipline considers organizational change theory , decision making , and human behavior to study changes in
complex systems within an organization . 
The use of systems thinking will enable educators
to design and implement solutions that address the
reality of the complex environments of schools . 
Systems thinking requires that leaders address longterm solutions . How will proposed program changes
affect student achievement at the end of 3 to 5 academic years ? What are the unintended consequences of
creating learning teams ? Systems thinking uses basic
principles and management tools to help leaders
detect holistic changes and evaluate potential impact . 
A system is a group of interacting and interdependent
components that make up a whole . Schools have many
systems : the transportation department , the personnel
department , teacher evaluation process , and many
others . When all systems are considered in relationship
to each other , a holistic view of a school district develops . A school district is parallel to a living organism
because it is constantly changing , any adjustment to any
subsystem affects the whole , and all subsystems must
function properly for a healthy district . For example , 
teachers , books , students , and buildings are all necessary parts of the educational system . When any one of
these components is changed , all others are affected and
the impact exceeds those obviously expected . 
A basic assumption of systems theory is that systems
will change based on feedback . Effective feedback can
be at many levels and take many forms . For example , 
feedback about student achievement can be qualitative
and quantitative data and can provide information at
many levels : students , teachers , administrators , and so
on . The feedback must have utility , be economical to collect , and be meaningful . For example , mean achievement
scores for all fourth-grade students is simplistic feedback
for a fourth-grade teacher , but disaggregated achievement scores by student by content by construct is meaningful feedback for teachers . This type of feedback can
be used to plan improvements ; the feedback must be
available within the system and at appropriate levels . 
Systems thinking and feedback help educators
identify patterns as different from events . For
Systems Theory / Thinking———987
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 987
example , assume that data indicate that a group of
fourth graders cannot perform long division . If the
school teaches those fourth graders the necessary math
skills , then it has reacted to the feedback . This action
will not enable future fourth graders to perform long
division . However , systems thinking would require the
organization to consider the curriculum , assessment
procedures , teacher characteristics , and student characteristics to identify the root causes of failure . What
patterns exist ? Have all students failed to master the
skill ? What systems changes can be made to influence
the scores of future fourth grade students ? A common
example of systems thinking is that alignment of curriculum , instruction , and assessment can positively
affect achievement scores . Systems thinking promotes
a holistic view of the school and district and allows
leaders to improve the school . 
Systems thinking expects circular patterns of feedback that can be used for continuous systems improvement . In the above example , if the school strives for
alignment of important components with the vision and
mission , then curriculum drives instruction , instruction
drives assessment , and assessment leads to evaluation
and adjustment of the curriculum . A traditional view
would consider a linear relationship between key components : standards drive the curriculum , the curriculum
drives instruction , and instruction drives assessment , 
and so on . Traditional approaches lack feedback loops
and are likely to repeat the same errors year after year . 
Finally , the students move to the next grade , a different
group replaces them , and the process repeats without
feedback ; linear cause-effect models fail to consider the
impact of end components on initial components . 
Unfortunately , many education leaders fail to
use systems thinking to address problems ; to a great
extent , education thinking is highly linear , traditional , 
and fragmented . Many educators are highly skilled
at problem solving at the individual issue level and
have been reinforced for sequential and hierarchical
solutions . Traditional approaches are not productive
because schools are no longer isolated systems that
can operate independent of the larger community . 
Systems thinking will become a more important management tool because many current problems within
education are systematic in nature . 
—Bill Thornton
See also accountability ; boards of education ; boundaries of
systems ; chaos theory ; Chicago school reform ; communities , types , building of ; conceptual systems theory and leadership ; consolidation , of school districts ; innovation , in
education ; Kentucky Education Reform Act ; leadership , 
system-oriented ; management theories ; networking and
network theory ; open systems theory ; organizational
theories ; philosophies of education ; planning models ; policy
making , values of ; rational organizational theory ; restructuring , of schools ; school improvement models ; strategic
planning ; systemic reform
Further Readings and References
Cooper , B .  , Fusarelli , L .  ,  & Randal , E .  ( 2004 )  . Better policies , 
better schools : Theories and applications . Boston : Pearson
Education
Goldenberg , C .  ( 2004 )  . Successful school change . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Morrison , K .  ( 2002 )  . School leadership and complexity theory . 
New York : Routledge . 
Sarason , S .  ( 2002 )  . Educational reform . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Wallace , M .  ,  & Pocklington , K .  ( 2002 )  . Managing complex
educational change . New York : Routledge . 
988———Systems Theory / Thinking
S-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 988
 TABLE OF ORGANIZATION
The social organization of institutions for most of the
nineteenth century was marked by individualism and
casual cooperation . With the emergence of an urban
industrial society , organizing people for work or public
service required more deliberate and formalized models . German sociologist Max Weber wrote extensively
about the importance of rationalization for organizing
people for optimal problem solving . Bureaucracy was
Weber ’ s optimal rationalization model . The table of
organization , or organizational chart , is a graphic representation of an organization ’ s structure—the division
of labor , roles , and hierarchy of authority that characterize the formal structure of the organization . 
A division of labor breaks the work of the organization into separate jobs , each with a specific set of
tasks clearly differentiated from other tasks . The division of labor assumes that the responsibilities of one
job are well-defined and can be clearly delineated
from the responsibilities of other jobs . Differentiation
is aimed at reducing redundancy and interpersonal conflict and increasing efficiency . 
Organizations most commonly differentiate their
structures vertically and horizontally . Vertical differentiation refers to the number of authority levels in
an organization . Authority and power in a bureaucracy
are largely centralized at the higher levels of the
organization . An organization ’ s vertical coordination
involves people at higher levels of the organization
coordinating and controlling the actions of people at
lower levels of the organization through positional
authority and rules . Offices within the hierarchy have
clearly defined authority over lower-level offices and
are , in turn , supervised by clearly specified higherlevel offices . With responsibilities and authority
clearly defined , the system can be coordinated topdown from level to level , with rules and procedures
rather than through personal supervision . 
Horizontal differentiation is the degree of differentiation among workers at the same level of authority or the
number of subtasks required to process raw material or
produce a product . Horizontal differentiation breaks
tasks into manageable pieces . Lateral coordination of
tasks occurs through communication among individuals
who work at the same level of authority or engage in the
same tasks or subtasks in the organization . 
The problem with organizational charts or any
graphic representation of organizational structure is
that they often fail to represent actual work groups and
dynamics . While it is true that organizations may have
clearly visible , formal structures , they also have often
invisible , informal structures , norms , groups , relationships , and dynamics that are less tangible but highly
influential . 
—Judith A . Ponticell
See also bureaucracy ; chain of command ; conflict management ; division of labor ; governance ; hierarchy , in organizations ; infrastructure , of organizations ; management
theories ; organizational theories ; rational organizational
theory ; role conflict ; role theory ; span of control ; systems
theory / thinking ; Weber , Max
Further Readings and References
Cunningham , W . G .  ,  & Cordeiro , P . A .  ( 2003 )  . Educational
leadership : A problem-based approach ( 2nd ed .  )  . Boston : 
Allyn & Bacon . 
989
T
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 989
Hall , R . H .  ( 1991 )  . Organizations : Structures , processes , and
outcomes ( 5th ed .  )  . Englewood , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Weber , M .  ( 1947 )  . The theory of social and economic organization ( A . H . Henderson & T . Parsons , Trans .  )  . Glencoe , 
IL : Free Press . 
 TAXES , TO SUPPORT EDUCATION
Societal agencies must decide who should pay for the
resources ( e . g .  , teachers , buildings , equipment , materials ) required for schooling . One criterion for payment is benefits received . Who benefits from
education ? Certainly , the students benefit because
education provides them with skills and knowledge
that will improve their intellectual facility and cultural
appreciation and by increasing their human capital
and , thus , their social status , earnings , and access to
opportunities . To that extent , students or their families
should bear some of the costs of education . 
At the same time , however , schooling has considerable benefits for society as a whole . Education can
be a powerful force for socialization . Education provides society with a common language and set of
values . Educated citizens better understand and more
readily accept their governments , thereby enhancing
political stability . In our democratic republic , education prepares citizens to be more effective participants
in self-government . 
In most societies , the majority view holds that
elementary and most secondary education provides
social benefits of such magnitude as to justify public
financing and provision . The question then arises as to
what type of tax system is best to support public elementary and secondary schools . The design of a tax
system generally rests upon three principles : taxpayer
equity , revenue stability , and economic efficiency . 
In general , there are two concepts of taxpayer
equity that might be considered : benefits received
and ability to pay . Because of the considerable social
benefits of education , the benefits received approach
provides little guidance for designing a tax system to
support elementary and secondary education . 
The ability-to-pay principle holds that individuals
with greater ability to pay taxes , generally those with
greater income and wealth , should pay more tax than
those with less ability . This rule rests upon two related
assumptions : first , that the generation of any given
level of tax revenue should entail the minimum sacrifice
of social welfare and , second , that this sacrifice is
minimized when the rich pay more taxes than the
poor . Thus , the ability-to-pay principle requires that
the economic burden , or incidence , of a tax rises with
income . By this principle , a tax is characterized as progressive , proportional , or regressive . These concepts
are best defined in terms of the average tax rate , or
ratio of taxes paid to income . If the average tax rate
increases with income , the tax is progressive . If it falls , 
the tax is regressive . If it remains constant regardless
of income , the tax is proportional . 
Efficiency in taxation refers to the effects of the tax
system on the economy and the costs of collection and
compliance associated with raising any given level of
revenue . If one believes that the workings of a freemarket economy result in the most efficient allocation
of resources , then the imposition of a tax should alter
resource allocation decisions as little as possible . For
firms , such decisions would concern what to produce
and what resources to employ . For consumers , these
decisions would include what to buy and how much to
work . To the extent a tax does distort economic decisions , it creates an excess burden ; that is , a loss of
welfare over and above the revenue collected . Excess
burden is sometimes referred to as “ welfare cost ” or 
 “ deadweight loss .  ” The only tax that does not entail an
excess burden is a lump sum tax , a certain amount that
must be paid regardless of the taxpayer ’ s behavior 
( e . g .  , decisions regarding work , consumption )  . There
is nothing a taxpayer can do to avoid a lump sum tax . 
Such a tax is efficient but inequitable and rarely
invoked . With this exception , taxes generally impose
some measure of excess burden . 
Efficiency in collection and compliance refers to
minimizing the costs of gathering a given level of tax
revenue . These costs involve not only the resources
required by the government to collect the revenues but
also the resources and effort of the taxpayers in complying with the tax law . The latter may include expenditures on accountants and tax lawyers , as well as the
value of taxpayers ’ time in keeping records and filling
out tax forms . These costs vary across tax systems . 
For example , the government ’ s costs in collecting the
U . S . personal income tax are relatively low , while the
taxpayers ’ costs of compliance are high . In contrast , 
collection costs for the property tax are relatively high , 
while compliance costs are low . 
Because taxes are raised by governments to finance
public services deemed essential by the electorate , 
it is desirable that tax systems exhibit two additional
characteristics : stability and growth . Stability refers to
990———Taxes , to Support Education
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 990
the revenue yield of a tax from year to year as levels
of economic activity and incomes vary over the same
period . Stable tax revenues decrease proportionately
less than aggregate income during economic downturns but also increase proportionately less during
periods of economic expansion . An example of a stable tax is the property tax . Sales and income taxes , on
the other hand , tend to rise and fall proportionately
more than aggregate income over the economic cycle . 
Such taxes are termed income elastic , while stable
taxes are income inelastic . 
To the extent that school enrollments grow over time
and societies seek to improve school quality ( e . g .  , 
with more and better teachers , better physical plants , 
improved technology )  , growth is another desirable
characteristic for a tax system . Some tax bases have
greater growth potential than others . For example , as
the U . S . economy has moved toward having a greater
service sector , a sales tax that includes services in its
base will likely exhibit more growth than a sales tax
that is limited to tangible personal property . The argument most frequently made against the expansion of
the sales tax to include services is that such a change
would significantly increase collection and compliance costs . Any tax should be evaluated in terms of its
potential to raise revenue that will keep pace with the
rising demand for the public services that it is intended
to finance . 
Although responsibility for public elementary and
secondary education rests almost entirely with our
nation ’ s nearly 15 , 000 local school districts , about half
the money spent on public K–12 education is provided
by the states , while local districts provide about 42%
and the federal government about 7% . The state share
has risen substantially since 1970 for several reasons . 
First , in response to lawsuits in the majority of states , 
state legislatures have increased school aid to offset
differences in the ability of local districts to support
schools through the local property tax . Second , states
have sought to ease local property tax burdens . Finally , 
the school accountability movement has prompted an
increased state role in assisting local schools . 
Local districts have traditionally financed nearly
their entire share of public school revenue through the
property tax . States generally depend on income and
sales taxes , traditionally less stable than the property
tax . Indeed , state revenues have become increasingly
sensitive to economic cycles in recent years . Therefore , 
as states continue to expand their share of public
school revenue and the relative importance of local
property taxes continues to decline , public school
finance becomes more sensitive to economic cycles . 
—Michael F . Addonizio
See also accountability ; economics , theories of ; equality in
schools ; equity and adequacy of funding schools ; finance , 
of public schools ; Kalamazoo case ; lottery systems ; productivity ; property tax ; sales tax
Further Readings and References
Blumenthal , M .  ,  & Slemrod , J .  ( 1992 )  . The compliance cost of
the U . S . individual income tax system : A second look after
tax reform . National Tax Journal , 45 , 185–202 . 
Bowen , H . R .  ( 1977 )  . Investment in learning : The individual
and social value of American higher education . San
Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Levin , H . M .  ( 1987 )  . School finance . In G . Psacharopoulos 
( Ed .  )  , Economics of education : Research and studies 
( pp . 426–436 )  . Oxford , UK : Pergamon Press . 
Odden , A . R .  ,  & Picus , L . O .  ( 2004 )  . School finance : A policy
perspective ( 3rd ed .  )  . Boston : McGraw-Hill . 
Rosen , H . S .  ( 1995 )  . Public finance ( 4th ed .  )  . Chicago : Irwin . 
Weisbrod , B . A .  ( 1964 )  . External benefits of public education : 
An economic analysis ( Research report No . 105 )  . Princeton , 
NJ : Princeton University , Department of Economics , 
Industrial Relations Section . 
 TAYLOR , FREDERICK
Frederick Winslow Taylor ( 1856–1915 )  ,  “ father ” of scientific management , formalized the principles of scientific management and rational efficiency during an era
of industrial growth at the height of the Progressive era . 
Though Taylor is best known for his experiments designed
to make labor more productive and his work on tool steel , 
the impact of scientific management on organizations , 
including schools , was enduring . He viewed workers as
rational people who were motivated by money , and from
an organizational perspective , this meant the provision of
incentive schemes , clear delineation of authority , task specialization , and division of labor . 
Born to a well-to-do Quaker family in Germantown , 
Pennsylvania , Taylor traveled extensively in Europe and
attended Phillips Exeter Academy as a young man . 
Due to headaches probably attributable to poor eyesight 
( he was diagnosed with astigmatism later in life )  , Taylor
left Exeter to apprentice at a small machine shop , 
which served to solidify his interest in an engineering
career . 
Taylor , Frederick———991
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 991
After his apprenticeship , Taylor took a position
at Midvale Steel in Philadelphia . While employed
full-time , he also enrolled at the Stevens Institute of
Technology , in New Jersey , but never attended classes . 
Despite this fact , he earned an engineering degree . He
spent 12 years at Midvale Steel , advancing rapidly from
a laborer to a foreman and ultimately to chief engineer . 
At Midvale , he developed and implemented the fundamental essentials of what later became known as scientific management , including the dissection of work
tasks into discrete actions and the timing of each action
based on repeated stopwatch studies . The time studies
led to the implementation of a differential rate , which
meant that workers earned an amount that depended on
the output for the whole day . Consumed with finding
the most efficient way to perform tasks , Taylor realized
that productivity meant standardizing work , tools , and
maintenance techniques . 
Taylor left Midvale and moved to Maine to run a
pulp mill , a largely unsuccessful and unprofitable move
for him . His next move was to Pennsylvania in 1898 to
take a position at Bethlehem Steel , where he was hired
to introduce a piecework system in the machine shop . 
However , Taylor was initially more interested in improving machine tools and machine shop processes , an
interest that led to the development of a new “ highspeed ” tool steel , a material that allowed machine tools
to cut metal at 3 to 4 times the previous speeds , as well
as a special slide rule for calculating machine speed and
feed . Both were innovative engineering breakthroughs . 
Bethlehem was also the site of one of Taylor ’ s
most famous industrial time-and-motion experiments . 
Common laborers were hired to load pig iron from the
yard pile into railcars for shipment . With an immigrant
worker he named Schmidt , Taylor conducted a series
of tests on the effect of pace , rest periods , method of
handling the load , and compensation . Taylor demonstrated that an efficient worker could earn higher
wages with an increase in total output . In Schmidt ’ s
case , he earned $1 . 85 a day rather than $1 . 15 , earning
a 60% higher wage for loading 380% more pig iron . 
Bethlehem would be Taylor ’ s last permanent job . 
After leaving Bethlehem Steel , he worked primarily
as a consultant and lecturer , preaching the gospel of
scientific management . In 1910 , his most well-known
essay ,  “ The Principles of Scientific Management ,  ” was
published . Labor leaders and other critics denounced 
 “ Taylorism ” as oppressive and antidemocratic . A
strike at a government arsenal over the introduction of
scientific management prompted a congressional
investigation of the Taylor system , though little was
accomplished other than a general denouncement of
Taylorism . Wounded by the conflict , Taylor withdrew
from public life , letting his growing number of followers carry the battle for “ the one best way ,  ” a catchword
of the movement he introduced . After his death in 1915 , 
his followers continued his efforts . 
Taylor ’ s development of a science of management
had a profound impact on American industry . Under
Taylor , standardization and managerial control , professionalism , and scientific method were championed
as never before . To Taylor ’ s critics , however , Taylorism
was the quintessence of the mechanistic , alienating
character of modern industrialism . Factory workers
gradually lost control of their tools , the process of production , even the way they moved their bodies as they
worked . This de-skilling of the workforce served to
control knowledge and centralize decision making . 
Scientific management , with its focus on efficiency , 
impacted many facets of American life , including
education . According to Taylor , application of scientific management could be generalized into every
arena of national life , even to the pulpit , and certainly
to schools . Administration of the schools was largely
in the hands of large , politicized school boards . With
the professed goal being to take the schools out of politics , there was impetus to centralize school boards and
take power away from local ward bosses . The vision of
a liberal education for all students was replaced with
an education that prepared students to take their appropriate role as workers . Schools increasingly focused on
centralization , expert knowledge , and accountability as
the route to school reform . Efficiency experts advocated school reform based on a manufacturing analogy , 
comparing schools to factories , referring to students as
the “ raw material ,  ” and renaming school officials as
administrators . The factory model of schooling was
evident in the efforts to standardize the schools with
the emergence of supervision standardization , standardized testing , standardized curriculum , and standardized
clusters of children . 
Taylor ’ s scientific management also had a lasting
effect on the field of educational administration , making educational administration a “ science ,  ” which gave
the field status and prestige similar to that claimed
by medicine and law . Educational study became more
technical during this time with the development of
large school bureaucracies . School administrators
992———Taylor , Frederick
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 992
were taught that accountability was one of the major
goals of educational administration . Taking their cue
from the ideology of scientific management , new educational administrators demanded autonomy , authority , and discretion to perform their duties . This new
educational profession , along with the many structural
and organizational changes schools underwent during
this era , is attributable in part to Taylor and his view of
industrial organization as a great machine . 
—Susan R . Wynn
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; bureaucracy ; chain of command ; cost-benefit analyses ; division of
labor ; line and staff concept ; management theories ; organizational theories ; outputs , of systems ; performance evaluation systems ; productivity ; scientific management ; table of
organization ; work task measurement
Further Readings and References
Gabor , A .  ( 2000 )  . The capitalist philosophers : the geniuses of
modern business—their lives , times , and ideas . New York : 
Random House . 
Kanigel , R .  ( 1997 )  . The one best way : Frederick Winslow
Taylor and the enigma of efficiency . New York : Viking
Penguin . 
Nelson , D .  ( 1980 )  . Frederick W . Taylor and the rise of scientific management . Madison : University of Wisconsin Press . 
Taylor , F .  ( 1911 )  . The principles of scientific management . 
Retrieved June 8 , 2004 , from 
. au / het / taylor / sciman . htm
 TEACHER RECRUITMENT
AND RETENTION
Research in recent years has made it apparent that
excellence in education is dependent upon having a wellqualified teaching force . A highly competent teacher
appears to be the most important element in student
academic success . However , the ability to recruit and
retain highly qualified teachers in U . S . public schools
appears problematic . If teacher / pupil ratios remain
constant or increase , more than 2 million new teacher
hires will be required by the 2008–2009 academic
year . Although many teachers enter the field each year , 
the average age of the teaching force is higher than in
past decades , and retirements will be increasing at a
rapid rate over the next 10 years . 
PROBLEMS RELATED TO TEACHER
RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION
Problems with teacher shortages and retention exist
everywhere , but they are more pronounced and severe
in some content areas and school systems than in
others . The greatest teacher shortages exist and are
expected to escalate in urban and rural districts
enrolling low-income , low-performing , and primarily
minority students . Schools in the West and South are
also facing teacher shortages , particularly in communities where enrollment is increasing due to an influx
of new industry . Due to present shortages and teacher
transfer and turnover rates , a child in public school
has a 1 in 14 chance of beginning the school year without a permanent teacher who is certified and qualified
to teach the grade level or subject area the child is
studying . The odds of having uncertified teachers are
considerably higher in urban and rural schools than in
suburban ones . Schools with high percentages of
minority and low-income students , low standardized
test scores , and very limited financial resources tend
to have more severe teacher shortages . 
Greater shortages exist and are expected to expand
more rapidly in some specialty subject areas than in
others . The biggest problem areas are foreign language , English as a second language , and special education , with somewhat smaller shortages for science , 
mathematics , and vocational education teachers . In
some school systems , English and social studies teachers
are also becoming scarce . 
Another problematic issue related to the recruitment and retention of teachers is the anticipated shift
in the demographics of the public school population . 
The U . S . population is expected to change dramatically in the next decade and beyond so that 50% or more
of the population will be classified as being from
minority groups . Many of them may speak languages
other than English . Yet most of the teachers in these
schools will likely be White and English speaking
unless drastic changes are made in the recruitment
processes for potential teachers . 
Ethnic and language minority teachers presently
comprise only about 5% of the teaching population . 
Although teachers from minority groups tend to
remain in the teaching profession in greater numbers
than nonminorities , the shortage of minority teachers , 
who may have a better understanding of the cultures
and languages of minority students , is another issue to
Teacher Recruitment and Retention———993
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 993
be addressed as schools seek to recruit and retain
high-quality teachers . Many teachers are not adequately
prepared to meet the needs of urban youth , nor are they
prepared for dealing effectively with culturally diverse
populations . 
The solution to the teacher shortage is not simply
preparing a diverse group of individuals to teach . 
The teacher shortage is exacerbated because many
individuals who are certified to teach choose not to
do so or leave school systems or schools with the
most limited resources and with children who have
the greatest needs in order to teach in more affluent , 
less stressful , and better-resourced school systems . 
Each year , 40% of those who are trained to teach
choose not to do so . The annual teacher turnover rate
has been estimated at 16% a year . In high-poverty
schools , the turnover rate reaches 20% . Thirty-three
percent of new hires leave teaching in their first 3
years , and 46% are gone before 5 years . The turnover
rates among individuals under 30 appear to be the
highest of all age groups . Teachers with midlevel
grade point averages in college are more likely to
remain in teaching than high and low performers , 
suggesting that most teachers remaining in the field
are average performers academically . 
Those teachers holding regular certification , 
masters , and specialist degrees tend to stay in the field
longer than others . The reasons for these findings are
unknown . There is some evidence their decision to
remain in the field may be related to an increased level
of competence or a greater commitment to the field . 
Higher salaries may be paid to these teachers due to
advanced degrees held , perhaps helping them to see
themselves as professionals more so than lower-paid
colleagues . 
Although some teachers leave the field because
of family circumstances , such as having a spouse
change jobs or wanting to stay home to raise a family , 
this is not the primary reason they leave . There are
many factors related to teachers ’ working conditions
affecting their decisions to leave teaching , including
poor student discipline , lack of administrative support , lack of involvement in decision making in areas
directly related to teaching and learning , and a public
perception that teachers are not doing their jobs adequately . There are also identified reasons why people
do not enter the field , such as low pay and a lack of
respect for the profession . A first step in developing
solutions to teacher shortages is to examine the issue
more fully . 
EXPLORING REASONS
FOR TEACHER SHORTAGES
Although teacher recruitment and retention may seem
to be separate issues , they are closely related . Factors
keeping individuals from entering the profession often
cause those in it to leave . Teachers are not entering
the profession for reasons such as low pay , a negative
public perception of teachers and public education , 
and a lack of mentorship and knowledge . Most leave
because of dissatisfaction with their jobs . This dissatisfaction is related to many factors , such as lack of status , increasing societal demands for public education , 
inadequate resources and financial support , lack of
administrative support , immediate immersion into
teaching without adequate mentoring , and poor working conditions in general . 
Changes in society have caused changes in the perception of teaching and teachers and a change in the
relationships between schools , teachers , and communities , often with negative consequences . The social
structure has changed , causing schools and teachers to
take on many roles previously assumed by families
and communities , adding to the complexity of the job . 
Factors related to working conditions of teachers
sometimes make it difficult for even those most committed to the students and the profession to remain in
the field . Organizational and structural constraints
hinder recruitment and retention efforts . Each of these
issues is described in the following sections . 
CHANGES IN THE TEACHING PROFESSION
Over the last few decades , the context of teaching
has changed as our society in the United States has
become more complex and disconnected . This has led
to a change in the way teachers are perceived by the
public and the context within which schooling occurs . 
During the first half of the nineteenth century , 
schools generally had widespread public support . 
Although salaries and working conditions were often
dismal , teaching was a highly regarded profession , 
and schools were viewed as a major asset for communities . Teachers had a great deal of autonomy within
the school and community support for education , 
although many personal sacrifices were required from
teachers . For example , female teachers were not
allowed to marry . As schools became consolidated , 
growing larger in size , they began to become disassociated from the communities and families they served . 
994———Teacher Recruitment and Retention
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 994
The professionalization of teaching and administration , 
which excluded parents from the teaching / learning
process , increases in costs associated with schools and
education , and rapid changes in society prompting
people to become more separated from the social
institutions that serve them have all added to a growing
disconnect between schools and their communities . 
This sense of disconnect often causes teachers to feel
isolated from the communities they serve and unappreciated for the job they perform . 
Although some research suggests many parents
believe the schools their children attend are good , the
general perception of public education is that it is failing . The disconnect between schools and society has
led to dwindling levels of respect for teachers , teaching , and schools . This perception has , in turn , led to
and been further promoted by the imposition of external mandates at the state and national levels with no
acknowledgment of the increasingly complex context
of the teaching setting or the increasing needs of the
students involved . The mandates , largely developed
without input from educators , have placed teachers and
administrators in the untenable position of being held
publicly accountable for meeting all of their students ’ 
needs in an environment of dwindling resources , highstakes testing , and little community support . 
These factors often combine to create a sense of
powerlessness , leading to discontent with the job . 
Teachers tend to leave the profession when they no
longer believe they can make a difference for students . 
Instead , they choose professions bringing more esteem , 
more freedom , and less pressure , leaving classrooms
without qualified teachers and students without the
guidance and support they need . 
THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY
During the later quarter of the twentieth century
through today , societies have been enmeshed in rapid
changes accelerated by technological advances and
the rise of the global marketplace . There has been a
breakdown in traditional family structures , with new
and different family arrangements emerging . 
Increasing levels of poverty , crime , and violence have
become pervasive realities in much of the country , 
particularly in urban areas . Consequently , many students
now come from homes unable to provide the financial
or emotional support they need . 
School personnel are being called upon not only
to teach the basic skills and subjects ; they are also
expected to take on issues previously addressed by
families , such as character education and sex education , while providing for students ’ health and psychological care . Some schools have even taken on the
responsibility for providing sleeping accommodations
for children from homeless families . In addition to
teaching students , schools are being held responsible
for many social agency services . 
These societal expectations , coupled with external
mandates imposing rigid standards for all students
and schools , without consideration of the resources or
context , place a heavy burden on teachers . As a result , 
some decide to leave teaching , and others decide against
even considering the profession . 
WORKING CONDITIONS OF TEACHERS
In addition to the problems related to the context of
teaching and the expectations society has placed on
schools , the conditions of daily work under which teachers
operate serve as an obstacle in teacher recruitment and
retention . One of the primary reasons teachers leave the
profession , in addition to feeling they do not receive
adequate parent and community support , is that they are
also faced with inadequate support from administrators
and school colleagues . This lack of support is transmitted
in many ways : Limited demonstrated means of appreciation , a lack of professional community within the school , 
and inadequate resources , reflecting the low priority
placed on public education . 
Administrators can play a key role in whether
or not teachers remain in a school . When teachers feel
supported and encouraged , they are more likely to feel
satisfied with their situation . A lack of empowerment , 
coupled with mandated curriculum and teaching practices , can cause teachers to feel deprofessionalized . 
Intelligent and creative teachers will quickly become
frustrated in those types of situations . However , when
provided with opportunities for meaningful decision
making , teachers tend to feel more fulfilled , have a
stronger sense of identity as a teacher , and are satisfied with their working conditions . 
It is common for new teachers to be given the most
difficult classes or schools without someone assigned
to guide or support them as they face difficulties in
these situations . Although many states have mentoring
systems for new teachers , these are often underfunded
mandates having little effect on new teachers ’ professional lives . Without someone to help new teachers
learn about complex local contexts , it is difficult for
Teacher Recruitment and Retention———995
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 995
these educators to master and survive the formal and
informal organizational and political cultures in their
schools and school systems . 
Principals and other teachers often take a handsoff approach to other teachers ’ classrooms and expect
teachers to solve their own problems . Student disciplinary problems may become problematic , particularly for inexperienced teachers . With no one to turn
to , they may find the task just too difficult . The
National Center for Policy Analysis claims about one
quarter of teachers leaving teaching because of dissatisfaction cite student disciplinary problems as their
primary factor for leaving . 
Another reason teachers leave the classroom is that
they become frustrated with the lack of resources available to support teaching and learning . Low salaries are
one of the reasons individuals leave early in their careers
or do not choose teaching as a profession . In general , 
this factor holds more importance for males than for
females . Low teaching salaries make it more difficult to
hire and retain teachers in high-demand fields such
as foreign language , science , mathematics , and vocational
education , as professionals can earn higher salaries
working in their fields of practice where their skills are
in high demand . Another factor hindering teacher retention is a lack of adequate teaching materials and supplies . This situation often results in teachers having to
use their own money to support their classrooms and
students . This lack of resources combined with low
salaries lessens the likelihood of top achievers entering
or remaining in the teaching profession . 
A related issue closely connected to financial
resources is class size . In some settings , teachers are
asked to teach 30 or more students of diverse abilities , 
making the job extremely difficult , particularly in the
lower grades . Large class sizes , limited classroom space
and other resources , and increasing levels of public
accountability can raise teachers ’ levels of frustration , 
causing them to leave the field . Knowledge about these
problems can likewise cause potential teachers to select
other career fields . 
Inadequate resources are generally reflected in poor
facilities . Although this might seem an unlikely reason
for teachers to leave teaching or to not consider it as a
profession , unattractive or unsafe facilities , inadequate
heating and cooling systems in buildings , and insufficient classroom space represent a lack of support and
can cause people to feel unappreciated . When considered in combination with other issues , poor facilities
have been found to affect teacher dropout rates . 
ORGANIZATIONAL AND
STRUCTURAL CONSTRAINTS
Another reason for the teacher shortage is organizational and structural constraints that discourage people
from entering or staying in the teaching profession . 
Some of these constraints hinder people from teaching
in high poverty schools , where the greatest need for
highly qualified personnel exists . These organizational
and structural factors are hiring practices and policies , 
certification requirements , teacher assessment systems , 
and policies related to teacher salaries . 
Hiring Practices and Policies
Hiring practices , particularly in large urban schools , 
where needs are great , are sometimes culprits in perpetuating teacher shortages . These systems often have
outdated procedures for posting and filing positions , 
making it difficult for people to know what jobs are
available . Such systems may have personnel staff
shortages , causing late hiring and outdated , inflexible
rules . In addition , when staff members are overworked , 
resultant attitudes within personnel offices may not be 
 “ people-friendly .  ” In such settings , new teachers may
be hired at the last minute , sometimes even after school
starts , causing even those committed to teaching in
low-income schools to take other jobs . 
Transfer policies , which sometimes impact hiring
practices , impact teacher shortages and particularly
teacher dropout rates . In most school district settings , 
teachers are permitted to transfer to a new school
based on seniority . Thus , teachers who are new to a
system are often placed in the most difficult schools as
teachers who are already in the system transfer out of
these schools . Schools where student performance is
chronically low , discipline problems are high , or
resources are limited often have the highest turnover
rate among teachers . This can result in a disproportionately high percentage of new teachers or teachers
with alternative certification , who may not be able to
support or mentor one another effectively , being left to
fend for themselves in these difficult situations . 
State Certification Policies
State teacher certification policies may help to cause
teacher shortages . Debates around certification requirements have become a very politically charged area . 
Those who support stringent certification requirements
996———Teacher Recruitment and Retention
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 996
requiring a degree in an education field believe
accepting people who have not gone through traditional educational channels to acquire their training
will reduce the quality of teachers and teaching . These
proponents of traditional certification approaches suggest alternative approaches will further exacerbate the
problems in low-performing and underfunded schools , 
the places where alternatively trained and uncertified
teachers are most often hired . 
Those proposing more flexible certification requirements or the elimination of certification requirements
state there is insufficient data to support the case for certification solely through acquiring college degrees in
education . They suggest those who prepare educators
and support traditional models of certification are only
concerned about keeping control over the profession . 
PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
OF TEACHERS
Issues related to teacher assessment and evaluation
are sometimes a consideration when teachers leave the
field . Assessment systems are often haphazard or ineffective , allowing little differentiation between good
and poor teachers in terms of feedback or rewards . 
This lack of meaningful feedback can affect morale of
stronger teachers and the reputation of the profession . 
There has been much dissension about this issue , with
concerns expressed about the fairness and integrity of
any evaluation system . The creation of more accurate
performance assessment measures has often required
cooperative efforts between teacher unions and state
or local school boards . 
Closely related to the lack of rewards for good
teaching are the standard salary scales used in most
systems . In these pay scales , teachers receive salary
increases based on the level of increased educational
degree and years of service . Although most systems
increase salaries for teachers who receive National
Board Certification , there are few systems tying
salaries to student performance , teacher competence , 
or to subject areas based on shortages , need , and the
marketplace . Thus , outstanding teachers may believe
their efforts are not recognized , and teachers in fields
where there are higher salaries in other jobs , such as
science and mathematics , may leave the field or simply
fail to select teaching as a viable vocation . Like assessment systems and alternative certification , differentiated salary scales have strong proponents on both
sides of the issue . 
RECRUITMENT STRATEGIES TO
OVERCOME TEACHER SHORTAGES
It is imperative to understand the intertwined nature of
issues pertaining to teacher recruitment and retention
and to deal with these two issues as parts of a whole . 
Although some strategies may impact retention , they
may be primarily focused on recruitment and vice
versa . Typically there has been more attention given to
recruitment efforts than to retention strategies . Among
the approaches used to recruit teachers are recruiting
from selected audiences or groups , using alternative
methods for preparing teachers , changing hiring practices and policies , and enhancing financial rewards . 
Recruiting From Selected
Audiences or Groups
It has become a common practice among more affluent or larger school districts to recruit potential teachers
from selected audiences or groups . Several types of
targeted recruitment are described below . 
Recruiting Teaching Professionals
One of the most prominent strategies for recruiting
new teachers is focusing upon selected audiences or
groups as the primary source for prospective teachers . 
A common approach involving selected audiences
or groups is to recruit teachers from other schools or
states who are already teaching and lure them with
better working conditions , salaries , or other financial
incentives . While this might aid the school system hiring these teachers , it does little to solve the overall
teacher shortage . Another approach involving selected
audiences is hosting hiring days on college campuses
known to produce the quality , race , or subject matter
of teachers needed by a school district . 
In some situations , particularly in large cities , 
systems recruit international teacher groups with a particular emphasis on filling positions in mathematics , 
science , foreign language , and bilingual education . For
example , Palm Beach County , Florida has been recruiting in the Philippines and Spain for a number of years
and appears to be satisfied with the quality of the
teachers they have employed because they are continuing this hiring practice . 
Foreign teachers are being employed throughout
the country , particularly in urban areas . Although
the numbers of these teachers are minimal overall
because of a limitation on visas , most U . S . school
Teacher Recruitment and Retention———997
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 997
systems report the use of foreign teachers has been
quite successful . These teachers bring new dimensions and perspectives to the school . Often , however , 
they are put into difficult schools in which the differences in language and culture can sometimes cause
problems for them . The primary difficulty these
teachers appear to have is in the area of classroom
management . Thus , as with all new teachers , it is
essential that support networks are incorporated into
the system to ensure their success . 
Many school systems that recruit foreign teachers
do so through external companies that specialize in
this area . They appear to be pleased with the results , 
as hiring from abroad is a rather complicated issue , 
particularly after increased security demands emanating from the September 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . 
Recruiting Minority Faculty
One of the most difficult issues to resolve in teacher
recruitment is ensuring adequate numbers of minority
teachers enter and stay in the profession . Whatever
the specific program strategies used , ensuring an adequate number of minority and bilingual teachers to
serve our schools requires extensive planning and
implementation . 
Some school systems have developed programs to
reach out to minority groups , particularly African
Americans and Hispanics , to encourage them to enter
teaching and to support them once they have entered
the field . Jefferson Country , Kentucky , has developed
what might be considered a model program for addressing this need . A staff person responsible for minority
recruitment utilizes scholarships , loans , and workstudy programs to entice promising teacher candidates . The system also provides staff positions for
minority individuals , allowing them to work while
studying to become teachers . The district works in conjunction with the local university and the community
to identify potential educators and support them
throughout their preparation process . 
The Fontana Unified School District , in San
Bernardino County , California , has developed a program with six components to recruit and retain bilingual
teachers . These include ( a ) policies to ensure students ’ 
needs are met ,  ( b ) a career ladder for bilingual teacher
aides ,  ( c ) assistance in the credentialing process ,  ( d ) a
recruitment plan ,  ( e ) staff development activities , and 
( f ) working relationships with the community . 
Some universities have become engaged in efforts to
recruit minorities into the teaching field . For example , 
Clemson University , in partnership with three historically Black colleges , initiated the “ Call Me Mister ” 
program , which recruits young Black males into the
teaching field . Students receive tuition , room and
board , and a stipend . In exchange , these students agree
to teach in South Carolina schools for 4 years when
they graduate . 
The DeWitt Wallace-Reader ’ s Digest Fund was
instrumental in developing the Pathways to Teaching
Careers Program , focused primarily on recruiting
African Americans into the teaching profession . 
While implementing this program , the developers
discovered Peace Corps volunteers were a prime group
for recruitment as were paraprofessionals already
working in schools . 
Professional Outreach
Some school systems and states have established
networks and advertising campaigns to recruit people
with degrees in education who have left the field or
never entered it . This recruitment approach is often
enhanced with scholarships , loan forgiveness , or alternative certification routes for these potential teachers . 
Another recruiting approach is to reach out to those
in other professions who have the skills and knowledge
in a particular area of need or who have proven themselves as highly qualified professionals . Individuals in
careers such as engineering , who may not be happy in
their jobs or are retired from their careers and are seeking fulfillment in another arena , are prime candidates . 
Outreach efforts such as “ Troops to Teachers ” 
encourage retired or other military personnel who have
at least a baccalaureate degree to select a career in
teaching . This is sometimes combined with alternative
certification programs . Participants can receive tuition
assistance while getting certified by making a commitment to teach in a low-income school . Retention
rates and satisfaction levels for the teaching performance of this group are high among principals . 
Research indicates teachers often like to teach in
communities near their homes and in situations both
culturally and economically familiar to them . Retention
levels are high for teachers in schools near their homes . 
Thus , many schools and states are focusing on “ growing their own ” approaches to teacher recruitment . This
involves strategies such as recruiting individuals in
the local community colleges , encouraging teaching
assistants and paraprofessionals to consider getting
education degrees or participating in alternative certification programs , or implementing extensive career
998———Teacher Recruitment and Retention
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 998
awareness programs for students in middle or high
schools . The recruitment of teaching assistants into
the profession is expected to increase due to requirements in the No Child Left Behind legislation requiring they have at least 2-year degrees . 
Some schools have instituted “ Future Teacher Clubs ” 
and “ Investigating Teaching ” classes in their schools , 
taking a long-term approach to recruiting teachers into
the field . Some combine this effort with recruiting
future teachers at local community colleges . 
Sometimes community members become involved
in encouraging other community members to enter the
teaching profession . For example , in Detroit , a local
philanthropist working with Michigan State University ( MSU ) has provided funds to encourage people to
teach in Detroit Public Schools . Within this program , 
high school students may attend summer sessions to
learn about teaching , get funds providing loan forgiveness clauses for teaching in Detroit , and obtain
summer fellowships for professional development . 
The local union has joined in the effort by connecting
a mentoring program for new teachers to this effort . 
This combination of support addresses recruitment
and retention in meaningful ways . 
IMPLEMENTING ALTERNATIVE CURRICULAR
AND CERTIFICATION PRACTICES
One of the most controversial approaches to expanding
the pool of teachers is the use of alternative curricular
models or varied routes to obtaining a degree in education . These approaches fall into three categories : 
adapting college preparatory programs , changing the
venue of teacher preparation , and waiving or changing
teacher certification requirements . 
Adapting College of Education Programs
To expand the teaching pool , some colleges of
education have adopted a fifth-year program model in
which students who have degrees in fields other than
education acquire a master ’ s degree in education
enabling them to become a certified teacher . Sometimes these programs are combined with outreach
efforts to those who may have had careers outside of
education and include scholarships or loan forgiveness programs . 
A more recent addition to changing teacher preparation programs is using distance education as a means
of making the pursuit of a degree or certification more
flexible . Such programs permit students the opportunity
to work on their degree on their own schedule and in
distances far away from the college in which the program is offered . There is some controversy regarding the
quality of such programs . Research indicates the best
of these generally involve both “ high-tech and hightouch ,  ” meaning the technology is of high quality but
the human element is also considered and dealt with . 
A final change in curriculum that is meant to make
the field more enticing is the development of school / 
university partnerships in which both parties take
responsibility for teacher preparation . Formally called 
 “ professional development schools ,  ” these partnerships may have a beneficial effect on teacher retention , as teachers in the field are usually engaged in
professional development activities as a part of the
partnership . Such partnerships tend to raise the status
of teachers , because they are recognized as a vital part
of the teacher preparation process . 
There is some evidence preservice teachers
working in professional development schools are better
prepared to teach than those who go through a regular
internship program . It is purported they will stay in
the field longer because they are better prepared . 
However , there is not presently a solid body of literature to substantiate this claim . 
Changing the Venue
for Teacher Preparation
One approach to expanding the teaching pool is
to move the location of teacher preparation from colleges of education to other venues . In some states , 
community colleges are instituting teacher education
programs . In other states , community colleges are
working in conjunction with 4-year colleges to provide the first 2 years of teacher preparation . Nearly
half of all minorities in higher education are enrolled
in community colleges , so this makes an excellent
location for recruitment of minorities . These joint
programs , often called “ 2 + 2 ,  ” differ from traditional
articulation agreements because students are enrolled
at both institutions , and thus they provide more
student support and an easier transition from the community college to the university . 
Another change in venue is offering teacher preparation programs through private enterprise , often
using distance education programs . The use of online
programs , offered by groups such as Sylvan Learning
Centers , is expanding . Although online courses
increase accessibility and scheduling flexibility , issues
of quality are not fully resolved . 
Teacher Recruitment and Retention———999
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 999
Changing or Waiving
Certification Requirements
A “ quick fix ” approach to recruiting teachers is
changing or waiving certification requirements . Those
supporting such changes suggest we need to open up
teaching to a broader range of people . Those who
oppose such actions believe it negates the presence
of a knowledge base of teaching , deprofessionalizes
teaching , and will result in higher teacher drop rates , 
as teachers who do not have an in-depth preparation
experience will find themselves unprepared for the
rigors of the classroom . 
Currently , 41 states and the District of Columbia
have instituted alternative certification programs . 
Some states , such as Texas and Delaware , have eliminated or lessened teacher certification requirements . 
Others have instituted “ quick ” routes into teaching .  
 “ Teach for America ” recruits college graduates who
do not have teaching degrees into inner cities and rural
schools to teach for 2 years . They receive intense training in a summer program prior to beginning their
teaching careers . Some also receive loan forgiveness
for each year they teach . 
Alternative certification programs have not been in
place long enough to definitively determine whether
teachers who are certified through them or who do not
have to meet any certification standards are as qualified to teach or as successful or whether they stay in
the field as long as or longer than teachers who have
obtained their degrees and certification through a traditional route . Data in Delaware indicate these teachers
are staying in the field , but findings from other studies are not as clearly supportive of alternative certification programs . 
Factors appearing to enhance teaching success for
alternatively certified teachers are a rigorous screening process , a strong well-developed mentor program , 
field-based experiences , recruiting people who hold
at least a bachelor ’ s degree and an interest in teaching , 
and having high performance standards . 
ADJUSTING HIRING
PRACTICES AND POLICIES
A third approach to teacher recruitment that can
affect retention rates is adjusting hiring practices
and policies . The first element deals with how personnel are hired . The second focuses on financial
issues . 
Improving Hiring Practices
If school systems want to hire teachers , they need to
make the process as easy as possible . As noted previously , often the poorest districts have the most archaic
hiring systems . The rise of technology is aiding systems to improve their procedures . Using technology
allows potential employees to gain information about
employment possibilities and apply on a 24-hour basis
and helps make the process more accessible . Providing
an e-mail address where questions can be answered is
another strategy boosting teacher recruitment . 
Minimizing paperwork and ensuring a positive
attitude among employees are all factors in the recruitment and successful hiring of new teachers . Staff in
personnel offices must be well trained to be “ customerfriendly ” and to understand they are competing in a
marketplace where making applicants feel welcome is
essential . 
Financial Rewards
One of the more recent innovations in teacher recruitment , which can also be a factor in retention , is the use
of financial incentives and rewards . Some school systems give cash , signing bonuses to teachers who will
accept contracts to teach in hard-to-fill positions . Some
states give scholarships or loans to students with a caveat
they must teach in particular types of schools or teach in
specific subject areas for a certain period . These strategies appear to be effective methods for recruiting
teachers into the field and for keeping them in a school
system . However , they are less effective in recruiting
and retaining teachers than recruiting teachers from professions outside of the teaching field . 
A small percentage of school systems are paying
moving expenses and / or giving low interest loans for
housing or other personal needs . Some systems are
experimenting with the concept of differentiated
salaries , paying people in some subject areas more
than others , which can aid in hiring teachers for highneed subject areas . Some are providing new faculty
credit for work experience and thus starting them
higher on the salary scale when they enter the profession . Other systems retrain present staff , such as
middle school teachers , assisting them to gain certification in a hard-to-fill area such as mathematics or
English as a second language . These types of incentives are new , and there is not yet a body of research
about their effectiveness . 
1000———Teacher Recruitment and Retention
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1000
TEACHER RETENTION STRATEGIES
There appears to be more attention given to teacher
recruitment than retention . This may be true because
it is somewhat easier to develop and implement
recruitment strategies than to develop systems for
retaining teachers . Retention strategies often require
creating new structures , engaging in innovative practices , and overcoming longstanding policies and
procedures . These changes require time and money , 
which are often in short supply in most school systems . They also are tied to political realities and need
community support . 
However , some retention strategies are being implemented or have been recognized as possibilities for
keeping teachers in the profession . These strategies
include enhancing professional status and restructuring working conditions through the creation of internal
and external support systems . Teachers value working
in a collegial atmosphere led by a principal with a
strong instructional emphasis . They want to see evidence that the work they do each day is important and
makes a positive difference in the lives of children . 
Enhancing Professional Status
While salaries and benefits are not a primary
reason why teachers leave teaching , improving pay
may raise the status of the profession , and if implemented in ways tied to professional competence , it may
enhance retention rates . A financial reward system that
appears to be used fairly commonly is paying people
for proven skill development such as completing a
specific number of college credits or obtaining an
advanced degree , successfully completing some specified
professional development activities , or demonstrating
skills through avenues such as portfolio development
or obtaining National Board Certification . There is
some evidence this encourages people to stay in the
field . 
National Board Certification is a standards-based
approach to fostering self-reflection and analysis of
one ’ s own teaching practice . By engaging in the dual
process of creating a portfolio and participating in
assessments on content expertise and knowledge
about how children learn at various developmental
stages , teachers demonstrate , and receive recognition
for , their expertise as effective teachers . According to
literature produced by the National Board Certification , 
this process helps teachers become more focused , 
reflective , and confident and provides an important
professional development experience for each participating teacher . Once a teacher has earned National
Board Certification , there is usually a salary increase
for achieving this designation . 
There is much discussion about moving beyond
standard methods for improving salaries . Some school
systems and states are changing retirement rules to
allow retired teachers to come back into the field
without losing retirement benefits . This approach
enhances the finances of those teaching and also keeps
some of the most experienced teachers available . 
Some systems use them to mentor younger teachers or
to serve as lead teachers . 
Another approach being considered is to develop
mechanisms connecting student performance to teacher
pay . In some states , such as Florida , schools receive
bonuses for student improvement . These bonuses are
used to enhance school resources or to give bonuses to
teachers in the schools . 
Attempts are also being made to isolate factors
affecting student success and develop assessment and
evaluation systems that reward excellence in teaching
and weed out poor teachers . While such an approach
will raise the prestige and credibility of teachers , it
will require cooperation between unions and school
boards and a body of research supporting what is
assessed and measured . While there appears to be a
desire on the part of the field and the general public to
identify strategies impacting student learning , a strong
enough body of knowledge to create an acceptable
system is lacking . There are other constraints as well , 
including collective-bargaining agreements and the
organizational culture of schools , that tend to minimize individual contributions and rewards and instead
focus upon the profession as a whole . However , it
appears there will be much pressure to develop some
type of assessment system tying teaching to learning , 
along with a system of financial rewards for those
teachers who improve student learning . 
Restructuring Work Environments
One of the most common reasons for teachers to
leave the profession is the isolation of teaching and
the lack of opportunities for collaboration within the
teaching environment . There are strategies being used
in many situations that seek to change that environment . Some involve internal systems of support , and
others depend on external support systems . 
Teacher Recruitment and Retention———1001
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1001
Internal Support Systems
Traditionally , schools have been organized in
cell-like structures , with teachers operating somewhat
independently under the headship of a principal who
has been seen as the “ leader ” of the school . This
model has led to a sense of isolation and is a factor in
teachers leaving the profession . Some of the most
promising retention strategies involve changing this
model by developing a sense of team and teacher support systems and ensuring administrative support for
collaboration and empowerment . 
High-quality leaders who empower teachers
through meaningful involvement in decision making
about teaching and learning issues and help create and
support learning communities also help improve the
retention rates for teachers . Teachers appreciate
principals who support them when it is needed , make
efforts to address teacher concerns , and communicate
effectively . Having a shared vision and high yet realistic expectations for teaching and learning also affect
a teacher ’ s perception about the working conditions at
the school . Strong leaders are essential for improving
the working conditions of teachers . 
A 2001 study by North Central Regional
Educational Laboratory in seven states indicates attrition can be reduced by half or more by providing
support systems for new teachers . Many schools have
implemented new-teacher mentoring programs to
guide them through their first year and in some
instances , their second year of teaching . Because so
many new teachers become disillusioned within their
first few years , it is essential to have strong support
systems in place to assist new teachers as they learn
the social and political realities of their schools and
school systems . 
Some schools have developed school improvement
teams in which teachers and parents and sometimes
students engage in dialogue about school needs , goals , 
and actions . Often these teams develop into learning
communities in which people are encouraged to support and work collaboratively with one another . 
Methods for improving teacher working conditions
can be built into school improvement plans , ensuring
that the multiple stakeholders representing a school
community understand and value the connection between
teachers engaged in ongoing learning and effective
learning for students . 
Some schools have developed common planning
times or a common lunch hour to ensure that people
have opportunities to think , learn , and share with one
another . Some research on teacher working conditions
has identified lack of time to plan , discuss educational
issues , and teach as a major issue for teachers . It is not
unusual for teachers to work nights and weekends to
plan , assess student work , and collaborate with others . 
When these obligations conflict with family needs , it
presents concerned teachers with a dilemma—meet
student needs or meet family needs ? If a teacher does
not feel valued by a community or school system , the
frustration of this situation may cause him or her to
leave the teaching profession . 
Many teachers believe they cannot meet the educational needs of all students with their large class sizes
and heavy student loads . This too is a frustrating
situation for teachers who want to make a positive
difference in the lives of children . Structures such as
common planning times and school improvement
teams help alleviate difficulties , particularly in problem
schools , and aid in making teaching a more rewarding
experience . 
Having meaningful opportunities to participate in the
decision-making process appears to positively influence
retention . When teachers , administrators , and parents
work together for the common good of the school and
students , faculty develop a stronger loyalty to and bond
with the school and tend to remain in it . The relationships with the community also tend to improve . The
more teachers feel valued and efficacious , the more
likely they are to remain in the teaching profession . 
An important part of supporting all teachers is having strong professional development programs meeting their individual needs . Although new teachers
have special training needs , the nature of teaching and
learning requires all teachers to update their skills and
to engage in continuous learning . Providing funds and
time to allow teachers to grow professionally is an
important element in teacher retention . Sometimes
these programs are developed in conjunction with universities and bring in the most recent researchers to
ensure that teachers are familiar with innovative information . Having such partnerships tends to strengthen
the collaborative efforts of the school . 
Restructuring schools to make them smaller appears
to be one of the most successful strategies in teacher
retention . It reduces isolation and makes problems
appear to be more solvable . Some schools have developed schools within a school to enhance communications and interactions , ensuring stronger relationships
between and among students , teachers , and parents . 
1002———Teacher Recruitment and Retention
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1002
Reforms , policies , and organizational patterns can
help improve teacher working conditions by attending
to issues mattering most to teachers . For example , 
many teachers believe an important area for improvement is to increase their time available for teaching
and their ability to participate in decisions directly
affecting teaching and learning . Class size reductions , 
reduced teaching loads ( especially for new teachers )  , 
adequate time for planning and collaborative work , 
and high-quality professional development focused
on individual needs may improve teachers ’ perceptions
about their working conditions . School districts create
some of the policies contributing to school working
conditions . This is especially true in the areas of facilities , resource allocation , and professional development . Therefore , it is important to identify policies in
districts that act as catalysts or barriers for improving
working conditions . 
External Support Systems
Other methods for restructuring schools so teachers
are supported and are more professionally engaged
involve making connections with individuals , groups , 
or organizations external to the school . Among the most
prominent are school assistance teams , local , regional , 
or national educational networks , professional development schools , the involvement of external stakeholders or intermediary organizations , and state or federal
policies . 
School Assistance Teams
In 2002 , the federal government identified over
8 , 000 schools as low performing , based on state definitions under the No Child Left Behind ( NCLB ) legislation . The number of low-performing schools is
expected to increase in the next few years due to the
NCLB standards for student adequate yearly progress 
( AYP )  . 
Morale among students and faculty within lowperforming schools is often low , making it difficult to
hire and retain qualified teachers . School assistance
teams , composed of experts who work with troubled
schools under the direction of state departments of
education , are being created across the nation . Implementation methods and strategies vary . Many states , 
such as North Carolina , Texas , and Alabama , report
impressive school improvement gains resulting from
the efforts of the school assistance team models . 
School assistance teams can facilitate an increased
focus on student learning needs , promote collaboration , and mandate that adequate time be earmarked for
professional development and inquiry into best practices for teaching and learning . Although it is not primarily a strategy for teacher retention , improving
troubled schools has the potential for retaining
teachers and is a promising strategy requiring further
research . 
Professional Education Networks
Many researchers have emphasized the importance
of professional education networks as an avenue for
enhancing schools and teacher professionalism . For
example , teacher leadership networks help mature
teachers prepare for new leadership roles within
their schools and school systems . As teacher
leaders , they are able to serve as a resource for new
teachers , facilitate active engagement by multiple
stakeholders in collaborative decision making , serve
as critical friends for other teachers , and assist with
learning-focused leadership activities within the
school . 
Professional Development Schools
Professional development schools and networks
connecting them with others emphasize the need
for mutually beneficial partnerships between and
among colleges of education or other higher-education
entities and pre-K–12 schools and systems . As with
the professional education networks described above , 
an underlying purpose for professional development schools is to improve the quality of education
for today ’ s students and teachers as well as for
teachers of tomorrow . By interacting with a variety
of stakeholders , all focused on the improvement
of teaching and learning , classroom teachers are
able to become engaged in meaningful and ongoing
professional development that enriches their own
practice . 
External Constituents
and Intermediary Organizations
Opportunities to understand and participate in
activities strengthening the intersection among educational improvement and community and economic
development can help teachers develop new skills and
Teacher Recruitment and Retention———1003
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1003
understandings . Schools and their communities have
become disconnected , according to some research . As
such , educational , community leadership , and economic
development tasks are viewed in isolation rather than
as interdependent parts of a whole . When teachers can
interact with external constituents in ways that
embrace the interdependent nature of communities , 
rather than having to defend their practice from undue
criticism , there can be opportunities for all members
of the community to gain a deeper appreciation and
respect for each other . 
Intermediary organizations , groups actively promoting a reform effort in a school or school system , can
serve an important role in improving teacher working
conditions by focusing regular attention on issues or
situations . The role of intermediary organizations
often is to ask provoking questions , conduct research
on practices , and evaluate the results of initiatives . 
The Annenberg Challenge is one example of educational reform efforts benefiting from the involvement
of intermediary organizations . 
State and Federal Policies
States help ensure teaching quality , set standards
for the preparation of new and current teachers , and
develop licensing requirements . States can provide
assistance to schools and districts by offering incentives for retaining strong teachers , especially in hardto-staff and low-performing schools . Additional
funding or incentives for improved school facilities
and other working condition issues can go a long way
to help retain quality teachers . Federal policies such
as No Child Left Behind or Title II allocations should
include adequate funding to support the recruitment
and retention of qualified teachers in all school districts . 
The unintended consequences of state and federal policies must be taken into consideration by policymakers , 
particularly as they affect the morale of teachers and
the public perception of the teaching profession and
public education if the teacher retention issue is to be
resolved . 
—Cynthia J . Reed and Frances K . Kochan
See also attitudes toward work ; career stages ; class size ; differentiated staffing ; leadership , teacher ; morale ; National
Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education ; professional development schools ; satisfaction , in organizations
and roles ; schools of education ; student teaching ; team
teaching
Further Readings and References
Allen , R .  ( 2002 )  . Teacher education at the community college : 
partnership and collaboration .  ( ERIC Clearinghouse for
Community Colleges , EDO-JC-02-05 )  . Retrieved September
7 , 2005 , from 
dig01205 . htm
Boyd , D .  , Lankford , H .  , Loeb , S .  ,  & Wyckoff , J .  ( 2003 )  . The
draw of home : How teachers ’ preferences for proximity disadvantage urban schools . National Bureau of Economic
Research . Retrieved September 7 , 2005 , from 
Dzvimbo , K . P .  ( 2003 )  . The international migration of skilled
human capital from developing countries . Washington , DC : 
World Bank , HDNED . 
Edwards , V . B .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2000 )  . Quality counts 2000 : Who
should teach ?  [ Special issue ]  . Education Week , 19 ( 18 )  . 
Evelyn , J .  ( 2002 , March 8 )  . States give community colleges a
role in educating teachers . The Chronicle of Higher
Education . Retrieved September 7 , 2005 , from http :  /  / 
chroniclecom / 
Hanushek , E . A .  , Kain , J . F .  ,  & Rivkin , S . G .  ( 2004 )  . The
revolving door . Education Next , 4 ( 1 )  , 76–82 . 
Hare , D .  ,  & Hare , J .  ( 2001 )  . Effective teacher recruitment and
retention strategies in the Midwest : Who is making use of
them ? Naperville : IL : North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory . 
Harrington , P . E .  ( 2001 )  . Attracting new teachers requires
changing old rules . The College Board Review , 192 , 6–11 . 
Hussar , W . J .  ( 2002 )  . Projections of education statistics to
2011 . Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Education , 
National Center for Education Statistics . 
Kochan , F . K .  ,  & Reed , C . J .  ( 2005 )  . Collaborative leadership , 
community building , and democracy in public education . 
In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational
leadership ( pp . 68–84 .  ) Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Koop , W .  ( 2000 )  . Ten years of Teach for America . Education
Week , 19 ( 41 )  , 48–53 . 
Legler , R .  ( 2002 )  . Alternative certification : A review of theory
and research . North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory . Retrieved September 7 , 2005 , www . ncrel . org / 
policy / pubs / html / alcert / index . html
Mantle-Bromley , C .  , Gould , L . M .  , McWhorter , B . E .  ,  & 
Whaley , D . C .  ( 2000 )  . The effect of program structure on
new teachers , employment , and program satisfaction patterns . 
Action in Teacher Education , 22 ( 1 )  , 1–14 . 
Mathews , D .  ( 2003 )  . Is there a public for public schools ? 
Dayton , OH : Kettering Foundation . 
Milanowski , A .  ( 2003 )  . The varieties of knowledge and skillbased pay design : A comparison of seven new pay systems
for K–12 teachers . Education Policy Analysis Archives , 
11 ( 4 )  . Retrieved January 30 , 2003 , from 
. asu . edu / epaa / v11n4
Moir , E .  ( 2003 )  . Launching the next generation of teachers
through quality induction . New York : National Commission
on Teaching & America ’ s Future . 
Murphy , P . J .  ,  & DeArmond , M . M .  ( 2003 )  . From the headlines
to the frontlines : The teacher shortage and its implications
1004———Teacher Recruitment and Retention
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1004
for recruitment policy . Seattle : University of Washington
Center on Reinventing Public Education , Daniel J . Evans
School of Public Affairs . 
Nieto , S .  ( 2003 )  . What keeps teachers going ? New York : Teachers
College Press
Odden , A .  ( 2000 )  . New and better forms of teacher compensation are possible . Phi Delta Kappan , 81 , 361–366 . 
Schneider , M .  ( 2003 )  . Linking school facility conditions to
teacher satisfaction and success . Washington , DC : National
Clearinghouse for Educational Facilities . 
Theobald , N . D .  ,  & Michael , R . S .  ( 2001 )  . Turnover in the
Midwest : Who stays , leaves , and moves ? Naperville : IL : 
North Central Regional Educational Laboratory . 
U . S . General Accounting Office .  ( 2001 ) Troops to teachers program helped address teacher shortages : Report to Congress
2001 . Washington , DC : Author . 
Useem , E .  ( 2003 , March 1 )  . The retention and qualifications of
new teachers in Philadelphia ’ s high-poverty middle
schools : A three-year cohort study . Philadelphia Education
Fund . Paper presented at the annual conference of the
Eastern Sociological Society , Philadelphia , PA . 
 TEAM TEACHING
Team teaching , conceptualized and developed at Harvard
University in the mid-1950s , calls for teachers to work
together to plan , teach , and evaluate a common group
of students . Initiated in 1957 , a team project sponsored
by Harvard University and Lexington , Massachusetts , 
Public Schools , attracted worldwide attention and
influenced the design of school buildings . A great many
schools were designed to accommodate team teaching
and featured large , open classrooms or spaces with collapsible partitions . Many of these school buildings , 
however , were poorly utilized , and some of these facilities were reconverted into self-contained classrooms
with hard walls . Many early team-teaching efforts were
abandoned or modified because of the presumed failures
of the open-space architecture . Team teaching seemed
unsuccessful because teachers were poorly prepared to
take advantage of teaming , and support from administrators was lacking . 
Functional divisions of curriculum and student
tracking have characterized the bureaucratic organizational structure of schools . This structure promoted
teacher isolation and detachment , forcing them to
work both physically and intellectually separate from
their colleagues with limited professional sharing . 
Influenced by organizational theory literature from the
corporate sector , authentic teamwork , collegial interaction , 
and collaborative decision making are associated
with successful school improvement and have become
prominent in the literature on school reform . Team
teaching has become a major element of school organizational and curricular reform . 
The team-teaching approach is being promoted
partly because of increased expectations that all students
meet standards of learning performance through inclusive practices . At the same time , professional standards
adopted by the National Board for Professional Teaching
Standards , the Interstate New Teacher Assessment and
Support Consortium , and the National Staff Development Council endorse working collaboratively , fostering relationships with school colleagues , and creating
time for teachers to work together . 
The middle school movement of the 1980s
promoted school restructuring from individualized
teaching in junior highs to middle schools organized
around team teaching . The influential report , Turning
Points , released by the Carnegie Council on Adolescent
Development , urged school restructuring around organizational cultures that are characterized by collaborative inquiry , teacher teaming , and collegial sharing . In
2000 , 79% of middle school principals reported that
they had teams , up from 57% in 1992 . 
The restructuring of high schools to smaller learning communities includes interdisciplinary teaching
teams and planning periods designed for teacher collaboration . Teacher teaming in high school can ease
student transition from middle school and ensure that
instruction for English language learners and special
education students includes high-level concepts in
content area studies . 
In elementary schools , the team-teaching approach
is being advanced because of special education mandates for inclusion classrooms and as a way to provide
developmentally appropriate educational experiences
and individualized instruction that will benefit all
students . Teacher teams with multiage groups of
students , looping , and coteaching distinguish staffing
models that are changing the elementary school norm
of the self-contained classroom-based teacher . 
In essence , teachers in teams seek to accomplish
collaboratively what self-contained teachers seek to
accomplish independently . It shifts the role of instruction from the individual to a team . Team teaching
must include basic elements :  ( a ) long- and short-range
curriculum planning by all team members ,  ( b ) coteaching ,  ( c ) team assessment of instructional sequences
and entire instructional program ,  ( d ) students regularly
Team Teaching———1005
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1005
connecting with all team members ,  ( e ) team responsibility for evaluating student progress , and ( f ) unselfish
sharing of classroom materials and space . 
Proponents of team teaching maintain that it
reduces teacher isolation , provides avenues for professional growth , promotes greater instructional interaction to examine classroom challenges , and improves
student achievement . Researchers contend that teamed
teachers are more likely to collaborate and share their
knowledge , as well as create stronger relationships
among themselves and students . Teachers benefit from
opportunities to focus collaboratively on improving
curriculum and teaching practices , activities that may
affect student achievement . 
Teaming is associated with implementation of
more effective classroom practices and greater teacher
capacity for change . A number of researchers report
that teachers who work collaboratively in teams
increase curriculum coordination , authentic instruction , interdisciplinary practices , and authentic assessment . In addition , studies show schools that have
implemented teaming report a more positive school
climate , higher teacher job satisfaction , and more frequent contact with parents . 
School arrangements critical to the success of
teaming are common planning time , lower student
numbers , and team longevity . Studies provide evidence
that restructuring school schedules to offer sufficient
common planning time enables teachers to learn and
problem solve together . Research also suggests that
successful team activities , particularly curriculum
coordination and coordination of student assignments , 
are more likely to occur when teams of teachers work
with fewer students . Furthermore , teachers who have
teamed together 3 or more years implement more effective classroom practices and team activities . 
Teachers value the benefits of teaming and prefer
to work in teams rather than work individually . However , in some studies , creating and maintaining habits
of collaborative work patterns in schools continues to
be an elusive objective . Common obstacles to effective teaming practices are the lack of time for professional collaboration , increasing work demands , and a
lack of commitment by teachers . Teacher conflict
within teams also affects collaborative work . Furthermore , team continuity and constantly changing team
membership is a challenge in schools with high teacher
turnover and affects the team ’ s impact on student outcomes . Perhaps the most debilitating barrier is the
lack of administrator resolve to promote and sustain
collaborative practice . This kind of endeavor requires
leadership that is prepared and committed to confront
and deal with the challenges of reforming schools . 
—Bobbie J . Greenlee
See also career stages ; instructional interventions ; leadership , 
distributed ; learning environments ; mentoring ; restructuring , of schools ; teacher recruitment and retention
Further Readings and References
Cotton , K .  ( 2001 )  . New small learning communities : Findings
from recent literature . Portland , OR : Northwest Regional
Educational Laboratory . 
Erb , T . O .  ( 2001 )  . Transforming organizations for youth and
adult learning . In T . S . Dickinson ( Ed .  )  , Reinventing the
middle school ( pp . 176–200 )  . New York : RoutledgeFalmer . 
Flowers , N .  , Mertens , S . B .  ,  & Mulhall , P . F .  ( 2000 )  . How
teaming influences classroom practices . Middle School
Journal , 32 ( 2 )  , 52–59 . 
Jackson , A . W .  ,  & Davis , G . A .  ( 2000 )  . Turning points 2000 : 
Educating adolescents in the 21st century . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Leonard , L .  ,  & Leonard , P .  ( 2003 )  . The continuing trouble
with collaboration : Teachers talk . Current Issues in
Education , 6 ( 15 )  . Retrieved September 7 , 2005 , from

Valentine , J . W .  , Clark , D . C .  , Hackman , D . G .  ,  & Petzko , V . 
N .  ( 2002 )  . A national study of leadership in middle level
schools : Vol 1 . A national study of middle level leaders
and school programs . Reston , VA : National Association of
Secondary School Principals . 
 TECHNOLOGY AND THE LAW
How we communicate has changed because of the
explosive growth of the Internet , which has prompted
the development of many new technologies ( e . g .  , digital cameras , wireless computers )  . 
The Internet and the World Wide Web ( WWW ) are
often confused , and the terms are used interchangeably . The Internet is a networking infrastructure . It is
a network of networks that is capable of connecting
computers around the world utilizing a variety of
protocols . The WWW is the medium by which one
accesses information over the Internet using a browser
that connects the end user to Web documents or
pages that contain video , graphics , text , and sound . 
The Internet is available in over 200 countries , millions
of people use it daily , and there are over 100 million
Web pages of information . The Internet is a teaching
and learning tool that has tremendous potential for the
1006———Technology and the Law
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1006
user ; therefore , students must have free access to the
Internet to learn how to analyze , locate , evaluate , and
communicate information and ideas . 
The Internet coupled with the need to provide
access to information has become the challenge for
twenty-first century schools . However , this access to
information comes with the potential for abuse . Most
discussion concerning the abuses of technology centers around access to inappropriate material on the
Internet . 
State and federal governmental officials often find
themselves being reactive rather than proactive when
it comes to technology abuses . In an effort to protect
children from pornography and predatory behavior , the
U . S . Congress passed several pieces of legislation in the
last decade . First , the Communications Decency Act 
( CDA ) was enacted as part of the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 . The act made it law that any individual
who transmitted obscene or indecent material to a minor
under 18 years old was criminally liable . It was challenged in Reno v . American Civil Liberties Union in
1997 , and the Supreme Court struck down the statute
because it was “ facially overboard ” and a constitutional
violation that abridged free speech . 
Second , the Congress , in 1998 , passed the Child
Online Protection Act ( COPA ) before the ink was dry
on Reno . In an attempt to address issues raised by the
Court in Reno , they wrote COPA so that it applied
only to information displayed on the Internet , restricts
only the material that is harmful to minors , and
applied to communication made for commercial purposes . The legislation was challenged by Internet
providers who believed that the statute violated the
First Amendment free speech rights of adults by banning constitutionally protected speech . The Supreme
Court based their decision on the fact that by using
community standards to identify harmful material , the
statute was overboard , and they remanded the case to
the lower court . 
Finally , the Congress passed the Children ’ s
Internet Protection Act ( CIPA ) in 2001 . This statute
requires that public schools and libraries implement
Internet safety policies and install Internet filters on
computers to prevent users from accessing pornography , obscene material , and other material that is harmful to minors . CIPA applies to schools and libraries
that receive federal discounts for purchasing Internet
access under the federal E-rate program and those
who receive funds to purchase computers or Internet
access under Title III of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act of 1965 . CIPA was challenged by the
American Library Association and others on the
grounds that it violated the constitutional rights of
adults and children using libraries . The Supreme
Court upheld CIPA . It is important to note that the
American Library Association case applied only to
public libraries . Public schools did not participate in
the case , and they have been meeting CIPA ’ s requirements since October 2002 . 
Filtering is Internet commercial-blocking software
that denies access to inappropriate materials or activities . Nancy Willard noted in 2002 that commercial
filtering software used in schools may be legally challenged for the following reasons : 
• Blocking decisions are not being made by professional educators or librarians . 
• Category definitions and categorization decisions of
the companies are made without reference to local
community or school standards . 
• Lists of block sites , as well as the specific methods that
filtering software companies use to compile and categorize lists , are considered proprietary information . 
• There is no vehicle to ensure public accountability
on the part of the commercial filtering software
companies . They are not subject to freedom of
information / access to public records laws . Their
board of directors cannot be held accountable to
the citizens of a community through an election
process . 
• Several filtering companies have extensive marketing relationships with conservative religious organizations . The primary target markets for many
filtering companies are employers in government and
business . It is unknown how the existence of other
markets may be impacting the blocking decision
making of these companies . 
To further protect students , most schools require
students and their parents to sign an “ Acceptable Use
Policy ” agreement . This document outlines specific
guidelines for Internet use at school . The typical policy informs the user that the Internet is not to be used
for private , commercial , business , religious , or political reasons . It also informs them that materials on the
Internet and the content of e-mail messages are not
confidential ; they are expected to respect the rights
and property of others ; and they may not improperly
access , misappropriate , or misuse the files , data or
information of another . Those who fail to follow the
policy guidelines will have their privileges to use the
Internet suspended or revoked . 
Student-created Web pages are another area of
concern . Many school districts do not allow students
Technology and the Law———1007
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1007
to create personal Web pages during school time . This
does not mean that student cannot create his or her
own personal Web page . If students create Web pages
away from school and do not disrupt school activities , 
they are within their rights and should not be disciplined . When issues of this nature arise , administrators must realize that students retain their right to free
expression . Finally , school-sponsored Web pages are
typically maintained by the school ’ s technology specialist and are used to display school-related business
or activities . Students should not be permitted to link
their personal Web pages to the school Web page . However , student work may be exhibited on the school
page with prior permission from the student . 
—John S . Gooden
See also computers , use and impact of ; digital divide ; instructional interventions ; instructional technology ; law , trends
in ; learning , online ; Web-based teaching and learning
Further Readings and References
Child Online Protection Act , 47 U . S . C . 231 ( 1998 )  . 
Communications Decency Act , 47 U . S . C . 223 ( 1996 )  . 
Coppola , E .  ( 2004 )  . Powering up : Learning to teach well with
technology . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Fabos , B .  ( 2004 )  . Wrong turn on the information superhighway . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Reno v . American Civil Liberties Union , 117 S . Ct . 2329 
( 1997 )  . 
Supreme Court rules on Child Online Protection Act .  ( 2002 , 
July )  . The Computer & Internet Lawyer , 19 , p . 30 . 
Tenenbaum , L .  ( 2000 )  . Disciplining student for off-campus
Web sites . New York Law Journal , 31 ( 2 )  , 110–115 . 
Tinker v . Des Moines Independent Community School District , 
393 U . S . 503 ( 1969 )  . 
United States v . American Library Association , Inc .  , 539 U . S . 
194 ( 2003 )  . 
Wenglinsky , H .  ( 2005 )  . Using technology wisely . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Willard , N .  ( 2002 )  . The constitutionality and advisability
of the use of commercial filtering software in U . S . public
schools . Eugene , OR : Center for Advanced Technology in
Education . 
 TELEVISION , IMPACT
ON STUDENTS
Television is a telecommunication system that transmits images of objects ( stationary or moving ) between
distant points and most often comes into schools via
cable or satellite transmission . Television programs
have positive effects on teaching and learning , especially when teachers use television programs that
are produced and used explicitly for instructional purposes . Even greater benefits are noted when teachers
are involved in the selection , utilization , and integration of television programming into the curriculum . 
Through the use of television programs , teachers are
able to focus on the latest news and current events
along with exposing their students to world events and
cultures other than their own . Students are able to see
beyond their teachers ’ own perspectives and can
explore truth without sensationalism or condescension . Dramatic television ( fictional stories ) with educational messages can engage and motivate students , 
model healthy behaviors , stimulate students ’ minds , 
and engage children ’ s emotions . Interactive cable televising can even link classrooms and teach advanced
high school courses that could be prohibitively expensive
for any one system to offer alone . 
A number of companies and services are available
to school systems to provide televised educational
programming . The Stars Schools Consortium , Cox
Communications , Galaxy Classroom , Sunburst
Technology , Direct TV , and the JASON Project provide a multitude of telecourses , live broadcasts , and
educational materials to thousands of students nationwide . CNN ’ s Student Newsroom delivers a daily 10-
minute news segment produced by students , while
Channel One produces a daily 12-minute news summary , containing 2 minutes of advertisements , that is
fed directly into classrooms . 
Although the widespread public belief is that television has detrimental effects on student achievement , 
the sum of the research on television viewing does not
support that belief . For example , National Assessment
of Educational Progress ( NAEP ) surveys from 1980
to 1984 reveal that viewing 1 to 2 hours of TV a day
actually correlates positively with students ’ reading
achievement . However , achievement falls with longer
daily viewing periods . Also , the evidence is insufficient to suggest that television viewing displaces academic activities or has a negative impact on school
achievement . The viewing of television by very young
children does not lead to significant learning gains . 
Students may be very attentive while they watch TV
and still have a very small understanding of what is
happening in the program . There are a few negative
aspects of TV viewing that are supported by research . 
1008———Television , Impact on Students
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1008
Viewing violence on television is moderately correlated with aggression in children and adolescents . Also , 
television viewing is correlated with child obesity and
a decline in the overall physical fitness of American
children . 
Despite the positive effects of using TV in the
classroom , teachers use TV less then 30 minutes a week
in school . It is likely that prevailing negative public
beliefs about television viewing will continue to limit
the use of appropriate and enriching educational programs in schools . 
—Kimberly Martinez
See also computers , use and impact of ; discipline in schools ; 
instructional technology ; literacy , theories of ; National
Assessment of Educational Progress ; violence in schools
Further Readings and References
Bray , M .  , Brown , A .  ,  & Green , T .  ( 2004 )  . Technology and the
diverse learner . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
DeRoche , T .  ( 2003 , October 22 )  . Classroom TV . Education
Week . Retrieved September 7 , 2005 , from bpn . net / pdfs / 
Education_Week_GALAXY . PDF
Lehr , F .  ( 2000 )  . Television viewing and reading . Urbana , IL : 
ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication
Skills .  ( ERIC Document Reproduction Services No . 
ED272855 ) 
Wenglinsky , H .  ( 2005 )  . Using technology wisely . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Winn , M .  ( 2002 )  . The plug-in drug . Television , computers , and
family life . New York : Penguin Books . 
 TERRORISM
Terrorist attacks and impact on schools has necessitated a new role for leaders at local and district , as well
as at university and policy-making , levels . Terrorism
means the use of terror to repress or domineer by
means of panic and fear , and bioterrorism is the intentional use of infectious biological agents , or germs , to
cause illness . While learning how to deal with terrorism has become central to U . S . foreign policy , transference has only just begun for educational institutions . 
Principals and superintendents have been called upon
to guide action for preventing catastrophe and simultaneously promote the health of school populations . 
Governmental agencies claim that schools increasingly
constitute soft targets for attracting terrorist attacks , 
mainly because they draw overwhelming media
attention and house society ’ s most innocent citizens . 
Schools as national icons may be in preeminent danger , not unlike renowned buildings , as demonstrated
by the terrorist attacks on America on September 11 , 
2001 . The President of National School Safety and
Security Services warns that Al-Qaeda has already
threatened America ’ s children and victimized school
buses abroad . Moreover , the American Red Cross has
alerted citizens to prepare for the unthinkable .  “ Code
Orange ”  ( high security ) dictates that school leaders
report suspicious activity , review emergency plans , 
and address children ’ s fears . Specialized curricula
address racial issues and powerful feelings , especially
involving wrongful attribution as a result of terrorism . 
The K–12 school system ’ s mandate is to demonstrate
the necessary problem solving for developing emergency response systems consistent with the expectations for homeland security . As one major change , 
comprehensive partnerships with agencies , communities , and universities must be forged . Systematically
integrated schools can effectively exploit the expertise
of public health organizations , security agencies , disease and poison control centers , and more . However , 
legislative mandates involving safety and liability
issues for schools have sprung forth marketers in the
form of consulting firms that target crisis preparedness training . Such coalescing realities make it difficult to ascertain how much emergency school
responsiveness is “ rational ” and “ authentic ” apart from
corporate America ’ s own motives . Terrorism cannot
escape scrutiny , then , as a marketing and media concept that strategically garners material for both profit
and headlines . 
Although efforts to counter escalated violence can
create safer schools , goals of democracy must not be
sacrificed in the process . Diversity awareness in the
context of terrorism reflects social justice missions to
build inclusive communities and eliminate “ systemic
racism .  ” Racial profiling denies particular groups the
right to equal treatment in all public spheres , including schools . Similarly , as security tightens , rationalized racism escalates in the form of scapegoating , 
leading some scholars and policy analysts to describe
a “ dangerous ”  “ security regime ” emerging in the
United States . Since the September 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks and the passage of the USA Patriot Act in
2001 , the FBI ’ s vigilant activity has reportedly
increased at college campuses , in effect suspending
the civil rights of those for whom terrorist connections have been alleged . 
Terrorism———1009
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1009
New scholarship stresses that emergency procedures
should not be enforced independent of a school ’ s diversity conduct , an action that may counter the national
climate or racist agendas . Racial targeting is seen as
inextricably linked to terrorism—one area profoundly
affecting the other . The protection of schools through
emergency preparation therefore demands vigilance . 
Personal stories of racially motivated acts have
abounded since the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 
2001 . For example , a Middle Eastern university student
was handcuffed and detained after registering , as
required , by the U . S . Immigration and Naturalization
Service . He had aroused suspicion ,  “ guilty ” only of carrying a part-time course load that semester , even with
his advisor ’ s approval . Once triggered , incidents involving racially motivated assaults in the guise of security , 
protection , and patriotism can produce a domino effect . 
A new leadership attitude toward safety as inseparable from tolerance , diversity , and inclusion is necessary . Professors who prepare administrative leaders
are similarly challenged . The Educational Leadership
Constituent Council ( ELCC )  ( 2002 ) standards have
one safety benchmark :  “ Develop and administer policies that provide a safe school environment and promote student health and welfare .  ” In contrast with this
picture , the momentous forces school leaders must
face are grave , revolving around the powerful missions of antiviolence crisis preparedness and human
rights protection . Innovative programming that
addresses links between crisis intervention and terrorism awareness offers a solution , as in the case of the
Texas School Safety Center , where administrators learn
how to create more secure environments . A deeper
goal is to simultaneously carry out diversity awareness building to reinforce their interrelatedness . 
In addition , few living accounts exist of emergency
preparedness within the context of democratic citizenship . In one principal ’ s school in Israel , safety issues
required a nontraditional communal deliberative
process in response to ongoing violent turbulences . 
Action research by leadership aspirants in the United
States may be comparatively less developed where
focus is on crisis planning for virtually every type of
catastrophe imaginable : Concern has shifted to how
administrators would respond in the event of a bioterrorist attack , especially involving airborne gases . But
terrorism preparedness is not foreign to Florida ’ s
schools , for example , where bomb threats and evacuations are regularly rehearsed . Prospective administrators asked penetrating questions during the 2003 U . S . 
coalition war with Iraq , when the media suddenly
announced ways to prepare for a terrorism attack : This
Code Orange raised everyone ’ s consciousness level
about the possibility and realities of terrorism . Are
school leaders adequately trained to deal with an
emergency of this magnitude ? Such perplexing questions hint at the profound change on the horizon for
American schools and society . 
—Carol A . Mullen
See also adaptiveness of organizations ; capacity building , 
of organizations ; culture , school ; diversity ; global cultural
politics ; international education ; mentoring ; partnerships , 
interagency ; right-wing politics , advocates , impact on education ; role model ; school improvement models ; school
safety ; violence in schools
Further Readings and References
American Red Cross .  ( 2003 , February )  . Homeland Security
Advisory System recommendations . Retrieved September
7 , 2005 , from 
Arnone , M .  ( 2003 )  . Watchful eyes : The FBI steps up its work
on campuses , spurring fear and anger among many academics ( Special report )  . Chronicle of Higher Education , 
49 ( 31 )  , A14 . 
Dorn , M . S .  ( 2002 )  . Terrorism and schools . School Planning
and Management , 40 ( 11 )  , 19–35 . 
Educational Leadership Constituent Council .  ( 2002 )  . 
Educational Leadership Constituent Standards . Arlington , 
VA : National Policy Board for Educational Administration . 
Retrieved April 16 , 2003 , from 
Hoover , E .  ( 2003 )  . Closing the gates : A student under suspicion ( Special report )  . Chronicle of Higher Education , 
49 ( 31 )  , A12 . 
Jolly , E . J .  , Malloy , S . M .  ,  & Felt , M . C .  ( 2001 )  . Beyond
blame : Reacting to the terrorist attack . A curriculum for
middle and high school students . Newton , MA : Education
Development Center . Retrieved June 8 , 2003 , from http :  /  / 
www . edc . org / spotlight / schools / beyondblame
Mullen , C . A .  ( 2004 )  . Climbing the Himalayas of school leadership : The socialization of early career administrators . 
Lanham , MA : Scarecrow Press / Rowman & Littlefield . 
National School Safety and Security Services .  ( 2001 )  . 
Terrorism & school safety , 1–8 .  ( Full report available at Web
site )  . Retrieved July 15 , 2003 , from rity . org / resources / nasro_survey_2002
Rizvi , F .  ( 2003 )  . Democracy and education after September
11 . Globalisation , Societies , and Education , 1 ( 1 )  , 25–40 . 
Schechter , C .  ( 2002 )  . Marching in the land of uncertainty : 
Transforming school culture through communal deliberative process . International Journal of Leadership in
Education , 5 ( 2 )  , 105–128 . 
Trump , K . S .  ( 2002 )  . The impact of terrorism on school safety
planning . School Planning & Management , 41 ( 7 )  , 22–26 . 
1010———Terrorism
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1010
 TESTING AND TEST
THEORY DEVELOPMENT
In education , a test is a tool or technique intended to
measure students ’ knowledge , intelligence , or ability . 
It usually consists of a series of questions , problems , 
or physical responses . A standardized test is a written
test whose score is interpreted by reference to the scores
of a norm group . An aptitude test ostensibly measures
a person ’ s “ natural ability ,  ” while the achievement test
measures knowledge learned by the person . There are
generally two types of questions in a test . First , there
is the multiple-choice question . For a multiple-choice
question , the test taker will check one or more of the
choices in a list . Second is the free-response question . 
The free-response question requires the test taker to
state an opinion or to write an essay or short answer . 
This latter type of question usually requires a deeper
level of analytical thinking . 
There are two branches to testing theory—classical
test theory and the item response theory ( IRT )  . The
British psychologist Charles Spearman laid the foundation for the classical test theory , also called the true
score model . The key concepts of classical test theory
are reliability and validity . Reliability is the accuracy
of the scores of a measure . A test is considered reliable if it allows for stable estimates of student ability . 
In other words , it achieves similar results for students
who have similar ability and knowledge levels . On the
other hand , a valid measure is one that is measuring
what it is supposed to measure . Validity implies reliability ( accuracy )  . A valid measure must be reliable , but
a reliable measure need not be valid . 
The essence of classical test theory is that any
observed test score is the composite of two hypothetical
components : a true score and a random error component . 
X = T + E
Where X is the observed score , T is the true score , and
E is the error score . 
In classical test theory , reliability is defined mathematically as the ratio of the variation of the true score
and the variation of the observed score , which means
how much of the variation in the observed score is
explained by the variation of the true score . Or equivalently , reliability is defined as 1 minus the ratio of the
variation of the error score and the variation of the
observed score : 
where ρXX′ is the symbol for the reliability of the
observed score X , and σ2
X , σ2
T , σ2
E are the variances of
the observed , true , and error scores , respectively . We
can see that the reliability coefficient can be mathematically defined as the ratio of true score variance to
observed score variance . 
IRT , also called latent trait theory , is a modern test
theory . IRT requires stronger assumptions than classical test theory . First , a single common factor accounts
for all item covariance . This common factor is the
latent trait of interest , and there is a single latent
trait . Second , relations between the latent trait and
observed response have a specific form . The line relating the trait and response is called the item characteristic curve ( ICC , see Figure 1 )  . 
In IRT , the latent trait is usually represented as
theta (  )  , as represented by the vertical axis in Figure
1 . The vertical axis is the probability of getting the correct response . The ICC curve is usually represented by
the logistic ICC . 
The standard mathematical model for the item
characteristic curve is the cumulative form of the
logistic function . The equation for the two-parameter
logistic model is shown as : 
Testing and Test Theory Development———1011
ρXX = σ2
T
σ2
X 
= σ2
T 1
σ2
X1 
= 1 − σ2
E
σ2
X 
= ρ2
XT . 
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
−3 −2 −1 0123
P ( Θ ) 
Θ
Ability
Figure 1 Item Characteristic Curve
SOURCE : Author . 
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1011
where  is the ability level and P (  ) is the test
subject ’ s standing on the underlying trait . Item parameters , a and b , indicate the individual ’ s standing in
the latent trait . This logistic model relates the level of
the latent trait and item parameter to the probability of
answering the question correctly . 
The difficulty parameter , b , is the point on the ability scale where p (  )  = 0 . 5 ; that is , a person whose
ability is b has a . 50 chance of answering the question
correctly . The discrimination parameter , a , is the
steepness of the ICC curve at its steepest point . It
indicates the degrees to which the item distinguishes
individuals with trait levels above and below the slope
of the ICC . 
The most general form of the logistic curve is
called the three-parameter logistic model : 
where c is the guessing parameter , and a and b are the
discrimination parameter and difficulty parameter , 
respectively . 
Some of the test takers will get the correct response
by guessing . Therefore , the most general form of the
logistic curve adds a component , c , which denotes the
probability of getting the item correct by guessing alone . 
In the classical test theory , there is only one reliability estimate , whereas in IRT , each item contributes
some information about the test taker ’ s latent trait . The
amount of information relies on the steepness of the
ICC ( a parameter )  , and the location of the information
depends on the difficulty parameter ( b parameter )  . 
—Xiaogeng Sun
See also accountability ; item response theory ; J-curve theory ; 
school improvement models ; quantitative research methods ; standardized testing ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Goldberg , M .  ( 2005 )  . Test Mess 2 : Are we doing better a year
later ? Phi Delta Kappan , 86 , 389–395 . 
Linn , R .  ( 2000 , March )  . Assessments and accountability . 
Educational Researcher , 29 ( 2 )  , 4–16 . 
Madaus , G .  ,  & Kellaghan , T .  ( 1992 )  . Curriculum evaluation
and assessment . In P . Jackson ( Ed .  )  , Handbook of research
on curriculum ( pp . 119–154 )  . New York : Macmillan . 
National Commission on Testing and Public Policy .  ( 1990 )  . 
Reframing assessment : From gatekeepers to gateway to
education . Chestnut Hill , MA : Boston College . 
Phelps , R .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 2005 )  . Defending standardized testing . 
Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
Sacks , P .  ( 1997 , March / April )  . Standardized testing : Meritocracy ’ s crooked yardstick . Change , pp . 25–28 . 
 TEXTBOOKS
Textbooks have been an important part of American
education almost from the beginning of efforts to provide
universal public education . A common text from which
to teach and learn was viewed as essential for teaching
groups of students . In addition to being a tool for teaching , the textbook was considered useful for instilling
desirable values in children and establishing American
traditions . As schools progressed and changed during
the nineteenth century and twentieth century into the
twenty-first century , textbooks have remained an integral part of schools . As such , textbooks have been a
focus in attempts to improve schools , an element of
efforts to influence the minds of children and thereby
the character of the nation , and the target of criticisms of
schools . 
THE ROLE OF TEXTBOOKS
IN AMERICA ’ S CLASSROOMS
It is widely recognized , though not always viewed
favorably , that the teacher is at the center of the classroom and the textbook the teacher ’ s most frequently used tool . Textbooks are the primary resource
for teachers for several practical reasons . In early
American education , students were instructed individually using a variety of books brought from home . 
Innovators , including Horace Mann , viewed this practice as impractical and proposed the use of common
textbooks as a means of facilitating group instruction . 
Through the years , the use of common textbooks has
provided the organization and structure necessary to
instruct groups of students . Textbooks are also viewed
as a source of accurate subject matter content and
helpful instructional strategies , especially for teachers
who may not be strong in a particular subject area . 
1012———Textbooks
P (  )  = c +  ( 1 − c ) 
1
1 + e−a ( −b ) 
P (  )  = 1
1 + e−L = 1
1 + e−a ( −b ) 
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1012
In addition to being used for instructional purposes , 
schoolbooks have served to both form and defend
America ’ s image of itself . Schools in America have
always been viewed in part as a means of presenting
to children moral , political , cultural , social , and economic concepts . The provision of free public education and free textbooks provided a means of
presenting those concepts deemed desirable by textbook authors and the public . The textbook as both an
instructional tool and a way of influencing the values
of children has changed through the years . 
HISTORY
The first American textbooks were similar to their
English counterparts and were compilations of selections from diverse sources . The “ primers ,  ” as all elementary books for children were called , were united by the
teaching of religion and reading . The selections were
chosen to represent the best literature , but they were
ill-suited for students to acquire a taste for reading or
to learn about the world . 
From the late eighteenth century and to the middle
of the nineteenth century , textbooks began to take into
account the interests and needs of children and to
appeal to the middle class . Around 1790 , Noah Webster
published a reader that contained familiar stories in
common language . Webster also published a speller
that helped to standardize spelling , helped to reform the
language , and took a leading place among spellers
for decades . In the 1830s , books began to be written to
reflect better teaching strategies . The McGuffey
Eclectic Reader , which appeared in 1836 , and Warren
Colburn ’ s Intellectual Arithmetic , published in 1821 , 
contributed to improved instruction in their fields . 
Through the latter part of the nineteenth century
and into the twentieth century , textbooks showed a
reduced emphasis on religion and became more
professional . Teachers and professional educators
replaced clerics and Latin professors as authors of
textbooks . Textbooks reflected advances in educational methods . Print and illustrations were improved . 
The role of textbooks expanded throughout the
twentieth century . Textbooks are now available for
practically all subjects taught in schools . The amount
of subject matter content included in textbooks has
increased in attempts to appeal to various users . A
variety of ancillary materials such as workbooks , 
test banks , remedial and enrichment activities , plans
for teaching , and critical thinking exercises are often
available to teachers as a part of textbook packages . 
In general , textbook publishers have attempted to provide complete sets of material to meet teacher needs . 
AMERICAN CULTURE AS
PRESENTED IN TEXTBOOKS
Through the years , textbooks have reflected not only
advances in instructional methods but also changes
in American values and culture . The provision of free
public education made the decisions regarding
schools , including the selection and use of textbooks , 
a part of the public and political domain . As such , 
the role of textbooks in presenting America ’ s ideology
has reflected political struggles and changing public
values . 
The ideology presented in nineteenth century textbooks was both simple and unrealistic . America was
considered a nation blessed by God . Its heroes were
presented without flaws , its opponents as villains . 
America was the land of liberty and the home of the
brave . Honesty , thrift , love of God , love of country
and hard work were all valued . America was presented as superior to other nations . Ownership of
private property was highly valued , and stealing was
immoral . Textbooks divided people into races that
supposedly possessed inherent and unchangeable
qualities . The ideal person was male , White , of
Northern European background , Protestant , and selfmade . Indians were considered to be savages , but
with primitive purity . Jews were presented as crafty , 
greedy , and sly . Blacks , then referred to as Negroes , 
were regarded as the most inferior of races and incapable of improvement . Blacks were considered lazy , 
shiftless , lacking in intellectual ability , and irresponsible . Social standing in nineteenth-century textbooks
was important , but it was to be achieved through one ’ s
own efforts rather than through rank or privilege of the
Old World . Everyone , even the poor , was considered
worthy of the opportunity to get ahead . Women were
valued , worthy of respect , and equal to man before
God . However , women were not extended economic
or social equality . A woman ’ s interest was to be in her
husband and children . 
Textbook authors presented to nineteenth-century
schoolchildren the image of America they deemed
worthy of preservation . Successive generations challenged the generalizations and assumptions present
in this image . Issues of religion , nation , and race were
prominent among the issues addressed . 
Textbooks———1013
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1013
Textbooks at the turn of the twentieth century
reflected a societal increase in religious diversity and
secular values . As a result , religious passages in textbooks decreased , and morals were presented in ways
acceptable to various religions . In the 1920s and continuing into the second half of the twentieth century , 
those concerned that evolution conflicted with religion challenged the teaching of evolution in schools
through legal channels , blacklists , and appeals to school
boards . In 1968 , the Supreme Court in Epperson v . 
Arkansas ruled against state bans on teaching evolution . Textbook publishers attempted to avoid the issue . 
In some books , the word evolution was replaced with
adaptation or other terminology . Others omitted
chapters on evolution altogether . At the end of the
twentieth century , religious leaders again took issue
with textbooks , charging that publishers attempted to
take God out of the schools by reflecting a humanistic
philosophy in textbooks . Local district selection of
textbooks served to mediate among those who sought
to ban or censor what they considered religiously
unacceptable textbooks , educators , and publishers . In
general , publishers have attempted to avoid controversial religious issues that adversely affect the market
for their texts . 
Nationalistic concerns relative to textbooks have
involved a variety of issues related to the American
way of life . Various groups have objected to textbooks
that questioned the events leading to the American
Revolution and the motives of early American
patriots , contained perceived anticapitalist sentiments , 
reflected positively on communism or socialism , or in
other ways questioned the traditional way of life in
America . Even though some individuals and groups
have reacted negatively and aggressively to nationalistic concerns , the overall impact has been minimal—
the results being some revisions and a few books to be
removed from adoption lists . 
The most consistent and successful efforts to revise
the culture of America as portrayed in textbooks
concerns the portrayal , or lack thereof , of the role of
African Americans and other ethnic groups . For some
ethnic groups , the struggle was only to obtain recognition of their contributions . African Americans
also had to overcome inaccurate representations of
their capacity , character , and history . From the 1930s
through the 1960s , African Americans succeeded in
removing offensive texts , being portrayed in texts in
professional roles , and being credited with their contributions to America . 
In the 1970s , interest turned to eliminating gender
bias in textbooks . Protests were made that women were
consistently depicted in domestic roles or traditionally
female occupations . Those involved in textbook selection and textbook publishers , in turn , have successfully reduced gender bias . 
CRITICISMS OF TEXTBOOKS
AND PUBLISHERS ’ PERSPECTIVES
As the primary instructional resource in American
schools , both the content and quality of textbooks
have been the target of criticism . According to critics , 
the desire by publishers to produce commercially successful material has resulted in lower-quality textbooks . The desire to satisfy the content requirements
of various school districts often results in superficial coverage of topics and in central concepts being obscured . 
Attempts to include features such as real-world applications , critical thinking , technology connections , and
cooperative learning in the textbook narrative have
resulted in visual confusion and poor readability . 
Nationally marketed textbooks cannot reflect local
needs or concerns . The end products have been widely
viewed as pedagogically unsound . 
The most far-reaching concern of educators is that
publishers , through textbooks , provide a de facto
national curriculum . Textbook publishers have
assumed the role of curriculum developers in the
absence of governmental action in this area . At the
federal level , there is minimal direct influence over
education , as evidenced by the lack of a national education curriculum and the absence of a national testing program that would influence the curricula of
schools . Federal efforts at curricular reform , even
well-funded federal curriculum projects of the 1960s
and 1970s , have been unsuccessful at making widespread and lasting impact . State support in terms of
curriculum development , where it exists , is commonly
in the form of curriculum frameworks or structures , 
rather than specific , detailed curricula . Many in the
local schools have been content letting textbooks
define the curricula . The lack of federal , state , or local
governmental control of the curricula of schools coupled with the almost universally acknowledged
teacher reliance on textbooks has placed textbook
publishers as the primary determiners of the curricula
in America ’ s schools . 
Publishers contend that even though their primary
goal is to produce books that will sell , they attempt to
1014———Textbooks
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1014
produce books that will help students and teachers . 
The books they produce are a reflection of what schools
say they need and want . State curriculum frameworks
and other guides are used to determine the content and
teaching needs . The needs of teachers are determined
through surveys , focus groups , and through direct
contact by sales representatives . Further feedback is
obtained from consultants consisting of teachers , 
researchers , and others considered experts in the field . 
The various sources of information are used to help
determine the content , teaching strategies , and format
that will be useful to teachers and acceptable to those
selecting textbooks . 
The reaction by publishers to the perceived needs
of practitioners and researchers can be misapplied as
they are incorporated in textbooks . As an example , 
publishers responded quickly to research indicating
that textbooks were too difficult to read and that certain characteristics of text in books influenced comprehension . Readability formulas were developed to
evaluate textbooks relative to the favorable characteristics . Subsequently , many textbooks were written
to readability formulas , which , in turn , invalidated the
readability tests . Other textbooks were oversimplified , 
diminishing their usefulness to students and teachers . 
Publisher response to the call for the inclusion of special features or topics such as real-life applications in
mathematics textbooks has often been superficial , satisfying reviewers ’ checklists without contributing to
the instructional quality . In general , the struggle to
satisfy legitimate marketing concerns is often misapplied , overgeneralized , or superficially addressed . 
Publisher reaction to school needs is in part due to the
nature of a profit-making industry that is unregulated and
national in scope . The economics of textbook publishing
dictates a large number of prints , and therefore texts
appeal to a large number of school districts . Adoption
cycles of 5 to 7 years and copyright limitations that do
not protect the underlying ideas or approaches used in
textbooks also increase the need to publish a textbook
that sells . Risk taking is minimized , and textbooks by
different publishers become more alike . 
Publishers receive confirmation that they are
meeting the needs of teachers and students based on
the selection and use of their products . Publishers produce products based on the perceived needs of
schools , schools select and purchase from among
available textbooks , and publishers make a profit . This
cycle will change only when teachers and schools
select and buy different books . 
TEXTBOOK SELECTION
Selection of textbooks generally occurs in two different ways . In approximately half the states , statewide
textbook committees select a number of textbooks
that then comprise a list of books approved for selection by the local school districts . These states are
referred to as “ adoption ” states . Other states , referred
to as “ open states ,  ” allow local school districts to
select textbooks with few restrictions . In both adoption states and open states , final selection is usually by
local school district committees consisting of classroom teachers with administrators in advisory roles . 
Selection of textbooks at the local level is hindered
by a variety of factors . Local school districts often have
informal methods of selecting textbooks that consist of
little more than checklists or superficial rating methods . 
These methods place equal importance on minor issues
as on more important issues . Teachers typically receive
little or no training in the selection process and are
not given adequate time to review texts . The selection
process is complicated by the logistics involving the
arrival of textbooks at the schools and their distribution
to textbook committee members . Textbooks selection
committees can be distracted during the selection
process by the offer of free inducements and presentations by sales representatives . Combinations of these
factors often relegate selection of textbooks to a less
significant position than warranted by their prominent
and central use in classrooms . 
SUMMARY
The difficulty with the selection of textbooks , as
with the various criticisms and controversies , has not
diminished their use . Textbooks are acknowledged as
both an important and imperfect guide for American
teachers . Imperfections sometimes result from a
profit-making industry taking the lead role in curriculum development . Teachers can misuse textbooks or
overuse them to the exclusion of other resources . The
content and teaching strategies of textbooks can be
inadequate . However , as schools have changed and
evolved through the centuries of American existence , 
textbooks have remained ubiquitous . As the American
society has battled to establish values , guard traditions , and define the culture of America , textbooks
continue to be used widely in schools . Textbooks are
present in all regions of the country , are used in schools
of varying quality , and are the primary teaching tool of
Textbooks———1015
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1015
the vast majority of the teachers in America . They are
widely considered by both teachers and the public as
essential to quality instruction and important to forming public opinion . Even with technological gains and
advances in teaching methods , textbooks remain the
central tool in America ’ s classrooms . 
—Gregory D . Freeman and Lisa B . Lucius
See also Asian Pacific Americans ; Black education ; civics , 
history in schools ; civil rights movement ; creationism ; cultural politics , wars ; curriculum , theories of ; discrimination ; 
diversity ; ethnicity ; ethnocentrism ; feminism and theories
of leadership ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; 
history , in curriculum ; ideology , shifts of in educational
leadership preparation ; Latinos ; literacy , theories of ; Mann , 
Horace ; minorities , in schools ; religion , in schools ; sexism 
( glass ceiling )  ; social studies
Further Readings and References
Altbach , P .  , Kelly , G .  , Petrie , H .  ,  & Weis , L .  ( 1991 )  . Textbooks
in American society : Politics , policy , and pedagogy . 
Albany : SUNY Press . 
Brophy , J .  ,  & VanSledright , B .  ( 1997 )  . Teaching and learning
history in elementary schools . New York : Teachers College
Press . 
DelFattore , J .  ( 1992 )  . What Johnny shouldn ’ t read : Textbook
censorship in America . New Haven CT : Yale University
Press . 
Elliot , D . L .  ,  & Woodward , A .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1990 )  . Textbooks and
schooling in the United States . Eighty-Ninth Yearbook of
the National Society for the Study of Education ( Part 1 )  . 
Chicago : National Society for the Study of Education . 
Evans , R .  ( 2004 )  . The social studies wars . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Giordano , G .  ( 2003 ) Twentieth-century textbook wars : A
history of advocacy and opposition . New York : Peter Lang . 
Ravitch , D .  ( 2003 )  . The language police . How pressure groups
restrict what students learn . New York : Vintage . 
Zimmerman , J .  ( 2002 )  . Whose America ? Culture wars in the
public school system . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University . 
 THEORIES , USE OF
A theory is essentially a set of assumptions from
which a set of empirical laws ( or principles ) may be
derived . What makes a theory a theory ? For a proposal
to be a theory , it must be descriptive , analytical , and
predictive . To be descriptive , it must point to the phenomenon being described , such as a series of behaviors being described by a leadership theory . Next , it
must analyze relevant phenomena . For example , some
leadership behavior may be classified as structuring
tasks , while others as concern for subordinates ’ wellbeing . Last , the predictive criterion requires the theory
to predict that certain leadership behaviors to be
perceived as effective will focus on achieving tasks , 
while other behavior will be directed at meeting subordinates ’ emotional needs . 
These criteria for theory separate it from models 
( the Getzels-Guba model ) and taxonomies ; the former
is more descriptive , while the latter is both descriptive
and analytic . Models function as metaphors , while
taxonomies function as classification devices . Both
lack the capacity to predict . 
While most Americans separate theory and practice , 
most scientists perceive their connection . John
Dewey ’ s deliberate use of the singular notes his perception of the unity of theory and practice . Further
uses of theory include its objectivity , although Thomas
Kuhn noted that scientists and the public subscribe to
a paradigm until some divergent theory comes along to
challenge accepted conventional wisdom . Theory
ought to be comprehensive , covering a considerable
range of phenomena under its rubric , such as the leadership behavior of a large number of individuals . A
theory also should be a guide to new knowledge . Any
theory in the behavioral sciences should be a guide to
action , as well as a guide to collecting relevant data , 
such as what the impact on morale will be of the superintendent reducing principals ’ degree of freedom . 
Last , issues of validity and reliability arise . Validity
concerns whether we actually are investigating what
we think we are investigating . Reliability refers to the
issue of whether we can replicate the processes and
results achieved in our first attempts . Qualitative studies , many of which deal with cases , focus more on
descriptive validity , moving away from dealing with
reliability . 
—Arthur Shapiro
See also critical theory ; deconstruction ; empiricism ; hypotheses , in research ; philosophies of education ; quantitative
research methods ; research methods ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Crow , G .  ,  & Grogan , M .  ( 2005 )  . The development of leadership thought and practice in the United States . In F . English 
( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership 
( pp . 362–379 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
1016———Theories , Use Of
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1016
Dewey , J .  ( 1938 )  . Experience and education . New York : 
Macmillan . 
Kuhn , T .  ( 1970 )  . The structure of scientific revolutions . 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
 THEORY MOVEMENT , 
IN EDUCATIONAL
ADMINISTRATION
The theory movement in educational administration
began shortly after World War II , with the emergence
of educational administration as an established academic discipline . The creation of the National Conference of Professors of Educational Administration 
( NCPEA ) in 1947 and the University Council for
Educational Administration ( UCEA ) in 1956 , led by
Daniel Griffiths , Jack Culbertson , and Paula Silver , 
spurred the emergence of the theory movement in
educational administration . The theory movement
reflected the belief that educational administration
consisted of more than a loose collection of individual , anecdotal experiences—more than a mere collection of “ war stories ” told and retold by retired school
administrators . Beginning in the 1950s , superintendents and other school leaders were being trained to
be applied social scientists . Coursework in educational administration was thoroughly infused with
theories and concepts borrowed from the social and
behavioral sciences , reflecting the belief that the practice of administration was more than the execution of
technical tasks . Through the lens of the theory movement , scholars began to view schools as complex
sociopolitical systems and sought a way to explain
and predict behavior in those systems . 
The theory movement was founded on an intellectual paradigm borrowed from social psychology , management , and the behavioral sciences and emphasized
empiricism , predictability , and scientific certainty . 
The movement reflected a determined effort to bring
the social science disciplines ( particularly psychology , sociology , and social psychology ) to bear upon
administrator preparation in education . Theories and
conceptual tools borrowed from political science
and economics were also used , allowing educational
leaders to become schooled in the principles of
resource allocation , motivation , individual and group
interaction , and the nature and functioning of public
bureaucracies . 
Because of the theory movement , the focus of
educational administration shifted from “ how to do
it ” to an orientation based on inquiry , with the field
itself a legitimate area of study . This shift is readily
identifiable in texts on educational administration . 
The study of theory was necessary to deal effectively
with the wide array of social issues facing school
administrators . 
As the theory movement became dominant , the
field of educational administration emerged as a
legitimate academic discipline , on par with business
management and public administration . As the field
matured , the study and practice of administration , 
which had historically faced inward upon relations
within the school system , necessarily turned its
focus outward to relations of the school system with
other systems with which it was inextricably bound : 
political , legal , and economic systems , among
others . School administrators were encouraged to
adopt a holistic approach and to see how education
fit within the larger social system—how education
was related to the larger political , social , economic , 
and legal order—and , conversely , how other institutions and organizations impacted the educational
system . 
The rise of the theory movement in educational
administration has not been without problems . As an
applied , professional discipline , much like business
or public administration , tension has always existed
between the role and integration of theory into programs designed to prepare educational leaders . 
University-based administrator preparation programs have been criticized as being too theoretical
and divorced from the actual practice of school
administration . The knowledge base in educational
administration has been questioned , and sharp disagreements have arisen over whether education schools
are the best place to train and prepare school leaders . 
Because of this fundamental tension , efforts are
being made to more effectively integrate the theory
movement into the actual practice of educational
administration . 
—Lance D . Fusarelli
See also behaviorism ; bureaucracy ; contingency theories ; 
empiricism ; Greenfield , Thomas Barr ; Halpin , Andrew
William ; hypotheses , in research ; National Council of
Professors of Educational Administration ; quantitative
research methods ; research methods ; University Council
for Educational Administration
Theory Movement , in Educational Administration———1017
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1017
Further Readings and References
Culbertson , J . A .  ( 1981 )  . Antecedents of the theory movement . 
Educational Administration Quarterly , 17 , 25–47 . 
Culbertson , J . A .  ( 1995 )  . Building bridges . University Park , 
PA : UCEA . 
Greenfield , T .  ,  & Ribbons , P .  ( 1993 )  . Greenfield on educational administration . London : Routledge . 
Griffiths , D .  ( 1988 )  . Administrative theory . In N . Boyan ( Ed .  )  , 
Handbook of research on educational administration 
( pp . 27–52 )  . New York : Longman . 
 THEORY X , THEORY Y
Theories X and Y were developed by Douglas
McGregor to indicate the two major belief systems
managers held about the basic nature of workers
under their supervision . Descriptions of the two differing concepts of supervisor attitudes and discussion
of the positive effects of adopting the human approach
to management of Theory Y were discussed in his
classic work , The Human Side of Enterprise . 
McGregor ’ s definitions of the two theories came
from the analysis of manager behavior in many business organizations during the 1950s . McGregor concluded that manager beliefs about employees ’ attitudes
toward their jobs affected the productivity of those
workers . Supervisors who believed their employees
were lazy , uncommitted , and needed coercion to force
them to perform their duties were defined as Theory X
managers . Productivity was not optimal in those
groups . Other supervisors who believed their employees were interested in work , sought responsibility , and
were committed to helping the organization succeed
were identified as Theory Y managers . Productivity of
these groups was usually maximized . 
McGregor characterized the Theory X supervisor as
one who believed in traditional authoritarian scientific
management principles :  ( a ) The average person has an
inherent dislike of work and will avoid it if possible ;  ( b ) 
because they dislike work , people must be coerced , controlled , directed , and threatened with punishment to get
them to put forth effort necessary to accomplish the
organizational objectives ;  ( c ) the average person prefers
to be directed , wishes to avoid responsibility , has relatively little ambition , and desires security above all else . 
Supervisors who established meaningful and
productive relationships with their workers McGregor
labeled Theory Y managers . Their beliefs about
employees were :  ( a ) The expenditure of mental and
physical effort in work is as natural as play or rest ;  
( b ) if committed , employees will exercise self-direction
and self-control to achieve objectives for the organization ;  ( c ) worker commitment to accomplishing objectives is connected with the rewards associated with
achievement , two of which are ego satisfaction and selfactualization ;  ( d ) the average person not only learns to
accept responsibility , but actually seeks it ;  ( e ) the capacity to engage in creative acts using imagination and ingenuity is distributed widely throughout the population and
not just among a few special people ; and ( f ) present organizations are designed to tap into only a small percentage
of potential available in the population . 
McGregor wanted to demonstrate that the principles of scientific management were ineffective , but
even more , he wanted to advance new understandings
of management concerns such as motivation , an internal force not dependent on external factors of authority or coercion ; employee evaluation procedures ; and
the structure of employee compensation plans . Theory
Y included a fourth element , integration , the concept
that the needs of the organization could be met as well
as the needs of the individual . Integration was a most
important consideration for changing the behavior
of both supervisors and workers because the human
approach to supervision significantly increases
worker levels of commitment to the organization and
their productivity . This idea was not considered possible or important by the practitioners of scientific management . McGregor defined the concepts as theories
to encourage additional study , analysis , and development of his ideas , and in this endeavor , he was highly
successful . Not only did his work receive wide recognition for its significance in understanding principles
of successful management , his models provided a
large portion of the theoretical underpinning for the
field of organizational development and the emphasis
on human resource management practiced in most
organizations for 30 years prior to release of his ideas . 
As awareness of the significance of these theories
grew , managers reduced their adherence to the concepts of scientific management that had been promoted by Frederick Taylor a generation earlier . 
Studies comparing supervisor beliefs with supervisory behavior have shown that people usually espouse
the values of Theory Y but often take actions that are
based on Theory X . This finding supported the belief
of McGregor and others that an orientation to Theory
Y management required education programs to change
manager beliefs about the factors that affected worker
1018———Theory X , Theory Y
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1018
productivity . Theories X and Y have been studied , 
debated , and even criticized , but they are widely
recognized for their originality and the important contributions to better understanding the world of organizational management and productivity in industrial , 
service , and educational organizations . 
Educational administration scholars often recommend
that school leaders use Theory Y concepts in their
approach to management of educational organizations . 
To do so , they argue , reinforces recognition of the professionalism of educators and results in better learning
environments for students . Success in this endeavor
often has been modest , however , because the detailed
mandates and expectations for immediate results of
federal and state legislative and policy groups and the
clients of educational organizations usually pressure
educational leaders to adopt more coercive and directive behaviors in the belief that quick direction and
pressure produces quality results . 
The Theory Y concept has been criticized by a few
scholars as being in part an unrealistic statement of
human nature . McGregor assumed that if workers
were given freedom , flexibility , and opportunity for
commitment without coercion , they would become
serious and highly productive workers . He did not
acknowledge that workers with the freedom to become
committed and serious workers also have the freedom
to not become serious about their work or their commitment to the organization . Without recognition that
individuals have the freedom to choose either way , the
theory may become a kind of personal determinism
that guarantees certain worker responses to specific
supervisory behaviors . This very real option to choose
noncommitment may explain research results that have
documented supervisors quickly retreating from a
Theory Y attitude to a more Theory X operational
approach when their followers do not become dedicated and productive within a short time . 
—Max S . Skidmore
See also adaptiveness of organizations ; attitudes toward work ; 
belonging ; collaboration theory ; human resource development ; leadership styles ; management theories ; mentoring ; 
motivation , theories of ; personnel management ; satisfaction , in organizations and roles ; self-actualization
Further Readings and References
Heil , G .  , Bennis , W .  ,  & Stephen , D .  ( 2000 )  . Douglas
McGregor Revisited : Managing the human side of the
enterprise . New York : Wiley . 
McGregor , D .  ( 1960 )  . The human side of enterprise . 
New York : McGraw-Hill . 
McGregor , D .  ( 1967 )  . The professional manager ( W . Bennis & 
C . McGregor , Eds .  )  . New York : McGraw-Hill . 
Weisbord , M .  ( 2004 )  . Productive workplaces revisited : 
Dignity , meaning , and community in the 21st century . San
Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
 THORNDIKE , EDWARD
Edward Thorndike ’ s ( 1874–1949 ) work was among
the initial attempts to examine and explain memory
and learning . His work , along with that of John B . 
Watson , is relevant to educators , as it has had a direct
impact on academic instruction , classroom management , and administrative practices . 
Thorndike was born August 31 , 1874 , in Williamsburg , 
Massachusetts . He took a BA in 1895 at Wesleyan
University and an MA at Harvard in 1897 . He received
his PhD in 1898 from Columbia University . 
In 1927 , while working on a grant from the Carnegie
Corporation , he launched a series of investigations on
learning that led to Thorndike ’ s law of effect . This law
that had its origin in early tests and experiments by
Watson related to the impact of positive and negative
consequences on behavior and was ultimately substantially supportive of these experiments in human
learning . Through this early work , Thorndike concluded
that repetition and reward were critical factors in
learning . In 1932 , he reported on a series of six experiments with chicks , concluding that rewarding a connection strengthens it ; punishing consequences weakened
it a little or not at all . 
The basis of learning accepted by Thorndike in his
earliest writings was association between sense
impressions and impulses to action . Such associations
became known as “ bonds ” or “ connections .  ” Because
the bonds or connections were thought to become
strengthened or weakened in establishing and breaking habits , Thorndike ’ s system has sometimes been
called a “ bond ” psychology or simply “ connectionism .  ” Thorndike ’ s work formed the foundation for
later work by John B . Watson and B . F . Skinner and
underpins the theory of behaviorism . 
Thorndike developed three basic laws to underpin
his theory . The first of these , the law of readiness , is
an accessory principle that describes a physiological
substratum for the law of effect . It describes the following conditions under which a learner tends to be
Thorndike , Edward———1019
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1019
satisfied or annoyed :  ( a ) When a conduction unit is
ready to conduct , conduction is satisfying ;  ( b ) for a
conduction unit ready to conduct , not to conduct is
annoying ; this condition provokes any response
related to the annoyance ;  ( c ) when a conduction unit
is not ready for conduction and is forced to conduct , 
conduction is annoying . 
The second of Thorndike ’ s laws , the law of exercise , refers to the strengthening of connections with
practice ( law of use ) and to weakening of connections
or forgetting when practice is discontinued ( law of
disuse )  . Strengthening is defined by the increase in
probability that the response will be made when the
situation recurs . 
Thorndike ’ s third important law , the law of effect , 
refers to the strengthening or weakening of a
connection as a result of its consequences . When a
response or behavior is accompanied by or followed
by a satisfying consequence , the strength of the connection is increased ; if the connection is made and
followed by an annoying consequence , the strength
is decreased . 
Thorndike ’ s theory , grounded in these laws , was an
initial attempt to study “ how we learn , remember , and
forget .  ” It is significant for educators in that it underpins philosophy and practice in the schools and forms
a foundation for the field of educational psychology . 
For educational leaders , Thorndike ’ s law of effect is
relevant to understanding how to motivate others . In
addition , the impact of repetition or practice encompassed by his law of exercise provides a foundation
for ensuring that specific behaviors tend to appear in
the desired situations . 
—J . M . Blackbourn
See also achievement tests ; behaviorism ; empiricism ; intelligence ; learning environments ; psychology , types of ; psychometrics ; quantitative research methods ; testing and test
theory development ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Thorndike , E . L .  ( 1913 )  . Educational psychology . New York : 
Columbia University Teachers College Press . 
Thorndike , E . L .  ( 1927 )  . The measurement of intelligence . 
New York : Columbia University Teachers College Press . 
Thorndike , E .  ( 1963 )  . The concepts of over- and underachievement . New York : Teachers College Press . 
Travers , R .  ( 1996 )  . Apprentice to Thorndike . In C . Kridel , 
R . Bullough ,  & P . Shaker ( Eds .  )  , Teachers and mentors : 
Profiles of distinguished twentieth-century professors of
education ( pp . 95–100 )  . New York : Garland . 
 THREE-FACTOR MODEL , 
FIVE-FACTOR MODEL
Personality has been called by Abram Kardiner an
essential adaptive organization of biological and
behavioral functions that is of paramount importance
to social life . Psychologists have generated a plethora
of personality theories and measures of personality
during this century . 
However , the major contenders at this time appear to
be the three-factor model ( TFM ) and the more recent
five-factor model ( FFM )  . The TFM employs these traits : 
Extroversion , Neuroticism ( or Emotional Instability ) 
and Psychoticism . The five traits represented in the FFM
are Extroversion , Emotional Instability , Agreeableness , 
Conscientiousness , and Openness . 
The Eysenck model ( TFM ) is generally preferred for
three reasons . First , this theory of personality is strongly
supported by a very long and continuous history of
research and development . Eysenck ’ s dedication to
research on personality has made him the most frequently cited psychologist in the world . Eysenck points
out that nearly all large-scale studies of personality find
the equivalent of the three traits he proposes , that the
traits are found worldwide , that an individual ’ s status
relative to the traits is consistent across time and that
research on the genetics of personality support the three
traits . Second , the development of the theory and related
research has focused on measurement . The instrument
associated with the model includes both adult and child
versions , which makes comparisons between teachers
and students possible and extends the possible areas for
research . Third , it is a rich explanatory theory that suggests many potential research hypotheses , in contrast to
the FFM , which is largely a descriptive model . 
The three Eysenckian traits can be briefly characterized as follows . The Extroversion (  “ E ”  ) trait is a
bipolar scale that is anchored at the high end by sociability and stimulation seeking and at the other end by
social reticence and stimulation avoidance . This trait
is tied to basal levels of arousal in the neocortex . The
Neuroticism trait is anchored at the high end by emotional instability and spontaneity and by reflection and
deliberateness at the other end . This trait ’ s name is
based on the susceptibility to anxiety-based problems
of individuals high on the “ N ” trait . This trait is
related to one ’ s degree of reactivity to emotional stimuli . The Psychoticism trait is anchored at the high end
by aggressiveness and divergent thinking and at the
low end by caution and empathy . The label for this trait
1020———Three-Factor Model , Five-Factor Model
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1020
is based on the susceptibility to psychotic disorders of
a significant subgroup of individuals high on the “ P ” 
trait . This trait is polygenic in nature and may , to some
degree , be a reflection of the amygdala ’ s sensitivity to
androgen . None of the traits are intended as indicators
of psychopathology . The scales based on these traits are
measures of temperament source traits that in interaction with experience produce personality . 
Eysenck ’ s theory and the research it has generated
suggest linkage to a variety of developmental problems
such as overactivity , shyness , antisocial behavior , and
anxiety disorders , as well as other characteristics , such as
creativity . Center and Kemp have discussed how the
theory and research might be applied to dealing with
children and youth with antisocial behavior . James
Wakefield has described the implications of the TFM
theory for educational settings and learning . In his discussion of Eysenck ’ s personality traits ( PEN )  , he covers
each relative to behavior , central nervous system arousal , 
learning , discipline , and achievement . The details of that
discussion are too involved to cover here but are well
worth reading . Furthermore , Wakefield has worked out
12 of the possible combination scores that a student
might get on the Eysenck instruments ( see Table 1 )  . 
Wakefield also offers descriptions of and suggestions for working with students having these personality ( temperament ) patterns ( see Table 2 )  . The EB3
theory has a great deal of heuristic potential for education on a variety of fronts and should receive more
attention than it has in the past . 
—David Center
See also affective domain ; child development theories ; counseling ; creativity , theories of ; emotional disturbance ; individual
differences , in children ; learning environments ; mental illness , in adults and children ; personality ; psychology , types of
Further Readings and References
Center , D .  ,  & Kemp , D .  ( 2002 )  . Antisocial behavior in children
and Eysenck ’ s theory of personality : An evaluation . 
International Journal of Disability , Development , and
Education , 49 , 353–366 . 
Center , D .  ,  & Kemp , D .  ( 2003 )  . Temperament and personality
as potential factors in the development and treatment of
conduct disorders . Education and Treatment of Children , 
26 ( 1 )  , 75–78 . 
Eysenck , H .  ( 1991 )  . Dimensions of personality : The biosocial
approach to personality . In J . Strelau & A . Angleitner ( Eds .  )  , 
Explorations in temperament : International perspectives on
theory and measurement ( pp . 87–103 )  . London : Plenum . 
Eysenck , H .  ( 1991 )  . Dimensions of personality : 16 , 5 , or 3 : 
Criteria for a taxonomic paradigm . Personality and
Individual Differences , 12 , 773–790 . 
Wakefield , J .  ( 1979 )  . Using personality to individualize
instruction . San Diego , CA : Educational and Industrial
Testing Service . 
Three-Factor Model , Five-Factor Model———1021
Table 1 PEN Combinations and Labels
PEN Combinations
1 . Low or Avg P , Avg E , Low or Avg N
2 . Low or Avg P , High E , Low or Avg N
3 . Low or Avg P , Low E , Low or Avg N
4 . Low or Avg P , Avg E , High N
5 . Low or Avg P , High E , High N
6 . Low or Avg P , Low E , High N
7 . High P , Avg E , Low or Avg N
8 . High P , High E , Low or Avg N
9 . High P , Low E , Low or Avg N
10 . High P , Avg E , High N
11 . High P , High E , High N
12 . High P , Low E , High N
Descriptive Labels
Typical , the majority of children
Sociable and Uninhibited
Shy and Inhibited
Emotionally Overreactive
Hyperactive
Anxious
Disruptive and Aggressive
Extremely Impulsive
Withdrawn and Hostile
Frequently Agitated
Very Disruptive and Aggressive
Very Anxious and Agitated
SOURCE : Reprinted with permission from Center , D . B .  ( 1999 )  . Strategies for Social and Emotional Behavior : A Teacher ' s Guide . 
Norcross , GA : XanEdu , Inc .  ; adapted from Wakefield , J .  ( 1979 )  . Using personality to individualize instruction . San Diego , CA : 
Educational and Industrial Testing Service . 
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1021
 TIME MANAGEMENT
Time management is not only a technique but also an
approach to managing one ’ s energies and the demands
of a role or job . The concept of time management
stems from Frederick Taylor ’ s early analysis of work
and how persons spend their time doing specific tasks . 
Taylor ’ s aim was to reduce unproductive work tasks
and hence reduce the amount of time allocated to
waste . Becoming more efficient was the goal of the
original time-and-motion studies . It remains the
objective with time management . 
School leaders are beset with expanding role expectations . The costs for not taking charge of one ’ s time , 
for losing control over what is done and how it is done , 
and for complaining and being cynical about the
demands of the job are far too great for a school leader
to not develop a personal time management plan . 
Effective time management requires several
components : 
1022———Time Management
Table 2 Descriptions of and Suggestions for Working With Students Having PEN Personality Patterns
High E
Low E
High N
Low N
High P
Low P
Behavior
Works quickly . 
Careless . 
Easily distracted . 
Easily bored . 
Works slowly . 
Careful . 
Attentive . 
Motivated . 
Overreacts to
emotional stimuli . 
Slow to calm down . 
Avoids emotional
situations . 
Underreacts to
emotional stimuli . 
Quick recovery from
emotional arousal . 
Solitary . 
Disregard for danger . 
Defiant and aggressive . 
Sociable . 
Friendly . 
Empathetic . 
Arousal
Works well under
stress from external
stimulation . 
Works poorly under
stress from external
stimulation . 
Easy arousal interferes
with performance , 
especially on difficult
tasks . 
Susceptible to test
anxiety . 
Hard to motivate and
tends to underachieve . 
Needs high arousal to
sustain effort on easy
tasks . 
Seeks stimulation
for an arousal high . 
Confrontation and
punishment may
stimulate . 
Not a sensation seeker . 
Can be too “ laid back .  ” 
Learning
Focus on major points . 
Needs continuous
reinforcement . 
Good short-term recall . 
Does best in elementary
school . 
Intermittent reinforcement
is sufficient . 
Good long-term recall . 
Does best in high school . 
Compulsive approach to
learning . 
Can study for long periods . 
Does best in high school . 
Exploratory learner . 
Short study periods are best . 
Does best in elementary
school . 
Slow to learn from
experience . 
Responds impulsively . 
Creative , if bright . 
Teachable . 
Convergent thinker . 
Does well in school . 
Discipline
Most responsive to rewards
and prompts , but also
responsive to punishment
and admonitions . 
Most responsive to
punishment and
admonitions , but also
responsive to rewards
and prompts . 
Similar to low E but high
N in combination with
low E requires a more
subdued approach . 
Similar to high E . 
However , both reward and
punishment need to be
more intense . 
Stimulated by punishment
and threats . 
Responds best to highly
structured settings . 
Responsive to both reward
and punishment . 
SOURCE : Reprinted with permission from Center , D . B .  ( 1999 )  . Strategies for Social and Emotional Behavior : A Teacher ' s Guide . 
Norcross , GA : XanEdu , Inc .  ; adapted from Wakefield , J .  ( 1979 )  . Using personality to individualize instruction . San Diego , CA : 
Educational and Industrial Testing Service . 
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1022
• Setting priorities to meet complex and multiple challenges
• Developing specific techniques to cope with difficult
and time-consuming tasks
• Deciding on the most productive ways to spend limited amounts of time
• Delegating responsibility effectively
• Handling routine tasks efficiently
• Structuring the day in order to see what needs to be
done and what has actually been accomplished by
the end of the day
• Making the environment work for the school leader
• Maximizing output through minimizing time spent on
administrivia , such as needless meetings and extemporaneous paperwork
There are four key steps to help a school leader
study the time structure of the workday . First , become
familiar with time management techniques . Second , 
analyze present time management practices . Third , 
decide what needs to be changed to help being effective rather than just being busy . Fourth , design , then
implement strategies that will lead to accomplishing
the identified time management changes . 
Time is the single resource available to a school
leader that does not come out of the budget , can ’ t be
spent in advance , can ’ t be banked for future use , can ’ t
be taken back once it is used , and is used completely
at the discretion of the owner . The key is how the time
that is available , with all its limitations , is used . 
Principals and other school leaders should be
able to fulfill their responsibilities within a reasonable
workweek of 40 to 50 hours . Everyone has available
60 seconds every minute , 60 minutes every hour , 8
hours every workday , 5 workdays every workweek , 
and 4 or 5 workweeks every work month . 
No one can control the moving of time , but everyone is able to decide how to use the time that is available . One approach is to differentiate among the
different “ kinds ” of time , such as : 
• Work time
• Worry time
• Leisure time
• Free time
• Peak time
• Busy time
• Sleep time
Work time is the set hours on the job each day . The
key to effective use of this time is how much of it is
actually devoted to accomplishing the major goals of
the organization . Worry time is wasted time and
should be converted to one of the productive time
modes . Leisure time must be built in to the workday
to ensure productive output . Free time is not synonymous with leisure time . There is no reason to have
every day tightly scheduled . Free time can be used
throughout the workday to accomplish unanticipated
tasks or simply to do something that has previously
been put on a back burner , even if it is just for fun . 
Peak time should be identified by the school leader
and used to focus on the highest priority from the priority or to-do list . Busy time is , indeed , synonymous
with phony time . School leaders must be cautious
about falling into the trap of showing others how busy
one is . 
Sleep time is crucial . It is clear that insufficient rest
causes errors , irritability , inefficiency , and ineffectiveness . So it is permissible to take a 10-minute power
nap or to take a walk or to find another way to get
some rest and relaxation when tired . This is a credible
use of time that may result in increasing effectiveness . 
Time management as an approach to improving
school leadership skills can be enhanced by frequently
and on a regularly scheduled basis reviewing the following characteristics of successful leaders . An effective school leader has : 
• The ability to set goals and priorities
• The ability to project into the future ( vision ) 
• The ability to place activities and issues in order of
priority
• The ability to identify key staff and delegate to them
key tasks
• The courage to refuse to waste time on needless tasks
• The ability to do it now
• The ability to take time to support , encourage , and
show concern for all people
• The ability to recognize that time is passing
• The ability to know when is the best time to use a
specific skill . 
Each school leader is different in style and will be
in a different setting with different goals . Only in a
specific situation can it be decided which mix of time
management skills will work for a particular place and
those goals . Each situation will require adjustments , 
rearrangements , and flexibility . 
—Neil J . Shipman
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; behaviorism ; division of labor ; economics , theories of ; efficacy
theory ; leadership effectiveness ; management by objectives ; 
management theories ; productivity ; quantitative research
methods ; resource management ; time-on-task
Time Management———1023
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1023
Further Readings and References
Kanigel , R .  ( 1997 )  . The one best way : Frederick Winslow
Taylor and the enigma of efficiency . New York : Viking . 
Shaver , H .  ( 2004 )  . Organize , communicate , empower ! How
principals can make time for leadership . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press . 
Shipman , N .  , Martin , J .  , McKay , B .  ,  & Anastasi , R .  ( 1983 )  . 
Effective time management techniques for school administrators . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Simon , R .  ,  & Newman , J .  ( 2004 )  . Making time to lead . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
 TIME-ON-TASK
For students in PK–12 schools , the school day is
segmented to allocate time for instruction and time for
noninstructional activities , such as lunch , recess , and
moving from one classroom to another . During instructional time , students have opportunities to engage in
learning . When students take advantage of these
opportunities during instruction , they are considered
to be “ on-task .  ” Researchers measure on-task behavior and call it “ time-on-task .  ” 
On-task time is differentiated from total time spent
in the classroom or other learning venues , because
students do not spend all the time they are in a classroom engaged in learning . Time is also consumed as
students enter and leave the room , when materials are
collected , and when student misbehavior is corrected . 
In addition , though the teacher may provide instruction , students do not always concentrate on learning
activities that take place . Students daydream , converse
with classmates , doodle , complete assignments for other
teachers , and sometimes sleep . 
Time for learning is affected by events within and
also beyond the control of the teacher . Time-on-task
is interrupted by events such as unplanned announcements over the public address system , students and
other teachers entering the room to procure materials
or share information , unannounced visits from guest
artists or speakers visiting the school , and the late or
early arrival of teachers of special programs , such as
art , music , keyboarding , and drug awareness . In short , 
time allocated for learning is not synonymous with
time used for learning . 
Numerous studies conducted over nearly 40 years
support a positive relationship between time-on-task
and achievement , especially for low-performing
students . Though the research is consistent , one criticism of these studies is that data gathering relies on
the observation of the researcher , and therefore , 
results may overestimate the amount of time that
students are actually on-task . That is , a student may
appear to be on-task while actually daydreaming or
may perfunctorily perform a rote task without attempting to learn from the task . 
The amount of time students attend to learning varies 
( a ) by subject matter—more time is spent on-task during mathematics lessons than during English , reading , 
or social studies lessons ;  ( b ) by achievement level—
higher-achieving students attend more during instruction than lower-achieving students ;  ( c ) by instructional
strategy—students ’ time-on-task is higher during laboratory and group work than during lecture ;  ( d ) by age—
older students spend more time off-task than younger
students ;  ( e ) by task relevance and challenge—students
are more likely to engage in content they deem relevant
and challenging ; and ( f ) by ethnicity—Asian and White
students report more time-on-task than do African
American and Hispanic students . Ethnic differences in
attention to task begin to disappear when lesson quality
and instructional quality are high , however . 
Time-on-task also appears to increase when class
size is lower . Some research suggests that lowering
class size for primary-aged youngsters increases the
time teachers are able to devote to individual students , 
thereby increasing the students ’ attention to the task . 
Similarly , as teachers spend more time assisting individual and small groups of students with learning
tasks , the students also spend more time-on-task . 
Researchers argue whether overall time-on-task
is better increased by lengthening the school day and
year or by limiting lecture in favor of other methods
found in the research to engage students in learning . 
Resolution of this argument has implications for both
policy and practice . 
—Dianne L . Taylor
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; Asian Pacific
Americans ; Black education ; class size ; compensatory education ; discipline in schools ; giftedness , gifted education ; 
individual differences , in children ; instructional interventions ; Latinos ; motivation , theories of ; productivity ; 
resiliency ; scheduling , types of in schools ; site-based management ; time management ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Alexander , K .  , Entwisle , D .  ,  & Olson , L .  ( 2001 , Summer )  . 
Schools , achievement , and inequality : A seasonal perspective . Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 23 , 
171–191 . 
1024———Time-on-Task
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1024
Cohen , D .  , Raudenbush , S .  ,  & Ball , D .  ( 2003 )  . Resources , 
instruction , and research . Educational Evaluation and
Policy Analysis , 25 , 119–142 . 
Smith , B . A .  ( 2000 )  . Quantity matters : Annual instructional
time in an urban school system . Educational Administration
Quarterly , 36 , 652–682 . 
Yair , G .  ( 2000 )  . Not just about time : Instructional practices
and productive time in school . Educational Administration
Quarterly , 36 , 485–512 . 
 TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Total quality management ( TQM ) is a philosophy and
practice where organizational members strive to meet
the needs of customers and where the structure and
functioning of the organization is designed to allow
them to do so . Organizationally , TQM is about developing and continuously improving quality systemic
processes . TQM is based on W . Edwards Deming ’ s
Fourteen Points of Quality Management . Joseph Juran
and Philip B . Crosby are also associated with the early
development of TQM . 
A quality systemic process is one that is predictable and repeatable , including achieving intended
performance results , conforming to or exceeding
specifications and standards set by the needs and
requirements of customers ( i . e .  , students ) and stakeholders ( e . g .  , parents , community , state )  , continuously
improving , and well deployed to all appropriate organizational units . A process is well deployed when it
can be identified in everyday practice of organizational members . It is important to remember when
TQM is applied to education , the product , better
described as a service , is the education of the student . 
Ongoing school improvement efforts to address
equity ( e . g .  , standards-based reform ) have frustrated
many educators because traditionally , schools are not
designed for change . The industrial model , on which
twentieth-century schools were based , was designed
for uniformity of product , not process improvement . 
Continuous improvement requires a dynamic , open , 
self-examining , interactive system . TQM can provide
a framework for the development of the type of system that can support continual change and improvement in schools . 
A school either has a quality program or it does not
based on systemic processes . For example , a quality
teaching and learning process could start with developing curriculum based on state , national , and local
learning standards ( i . e .  , needs and requirements ) and
identifying key measures ( i . e .  , state and local assessments ) for monitoring successful implementation . 
Educators are trained on using the curriculum and
assessments . Teachers deliver the curriculum ( i . e .  , 
educational service ) to students and use assessments
to monitor in-process quality , as well as end-process
performance results . Feedback from monitoring and
end-process results is used by administrators and
teachers to make changes to the curriculum , educator
training , method ( s ) of delivery , or monitoring and data
collection . 
Changes to teaching and learning processes are
undertaken to improve the predictability , reliability , 
and deployment of processes , including achieving , 
or demonstrating positive trends toward intended
performance results . From the above example , if one
fourth-grade teacher emphasizes instruction in
English , because that is what he feels is important , 
and another fourth-grade teacher emphasizes instruction in Math , because that is what she feels is important , then the process is not reliable . 
The fifth-grade teachers may predict which student
had which teacher by their academic strengths but must
now spend time addressing academic deficiencies
because the curriculum was not followed and students
don ’ t reliably come to them with the needed academic
skills to be successful in fifth grade . The fifth-grade
teachers are internal customers of the fourth-grade
teachers ; they rely on the services of the fourth-grade
teachers to be successful in teaching fifth grade . 
Furthermore , both fourth-grade teachers could reliably follow the curriculum but make changes in delivery so that from year to year , the incoming fifth-grade
students ’ academic skills are not predictable . Regarding
deployment , a school district may have a well-planned
curriculum that is aligned to state , national , and local
standards , but if teachers do not follow it to guide
instruction , then the curriculum is not being used in
everyday practice and is not well deployed , even
though students may have predictably high test scores . 
When test scores are reliably and predictably high
for most students , even though the teaching and learning process is not well deployed , then a quality
process does not exist . It is not possible to identify if , 
or how , teaching contributes to learning , and high test
scores may be the result of other factors , such as the
student ’ s home life ( e . g .  , high socioeconomic status , 
well-educated parents )  , as much as the teaching and
learning process . 
The above example follows the core component
of TQM that makes continuous quality improvement
Total Quality Management———1025
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1025
possible : the Plan-Do-Check-Act ( PDCA ) cycle . To
Plan is best identified as strategic planning on a large
scale ( i . e .  , district , school ) or action planning on a
smaller scale ( i . e .  , program , curriculum )  . To Do is
implementing the plan ; development of trust and
shared norms helps ensure what was planned is implemented . A normative environment in schools , a characteristic of tight coupling , is necessary for classroom
practice to reflect the rhetoric of reform . 
To Check is to collect and analyze formative 
( in-process ) and summative ( end-process ) data on key
measures of successful implementation . Key measures should be multiple , rather than rely on one measure of program success . To Act is to make changes to
program implementation , if needed , based on data
analysis of key measures . Effective action can be taken
in-process or end-process . 
As TQM moved from a lesser-known organizational
improvement model to literally becoming a fad in the
1990s , the definition of TQM grew increasingly broad
as technical dimensions of TQM were replaced with
institutional dimensions . This replacement process
reflects how TQM is practiced within specific organizations over time and may not reflect the technical
dimensions that initially resulted in successful practice . 
To ensure successful implementation of TQM , it is
important to determine the extent of implementation
efforts . A review of 99 papers on TQM from 1989 to
1993 in academic and practitioner journals found only
4% assessed the degree to which TQM was actually in
place . Studies that examine Baldrige Award organizations are the exception , since the award process ensures
that award winners have TQM fully implemented . 
State award programs that mirror the Baldrige National
Quality Award can provide a similar service to organizations ( e . g .  , schools ) in identifying the extent of
TQM implementation . 
—George R . Stanhope
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; behaviorism ; costbenefit analyses ; empiricism ; expert power ; globalism ; 
human resource development ; Interstate School Leaders
Licensure Consortium ; motivation , theories of ; performance assessment ; personnel management ; problem solving ; productivity ; research methods ; resource management ; 
school improvement models ; scientific management ; 
Taylor , Frederick
Further Readings and References
Deming , W . E .  ( 1986 )  . Out of the crisis . Cambridge : MIT , 
Center for Advanced Engineering Study . 
Deming , W . E .  ( 1993 )  . The new economics . Cambridge : MIT
Press . 
Elmore , R . E .  ( 2000 )  . Building a new structure for school leadership . Albert Shanker Institute . 
English , F .  ,  & Hill , J .  ( 1995 )  . Calidad total en la educacion . 
Mexico : EDAMEX . 
Sallis , E .  ( 2002 )  . Total quality management in education ( 3rd
ed .  )  . Sterling , VA : Stylus . 
Weller , L . D .  ,  & McElwee , G .  ( 1997 )  . Strategic management
of quality : An American and British perspective . Journal of
Research and Development in Education 30 ( 4 )  , 201–213 . 
Zbaracki , M . J .  ( 1998 )  . The rhetoric and reality of quality management . Administrative Science Quarterly , 43 , 602–636 . 
 TRACKING , OF STUDENTS
Two different definitions of tracking have been used in
textbooks over the past several decades . Historically , 
tracking began with curriculum grouping , or selecting
students based on their educational and occupational
plans . This type of tracking differentiates instruction
according to students ’ interests , desires , and ambitions . 
A more recent definition of tracking , seen pervasively in
public schools , is ability grouping , or grouping that tailors curriculum and instruction to each student ’ s unique
intellectual abilities . Hence , tracking is a term that can
be used to refer to either of the different grouping
arrangements , curriculum grouping or ability grouping . 
In 1985 , Jeannie Oakes defined tracking as the practice of dividing students into separate classes according
to their achievement level ( high , medium , or low )  . It
involves different curriculum paths for students who are
college bound and for those who are headed directly for
the workplace . Other measures for tracking are the categorizing of students according to particular measures
of intelligence for purposes of teaching and learning . In
this scenario , students are provided with curriculum and
instruction that school officials deem best suited to their
abilities and that match spoken or unspoken assessments
of each student ’ s future . In most senior high schools , 
students are assigned to a particular curriculum track
that provides sequences of courses for college-preparatory , vocational , or general-track students . 
Marked increases in high school attendance after
the turn of the twentieth century led to increases in the
diversity of secondary student populations , as well as
to an increase in the practice of testing students for
career interests . Tracking became widely practiced
then to deliver specific skills to different student
groups . No longer were high schools exclusively serving a population of college-bound individuals due to
1026———Tracking , of Students
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1026
compulsory education laws being strictly enforced
around 1900 . 
In 1954 , the Supreme Court struck down the 
 “ separate but equal ” clause of the constitution with
the landmark court case Brown v . Board of Education . 
Separation of students by race , ethnicity , and gender
was considered unconstitutional , and education was
to be made available to all on equal terms . Since it
was against the law to segregate students into different
schools , within school separation became a common
practice in schools . Because of this , there is a doublejeopardy effect for Hispanic and African American
students , who are less likely to have access to hightrack courses , and they are more likely than their
White peers to be placed in low-track classes
Between 1965 and 1975 , most American secondary
schools dismantled their tracking practices that
assigned students to predetermined programs of study . 
Track labels were no longer assigned to programs , but
were instead applied to specific coursework in which
students enrolled . 
Two landmark cases have found that tracking by
ability groups results in a disproportionate number of
minority students in lower tracks . In Hobson v . Hansen 
( 1967 , 1969 )  , courts ruled against ability grouping
because it resulted in unequal resources and no educational benefits . In Marshall v . Georgia ( 1984 , 1985 )  , 
the courts ruled in favor of ability grouping ; however , 
the practice was found to be equitable for all students . 
Therefore , in Hobson , the practice of tracking was
found to be inequitable and discriminatory , and in
Marshall , the practice was found to be equitable . 
Tracking has not historically worked well for
students in the low- and middle-ability groups , who
experience clear and consistent learning disadvantages . Many studies have shown that highly capable
students do as well in mixed-ability classes as they do
in high-track homogeneous groups . 
Tracking and ability grouping also characterize the
organization of classrooms for middle and elementary
students . Some evidence suggests that the ways elementary schools define ability may help to solidify
students ’ perceptions of their own achievement abilities and may eventually exaggerate initial performance differences among them . In a recent survey , 
approximately two thirds of middle-level principals
reported the use of whole-class grouping by ability in
at least some academic subjects . Whole-class ability
grouping also increased as students moved from fifth
through ninth grade . These findings mirror others who
discerned that eighth graders are almost always
grouped homogeneously for at least part of their
school day , with 89% of the classrooms using some
form of ability grouping . 
Students rarely move up from noncollege tracks to
college tracks ; however , 7 times as many students
move down from college tracks to noncollege tracks . 
Despite these claims , several studies have found that
tracking has little , if any , direct impact on student
achievement . On the contrary , Jeannie Oakes found in
1990 that assessments of academic ability , placement
in different tracks or ability-grouped classes , and the
reduced educational opportunities often parallel race
and social class difference . Once tracked into the lowerability group , students are almost always restricted in
their access to quality mathematics programs and
courses , qualified mathematics teachers , resources , and
learning opportunities . Hence , many lower-tracked
classes are forever subjected to inexperienced or
unqualified teachers , once again perpetuating the prevailing power structure that favors White , middle- and
upper-class males . Research indicates that students in
lower-track classes receive a different education from
other students both in terms of material covered and
quality of instruction . 
As a result of the growing criticism of tracking , 
schools are increasingly eliminating it . In a 1993 survey conducted by the National Center for Education
Statistics , more than half the schools reported that
they had begun to modify their approaches to ability
grouping , and only 15% reported using traditional
tracking mechanisms . 
—Karen Watt
See also achievement tests ; Black education ; child development
theories ; class , social ; compensatory education ; critical race
theory ; critical theory ; cross-cultural studies ; curriculum , 
theories of ; discrimination ; diversity ; early childhood education ; equality , in schools ; ethnicity ; eugenics ; expectations , 
teacher and student cultures ; giftedness , gifted education ; 
grades , of students ; Head Start ; individual differences , in
children ; intelligence ; learning , theories of ; measurement , 
theories of ; metacognition ; minorities , in schools ; A Nation
at Risk ; No Child Left Behind ; performance assessment ; productivity ; reform , of schools ; schooling effects ; special education ; standardized testing ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Carey , N .  , Farris , E .  ,  & Carpenter , J .  ( 1994 )  . Curricular differentiation in public high schools . Rockville , MD : Westat . 
Grossen , B .  ( 1996 )  . How should we group to achieve excellence with equity ? Eugene , OR : National Center to
Improve the Tools of Educators . 
Tracking , of Students———1027
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1027
Lucas , S . R .  ( 1999 )  . Tracking inequality : Stratification and
mobility in America high schools . New York : Teachers
College Press . 
Oakes , J .  ( 1985 )  . Keeping track : How schools structure
inequality . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . 
Oakes , J .  ( 1990 )  . Multiplying inequalities : The effects of race , 
social class , and tracking on opportunities to learn mathematics and sciences . Santa Monica , CA : RAND . 
Oakes , J .  , Ormseth , T .  , Bell , R .  ,  & Camp , P .  ( 1990 )  . 
Multiplying inequalities : The effects of race , social class , 
and tracking on opportunities to learn mathematics and
science ( Report to the RAND Corporation )  . Santa Monica , 
CA : RAND . 
 TRAIT THEORY
Trait theory represents researchers ’ earliest attempts
to investigate leadership . Around the turn of the twentieth century , researchers sought to identify traits that
effective leaders possessed by examining leaders who
had achieved a level of greatness . These preliminary
attempts to identify traits of leaders focused on wellknown historical figures who were men , which is why
this theory is often called the “ great man ” approach . 
Early proponents of the classic trait perspective
suggested that certain individuals have special innate
characteristics or qualities that make them leaders and
it is these qualities that differentiate them from nonleaders . Fundamental to this theory was the idea that
some people are born with traits that make them natural leaders . Influenced by the interest in mental testing and the functionalism that characterized the time , 
psychologists began to correlate specific individual
differences , in particular intelligence and mental ability , with performance in leadership positions . 
An ambiguous term , trait theory has been used
to refer to personality , temperaments , dispositions , 
and abilities , as well as to physical and demographic
attributes . One of the first systematic attempts to
review trait leadership research was conducted by
Ralph Stogdill . This seminal research study analyzed
over one hundred trait studies that took place over
a period of four decades . His results showed that a
person who holds a position of leadership surpasses
the average member of the group in several ways , 
including intelligence , scholarship , dependability , and
sociability . Though Stogdill determined that there was
indeed a high consistency in the relationship between
intelligence and being a leader , he concluded that it is
difficult to isolate a set of traits that are characteristic
of leadership without factoring situational effects into
the equation . A leader in some situations might not be
a leader in other situations . Several researchers during
this era substantiated this point . 
Based on numerous research studies conducted
between 1940 and 1960 , trait theory lost its appeal as
a premise for understanding leaders . One problem
highlighted by the studies was the lack of consensus
on the definitive traits that set great leaders apart from
each other . The only point on which theorists agreed
was that great leaders were special ; they had qualities
that were born within them . Another criticism of trait
theory was the fact that it overlooked the importance
of situations and the relationship to leadership . 
Despite these criticisms , interest in trait theory
resurged in the 1980s . Numerous meta-analytic reviews
of earlier leader-trait research were conducted . Based
on a reexamination of the original data , several
researchers concluded that traits are indeed associated
with leadership . Another line of research related to
trait theory is the study of charismatic leadership . 
These researchers postulate that specific leader qualities are linked to charismatic leaders who act in
special ways to influence and inspire their followers . 
Recent studies on leader attributes focus on five categories of traits or qualities : cognitive abilities , personality , motivation , social appraisal , and leader
expertise . Still another aspect of the examination of
the traits of leaders regards their gender roles and the
manner in which the public perception of gender has
had an enormous impact on who is selected to become
and remain an educational leader . The impact of trait
theory is evident in its continued influence on leadership theories and research . 
—Susan R . Wynn
See also charisma , of leaders ; discrimination ; feminism and
theories of leadership ; gender studies , in educational leadership ; great man theory ; homophobia ; intelligence ; leadership , theories of ; leadership effectiveness ; personality ; role
theory ; sexism ( glass ceiling )  ; superintendency ; Theory X , 
Theory Y ; three-factor model , five-factor model
Further Readings and References
Blount , J .  ( 2003 )  . Homosexuality and school superintendents : 
A brief history . Journal of School Leadership , 13 , 7–26 . 
Lugg , C .  ( 2003 )  . Sissies , faggots , lezzies , and dykes : Gender , 
sexual orientation , and a new politics of education ? 
Educational Administration Quarterly , 39 , 95–134 . 
1028———Trait Theory
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1028
McEwan , E .  ( 2003 )  . Ten traits of highly effective principals . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Zaccaro , S .  , Kemp , C .  ,  & Bader , P .  ( 2004 )  . Leader traits and
attributes . In J . Antonakis , A . Cianciolo ,  & R . Sternberg 
( Eds .  )  , The nature of leadership ( pp . 101–124 )  . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS
Eric Berne developed transactional analysis for use in
psychotherapy . It was further popularized in the bestselling books Games People Play and I ’ m OK—You ’ re
OK . More recently , managers have used transactional
analysis as an organizational change technique . 
Transactional analysis is concerned with three
areas of analysis : structural analysis ( the analysis of
individual personality )  ; time structuring ( the analysis
of the way people structure their time )  ; and life scripts 
( the analysis of the roles that people learn to play in
life )  . The focus in organizational change has been on
structural analysis and time structuring . 
STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
The personality of each person is made up of ego
states . Berne defines an ego state as a consistent pattern of feeling and experience directly related to a
corresponding consistent pattern of behavior . Although
school administrators cannot direct ego states , they
can observe behavior and from this infer which of the
three ego states is operating at any given time . This
should help them better understand others in the
workplace and the reasons for their behavior . 
The three ego states—the Parent , the Adult , and the
Child—are common to all people , but the content of
each is unique to each individual , based on his or her
background and experiences . 
• The Parent ego state derives from one ’ s parents or
other powerful figures in one ’ s childhood . It is
expressed toward others as nurturing , critical , or
standard-setting behavior . A school administrator
exhibiting a Parent ego state tends to talk down to
subordinates and to treat them like children . 
• The Adult ego state reflects maturity , objectivity , 
problem analysis , logic , and rationality . It is oriented
toward objective information gathering , careful
analysis , generating alternatives , and making logical
choices . A school administrator who behaves fairly
and objectively in dealing with subordinates is
exhibiting an Adult ego state . 
• The Child ego state derives from one ’ s experiences
as a child . This ego state can range from being
submissive and conforming to being insubordinate , 
rebellious , emotional , or perhaps inadequate . 
TIME STRUCTURING
Another focus of transactional analysis is the way in
which people structure their time . There are six basic
ways to structure time : withdrawal , rituals , pastimes , 
activities , games , and authenticity : 
1 . Withdrawal can be either physical or psychological . 
Examples include walking away from an argument 
( physical )  , withdrawing to avoid pain and punishment ( physical )  , withdrawing to think through a
problem and examine alternatives ( psychological )  , or
daydreaming ( psychological )  . 
2 . Rituals are stylized transactions , such as “ Good
morning , how are you ?  ” Such a rhetorical question
suggests the response ,  “ Fine , how are you ?  ” Such
interchanges have little meaning except to recognize
the other person . Should the receiver of the message
actually respond to the question , the sender would be
distressed because no answer is expected . 
3 . Pastimes are nonstylized transactions that have a
repetitive quality . Discussing the weather or politics
during social occasions are examples . 
4 . Activities consist of transactions centered on getting
work done . Work fulfills various needs in people , 
such as recognition and accomplishment . We all
know of cases where people die shortly after retirement . Explanations for this phenomenon include
people ’ s loss of a constructive way of structuring time
and feeling worthwhile and important to society . 
5 . Games are sets of ulterior transactions , repetitive in
nature , with well-defined psychological payoff . 
People use games to avoid authenticity or intimacy . 
Other books provide several descriptions of games . 
Therefore , we describe only a few of the more wellknown games used in organizations . Superior and
subordinate frequently play “ Blemish .  ” For example , 
a principal brings a report to the superintendent , and
he quickly skims it . Regardless of how good the report
is , the superintendent finds one or more “ blemishes ” 
in it and points these out to the principal . In this way , 
the superintendent maintains his power position . 
This game can be played at any level along the hierarchy ( principal-department head , department headteacher , teacher-student )  . Another game in which the
superior maintains a power position is called ,  “ Yes , 
Transactional Analysis———1029
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1029
but .  .  .  .  ” For example , the superintendent asks her
principals for input in solving a problem . Each suggestion from the principals is followed with a “ Yes , 
but .  .  .  ” response from the superintendent . Finally , 
there is the game of NIGYYSOB ( Now I ’ ve Got You , 
You SOB )  . In this game , one employee lures another
into a work situation ( for example , a superintendent
and principal ) in which the victim , the subordinate , 
is programmed for failure . When the mistake
occurs , the superintendent pounces on the principal , 
which results in embarrassment , a reprimand , or even
dismissal . 
6 . Authenticity refers to transactions that are devoid of
game playing and exploitation of people . 
Andrew Halpin and Don Croft are two early
researchers who recognized the significance of authenticity in organizational behavior . The chief consequence of their research on organizational climate was
identifying the pivotal importance of authenticity in
schools . Later , James Henderson and Wayne Hoy , after
an extensive review of the literature , identified three
basic aspects of leader authenticity in schools : accountability , nonmanipulation , and salience of self over role . 
Accountability is the aspect of authenticity that
describes the leader as accepting responsibility and
admitting errors . The authentic leader accepts responsibility for his or her own actions as well as those of
subordinates and admits mistakes when they are made . 
On the other hand , inauthentic leaders are unwilling to
accept responsibility and admit mistakes ; they blame
others and circumstances for their shortcomings and
failures . 
Nonmanipulation of subordinates reflects the
perception of subordinates that their leader avoids
exploiting them . Authentic leaders are seen as those
who avoid manipulating others as if they were objects , 
whereas inauthentic leaders are perceived as dealing
with subordinates as if they were things . 
Salience of self over role refers to the ability to
break through the barriers of role stereotyping and
behave in congruence with personal and situational
needs . Authentic leader behavior is relatively unconstrained by traditional role requirements . Inauthentic
leaders , in contrast , adhere to the narrow behavior of
their job descriptions , never allowing self to override
the routinized behavior of the office . In a follow-up
study , authenticity was related to commanding trust
and loyalty from teachers . An atmosphere of trust
facilitates organizational change in schools . 
How does transactional analysis relate to organizational change ? People are trained in seminars to
identify dysfunctional aspects enumerated by transactional analysis in its three areas : time structuring , 
analysis of transactions , and structural analysis . The
assumption is that this knowledge will make school
administrators more effective in their relationships
with faculty and in collegial relationships among the
faculty . Increased effectiveness in interpersonal relations in schools should help to reduce resistance to
change efforts proposed by school administrators . 
—Fred C . Lunenburg
See also behaviorism ; collaboration theory ; decision making ; 
egocentrism , theories of ; human resource development ; 
Maslow , Abraham ; mentoring ; motivation , theories of ; 
organizational theories ; personality ; psychology , types of ; 
Theory X , Theory Y ; transformational leadership
Further Readings and References
Berne , E .  ( 1986 )  . Transactional analysis in psychotherapy . 
New York : Ballantine . 
Berne , E .  ( 1996 )  . Games people play ( Rev . ed .  )  . New York : 
Ballantine . 
Halpin , A . W .  ( 1966 )  . Theory and research in administration . 
New York : Macmillan . 
Halpin , A . W .  ,  & Croft , D . B .  ( 1963 )  . The organizational climate of schools . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Harris , T . A .  ( 1993 )  . I ’ m OK—you ’ re OK . New York : Avon . 
Henderson , J . E .  ,  & Hoy , W . K .  ( 1983 )  . Leader authenticity : 
The development and test of an operational measure . 
Educational and Psychological Measurement , 3 , 63–75 . 
Hoy , W . K .  ,  & Kupersmith , W .  ( 1984 )  . Principal authenticity
and faculty trust : Key elements in organizational behavior . 
Planning and Changing , 15 , 80–88 . 
 TRANSFORMATIONAL
LEADERSHIP
Transformational leadership is composed of multiple
forms , originally concerning administration of educational organizations . Developed by James MacGregor
Burns in 1978 , it was later extended by Bernard Bass , 
noting its occurrence when leaders expand and promote employee interests . This involved the encouragement of employees beyond their self-interests , 
generating benefits for the organization and highlighting the mission and goals of the organization to maintain awareness and acceptance among its members . 
1030———Transformational Leadership
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1030
Transformational leadership recognizes and exploits
existing needs or demands of followers by looking
for their potential motives , seeks to satisfy these higher
needs , and engages the abilities of the followers . 
The strengths of this form of leadership lie in its collective vision and effective communication with all
employees . 
Transformational leadership consists of four components : charisma or idealized influence , inspirational
motivation , intellectual stimulation , and individualized
consideration . Furthermore , transformational leaders
pursue three fundamental goals : to assist staff in developing and maintaining a collaborative , professional
organizational culture ; to foster development of professional growth ; and to help staff members solve problems
more effectively by engaging them in new activities and
requiring from them an appurtenant effort . 
There are two fundamental goals of transformational leadership . The first goal is to assist staff
development and maintain a collaborative , professional school culture by means of communicating , 
observing , critiquing , and planning in collaboration . 
Norms of collective responsibility and continuous
improvement encourage staff to exchange teaching
techniques . Transformational leaders involve staff in
collaborative goal setting , reduce teacher isolation , 
use somewhat bureaucratic mechanisms to support
cultural changes , share leadership by delegating
power , and actively communicate a school ’ s norms
and beliefs . The second goal is to foster teacher development ; teachers ’ motivation for development is
enhanced when they internalize goals for professional
growth . This process is facilitated when they are
strongly committed to a school ’ s mission . 
Ultimately , the third goal of transformational
leadership is to assist teachers to solve problems more
effectively , which is of value because it stimulates
teachers to engage in new activities and put forth an
appurtenant effort . These leaders share a genuine
belief that their staff , as a group , could develop better
solutions than the principal alone . However , critics
argue that transformational leadership is unethical and
contend that it lacks the checks and balances of democratic discourse and power distribution . They also
contend that it manipulates followers into ignoring
their own best interests . 
Proponents of transformational leadership claim
it increases the organization ’ s productivity and
customer satisfaction , generating higher commitment
to the organization from employees and increasing
employee trust in management and organizational citizenship behavior ( i . e .  , discretionary extra-role workrelated behavior , such as conscientiousness , altruism , 
and sportsmanship , all of which are not related to the
formal reward system of the organization )  . This also
enhances employee satisfaction with both their jobs
and leaders , reduces employee stress , and increases
well-being . Evidence of the effects of transformational
leadership is deemed positive . This is because its practices have a sizable influence on teacher collaboration
and because significant relationships exist between
aspects of transformational leadership and educators ’ 
own reports of changes in both attitudes toward school
improvement and altered instructional behavior . 
Transformational leadership begins with the development of a vision , a view of the future that will excite
and convert potential followers . This vision may be
developed by the leader or the senior team or may
emerge from a series of general discussions , requiring
energy and commitment , as few people immediately
buy into a radical vision , and some much more slowly
than others . Transformational leaders thus seize
opportunity and employ tools at their disposal to gain
numbers and create a following . However , transformational leaders have to exercise caution with matters
of trust , as personal integrity is a critical element of
the package that they are promoting . In effect , they are
selling themselves as well as the common vision . 
They motivate followers by appealing to strong emotion regardless of the ultimate effects on the followers , 
not necessarily always tending to positive ethical values . Transformational leaders are often charismatic
but may not be as self-absorbed as this description
would suggest . In this way , they succeed through esoteric , rather than exoteric , motivation . 
Transformational leadership exists in a continuum
with transactional leadership , and therefore , a leader
may exhibit traits of both leadership styles . It recognizes the need for organizational practices such as performance appraisals , job descriptions , management by
objectives , performance-based pay , position grading , 
and organizational process analysis and clarification . 
It also recognizes and uses praise , recognition , and
the delegation of responsibility and work when both
leaders and followers are in agreement as to which
tasks hold importance . The transactional leader works
through creating clearly structured frameworks
whereby it is unambiguous to subordinates what is
required and what rewards are received for obedience . 
Reprimand is not always explicit but well understood , 
Transformational Leadership———1031
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1031
and formal systems of discipline are usually administrable . The transactional leader is responsible and fully
accountable for allocating work to subordinates , irrespective of whether the latter have resource or capability to perform the assigned tasks . In the event of
mishap , the subordinate is considered to be personally
at fault and penalized for failure . Alternatively , in contrast to transactional leaders , transformational leaders
motivate by appealing to followers ’ self-interests . 
One of the drawbacks of transformational leadership is that passion and confidence can easily be mistaken for truth and reality . While it is true that great
strides have been taken through enthusiastic leadership , it is also true that many passionate people have
led the charge into extirpation . Transformational
leaders often have tremendous amounts of enthusiasm , which , if applied relentlessly , can exhaust followers . They tend to see the big picture , but not detail . 
If they do not have delegated personnel to monitor
finer levels of specification , they face failure . 
Transformational leaders , by definition , seek to transform all elements . When the organization does not
need transformation and members are content , then
such a leader will become frustrated . Given the appropriate situation , however , they can develop their own
momentum and have been known to change entire
organizations . 
—Eunyoung Kim
See also administration , theories of ; charisma , of leaders ; 
Follett , Mary Parker ; leadership , complex ; leadership , distributed ; leadership , participatory ; leadership effectiveness ; 
leadership styles , management theories ; Maslow , Abraham ; 
Theory X , Theory Y ; transactional analysis
Further Readings and References
Bass , B . M .  ( 1985 )  . How to succeed in business according to
business students and manager . Journal of Applied
Psychology , 52 , 254–262 . 
Bass , B . M .  ( 1985 )  . Leadership and performance beyond
expectation . New York : Free Press . 
Bass , B . M .  ( 1990 )  . Bass and Stodgdill ’ s handbook of leadership . New York : Free Press . 
Bass , B . M .  ( 1990 , Winter )  . From transactional to transformational leadership : Learning to share the vision . Organizational Dynamics , pp . 19–31 . 
Burns , J . M .  ( 1978 )  . Leadership . New York : HarperCollins . 
Joyner , E .  , Ben-Avie , M .  ,  & Comer , J .  ( 2004 )  . Transforming
school leadership and management to support student
learning and development . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin
Press . 
Northouse , P .  ( 2003 )  . Leadership . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Starratt , R .  ( 2003 )  . Centering educational administration . 
Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
 TRENDS INTERNATIONAL
MATHEMATICS AND
SCIENCE STUDY
The Trends International Mathematics and Science
Study ( TIMSS , originally titled Third International
Mathematics and Science Study ) is a multicountry , 
multilevel study of math and science instruction and
achievement in 1995 , 1999 , and 2003 . Hosted by the
International Association for the Evaluation of
Educational Achievement ( IEA )  , the study is administered by Boston College ’ s TIMSS International Study
Center to provide important information for policy
development , to foster public accountability , to allow
areas of progress or decline in achievement to be identified and monitored , and to address concerns for
equity . TIMSS data are rich for education research , 
resulting in hundreds of articles , including empirical
analyses and comparisons , conference papers , commentaries and the like on individual country achievement , instructional policies and practice in math and
science , as well as international comparisons . 
TIMSS operates on a 4-year cycle , with 2007
slated for the fourth round of testing . Each of first
three rounds included different types of data collection , which led to a number of technical reports , data
analyses , and international databases . 
In 1995 , three grades were assessed in 42 countries , 
the fourth , eighth , and final year of secondary school . 
This initial year also included several other portions , 
including benchmark , video , curriculum , and case
studies , which required teacher and principal participation . In 1999 , only eighth graders were assessed in
38 countries . A benchmark and video study were
included . Twenty-six of the 38 nations had also participated in the 1995 study , which allowed for a variety of
comparative analyses . Study information included
school and home environments as well as curriculum
and instruction . In 2003 , only the paper-and-pencil
assessment was used for fourth and eighth graders in
46 countries . 
TIMSS student tests are developed with the aid
of math , science , and assessment experts guided by
grade-level assessment frameworks . Frameworks
1032———Trends International Mathematics and Science Study
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1032
reflect math and science curriculum and were revised
in 2003 to include assessment objectives for fourthand eighth-grade students and added problem solving
and inquiry ( PSI ) tasks . Tests include field-tested , 
multiple-choice , and written-response items . Student
answers are scored using specific grading criteria . 
After each TIMSS cycle , some test items are publicly
released . Students , teachers and building administrators fill out questionnaires to provide additional data
on a variety of instructional practices , students ’ own
learning expectations and their family characteristics , 
teacher quality and development , community and school
culture , local policy , and the like . 
Science assessment areas include earth , life , and
environmental sciences , and physics and chemistry , 
while math areas include numbers , algebra , geometry , 
data , and measurement . 
The 1995 TIMSS included a curricular study . 
Researchers gleaned information on math and science
instruction from textbooks , curriculum guides , and
other materials . Through 1996 and 1997 , the results
of the cross-country curricular study were available
through a number of reports . 
The TIMSS benchmarking studies compare states ’ 
and districts ’ science and mathematics programs and
subsequent achievement to international practice and
results . In 1995 , 5 states and 1 school district consortium
participated , and in 1999 , 13 states and 14 district consortia participated . The assessments were administered
to representative samples of eighth-grade students . 
The 1995 and 1999 , TIMSS video studies captured
eighth-grade students in several countries in order
to examine classroom instructional practices . The
1999 study was expanded to include seven of the topperforming countries in the 1995 assessment . 
The 1995 TIMSS case study of Japan , Germany , 
and the United States included data gathering on
teacher training and work environments , educational
standards , and how schools handle differing student
abilities . 
In the United States , a variety of partnerships collect and analyze TIMSS data , including the National
Science Foundation ( NSF )  , which both funds the
project and uses the subsequent data for advocating
improvement in math and science instruction . The
U . S . National Center for Education Statistics also analyzes data and releases various reports , published on
its TIMSS Web site . The U . S . Department of Education ’ s then Office of Educational Research and
Improvement ( now Institute of Educational Sciences ) 
also sponsored a number of reports , using several
elements of the TIMSS data . 
Books and peer-reviewed articles emerged from the
study as well , comparing student achievement across
countries , as well as cultural , school and family influences , instructional practices , tracking policies , and
the like . Articles also reported on achievement and
practice in individual countries . Some articles questioned
the rigor and usefulness of TIMSS cross-country
comparisons . 
—Angela M . Hull
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; curriculum guides ; 
evaluation ; math education ; performance assessment ; questionnaires ; science , in curriculum ; standardized testing
Further Readings and References
Baker , D .  , Akiba , M .  , LeTendre , G .  ,  & Wiseman , A .  ( 2001 )  . 
Worldwide shadow education : Outside-school learning , 
institutional quality of schooling , and cross-national mathematics achievement . Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis , 23 , 1–18 . 
Kuiper , W .  ,  & Plomp , T .  ( 1999 )  . TIMSS in a Western European
context . Educational Research and Evaluation ( An
International Journal on Theory and Practice )  , 5 ( 2 )  , 
78–246 . 
Stigler , J . W .  , Gonzales , P .  , Kawanaka , T .  , Knoll , S .  ,  & 
Serrano , A .  ( 1999 )  . The TIMSS videotape classroom study : 
Methods and findings from an exploratory research project
on eighth-grade mathematics instruction in Germany , 
Japan , and the United States . Education Statistics
Quarterly , 1 ( 2 )  , 109–112 . 
Wang , J .  ( 2001 )  . TIMSS primary and middle school data : 
Some technical concerns . Educational Researcher , 30 ( 6 )  , 
17–21 . 
 TRENHOLM , HARPER COUNCILL
President of Alabama State College and Executive
Secretary of the American Teachers Association , 
Harper Councill Trenholm ( 1900–1963 ) promoted
education equity , the professional growth of teachers , 
and the inclusion of African Americans in the National
Education Association ( NEA ) on equal footing . Using
a professional perspective to counter the legal , economic , and social boundaries imposed by race , 
Trenholm valued cooperation between Black and
White educators and placed a high premium on developing pride in Black history , heritage , and professional
Trenholm , Harper Councill———1033
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1033
status . Assuming the presidency of the State Normal
School , later Alabama State , he worked for the accreditation of Black schools using the same standards as
for White schools . He strengthened the Alabama State
Teachers Association , which became the largest Black
teacher organization in the South . In addition , he nurtured the American Teachers Association ( ATA )  , formerly the National Association of Teachers in Colored
Schools ( NATCS )  , which enhanced the professional
development of African American educators , elevated
their professional status , and secured their place in the
expanding Black middle class . His life work stressed
the agency displayed by African Americans in securing
equity in multiple arenas and the value of education in
the African American community . 
Trenholm had significant influence on the ATA-NEA
Joint Committee ’ s agenda , which included the dissemination of information on Black schools , the support of textbook revision to incorporate African
American history , and the expanded use of the media
to accomplish these ends . Trenholm ’ s work underscored self-determinism and pride in Black history
and culture . Denied membership in White educational
associations in the South and only marginal participation in the NEA , African American educators organized and sustained their own educational associations , 
such as the Alabama State Teachers Association 
( ASTA )  , which was the backbone of the American
Teachers Association ( ATA )  . Trenholm saw inclusion
in the White associations as an ultimate goal . In 1950 , 
he formulated a “ transitional interpretation ” of the
NEA ’ s bylaws that allowed affiliation of the Black
state associations if members were forbidden because
of race from joining the White affiliate . This interpretation of the bylaws , in effect in 1951 , facilitated the
participation of African Americans in the NEA and
brought their interests directly to the association ’ s
membership . 
During Trenholm ’ s tenure as college head , institutional power remained in the hands of the president , 
and Trenholm labored to retain state aid to Alabama
State College for Negroes ( ASCN ) as it experienced
phenomenal growth . As the civil rights movement
progressed , ASCN teachers and students were active
in the Montgomery bus boycott and in lunch counter
sit-ins . These acts of civil disobedience pitted
Trenholm , an employee of the state , against the opponents of desegregation , but he did not acquiesce to
demands to release files of ASCN professors and
students , many of whom were supporters of Martin
Luther King Jr . In 1961 , the NEA took a decisive step
toward the merger of the ATA and NEA—a goal he
had long labored for and which was finally realized in
1966 , 3 years after his death . The NEA recognizes
educators who have contributed to human and civil
rights with an award named in Trenholm ’ s honor . 
—Carol F . Karpinski
See also affirmative action ; Afrocentric theories ; American
Federation of Teachers ; Bethune , Mary McLeod ; Black
education ; civil rights movement ; Coppin , Fanny Jackson ; 
desegregation , of schools ; discrimination ; diversity ; Du Bois , 
W . E . B .  ; law , trends in ; National Educational Association ; 
Supreme Court , United States , key cases in education law ; 
Washington , Booker T . 
Further Readings and References
Gray , J . A .  , Reed , J . L .  ,  & Walton , N . W .  ( 1987 )  . History of
the Alabama State Teachers Association . Washington , DC : 
National Education Association . 
Perry , T . D .  ( 1975 )  . History of the American Teachers
Association . Washington , DC : National Education
Association . 
 TUTORING
Tutoring is providing individual , guided instruction
on specific subject matter , concepts , or skills for a
particular purpose . Studies have consistently found
that tutoring is a valuable instructional tool . Tutoring
has been shown to improve academic performance
and attitudes toward school of students tutored . There
appears to be an initially high rate of success in achievement gains in a relatively short time . Benjamin Bloom
wrote in 1984 that tutoring yielded achievement
2 standard deviations above the level of conventional
classroom group instruction and that the average
tutored student ranked above 98% of the students in
the control group classes . 
Tutoring can be conducted by students , volunteers , 
or trained tutors . Bloom ’ s study was conducted using
trained tutors , and research shows that children , 
youth , and adult volunteers can and should be trained
in fundamental tutoring skills . Training should be systematic , providing specific instruction in effective
tutoring strategies and providing for practice with
other tutors before pairing tutors with the students
they will help . 
1034———Tutoring
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1034
Cross-age tutoring involves older students ( e . g .  , 
sixth grade ) tutoring younger students ( e . g .  , second
grade )  , generally in basic academic skills ( e . g .  , reading )  . Students selected to be cross-age tutors should
not only be older but also more psychologically mature
than the students they will be tutoring . Peer tutoring
involves students being tutored by other students in
the same class or same grade . 
Some studies have shown that tutoring appears
to produce good effects on the tutors as well as the
students they help . Other studies indicate that positive
effects have consistently been found in achievement
and self-esteem . Student tutors improve their own
level of achievement , and some have shown higher
rates of maturity , conceptual complexity , leadership , 
and empathy to peers . With appropriate orientation
and training , cross-age tutoring has shown benefits for
both the tutor and the learner . 
—Judith A . Ponticell
See also collaboration theory ; instructional interventions ; 
learning , theories of ; mastery learning ; mentoring ; parental
involvement ; peer interaction / friendships
Further Readings and References
Allen , D .  ,  & LeBlanc , A .  ( 2004 )  . Collaborative peer coaching
that improves instruction . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin
Press . 
Bloom , B . S .  ( 1984 )  . The 2 sigma problem : The search for
methods as effective as one-to-one tutoring . Educational
Researcher , 13 ( 6 )  , 4–16 . 
 TYLER , RALPH WINIFRED
Ralph Winifred Tyler ( 1902–1994 ) made significant
contributions in the areas of curriculum design , testing , and evaluation . Some consider him “ the father of
behavioral objectives .  ” Tyler was among the first to
advocate student testing , not to produce a normal
curve distribution , but to provide information for
improvement of curriculum and determine if students
had reached the aims intended . His book , Basic
Principles of Curriculum and Instruction , written in
1949 , has been in continuous print and has been translated into many languages . This document is a syllabus for a curriculum class that Tyler taught during
his time at the University of Chicago . Within the
document are four questions that may have influenced
curriculum development , perhaps more than any other
document . The perspective offered by the questions
in this work has come to be known as the “ Tyler
Rationale .  ” He directed the famous Eight-Year Study
and was instrumental in the creation of the National
Assessment of Educational Progress ( NAEP )  , which
is still administered today as a measure of educational
attainment for children across the nation . 
Tyler was born April 22 , 1902 , in Chicago , Illinois . 
Shortly after his birth , Tyler ’ s family moved to
Nebraska , where he spent his childhood . Tyler
attended Doane College in Crete , Nebraska , where he
earned an AB degree at the age of 19 and began teaching high school science in Pierre , South Dakota , in
1921 . His MA degree was earned from the University
of Nebraska in 1923 and in 1927 , he earned a PhD
from the University of Chicago . His work in higher
education began as assistant supervisor of sciences
at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln . He was there
from 1922 to 1927 , and during this time completed his
MA and PhD . He served as an associate professor at
the University of North Carolina ; in 1929 , he moved
to Ohio State University , where he achieved the rank
of full professor . At Ohio State , Tyler began his work
as director of the now classic Eight-Year Study , 
involving 30 high schools and some 300 colleges and
universities . The secondary schools served as educational laboratories pursuing innovative programs
and creating their own forms for evaluating student
performance . In Recording and Appraising Student
Progress , coauthored with E . R . Smith , many of today ’ s
advocated “ authentic assessment ” practices can be
seen ( criterion testing , performances , student projects , 
etc .  )  . 
In 1938 , Tyler moved to the University of Chicago
as the chairman of the Department of Education and
later the Dean of Social Sciences and the University
Examiner . He continued his work on The Eight-Year
Study through 1941 . Tyler became the first director of
the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral
Sciences , based at Stanford University , in California . 
He remained in this position from 1953 until his
retirement . While Tyler officially retired in 1967 , he
remained active in education for another 25 years through
teaching , lecturing , consulting , writing , and serving on
a variety of committees , commissions , and foundations . In his 70-plus years as an educator , he authored
or coauthored hundreds of articles and books . 
—Anita Pankake
Tyler , Ralph Winifred———1035
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1035
See also accountability ; achievement tests ; curriculum , theories
of ; curriculum guides ; evaluation ; National Assessment of
Educational Progress ; performance assessment ; standardized testing ; testing and test theory development
Further Readings and References
Brandt , R .  ,  & Tyler , R .  ( 1983 )  . Goals and objectives . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , Fundamental curriculum decision 
( pp . 40–52 )  . Alexandria , VA : ASCD . 
Eisner , E . W .  ( 2001 )  . Ralph Winifred Tyler , 1902–94 . In J . A . 
Palmer ( Ed .  )  , Fifty modern thinkers on education : From
Piaget to the present ( pp . 54–58 )  . London : Routledge . 
Encyclopedia of World Biography .  ( 1998 )  . Ralph W . Tyler 
( 2nd ed . Vol . 15 , pp . 370–371 )  . Farmington Hills , MI : 
Thomson Gale Research Group . 
1036———Tyler , Ralph Winifred
T-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1036
 UNDERACHIEVERS , IN SCHOOLS
Little consensus exists in the educational literature
about the definition of underachievement , particularly
concerning how it is measured or to whom it applies . 
Yet the term is used often by academics , practitioners , 
journalists , and politicians somewhat indiscriminately
in describing poor academic performance in school
without any clarity about to what the underachievement relates . At times underachievement refers to the
relationship between an individual ’ s perceived innate
ability to learn and actual learning performance , while
at other times it refers to comparisons between an individual ’ s performance with that of a larger group . The
lack of a universally accepted definition of underachievement in the literature requires the presentation
of an operational definition in this context . Hence , 
underachievement is defined here as a discrepancy
between expected and actual academic achievement by
an individual , particularly among those students who
possess the cognitive ability to achieve at high levels . 
The term underachievement appears to have been
used initially within the literature about students identified as academically gifted ( i . e .  , those perceived to
have high learning potential ) whose performance in
school ( usually measured by grade point averages , 
sometimes measured by behaviors ) falls below anticipated achievement . Despite evidence of the existence
of underachieving students among those identified
as having high learning potential , prior to 1980 there
existed almost no substantive research on the topic of
gifted underachievement . Reasons cited in the literature tended to focus primarily on the individual
student and issues unrelated to school :  ( a ) poor family
relationships , particularly between father and son ,  ( b ) 
low self-image or self-concept , often generating feelings of nonacceptance by peers and social isolation , 
and ( c ) asocial personality traits and blaming others
for poor performance . Male students generally were
perceived more likely to become underachievers than
female students . These notions of underachievers in
schools tended to place the burden of responsibility on
the students or families or on academic performance
and behaviors associated with one gender . 
Through her school-based case studies of gifted
students , Joanne Whitmore , in 1980 , was the first to
identify school-based influences contributing to underachievement :  ( a ) students ’ perception of a lack of genuine respect by teachers ,  ( b ) competitive social climate
among students ,  ( c ) inflexibility and rigidity of curriculum and instruction ,  ( d ) emphasis on evaluation by
others ,  ( e ) negative comments by teachers about students
failing to achieve or conform ,  ( f ) constant teacher control
over classroom activities , and ( g ) students ’ perception of
unrewarding curriculum based almost solely on textbook
learning . She also found that teachers rarely considered
the roles that curriculum , instruction , assessment , and
their own behaviors as influencing conditions that can
lead to student underachievement . 
Initial indicators of underachievement are often
manifested in late elementary grades by student behaviors and attitudes such as unfinished work , disorganization , excuses for forgotten assignments and homework , 
uninterest in most academic subjects , and descriptions of school as boring or useless . Children who
are hyperactive , rebellious against authority , highly
critical of others , physically undercoordinated , and
1037
U
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1037
socially isolated by peers suffer from low self-esteem
and chronic inattention . Over time these behaviors
and attitudes lead to poor study habits , lack of perseverance , procrastination , and use of external escapes 
( e . g .  , video games , social life , drugs ) that support a
student ’ s energies toward learning avoidance . Prolonged
illness , emotional stress caused by family changes , 
perceived academic inabilities based upon race or
language , and learning difficulties requiring differentiated services also contribute toward fostering
underachievement . 
Underachievers often display poor academic selfconcepts , hold low values in learning attainment , and
have limited skills in using effective learning strategies . Loss of motivation for learning often stems from
a vicious cycle of low self-confidence and poor selfconcept by the students and unrealistic or too high
expectations for academic performance by parents
and teachers . Unless addressed appropriately through
early intervention in elementary school , underachievement becomes a more stable pattern in middle
and junior high and well entrenched by high school . 
Underachievement among secondary students is manifested by poor school attendance , underdeveloped
study habits resulting in low grades , family and school
behavior problems , and even dropping out of school . 
Chronic underachievement can also lead to criminal
behavior . 
Enriched curriculum that includes topics interesting
to students , differentiated instruction that is student
centered and student engaging , and opportunities to
complete alternative assessments are ways to mitigate
the development of underachieving characteristics . 
Despite implementation of such efforts , some students
still fail to work at their full academic potential . Prior to
taking action toward helping underachievers , teachers , 
administrators , counselors , and parents need to understand that underachievers are psychologically at risk of
long-term failure based upon three interacting reasons . 
First , underachievement is a learned set of behaviors , 
which can be changed through appropriate interventions . Second , underachievement is content and situation specific , rarely evident across all academic
disciplines . Third , underachievement is a self-concept
developed by expectations imposed by others : academic performance judged poor by others may well be
acceptable performance by the student . Three types of
intervention are often cited :  ( 1 ) supportive strategies
that affirm the student ’ s work and convey promise of further success and greater potential ,  ( 2 ) intrinsic strategies
that serve as unique motivating factors for that student , 
and ( 3 ) remedial strategies that help the student develop
appropriate learning skills and behaviors . Diminishing
a student ’ s underachieving behaviors requires significant time , attention , effort , and patience . 
Identification of gifted students varies greatly
because the field lacks a universally accepted definition for giftedness . Students from special populations 
( e . g .  , those with limited English proficiency , from low
socioeconomic backgrounds or minority groups ) often
are not included among those identified by traditional
academic measures ( i . e .  , high scores on IQ tests , high
GPA ) or nominated by teachers or parents . In addition , 
students possessing intrapersonal and interpersonal
skills or artistic talents are also often underidentified . 
The actual number of truly gifted students in American
schools is unknown , and thus the breadth of underachievement among students with high potential who
are unidentified , underutilizing their gifts in schools , 
or are at risk of school failure are unknown . Estimates
of underachievement among identified gifted students
range from 15% to 40% of gifted students , while
approximately 20% are school dropouts . The problem
of underachievement in our schools remains one of the
greatest social wastes of our time . 
—Tricia Browne-Ferrigno
See also at-risk students ; cultural capital ; dropouts ; individual
differences , in children ; instructional interventions ; intelligence ; learning environments ; metacognition ; productivity ; 
promotion , social ; resiliency ; schooling effects ; tracking , of
students
Further Readings and References
Peterson , J . S .  ( 2003 )  . Underachievers : Students who don ’ t
perform . In J . F . Smutny ( Ed .  )  , Underserved gifted populations : Responding to their needs and abilities ( pp . 
307–332 )  . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . 
Rayneri , L . J .  , Gerber , B . L .  ,  & Wiley , L P .  ( 2003 )  . Gifted
achievers and gifted underachievers : The impact of learning style preferences in the classroom . Journal of
Secondary Gifted Education , 14 ( 4 )  , 197–204 . 
Rimm , S .  ( 2003 )  . Underachievement : A continuing dilemma . 
In J . F . Smutny ( Ed .  )  , Underserved gifted populations : 
Responding to their needs and abilities ( pp . 333–344 )  . 
Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . 
Smith , E .  ( 2003 )  . Understanding underachievement : An investigation into the differential attainment of secondary school
pupils . Journal of Sociology of Education , 24 ( 5 )  , 575–586 . 
Vlahovic-Stetic , V .  , Vidovic , V .  ,  & Arambasic , L .  ( 1999 )  . 
Motivational characteristics in mathematical achievement : 
1038———Underachievers , in Schools
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1038
A study of gifted high-achieving , gifted underachieving
and non-gifted pupils . High Ability Studies , 10 , 37–49 . 
Whitmore , J . R .  ( 1980 )  . Giftedness , conflict , and underachievement . Needham Heights , MA : Allyn & Bacon . 
Whitmore , J . R .  ( 1986 )  . Understanding a lack of motivation to
excel . Gifted Child Quarterly , 30 , 66–69 . 
 UNIONS , OF TEACHERS
The lineage of teacher unions can be traced directly to
industrialization and to the industrial-model school
organizations that resulted . Just as trade union structures mirrored their industry counterparts , teacher
unions often established structures that mirrored those
of school districts . 
Before the industrial age , workers organized themselves largely around their work . Guilds were created
to control entrance into a work group and restrict the
availability of certain types of work . Trade unions
regulated apprentice practices and established hiring
halls . Craft unions contributed money that was used to
pay members who were sick or unemployed and regulated standards in their craft by creating sanctions
when members violated rules that were created by the
association . However , as the hierarchical structures of
factories became the norm , the organizational structures of unions changed to match the workplace . 
Industrial unionism took hold during the turn of the
century , waned during hard economic times , and was
revived again during the industrial prosperity of the
late 1940s . Although , like many workers , teachers had
been organizing for a long time , they did not formally
associate with unions in the beginning of their organizational efforts . The formal association of teachers
with unions began with the formation of the National
Education Association ( NEA )  . 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE
NATIONAL EDUCATION ASSOCIATION
Just as industrial workers were organizing , so were educational workers . Although not considered a union at the
time , the NEA was founded in 1857 . During its first 30
years , the NEA functioned more like a debating society
and then later merged with the National Association
of School Superintendents . By the turn of the century , 
college presidents controlled the organization and classroom teachers had little to do with its activities for
several decades . By the1890s , 50% of active members
were administrators and 11% were teachers . 
Industrial practices and the growing labor movement influenced the development of teachers ’ unions
as well as policies aimed at preventing them . Although
NEA was not formally affiliated with organized labor , 
in 1915 the Chicago Board of Education adopted a 
 “ yellow-dog ” contract , which stipulated that teachers
who belonged to unions would not be rehired . In spite
of these scare tactics , some teachers were dissatisfied
with how the NEA dealt with teachers , and started to
work to create a new national organization of teachers . 
These teachers wanted an organization focused on the
needs of teachers , and they were interested in affiliating with organized labor . The result was the creation of
a second national teacher organization—the American
Federation of Teachers ( AFT )  . 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS
The AFT was founded in 1916 partly at the urging of
Samuel Gompers , the president of the American
Federation of Labor . Although the NEA had been in
existence for quite some time , the formulation of a
teachers ’ organization that was associated with organized labor signified a shift in attitude . The new
national organization , the AFT , created locals affiliated
with the labor movement and was not dominated by
administrators . The NEA traditionally felt that unionism lowered the ideals of teaching and that unionization
led to teachers losing their image of being public servants . Defining and promoting teacher professionalism
is a recurring theme in the development of teacher
unionism and in the union ’ s role in education reform . 
EVOLUTION OF THE NATIONAL
EDUCATION ASSOCIATION AND THE
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS
For more than three decades , the NEA , unlike the
AFT , included everyone in public education—
teachers , principals , and superintendents—and was
the primary voice that defined teaching . In the late
1950s , the AFT began a push for collective bargaining
and started to win elections against the NEA . In
response , the NEA agreed to start collective bargaining for teachers , and control of the organization began
to switch from administrators to teachers . On April 11 , 
1962 , the United Federation of Teachers ( UFT ) went
Unions , of Teachers——1039
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1039
on strike for one day , an event that brought forth
a permanent change in the relationship between
organized teachers and their schools . The strike in
New York also signified the start of intense competition between the NEA and AFT for the representation
of large cities . Because of the events in New York City , 
teacher unionism and collective bargaining experienced rapid growth in the1960s . 
Collective bargaining began to define the relationship between teachers and school boards , a transition
that some viewed as significant and positive . 
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
Collective bargaining has played a significant role in
the industrialization of business and the subsequent
industrial model of public schooling . Although teacher
unionists have long seen the pursuit of formal collective bargaining relationships with districts as a vehicle
for teacher professionalization , negotiating contracts
has not traditionally been viewed as a tool for educational reform and in fact is often misunderstood and
misrepresented . 
Negotiating about educational policy does not
negate the need to negotiate about traditional breadand-butter issues , nor are these two mutually exclusive . Negotiating around standard settings is an activity
around which unions and management can create common ground . While these are not the traditional breadand-butter issues of unionism , and such activities
cannot substitute for negotiation around wages , benefits , and job protections , they can supplement and
complement bargaining . 
PROFESSIONAL TEACHER UNIONISM
Some teacher unions are changing to embrace reform
through what is sometimes called “ new ” or “ professional ” unionism . Professional unionism is a term
used to describe a changing role for unions . In this
new role , unions use the collective bargaining process
to include negotiating about educational policy , with a
focus on professional issues , as well as negotiating
about traditional bread-and-butter issues . Negotiating
for peer review , evaluation systems , professional
development , mentor and induction programs , and
new compensation systems are used as examples of
how negotiating about policy can shape the work of
teachers and transform industrial-style teacher unions
into professional unions . 
Professional unionism is a way to transform the
union ’ s bargaining strategy by focusing on the professional theme . This strategy is important in order to
restore the public ’ s confidence in organized teachers . 
Professional unionism allows for proactive engagement in school improvement and will alter certain
features of traditional unionism . Professional unionists hope to supplement the traditional concerns for
teacher rights , wages , and benefits with broader
concerns for educational improvement . By creating
both the appearance and the reality of direct teacher
engagement , of professional accountability and education improvement , unions hope to enhance teachers ’ 
cultural authority as well as their economic status . 
Professional unionism is a hybrid of sorts . Unions
engaged in reform bargaining do not forsake breadand-butter concerns for reform ideas but instead combine the two into one . 
Professional unionism is called upon to balance
teachers ’ legitimate self-interests with the larger interests of teaching as an occupation and education as an
institution . Most professional teacher unionists would
agree that a new relationship between the union and the
district is essential for the transition from industrialstyle unionism to professional unionism to occur . Many
of those engaged in professional unionism and collaborative relationships with school district leaders are
members of a national network of union locals known
as the Teacher Union Reform Network ( TURN )  . 
The Teacher Union Reform Network
TURN is a group of union leaders who are dedicated to the concept of new or professional unionism . 
Started in 1995 by Adam Urbanski and Helen
Bernstein , both local union leaders , TURN ’ s stated
purpose is to challenge teacher union leaders to advance
teachers as professionals , construct a broad-based
unionism , and link professionalism and new unionism
to ways for enhancing student achievement . TURN ’ s
mission statement includes
• Improving continuously the quality of teaching
• Promoting in public education and in the union
democratic dynamics , fairness , and due process
for all
• Seeking to expand the scope of collective bargaining
to include instructional and professional issues
• Improving on an ongoing basis the terms and conditions under which both adults and children work and
learn
1040———Unions , of Teachers
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1040
The union leaders who belong to TURN are at
the forefront of creating professional unionism and
are among the most notable examples of unions working in collaboration with management and using these
relationships to negotiate successful mentor and induction programs , peer appraisal and review programs , 
and new compensation systems . 
REFORMING TEACHER UNIONS
Teacher unions have been structured to mirror industrial
unions . The organizational structures inherited from
these industrialized roots are just as entrenched and difficult to reform in our unions as they are in our schools
and school districts , because teacher unions modeled
themselves after the structure they once organized
against . Unions became organized by a central authority , and they bargained with a central authority , the
school board . 
As a precursor to the more collaborative relationship with management necessary for professional
unionism to thrive , it is essential for teachers ’ unions to
focus first on their own internal organizational structures . Without internal transformation , it is less likely
that a progressive professional union will be able to
create a working relationship with the school district
and to sustain the changes necessary to influence educational reforms . These structures can be characterized
using the following categories typically found in most
teacher unions : governance , human resources , site
leadership , partnerships , communication and committees , and task forces . 
—Ellen J . Bernstein and Judith A . Ponticell
See also American Federation of Teachers ; collective bargaining ; conflict management ; contracts , with teacher unions ; 
division of labor ; National Education Association 
Further Readings and References
Bernstein , E .  ( 2003 )  . A journey toward professional unionism : 
The struggle for a transformation of a local teacher ’ s
union . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of
New Mexico , Albuquerque . 
Boyd , W .  , Plank , D .  ,  & Sykes , G .  ( 2000 )  . Teacher unions in
hard times . In T . Loveless ( Ed .  )  , Conflicting missions ? 
Teachers unions and educational reform ( pp . 174–210 )  . 
Washington , DC : Brookings Institution . 
Cresswell , A .  , Murphy , M .  ,  & Kerchner , C .  ( 1980 )  . Teachers , 
unions , and collective bargaining in public education . 
Berkeley , CA : McCutchan . 
Kerchner , C .  ,  & Koppich , J .  ( 1993 )  . A union of professionals : 
Labor relations and educational reform . New York : 
Teachers College Press . 
Kerchner , C .  , Koppich , J .  ,  & Weeres , J .  ( 1997 )  . United mind
workers : Unions and teaching and the knowledge society . 
San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Litzcke , K .  ( 2001 )  . Teacher unions as players in education
reform : A Canadian look at an American trend . Kelowna , 
BC : Society for the Advancement of Excellence in
Education . 
Murphy , M .  ( 1990 )  . Blackboard unions : The AFT and the
NEA , 1900–1980 . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . 
Perez Castillo , X .  ( 2000 )  . A TURN-ing point for teacher union
locals : A case study of Los Angeles , Minneapolis , and
Rochester . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of
California , Los Angeles . 
 UNIVERSITIES , PREPARATION
OF EDUCATIONAL LEADERS IN
The preparation of educational leaders has been an
accepted activity of colleges of education , especially
of comprehensive universities in the United States , for
the past 80 to 100 years . As teaching and administration developed into two separate vocations around the
turn of the twentieth century and the role of the school
principal became more specialized and complex , university training became more of the requirement and
K–12 educational administration became a foremost
area of graduate study in education . The scientific
management movement , coupled with state policies in
certifying principals , stimulated the growth of such
university preparation programs . Initially , novices
learned from highly experienced , retired administrators who tended to stress the technical , mechanical , 
and rational aspects of control , authority , and management rather than the curricular and instructional
aspects of leadership . 
This trend lasted until after World War II , when the
social sciences came into their own and the theoretical
literature in educational administration began to grow . 
Throughout the theory movement , hopes were high
that a solid knowledge base was to be generated and
that verified standards of practice would be established . A spirit of inquiry permeated the field , and
several milestones in the preparation of principals
occurred , including the establishment of the Committee
for the Advancement of School Administration 
( CASA ) and the University Council for Educational
Universities , Preparation of Educational Leaders In———1041
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1041
Administration ( UCEA ) in the mid-1950s . As a result , 
graduate programs in educational administration were
to be improved through the stimulation and coordination of research and training activities , the publication
and distribution of literature , and the exchange of
ideas . By this time , approximately 125 universities
were offering graduate programs in K–12 educational
leadership and administration , and nearly all states
required some form of administrative certificate for
superintendents and principals . University faculty
were selected on the basis of their academic preparation rather than their experience as administrators , and
the subject matter became more rigorous . The field
shifted from a practical orientation to a more theoretical one , from the use of one discipline to the use of
several disciplines , and from a technical orientation to
a more general one . 
As the educational reform movement of the early
1980s began to mature , school administration , the role
of educational leadership in school improvement , and
the preparation of educational leaders were pushed to
the center of the educational reform stage . By this
time , leadership preparation was further removed
from hands-on learning and experiential applications , 
and those receiving the training became skeptical of
its utility . A chasm between theory and practice developed , and pressures for change in the preparation of
educational administrators increased significantly . 
The theory movement failed to deliver on its promises , 
outcomes of the quest for a science of administration
were considerably less robust than had been anticipated , and the knowledge base employed in preparation programs had not been especially useful in
solving real problems in the field ( i . e .  , a behavioral
science knowledge base had little effect )  . Absent a
conceptual unity , content tended to focus on the managerial and institutional dimensions of administration
compared to teaching and the psychology of learning . 
In 1987 , the education administration profession selfidentified several key trouble spots in Leaders for
America ’ s Schools , prepared by UCEA . These concerns included ( a ) the lack of definition of good leadership ,  ( b ) an absence of collaboration between school
districts and colleges and universities ,  ( c ) the low
number of minorities and females in the field ,  ( d ) a
lack of systemic professional development ,  ( e ) the
poor quality of candidates for preparation programs ,  
( f ) the irrelevance of preparation programs ; programs
devoid of sequence , modern content , and clinical
experiences ,  ( g ) the need for licensure systems that
promote excellence , and ( h ) an absence of a national
sense of cooperation in preparing school leaders . This
report was followed by the National Policy Board for
Educational Administration ’ s ( NPBEA ) highly visible
1989 publication Improving the Preparation of School
Administrators : The Reform Agenda , recommending
that a common core of knowledge and skills in
preservice programs be defined to include the following :  ( a ) societal and cultural influences on schooling ,  
( b ) teaching and learning processes and school
improvement ,  ( c ) organizational theory ,  ( d ) methodologies of organizational studies and policy analysis ,  
( e ) leadership and management processes and functions ,  ( f ) policy studies and politics of education , and 
( g ) moral and ethical dimensions of schooling . The
content of these areas was to be grounded in the 
 “ problems of practice ” and supported by an increased
emphasis on clinical experiences . 
Reforms of the 1990s brought new standards for
school leaders , new and restructured programs , shifts
in content and instructional strategies , and new licensure exams . A reconceptualization of the administrator
role as one focused on leadership for student learning
led 24 states and the District of Columbia to unite and
form the Interstate School Leaders Licensure
Consortium ( ISLLC )  . In conjunction with the Council
of Chief State School Officers ( CCSSO )  , ISLLC generated a set of national standards that help link leadership more directly to productive schools and enhanced
educational outcomes . The primary objective of this
initiative was to strengthen the professional development of school leaders . The standards serve two main
purposes :  ( 1 ) provide a model for university preparation programs to assist in assessing their curriculum , 
instruction , and assessment and ( 2 ) provide the basis of
the School Leaders Licensure Assessment ( SLLA )  , a
national test used by states as a licensing tool for initial principal certification . The ISLLC Standards and
their corresponding indicators in the areas of knowledge , dispositions , and performance reflect what the
two organizations feel are basic operating norms that
successful principals employ . 
Although many institutions of higher learning have
used the ISLLC Standards to revise preparation programs for prospective school leaders , implementing
the No Child Left Behind Act ( NCLB ) of 2001 forced
them to confront the weaknesses of contemporary school
leadership and made it impossible to ignore the escalating need for higher quality principals—individuals
who have been prepared to provide the instructional
1042———Universities , Preparation of Educational Leaders In
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1042
leadership necessary to improve student achievement . 
In 2002 , the National Council for the Accreditation
of Teacher Education ( NCATE ) aligned its accreditation standards for educational leadership training
programs with the ISLLC Standards . This merger
provided a unified set of standards , the Educational
Leadership Constituent Council ( ELCC ) standards , 
for review and accreditation of administrator preparation programs . Candidates who complete the program
are educational leaders who have the knowledge and
ability to promote the success of all students by
Standard 1 : facilitating the development , articulation , 
implementation , and stewardship of a school or district
vision of learning supported by the school community
Standard 2 : promoting a positive school culture , providing an effective instructional program , applying best
practice to student learning , and designing comprehensive professional growth plans for staff
Standard 3 : managing the organization , operations , and
resources in a way that promotes a safe , efficient , and
effective learning environment
Standard 4 : collaborating with families and other community members , responding to diverse community
interests and needs , and mobilizing community
resources
Standard 5 : acting with integrity , fairness , and in an
ethical manner
Standard 6 : understanding , responding to , and influencing the larger political , social , economic , legal , and
cultural context
Standard 7 : the internship : provides significant opportunities for candidates to synthesize and apply the knowledge and practices and develop the skills identified
in ELCC Standards 1–6 through substantial , sustained , 
standards-based work in real settings , planned and
guided cooperatively by the institution and school district personnel for graduate credit . 
While each state establishes licensing , certification
and recertification requirements for school leaders
and , in most places , approves the college and university programs that prepare school leaders , research
findings reveal that changes in the nature of principal
preparation programs have been slow to follow the
change in the conceptualization of the work of the
principals ( i . e .  , the shift in perspective highlighting
principals ’ role in the improvement of instruction and
their greater impact on student performance and
achievement )  . Frequently cited role changes in the
literature are connected to increased time and stress
associated with accountability issues , management
tasks , staff development , curriculum design , shared
decision making , site-based management , budgetary
constraints , students ’ changing demographics , special
education issues , complex discipline and safety issues , 
and issues associated with school choice . In keeping
pace with today ’ s diverse society and ever-changing
social , political , and technological issues , educational
leaders are expected to be experts on current education
law and policy , standards-based reform , student learning , instructional programs , curricular issues , models of
assessment , social services , public relations , and fundraisers . Because of this , efforts to rethink , redefine , and
restructure the preparation of school leaders require
advocates who understand that school leadership is a
multifaceted issue that includes political and managerial as well as instructional and educational components . 
Effective educational leadership programs ensure
that their students gain the knowledge , skills , and
attributes of an instructional leader and the capacity to
galvanize the internal and external school communities in support of increased student achievement and
learning by creating opportunities for students to work
collegially as part of their graduate experience . To do
this , leadership preparation programs engage in
proactive and collaborative plans to identify , recruit , 
prepare , and retain diverse cohorts of highly qualified
candidates . They have active , involved faculty who
are connected to the field and are willing and able to
create and implement activities and environments that
enable adult students to challenge their assumptions , 
clarify and strengthen their values , and work on aligning their behaviors and practice with these beliefs , 
attitudes , and philosophies . Because school leaders in
the twenty-first century are much more heavily
invested in purpose-defining activities , in reflective
analysis , and in active intervention as opposed to
simply managing existing arrangements ( i . e .  , maintaining the status quo )  , curricular and instructional
practices in preparation programs need to address
issues of power and privilege , issues of social justice
and equity , and issues of excellence and equality . The
fabric of educational leadership curriculum , pedagogy , programs , and policies must shift from facultycentered to student-centered approaches that actively
involve students in the learning process , eliminate
student anonymity , and personalize instruction . 
Courses must be fashioned and infused with critically
Universities , Preparation of Educational Leaders In———1043
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1043
reflective curricula and methodologies that stimulate
students to think beyond current behavioral and conceptual boundaries in order to study , research , and
implement leadership practices that will fundamentally and holistically change schools in ways and in
manners that are consistent with an equitable , inclusive vision . 
These recommendations are consistent with others
who are encouraging the use of inductive , problembased strategies that are grounded in adult learning
theory and the integration of practical lessons of academic coursework with the day-to-day realities of
schools . Promising approaches and practices include
extensive , field-based , mentored internships in a variety of settings that connect knowledge and interpretive frameworks with practical experiences and
ideological commitments . Many innovative and
exceptional programs use cohorts , case study methods , administrative simulations , inquiry-based praxis , 
and action research . They tend to be more demanding , 
more selective , more coherent with a focus on
sequencing and scheduling and strong collaborations
with area districts . Strong leadership is the heart of all
effective organizations . Given new roles , multiple perspectives and values , changing school demographics , 
limited resources , and heightened expectations , strong
school leadership is needed . Principals need emotional muscle for interpersonal dynamics and preparation and programs need to foster it . 
—Kathleen M . Brown
See also human resource development ; Interstate School
Leaders Licensure Consortium ; standard setting ; state
departments of education ; theory movement , in educational
administration ; University Council for Educational
Administration
Further Readings and References
Andrews , R .  ,  & Grogan , M .  ( 2001 )  . Defining preparation and
professional development for the future . A paper commissioned for the first meeting of the National Commission for
the Advancement of Educational Leadership Preparation , 
Racine , WI . 
Hale , E . L .  ,  & Moorman , H . N .  ( 2003 )  . Preparing school principals : A national perspective on policy and program innovations . Washington , DC : Institute for Educational
Leadership . 
Jackson , B .  ( 2001 )  . Exceptional and innovative programs in
educational leadership . A paper commissioned for the first
meeting of the National Commission for the Advancement
of Educational Leadership Preparation , Racine , WI . 
McCarthy , M .  ( 1999 )  . The evolution of educational leadership
preparation programs . In J . Murphy & K . Seashore Louis 
( Eds .  )  , Handbook of research on educational administration .  ( pp . 119–139 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Sirotnik , K . A .  ,  & Kimball , K .  ( 1996 )  . Preparing educators for
leadership : In praise of experience . Journal of School
Leadership , 6 , 180–201 . 
 UNIVERSITY COUNCIL
FOR EDUCATIONAL
ADMINISTRATION
The University Council for Educational Administration
is a consortium of major research universities with
doctoral programs in educational leadership and policy . The dual mission of UCEA is to improve the
preparation of educational leaders and promote the
development of professional knowledge in school
improvement and administration . UCEA ’ s origins date
to 1954 when members of the Cooperative Program in
Educational Administration ( Middle Atlantic Region ) 
proposed an organization that would be devoted to
improving the professional preparation of educational
administrators . To help establish such an organization , 
a central office with part-time staff was established on
the campus of Columbia University , financed by a
grant from the W . K . Kellogg Foundation to Teachers
College of Columbia . 
Between 1956 and 1959 , UCEA ’ s constitution and
by-laws were formulated , the organization ’ s purposes
were defined , and additional financial support was
obtained in the form of a 5-year grant from the
Kellogg Foundation . The organization was officially
founded in 1959 , and the UCEA central office moved
to Ohio State University when a small , full-time staff
was hired . Since that period , UCEA has been housed
at Arizona State University , Pennsylvania State
University , and the University of Missouri-Columbia . 
UCEA has been a major contributor to
• Broadening the content of preparation programs for
educational administrators
• Extending the use of more effective methods of
inquiry in educational administration
• Shifting educational administration from an anecdotal orientation to a more scientific one , leading to
generalizations about organization and leadership
• Developing new instructional materials for administrator programs
1044———University Council for Educational Administration
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1044
• Fostering exchanges in research and in program
development between professors and administrative
leaders in the United States and their counterparts in
other countries
• Continuing efforts toward standards of excellence in
research and in preparation programs for administration . 
With the expiration in 1969 of a second 5-year grant
from the Kellogg Foundation , UCEA has been supported through a combination of membership dues , 
donations of resources , facilities , equipment and staff
time from member institutions , sales of publications
and instructional materials , and investment income . 
The council ’ s governance is vested in two official bodies , the executive committee and the plenum . The executive committee is composed of nine individuals
elected from member institutions . The executive committee makes decisions about appointments and compensation of personnel , develops plans for and makes
recommendations to the plenum , and , when necessary , 
makes interim program decisions . The plenum , comprised of one representative from each member university , elects the executive committee , helps make
governance , finance , and membership decisions , provides linkages with member university faculty and
students , and promotes programmatic involvement
with UCEA . Day-to-day operations of UCEA are the
responsibility of the executive director . In its history , 
UCEA has had seven executive directors ( including
two interim executive directors )  . Two of these executive
directors , Jack Culbertson and Patrick Forsyth , guided
the organization for 37 years of its 51-year history . 
The founding of UCEA in 1956 , led by Daniel
Griffiths , Jack Culbertson , Daniel Davies , and Paula
Silver , coupled with the creation of the National
Conference of Professors of Educational Administration ( NCPEA ) in 1947 , has been instrumental in the
emergence of the theory movement in educational
administration , which represents an attempt to define
the knowledge based in the fledgling field of educational administration . The activities of professional
organizations such as UCEA and NCPEA reflect the
belief that educational administration is more than a
loose collection of individual , anecdotal experiences—
a collection of war stories told and retold by retired
school administrators . Accordingly , UCEA has been a
major player in shaping ( and reshaping ) the knowledge
base in educational administration . 
To further this mission , UCEA has created eight program centers that facilitate work in a target area of interest over a substantial period of time through identifying
and coalescing the interests and resources of UCEAmember and nonmember institutions , school districts , 
and governmental agencies . UCEA program centers
address the following key areas : patterns of professional
administrator preparation , academic leadership , educational finance , field practices , special educational leadership and policy , ethics , urban education , school site
leadership , and the superintendency . In the near future , 
another program center will address school technology
leadership . The centers contribute greatly to UCEA ’ s
mission through their involvement of faculty in timely
and significant work in focused areas of inquiry , and
have made substantial contributions to knowledge production and exchange of ideas in the field of educational
leadership and the varied organizations served by educational leaders and administrators . 
Recently , UCEA has expanded its scope and
focused considerable attention on strengthening relationships among institutions that prepare administrators
for service and the school districts and other agencies in
which administrators serve . Although initially composed of a select number of elite universities , in recent
years UCEA has become much more inclusive , welcoming in a diverse array of member universities . 
—Lance Fusarelli
See also standard setting ; systems theory / thinking ; theory
movement , in educational administration
Further Readings and References
Culbertson , J . A .  ( 1981 )  . Antecedents of the theory movement . 
Educational Administration Quarterly , 17 ( 1 )  , 25–47 . 
Donmoyer , R .  , Imber , M .  ,  & Scheurich , J . J .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1995 )  . 
The knowledge base in educational administration : 
Multiple perspectives . Albany : State University of
New York Press . 
University Council for Educational Administration . Retrieved
from . 
University Council for Educational Administration———1045
U-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1045
 VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY
Reliability and validity are two basic concepts in test
theory . Reliability refers to the consistency of measures . One type is the test-retest reliability . In this
approach , a test is administered to the same group of
people twice , with a certain interval between the two
administrations . If most examinees get similar test
results across the two occasions , evidence is established
for high reliability . This type of reliability is also called
temporal stability . There are a number of factors that
may affect this type of reliability . One factor is the
memory effect . If a test is given twice within a short
period of time , the examinees will most likely remember their answers to the exam the second time they take
the exam . This may result in unusually high correlations between two sets of test scores , hence high reliability . On the other hand , if there is too long a period
between two test administrations , students may not
remember what they have learned previously . This may
lead to lower test scores at the second administration . 
The second type of reliability is the alternate-form , 
or equivalent-form , reliability . It refers to the comparability of test scores one obtains if given two equivalent forms of the same test . Factors affecting this type
of reliability include the extent to which the two forms
are equivalent and the extent to which the conditions
of two administrations are comparable . 
The third type of reliability is internal consistency . 
It refers to the extent to which items on the same test
instrument are homogenous with each other . It is distinguished from the previous two types of reliability in
that it requires only one test administration . There are
a number of formulas used for estimating internal
consistency , such as the Cronbach ’ s coefficient alpha and , 
for dichotomously scored items , the Kuder-Richardson
formulas ( KR-20 and KR-21 )  . A simpler approach to estimate internal consistency is the split-half method , which
divides a test into two halves and correlates the scores on
the two to obtain the reliability coefficient . 
The fourth type of reliability is the interrater reliability , which refers to the agreement between different
raters in their scoring of subjective items for the same
examinee . A further type of reliability is intrarater
reliability , which refers to the consistency with which
a rater applies the same scoring rubrics to score different examinees . 
One index for reliability is the reliability coefficient , which is obtained by correlating scores from the
same test for a group of examinees . Another index is
the standard error of measurement , which is the average difference between the true score and observed
scores for an individual . The various types of reliability reflect different sources of error . The generalizability theory uses a single index to take all sources of
error into consideration . 
Validity refers to the extent to which a test measures what it is supposed to measure and the legitimacy or appropriateness of inferences one makes
based on test scores . Traditionally , validity is broken
down into content , criterion-related , and construct validity . Content validity refers to the extent to which a test
adequately samples the content domain that it tries to
measure . The content validity of a fifth-grade math
test , for example , may be established if it is determined that what the test covers adequately represents
the important mathematical concepts and skills
1047
V
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1047
students learned in that grade . A useful tool is the test
blueprint , which is often used during test development
to link specific items to important instructional objectives . Expert panel review is often used for standardized tests to ensure content validity . 
Criterion-related validity refers to the use of an
external measure in judging the validity of a test . One
subcategory is the so-called concurrent validity , which
uses a concurrent measure of a variable as criterion for
validation . For instance , in order to judge the validity
of a newly developed intelligence test , one may use an
existent intelligence test and administer both the
newly developed instrument and the concurrent test to
the same group of students . A comparison of results
on the two tests would provide evidence for concurrent validity . The second subcategory of criterionrelated validity is predictive validity , which uses a
future measure as the criterion . It is often used with
aptitude tests . For instance , the SAT ( Scholastic
Aptitude Test ) is used to predict student academic performance in college . A comparison of student performance on the SAT and his or her subsequent college
grade point averages would establish predictive validity for the test . 
Construct validity refers to the extent a test measures the intended construct . Its validation comes
from the confirmation of a theory-based relationship
through a number of approaches . For example , discriminant analysis is used to correlate the results of a
construct measure with a variable that is theoretically
unrelated . Convergent analysis , on the other hand , is
used to correlate the results with a theoretically related
variable . A test is considered to have high construct
validity if the correlation through the first approach is
very low or if the correlation through the second
approach is very high . Construct validity may also be
established through factor analysis , which examines the
structure of the construct itself by looking at the relationships between its internal components . 
Another type of validity that is sometimes mentioned is face validity . It refers to the extent to which
a test appears to measure what it is supposed to measure . Although some people tend to dismiss face
validity as too trivial a concept , face validity can have
significant impact on the potential use of a test . 
The traditional separation of content , criterionrelated , and construct validity received some challenges in the 1980s and 1990s . For instance , one critic
suggested validating a test in terms of its value implications and social consequences of test use . Construct
validity is treated as a unifying concept . The process
of construct validation is considered never ending . 
Reliability and validity are closely related to each
other . Reliability of a test is considered a necessary
condition for validity , while validity is considered a
sufficient condition for reliability . 
—Yuankun Yao
See also attitudes ; measurement , theories of ; research methods ; Scholastic Aptitude Test ; testing and test theory development ; variables
Further Readings and References
Anastasi , A .  ,  & Urbina , S .  ( 1997 )  . Psychological testing . 
Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
Crocker , L .  ,  & Algina , J .  ( 1986 )  . Introduction to classical and
modern test theory . Orlando , FL : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . 
Messick , S .  ( 1995 )  . Validity of psychological assessment : 
Validation of inferences from persons ’ responses and
performance as scientific inquiry into scoring meaning . 
American Psychologist , 9 , 741–749 . 
Wainer , H .  ,  & Braun , H . I .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1988 )  . Test validity . 
Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
 VALUE-ADDED INDICATORS
The concept of value-added indicators of educational
performance rests on the assumption that schools add
value to the achievement of their pupils . Value-added
indicators would measure or approximate the contribution of a school to its students ’ learning and achievement . Though the concept originated in the field of
economics , it has been widely used in the school
effectiveness literature in educational research . 
STATISTICAL DERIVATION
Value-added indicators of school effectiveness evaluate growth or progress with a given group of students
on cognitive outcomes , usually reading or mathematics , during a specified time period . Therefore , panel or
longitudinal data on individual students are used in
their statistical derivation . 
Unlike average student test scores , which often
cannot reveal whether a given school is serving its
students effectively , value-added indicators capture
the difference between a school ’ s actual and expected
performance or growth on specific outcome measures . 
The indicators attempt to measure school performance
1048———Value-Added Indicators
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1048
or the effect of school policies and inputs using a
statistical regression that includes , to the extent possible , 
all the factors that contribute to a growth in student
achievement , in particular prior achievement and
student , family , and neighborhood characteristics . In
statistical terms , a value-added indicator is a residual : 
the deviation from the predicted value of dependent
variables or outcomes for each school . It is the residuals from the regression equation that would allow a
policymaker to tell whether a school is falling short of
or exceeding its predicted performance goals . 
An important feature of being able to measure a
school ’ s contribution to learning involves statistical
control for influences beyond the contribution of the
school . There are many possible variables for obtaining an expected level of growth : students ’ previous
attendance , gender , ethnicity , socioeconomic status , 
and prior achievement levels . 
UTILIZATION IN UNITED STATES EDUCATION
Value-added indicators of effectiveness are not used
extensively in the U . S . system of elementary and
secondary education . The Tennessee Value-Added
Assessment System ( TVAAS )  , developed by William
Sanders , is the most developed accountability program
employing value-added indicators . TVAAS tracks individual students ’ progress on state tests and attempts to
approximate schools ’ and classroom teachers ’ effects
on performance . The state aggregates data from a given
teacher ’ s students over a 3-year period and then compares the gains to a national sample of students , as
well as state and district gains . North Carolina and
Mississippi also use value-added measures of school
performance in their accountability systems . As of
2002 , districts in Ohio , Colorado , and Pennsylvania
were participating in a pilot program of value-added
indicators . The federal No Child Left Behind Act of
2001 requires states to test all students annually in
Grades 3 through 8 . Thus , federal policy has created the
conditions for states to develop accountability systems
based on value-added indicators , as they will have the
longitudinal data on student performance that would
enable them to measure growth from year to year . 
USE IN ACCOUNTABILITY
SYSTEMS : IMPLICATIONS
Proponents of using value-added indicators for school
accountability argue that these indicators help to determine
how schools are performing , discourage harmful
instructional practices , particularly for disadvantaged
students , and reward teachers and administrators for
factors that are under their control . The claims of advantages for equity are based on the idea that value-added
indicators are superior to yearly average test scores as
measures of student performance . 
The primary advantage of using value-added indicators for accountability is that they allow policymakers
to determine how effectively schools are educating the
students they serve . Schools that serve economically
advantaged students may be contributing very little to
the education of their students , and above-average test
scores could contribute to complacency in those communities ; on the other hand , students might abandon
good neighborhood schools simply because the
students served were proportionately disadvantaged . 
When policymakers can discern which schools are
performing well and which poorly with the resources
they have , there is another equity advantage : It can aid
them in learning about what is making schools
ineffective . In the policy context of performance-based
accountability systems , the designers of the reform
assume that schools ’ performance will improve continuously . Schools start from very different places and
need information to improve their performance . 
Average test scores that states and district policymakers
gather do not enable them to understand how schools
are effective and why . 
A second major argument in favor of using valueadded indicators for accountability is that they would
discourage educationally disadvantageous instructional practices , referred to by educators as “ creaming .  ” Such practices might encourage schools and
districts to reject prospective students , particularly
disadvantaged students . Likely , these practices are
subtler : preventing students from participation in
statewide assessments , tracking them into special education , or neglecting their needs by offering courses
geared toward academically advantaged students . 
A third potential advantage of a value-added system
is fairness to teachers and administrators . This is possible because the model enables a state or district to
measure the performance of schools based on students
in all grades and the students who are in the school for
a large part of the year . Recent attempts to demonstrate
fairness by researchers has called this potential advantage into question by showing that teachers in districts
with higher numbers of nondisadvantaged students
would look better on state tests than teachers who
Value-Added Indicators———1049
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1049
taught large numbers of disadvantaged students . The
failure of the TVAAS proponents to fully share their
data and statistical procedures with the wider educational community has raised great suspicion about the
claims of the advantages of the system . 
From an equity perspective , there are at least three
major objections to the use of value-added indicators . 
The first potential disadvantage of the use of the indicators is that controlling for student background characteristics might institutionalize lower performance
expectations for disadvantaged students . Policymakers
might send the undesirable message that the state or district has lower expectations for some groups of students
than others . 
A second concern for policymakers with the use of
these indicators is whether they are clear to teachers
and administrators . For instance , in Dallas in the
1990s , district officials linked school rewards to an
elaborate value-added model that controlled for race . 
Some researchers found that school personnel found
it difficult to make the connection between behavior
they can directly observe or affect and the types of
performance needed to win an award . 
Finally , there is the argument against the use of the
indicators for accountability purposes because of an
important assumption in the model that is violated
in practice . There is a built-in assumption of adequate
resources that account for the mix of students served
and schools ’ autonomy to obtain these resources . When
these indicators are used in an accountability system , 
policymakers are assigning causality to schools ’ performance . The state or district assigns rewards and sanctions for schools as though they had autonomy to do
whatever they needed to optimize their performance . Yet
in making this causal attribution , policymakers assume
that the schools are free to choose their resources : that
they have the autonomy to hire and fire employees , for
instance , and to obtain other instructional resources that
they would need to serve the students they have . Such an
assumption is problematic in most American public
school districts , where schools do not have wide latitude
to determine the resources that they will use . 
—Elizabeth H . DeBray
See also accountability ; Black education ; contracts , with
teacher unions ; economics , theories of ; factor analysis ; 
functionalist theory ; hierarchical developmental models ; 
individual differences , in children ; instructional interventions ; Latinos ; management information systems ; No
Child Left Behind ; performance assessment ; productivity ; 
psychometrics ; school improvement models ; schooling
effects ; standardized testing ; state departments of education ; tracking , of students ; validity and reliability
Further Readings and References
Clotfelter , C .  ,  & Ladd , H .  ( 1996 )  . Recognizing and rewarding
success in public schools . In H . Ladd ( Ed .  )  , Holding
schools accountable . Washington , DC : Brookings
Institution . 
Goertz , M .  ( 2003 )  . Implementing the No Child Left Behind
Act : the potential for a “ perfect storm .  ” Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the American Educational Research
Association , Chicago , Illinois . 
Hanushek , E .  ( 1997 )  . Assessing the results of school resources
on student performance : An update . Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 19 , 141–164 . 
Kupermintz , H .  ( 2003 )  . Teacher effects and teacher effectiveness : A validity investigation of the Tennessee value added
assessment system . Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis , 25 , 287–298 . 
Ladd , H .  , Roselius , B .  ,  & Walsh , R .  ( 1997 , November 8 )  . 
Using test scores to measure the effectiveness of schools . 
Paper presented at the Nineteenth Annual Research
Conference of the Association for Public Policy Analysis
and Management , Washington , D . C . 
Meyer , R .  ( 1997 )  . Value-added indicators of school performance : A primer . Economics of Education Review , 16 , 
283–301 . 
Mullens , J . E .  , Murnane , R . J .  ,  & Willett , J . B .  ( 1996 )  . The
contribution of training and subject matter knowledge to
teaching effectiveness : A multilevel analysis of longitudinal evidence from Belize . Comparative Education Review , 
40 , 139–157 . 
Raudenbush , S . W .  ,  & Willms , J . D .  ( 1995 )  . The estimation of
school effects , Journal of Educational and Behavioral
Statistics , 20 , 307–335 . 
Sanders , W . L .  ,  & Horn , S . P .  ( 1995 )  . The Tennessee valueadded assessment system ( TVAAS )  : Mixed model methodology in educational assessment . In A . J . Shinkinfred & 
D . L . Stufflebeam ( Eds .  )  , Teacher evaluation : Guide to
effective practice . Boston : Kluwer . 
 VALUES EDUCATION
Fully functioning people have beliefs , values , and
convictions . People without values , convictions , and
beliefs lack the inner strength needed in a society
whose survival relies on responsible , participating , 
and trustworthy people . Self-actualizing people have a
strong and clear set of values . They have convictions
and beliefs , and their values are part of their daily lives . 
They are able to see themselves clearly and frankly . 
1050———Values Education
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1050
According to some theorists , we need a usable and
validated system of values in which we can believe and
to which we can be devoted because the values are
true . Fully functioning people have sincere beliefs and
values with a high degree of clarity . They also have the
courage of their convictions . Their beliefs are deep and
consistent convictions that affect their actions . Fully
functioning people operate within their value systems
and have the courage to be themselves and to be imperfect . They see mistakes as opportunities for learning . 
Some proponents of values education posit value
education in the public schools should be restricted to
that which the school has the right and mandate to
develop . This would include an awareness of justice or
of the rights of others in our constitutional system . The
teaching of religious beliefs and specific value systems
would be prohibited by the Bill of Rights . They also
note that the Bill of Rights does not prohibit the teaching of the principles of justice and the awareness of
rights that are fundamental to the Constitution itself . 
One approach to values education is values clarification . Many people have difficulty making decisions
because the process seems too complex , pressures
are too varied , and change seems too upsetting . 
Therefore , some people feel confused or apathetic . 
They are unable to decide on their values or on a satisfying life style . The theory of values clarification
offers help for people who feel confused or whose
behavior is inconsistent . It encourages people to give
more thought to value-related ideas . 
Schools are filled with values whether they are
taught or not . It is not necessary to adopt a values education program because values are always being
taught . Those who are opposed to values education
generally mean that they do not want values that are
different from their own to be taught . This position
leads to the dilemma of determining which values
should be taught . Many maintain that there are some
basic values that students need to have and that these
values should be taught in schools . Unfortunately , 
there are those who have concerns about the most
basic values . The discussions of some of the basic values
might include : fairness , honesty , diligence , obedience , 
patriotism , respect , self-control , citizenship , responsibility , compassion , punctuality , perseverance , cooperation , loyalty , and work ethics . One example of such
a discussion might include the value of teaching students
to complete assignments when they do not want to do
the work . The argument develops around the problem
of teaching children to do what they are told to do
without questioning the value of what they have been
told to do . When children do whatever they are told to
do , that activity becomes right and the children
become obedient , diligent , cooperative , responsible , 
and good workers because they followed orders . They
did what they were told to do by a teacher or adult . 
Studies reveal that American soldiers who could be
brainwashed while imprisoned by enemies were primarily people without convictions and firm beliefs . 
People who do not stand for something within themselves will be the easiest to brainwash . 
The leaders of the Central Park East Secondary
School , in New York , suggested that educators focus
on teaching skepticism and empathy . By teaching
empathy , students would learn to consider circumstances from another ’ s point of view . By teaching
skepticism , students would learn to consider the validity and worth of what they encounter . There is a difference between a school that promotes skepticism and
empathy and the school that teaches students to be loyal , 
patriotic , and obedient , and other similar values . Schools
should address the need for schools to help students
learn autonomy and self-determination . When students
feel that they can be “ origins ” rather than “ pawns ,  ” 
they can develop the power of self-determination . 
Schools offer students very little power , except , for
example , as a hall monitor . Schools cannot promote
the learning of autonomy in the intellectual realm
while it is suppressed in the moral and social realms . 
Values education may succeed on a temporary
basis . Children may perform a specific behavior , but
they are not likely to develop a commitment to that
behavior . Educators can produce students who will
say the right words or do the right thing in a particular setting . Unfortunately , students will probably not
continue that behavior or transfer the desired behavior
to other situations . Values must be integrated into the
child ’ s own value system if they are to be transferred
to other settings . John Dewey recognized the problem
when he explained that beliefs cannot be plastered on
or hammered in . 
Educators may want to determine which values are
currently taught or cultivated in our schools . Schools
are and have been promoters of traditional values , but
we may not notice this because these values are the
same as our own or because we simply take them for
granted . The process of learning values requires that
children be provided with opportunities to ponder , contemplate , and make sense of such concepts as fairness
and courage . Children must be encouraged to reflect on
Values Education———1051
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1051
complex issues , to compare them to their own experiences , to determine for themselves and with others
what kind of person one should be . Students need to
examine traditions and determine which should be
kept . Children need to examine and consider how to
proceed when two basic values seem to be in conflict . 
—Carolyn Sayers Russell
See also Binet , Alfred ; character education ; civics , history
in schools ; coeducation ; democracy , democratic education
and administration ; Dewey , John ; dogmatism and scales of
Rokeach ; elementary education ; esteem needs ; ethics ; fundamentalism ; Maslow , Abraham ; moral education ; philosophies of education ; politics , of education ; psychology , 
types of ; self-actualization ; television , impact on students ; 
values of organizations and leadership
Further Readings and References
Anastasi , A .  ( 1968 )  . Psychological testing ( 3rd ed .  )  . Toronto , 
Canada : Macmillan . 
Pollack , B .  ( 1995 )  . The experimental psychology of Alfred
Binet , selected papers . New York : Springer . 
Pulliam , J . D .  ( 1976 )  . History of education in America ( 2nd
ed .  )  . Columbus , OH : Merrill . 
Raths , L . E .  , Harmin , M .  ,  & Simon , S . B .  ( 1978 )  . Values and
teaching ( 2nd ed .  )  . Columbus , OH :  . Merrill . 
Rogers , T . B .  ( 1995 )  . The psychological testing enterprise , an
introduction . Pacific Grove , CA : Brooks / Cole . 
Webb , L . D .  , Metha , A .  ,  & Jordan , K . F .  ( 2003 )  . Foundations
of American education ( 4th ed .  ) Upper Saddle River , NJ : 
Merrill Prentice Hall . 
 VALUES OF ORGANIZATIONS
AND LEADERSHIP
Values are defined as beliefs and attitudes held by
individual persons or collectivities . Values are also
viewed as the principles that guide behavior . The values held within a group or an organization are the values shared by the group ’ s members , which go beyond
individual values . 
An organization ’ s or group ’ s beliefs , desires , behavior , accountability , initiatives , innovation , integrity , and
flexibility reveal its core values , which influence organizational perceptions and decisions . Core values are
timeless , guiding principles that require no external
justification . Such principles have intrinsic value and
importance to those inside the organization . An organization ’ s culture is made up of core values that unify the
social dimensions of organizations . Core values
become the foundation and conscience of the organization , which distinguish successful organizations from
the unsuccessful . 
Within enduring organizations , values became the
organizations ’ essential and enduring tenets . Values
cannot be instilled into people ; people must already
have a predisposition to holding them . However , it is
acknowledged that a clear and well-articulated ideology will attract people to the enterprise whose personal values are compatible with the organization ’ s
core values , and conversely , may repel those whose
personal values are not similar . The task for executives is to find and retain people who have a disposition to share the organization ’ s core values . 
Values inform leadership practices . Prominent leadership researchers recognize the significant correlation
among attitudes , values , beliefs , leadership , and organizations . In their 2002 Synergistic Leadership Theory 
( SLT )  , Beverly Irby and Genevieve Brown stressed the
interconnectedness of four particular factors :  ( a ) beliefs
and values , and attitudes ;  ( b ) leadership behavior ;  ( c ) 
external factors ; and ( d ) organizational structure . The
SLT theory proposes that an alignment between
the leader ’ s attitudes , values , and beliefs and those of
the organization are important to the success of the
leader and the organization . Without this alignment , 
those who do not share the similar attitudes , values , and
beliefs may counter changes necessary for reform with
resistance . 
Sometimes value conflict occurs within organizations
when the interest of one group indicates one course of
action , while the other group ’ s welfare demands
another . Many scholars and researchers on value conflict resolution stress the “ person-situation fit ” in organizational settings , which is generally defined as
the congruence between norms and values of organizations and the values of persons . Thus , leaders have two
responsibilities :  ( a ) to articulate , model , and emphasize
the core values of the organization so that all members
work together toward meeting organizational goals and 
( b ) to make the effort to incorporate employees ’ values
so that there is a congruity between an organization ’ s
values and the values of its members . 
—Beverly Irby , Genevieve Brown , and Ling Ling Yang
See also administration , theories of ; capacity building , of organizations ; career development ; collaboration theory ; 
conflict management ; consideration , caring ; constructivism ; 
empowerment ; esteem needs ; ethos , of organizations ; 
1052———Values of Organizations and Leadership
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1052
group dynamics ; human resource development ; leadership , 
participatory ; management theories ; morality , moral leadership ; open-door policy ; personnel management ; transactional analysis ; values pluralism , in schools
Further Readings and References
Irby , B . J .  , Brown , G .  , Duffy , J . A .  ,  & Trautman , D .  ( 2002 )  . 
The synergistic leadership theory . Journal of Educational
Administration , 40 , 304–322 . 
Scott , W . A .  ( 1965 )  . Values and organizations . Chicago : Rand
McNally . 
 VALUES PLURALISM , 
IN SCHOOLS
The definition of pluralism has changed over time as
a result of a greater focus on diversity and inequities
in opportunities and resources for groups not considered part of the dominant culture . In the early 1900s , 
philosophers and writers , including Horace Kallen , 
began to challenge prevailing theories of assimilation
that posited the potential for various racial and ethnic
groups to blend together in a melting pot designed to
create a homogeneous citizenry in the United States . 
Kallen proposed an alternative view known as cultural
pluralism , which valued the distinct contributions that
each minority culture made to American society . 
Subsequent definitions of pluralism vary somewhat . 
In the 1960s , Milton Myron Gordon advocated for a
degree of separation among groups that would guarantee each group ’ s ethnic identity and traditions while
promoting cooperation among groups in the areas of
political action , economic life , and civic responsibility . More recent notions of pluralism have been influenced by the concept of multiculturalism , which
views diversity as part of the normal human experience and advocates for the acquisition and demonstration of dispositions and behaviors that promote
understanding and interactions with more than one
culture . Contemporary definitions of pluralism recognize diversity as a resource yet acknowledge that
inequities in political , economic , and educational
opportunities exist for members of historically
oppressed groups . To some , pluralism has taken on a
more political dimension in which the recognition of
differences must be accompanied by action for the
purpose of reducing or erasing inequity among
groups . 
Numerous issues arise for educational leaders who
value a contemporary view of pluralism in schools . 
Critics have argued that leaders must allow every culture
within a school fair and adequate time and resources for
the reproduction of its distinctive values and definition
of citizenry . This approach requires a focus on multicultural education for the purpose of ensuring that all
members of a school community appreciate , understand , and learn about each other ’ s cultures . In addition , 
school leaders who value pluralism and a commitment
to social justice need to understand and address how
members of various cultural and ethnic groups have
been denied economic , educational , and political opportunities in schools as well as in the community at large . 
Leaders can contribute by promoting policies and
instructional practices that assert the need for high
expectations for all students and attempt to eliminate
differential educational outcomes on the basis of race , 
ethnicity , gender , disability , or economic and other differences . Literacy for all students is considered to be
essential to positive educational outcomes , while the
inclusion of family and community perspectives promotes the values associated with a pluralistic educational environment . At issue for educational leaders is
the identification of processes that promote rich dialogue and subsequent action needed to realize the goals
of a pluralistic educational environment . 
—Katharine Shepherd Furney and Susan Brody Hasazi
See also Afrocentric theories ; Black education ; civil rights
movement ; creativity , in management ; cross-cultural education ; cultural capital ; diversity ; equality , in schools ; ethnocentrism ; fundamentalism ; humanistic education ; Latinos ; 
minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; philosophies of
education ; right-wing politics , advocates , impact on education ; semiotics ; values of organizations and leadership
Further Readings and References
Gordon , M . M .  ( 1964 )  . Assimilation in American life : The role
of race , religion , and national origins . New York : Oxford
University Press . 
Nash , R . J .  ( 2001 )  . Religious pluralism in the academy : 
Opening the dialogue . New York : Peter Lang . 
 VANDALISM IN SCHOOLS
Vandalism is a willful degradation of the environment
with no apparent motivation of profit or gain , the results
Vandalism in Schools———1053
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1053
of which are considered as damage by the perpetrators as well as by the victim in relation to the social
norms that are applicable in any particular situation . 
Vandalism is associated with monetary costs as well as
social costs . Monetary costs are obvious as schools
spend millions of dollars each year to repair or replace
the willful damage that school vandals cause . Social
cost is more complex and has an impact on education
program , has psychological impact on students , and
disruptive impact on intergroup relations . Clearly , vandalism is a very important topic and is a cause for concern for school leaders at a time when dollars for
education are scarce . 
Some acts of vandalism are intentional and malicious . Other acts that result in property damage or property disfigurement are not intentional , but rather may be
a consequence of thoughtlessness and carelessness . 
The two major categories of vandalism are school
defacement and property damage . Examples of
defacement are writing , painting , and drawing or graffiti on school buildings or property . Examples of property damage include breaking windows , equipment , 
and plumbing . 
There is no single factor that fully explains school
vandalism . Sociologists have found that there are
many reasons other than dissatisfaction with school or
education that cause vandalism . The causes are complex and at times interrelated . Society , the individual
vandal , the school , and family are among the causal
factors of school vandalism . The Safe Schools Study 
( 1987 )  , in examining the nature of vandalism , sociopsychological characteristics of vandals , and the schoolhome environment , revealed that the amount of school
damage and vandalistic behavior were related to lowsocioeconomic community status , low level of personal identification with the schools , inadequate
administration , and poor relations among teachers , 
administrators , and students . 
It is mostly middle school or junior high students
that commit acts of school vandalism . However , the 
 “ typical ” school vandal does not exist . There are
six types of vandals :  ( a ) the vindictive , who carry a
grudge against a particular teacher or other staff
member ;  ( b ) the malicious , who commit vandalism
out of sheer deviltry ;  ( c ) the ideological , who wish
to dramatize some particular stance or cause ;  ( d ) the
acquisitive , who combine destruction with theft ;  ( e ) 
the bored , who have few constructive outlets for their
energy ; and ( f ) the frustrated , who for one reason or
another see the neighborhood school as a symbol of a
society that is callously indifferent to their needs and
aspirations . 
There are many theories and recommendations on
reducing school vandalism . Most deal with physical
environment analysis of school sites prone to frequent
vandalism , promotion of positive school climate and
training in conflict resolution of school staff and
students , and involvement of the community . 
—Sandra Harris
See also at-risk students ; belonging ; community relations ; 
competition , forms of , in schools ; compulsory education ; 
consideration , caring ; determinism , sociocultural ; dropouts ; 
esteem needs ; school safety ; self-actualization ; underachievers , in schools ; violence in schools
Further Readings and References
U . S . Department of Health , Education , and Welfare .  ( 1978 )  . 
Violent schools-safe schools : The safe school study report
to Congress . Washington , DC : U . S . Government Printing
Office . 
 VARIABLES
A variable may be defined as a concept or a characteristic that involves variations . Researchers use variable
rather than concept or characteristic because most of
what is studied varies , that is , involves variation that
can be described numerically or categorically . 
Variables are composed of attributes or levels . An
attribute is the value or category that makes up the
variation . Thus , for example , the variable gender
would have as attributes female and male . These categories may also be referred to as levels . 
A precise definition of each variable communicates
clearly the researcher ’ s intent and enhances the usefulness of the results . Two types of definition of variables are commonly used in research : conceptual and
operational . 
A conceptual definition uses other words and
concepts to describe the variable , as in a dictionary . 
Conceptual definition is important in communicating
what is being investigated but may not indicate precisely what the variable means . 
An operational definition indicates how the concept is measured or manipulated , that is , what operations are performed to measure or manipulate the
variable . 
1054———Variables
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1054
There are several types of variables in educational
research . The most important are independent and
dependent , extraneous and confounding , and continuous and categorical . 
In research , one variable precedes another , either
logically or in time . The variable that comes first and
influences or predicts is called the independent variable . The second variable , the one that is affected or
predicted by the independent variable , is the dependent variable . In an experiment , at least one independent variable is the presumed cause of differences
between groups on the dependent variable . The independent variable is the antecedent , and the dependent
variable is the consequence . In nonexperimental
research , the independent variable cannot be manipulated or controlled by the investigator . Such variables
may still be considered independent if they clearly
precede the dependent variable or if they are used to
create categories for comparison . 
EXTRANEOUS AND
CONFOUNDING VARIABLES
An extraneous variable affects the dependent variable
but is unknown or not controlled by the researcher . 
These variables change the result and disrupt the
study . In designing research , investigators try to control or account for whatever extraneous variables may
be present . 
A confounding variable is one that varies systematically with the independent variable . 
CONTINUOUS AND
CATEGORICAL VARIABLES
A continuous variable can theoretically take on an
infinite number of values within a given range of
scores . In other words , the value of a continuous variable could be any point on a continuum . The values
are rank ordered , from small to large or low to high , to
indicate some properties or characteristics . Common
continuous variables in education research are
achievement and aptitude test scores . 
A categorical variable is used to assign an object or
person to a group that is defined to have specific characteristics . The simplest type of category has two
groups ( dichotomous )  , such as male / female . Other categorical variables can have three or more groups , for
example , grade level and nationality . It is also common
to use continuous variables to create categories . For
instance , an aptitude test score is generally treated as
a continuous variable , but the scores can be grouped
into categories such as high , middle , and low categories . Thus , depending on how the researcher uses
the variable , it can be either continuous or categorical . 
—Xiaogeng Sun
See also achievement tests ; case studies ; fieldwork , in qualitative research ; functionalist theory ; hierarchical developmental models ; instrumentation ; item response theory ; 
objectivity ; operational definitions ; research methods ; standardized testing ; structural equation modeling
Further Readings and References
Center , D .  ,  & Kemp , D .  ( 2002 )  . Antisocial behavior in children
and Eysenck ’ s theory of personality : An evaluation . 
International Journal of Disability , Development , and
Education , 49 , 353–366 . 
Center , D .  ,  & Kemp , D .  ( 2003 )  . Temperament and personality
as potential factors in the development and treatment of
conduct disorders . Education and Treatment of Children , 
26 , 75–78 . 
Eysenck , H . J .  ( 1991 )  . Dimensions of personality : the biosocial approach to personality . In J . Strelau & A . Angleitner 
( Eds .  )  , Explorations in temperament : International perspectives on theory and measurement ( pp . 87–103 )  . 
London : Plenum . 
Wakefield , J .  ( 1979 )  . Using personality to individualize
instruction . San Diego , CA : Educational and Industrial
Testing Service . 
 VIENNA CIRCLE
The Vienna Circle , or Wiener Kreis , was a group of
intellectuals actively engaged in philosophical discussion from the early 1920s until Nazism dispersed its
members . The group included Austrian , Czech , and
German professors with a cross-disciplinary interest in
ways to establish meaning . Although its members each
developed singular ideas of analytic philosophy , as a
group , they are known for logical positivism , an insistence on scientific reasoning based on real experience . 
The premise behind logical positivism is realism ; 
that is , all understanding emerges from sensory experience , and only things that can be experienced are
real . This was related to phenomenology , a nineteenthcentury philosophy that focused on the individual ’ s
understanding of phenomena , or description of events
that have occurred within memory . In 1835 , Auguste
Vienna Circle———1055
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1055
Compte defined positivism and its goal of discovering 
 “ unchangeable aspects of the universal Order .  ” By
comparison , logical positivism does not presume a
perennial truth , but rather a perennial search for truth
by using scientific reason . 
Members Hans Hahn , Otto Neuwarth , and Philipp
Frank had begun interdisciplinary conversations connecting science and epistemology , or the study of knowledge and how it is gained , as early as 1907 , but Moritz
Schlick helped organize the group around discussion of
the work of Ernst Mach ( known for Mach numbers of
sonic speed ) in 1922 . The philosophical aspect of his
work rested on the issue of empiricism , specifically on
measurement in seeking experimental proof . 
The Vienna Circle popularized the scientific methods of critical rationalism , meaning that any statement will always be open to challenge , and rational , 
meaning that agreed rules of logic must be used to
arrive at a decisive conclusion . This assumed a dialectical approach , meaning that the understanding can
always be better informed with subsequent study
because humans automatically use the Hegelian triad : 
An idea ( thesis ) and its contrast ( antithesis ) are reconciled ( synthesis )  , becoming a new thesis to challenge . 
One goal of the Vienna Circle was the unity of
science : Through logic , all phenomena can be reduced
to some basic concepts such as those in physics . This
required unity of language with which to express it ; 
this led to artificial languages that were eventually
discarded for exhibiting the same difficulties as regular language . However , linguistic analysis remains
necessary for valid collection of data used to verify or
falsify a thesis , because logic rests on the understanding of the terms used to make the argument of meaning . Some Vienna Circle members limited their
interest to the role of language itself as a source of
defining personal truth . In this way , they are compatible with existential philosophy and radical constructivism , which deny any existence outside of one ’ s
personally socially constructed experience . 
The American philosophy of pragmatism , that is , scientific thinking for practical application , also relied on
logical analysis . Whereas pragmatism uses logic to solve
problems , logical positivism studies the method of logic
itself and the nature of the problems . Charles S . Peirce ’ s
influence as the founder of pragmatism cannot be underestimated , for he was a mentor to William James , who , 
in turn , influenced Bertrand Russell and Alfred North
Whitehead , and they influenced Wittgenstein , who stimulated the Vienna Circle . Russell ’ s logical atomism
regarded individuals ’ thoughts as the building blocks , or
atoms , for constructing an understanding of the world . 
Pragmatism and the subsequent logical positivism contrasted the prevailing transcendental and romantic philosophy of the mid-nineteenth century as well traditional
Cartesian certainty . 
Another strong influence was phenomenology , 
which added a metacognitive , or self-aware , element
to philosophical inquiry . Not only must all information be gathered through sensory experience , it can be
understood using only conscious processes . The result
was strictly scientific , in that all conclusions must be
verifiable , but pluralistic , that is , open to more than
one perspective . Although reality may be constant , 
our understanding of it is not , and therefore “ truth ” is
always subject to change . 
According to Herbert Feigl , the Vienna Circle
member who coined the term logical positivism , the
circle was collegial and very self-aware of its own
intentionality to seek understanding together and tolerantly . In addition , individual members contributed
greatly varying related concepts . Hans Hahn is known
for his work in set theory , a mathematical model that
eventually influenced “ new math ” and the infusion of
algebraic logic . The complete thought of the equation
correlates to the complete thought of a statement , both
requiring logic . Franz Clemens Brentano responded to
Moritz Schlick ’ s willingness to apply the phenomenological methods of describing experience to questions
of ethics by emphasizing intentionality as part of the
logical process . Friedrich Waismann focused language
conventions and their influence on logic . Rudolf
Carnap ’ s syntactic perspective distinguished between
timeless truth and temporary confirmation , influencing
Noam Chomsky and Richard Rorty . 
Alfred Jules ( A . J .  ) Ayers studied under members
of the Vienna Circle . He brought logical positivism
to a wider English-speaking audience with his 1936
book , Language , Truth , and Logic . Karl Popper never
met with them but helped spread the concepts . Edgar
Zilsel , another close contact , combined their ideas
more closely with Marxism . Kurt Gödel , an occasional visitor , concluded that eventually , all mathematical proof must rest on something that cannot be
proven . This undermined logical positivism , for it
established that the logic could not be consistent . 
The Vienna Circle perceived personal and intellectual threat in the rise of Hitler . They began to leave
Austria for safer , democratic environments tolerant of
Marxist views and Jewish heritage and became an
1056———Vienna Circle
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1056
exiled network that continued to influence philosophical thought , primarily through the Journal of Unified
Science and the publication of the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science . Schlick , around whom the
circle had coalesced , did not leave Vienna and was ultimately killed in 1936 by a Nazi sympathizer . 
The Society for the Advancement of the Scientific
World View , organized in 1991 , documents the Vienna
Circle ’ s many contributions , among them the democratization of knowledge . 
—Naomi Jeffery Petersen
See also axiomatic theory ; constructivism ; dialectical inquiry ; 
functionalist theory ; Harris , William Torrey ; ideology , shifts
of in educational leadership preparation ; knowledge base , 
of the field ; knowledge , practical ; Marx , Karl ; objectivity ; 
philosophies of education ; positivism , postpositivism ; pragmatism and progressivism ; reductionism / parsimony ; semiotics ; theory movement , in educational administration
Further Readings and References
Ayer , A . J .  ( 1936 )  . Language , truth , and logic . Oxford University . 
English , F .  ( 1994 )  . Theory in educational administration . 
New York : HarperCollins . 
English , F .  ( 1998 )  . The postmodern turn in educational administration : Apostrophic or catastrophic development ? 
Journal of School Leadership , 8 , 426–447 . 
 VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS
There is no agreed-on definition among educators for
violence in schools . Definitions vary from that of the
American Psychological Association , which defines
violence as “ purposefully hurting someone ,  ” to a definition provided by the Centers for Disease Control 
( CDC )  , which includes “ deprivation .  ” The CDC definition of violence is a threat of use of force , with a high
probability of inflicting pain or damage , or power
against a person or group . Yet there is clear agreement
that a safe , nonviolent learning environment is necessary for student learning . 
The most complete report on school crime and
safety is the Indicators of School Crime and Safety : 
2003 Report , which is a joint effort by the Bureau of
Justice Statistics and National Center for Education
Statistics . This report looks at crime at school from
the perspectives of students , teachers , principals , and
the general population . It also provides information
regarding crime occurring in school , as well as on the
way to and from school . Indicators of school violence
specifically addressed in this report are victimization , 
fights , bullying , disorder , teacher injury , weapons , 
student perceptions of school safety , and others . 
The most recent report found that students aged 12 to
18 were victims of nearly 1 . 2 million crimes of theft and
764 , 000 nonfatal crimes of violence or theft at school in
2001 . However , between 1992 and 2001 , overall school
violence declined from 48 violent victimizations per
1 , 000 students to 28 . Since 1995 , the percentage of
students who reported being a victim of violent crime or
theft at school decreased from 10% to 6% . 
Other findings from this report indicate that some
behaviors have neither increased nor decreased , such
as percentages of suicides of school-aged youth , 
students being threatened or injured with a weapon on
school property , teachers being physically attacked by
a student , hate-related graffiti , and measures of marijuana use , alcohol use , and drug distribution . However , 
the prevalence of bullying has increased from 5% in
1999 to 8% in 2001 , with students reporting that they
had been bullied at school in the last 6 months . 
Although the report suggests that in general , violence at school is lessening , still , 48 people died in
school-related violence in the 2003 / 2004 school year , 
the highest number in any year in the past decade . 
This has caused advocates of school safety to have an
additional concern , since a 40% drop in spending for
juvenile crime prevention was proposed in the 2005
federal budget . 
—Sandra Harris
See also bullying ; discipline in schools ; esprit ( school climate )  ; learning environments ; peace education ; school
safety ; underachievers , in schools ; vandalism in schools
Further Readings and References
American Psychological Association .  ( 1999 )  . Warning signs : 
Recognizing signs of violence in others . Retrieved August
1 , 2004 , from nizing . html
Centers for Disease Control .  ( 2001 )  . Unintentional injuries , 
violence , and the health of young people . School Health
Program Fact Sheet . National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion Adolescent and School
Health . Retrieved August 1 , 2004 , from http :  /  / www 
. cdc . gov / nccdphp / dash / guidelines / injury_facts . htm . 
DeVoe , J . F .  , Peter , K .  , Kaufman , P .  , Ruddy , S . A .  , Miller , 
A . K .  , Planty , M .  , Snyder , T . D .  ,  & Rand , M . R .  ( 2003 )  . 
Violence in Schools———1057
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1057
Indicators of school crime and safety , 2003 ( NCES 2004-
004 / NCJ-201257 )  . Washington , DC : U . S . Bureau of
Justice Statistics and National Center for Education
Statistics . 
Toppo , G .  ( 2004 , June 28 )  . 48 school deaths highest in years . 
USA Today , p . 1A . 
 VOUCHER PLANS
Under a basic voucher proposal , as proposed by
Milton Friedman in the mid-twentieth century , the
per-pupil amount of state aid for public school
students would be made available for parents to use to
send their child to a private or public school of their
choice . Families could supplement the voucher for
their children to attend a private school that charges
more for tuition than the voucher amount . A number
of variations on the basic plan are possible , such as
restricting participation in the voucher program to
those private schools that agree to limit the copay
amount charged to parents . Also , the vouchers can be
made available only to specific student populations , 
such as children with disabilities , economically disadvantaged students , or those attending public schools
rated as deficient on various criteria . 
Voucher systems have been discussed in the educational literature for several decades , and there was a
brief , federally supported voucher experiment in the
1970s , but the Alum Rock School District , in
California , was the only demonstration site . Several
New England states , however , have had de facto
voucher systems for years , because they authorize
school districts that cannot support high schools to
provide a stipend for resident high school students to
attend neighboring public high schools or nonreligious private schools . Other than such tuition reimbursement plans , no significant voucher experiments
were implemented in the United States until the
1990s . In 1999 , Florida was the first state to adopt a
statewide voucher system , and this program targeted
only students attending public schools rated as deficient . Publicly funded voucher programs for disadvantaged youth also are operating in Cleveland , 
Milwaukee , and Washington , D . C . 
Vouchers are getting renewed attention as a strategy to give families more educational choices . Indeed , 
one of the central themes of the federal No Child Left
Behind Act of 2001 is to increase educational options
for students attending public schools that are not making
adequate yearly progress toward student performance
objectives . 
In a significant 2002 ruling , the U . S . Supreme
Court in Zelman v . Simmons-Harris held that voucher
programs including sectarian schools do not violate the
Establishment Clause of the First Amendment . With
the First Amendment barrier eliminated , the legality of
voucher plans will be decided on the basis of state law . 
In 2004 , the Supreme Court ruled in Locke v . Davey
that although the Establishment Clause permits states
to fund certain services in sectarian institutions , state
law might prohibit the use of public funds for religious
purposes . The Supreme Court rejected the argument
that the First Amendment ’ s Free Exercise Clause
demands that religious and secular purposes be treated
the same in distributing government benefits ( e . g .  , college scholarships ) and allowed states to require greater
separation of church and state than mandated by the
Establishment Clause . 
Thirty-six states have constitutional provisions
that prohibit public support of sectarian schools , and
voucher plans seem destined to generate litigation
based on these state provisions . A Florida court found
that state funds could not be used to support a voucher
plan that allowed students to attend religious schools . 
Florida also has enacted a tuition tax credit program
allowing a state tax break for donations to support private school tuition , and the Arizona Supreme Court
has upheld the constitutionality of a similar Arizona
program . However , the U . S . Supreme Court ruled in
2004 that the federal Tax Injunction Act does not bar
a federal suit claiming that the Arizona program
abridges the Establishment Clause , so the constitutionality of this tax benefit for private school tuition
remains unresolved . 
Maine ’ s tuition reimbursement program for
children attending high school outside their home districts has generated several rulings in which state
and federal courts have rejected challenges to the program ’ s exclusion of religious schools . Also , the
Vermont Supreme Court ruled that the state ’ s constitutional prohibition on using public funds for religious
worship precluded school districts from using tuition
reimbursement funds in parochial schools . The
Colorado Supreme Court in 2004 avoided the issue of
public support for religious schools by striking down
a voucher plan for low-income students as violating
the state constitutional provision requiring local
school districts to retain control over instruction . The
court reasoned that the voucher program would
1058———Voucher Plans
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1058
unconstitutionally require districts to give part of their
locally raised funds to nonpublic schools whose
instruction they do not control . 
About half of the states currently are considering
some type of voucher program to provide educational
options for specific groups of students . However , it
appears unlikely that a state will convert its entire
school funding system to vouchers in the near future , 
in part because of the fiscal implications . If all students
were eligible for vouchers , the students currently supported by parents in private schools or home education
programs could receive state support ( about 12% of
the students nationally )  . This would carry a high price
tag for financially strapped state and local governments , so it is not surprising that voters have rejected
statewide voucher proposals in several states , including California , Colorado , Michigan , and Washington . 
Nonetheless , voucher plans targeting economically
disadvantaged students or those attending “ failing ” 
public schools are likely to increase during the next
decade . Such limited voucher plans are viewed as less
costly than some other reform strategies ( e . g .  , reducing class size in public schools )  . Also , proponents
contend that such programs can give poor children
options that only the wealthy have traditionally
enjoyed . But critics are concerned that voucher programs will have a negative impact on the democratizing
function of public schools and will increase economic
and racial segregation . 
Some voucher programs that allow students to attend
religious schools are privately funded , so they avoid the
legal issues confronting publicly funded voucher plans . 
For example , after Indiana ’ s legislature rejected a statefunded voucher proposal in 1990 , the Golden Rule
Insurance Company in Indianapolis established the
Charitable Choice Program to provide partial tuition
scholarships for disadvantaged students to attend private
schools of their choice . The Children ’ s Scholarship
Fund and the Children ’ s Educational Opportunity
Foundation of America also have offered partial scholarships for students in New York City , Washington
D . C .  , and more than 30 other cities across the nation . 
Too few voucher programs are operating to make
sound judgments about their merits , and the studies of
voucher programs in Milwaukee and Cleveland have
been inconclusive regarding student achievement . 
Also , the public support of vouchers has been mixed . 
According to the Annual Phi Delta Kappa / Gallup
Polls , slightly more than half of the respondents
favored publicly funded vouchers from 2000 through
2002 , but the percentage dropped to 42% in 2003 . 
Voucher proposals raise a number of questions that
have not yet been resolved . If students at private
schools are funded with public dollars , should those
schools be required to accept all students , including
disabled students ? Should the requirements of state
standards and accountability systems accompany the
payment of public dollars for students enrolled in private schools ? 
There is some sentiment that charter schools , 
adopted now by four fifths of the states , represent
a backdoor approach to vouchers . Charter schools
remain public schools but are exempt from many state
regulations based on a charter with state or local education agencies or with universities . They are politically more popular than vouchers as a strategy to
increase parental choice in education . 
—Martha McCarthy
See also accountability ; charter schools ; choice , of schools ; 
economics , theories of ; Gallup Polls , on public education ; 
law ; market theory of schooling ; productivity ; schooling
effects ; underachievers , in schools
Further Readings and References
Friedman , M .  ( 1962 )  . Capitalism and freedom . Chicago : 
University of Chicago Press . 
Hibbs v . Winn , 124 S . Ct . 2276 ( 2004 )  . 
Locke v . Davey , 124 S . Ct . 1307 ( 2004 )  . 
Witte , J .  ( 1998 )  . The Milwaukee voucher experiment . 
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 20 , 229–251 . 
Zelman v . Simmons-Harris , 536 U . S . 639 ( 2002 )  . 
 VULNERABILITY THESIS , 
OF SUPERINTENDENTS
The vulnerability thesis was developed by Raymond
Callahan in his enduring 1962 historical work , 
Education and the Cult of Efficiency : A Study of the
Forces That Have Shaped the Administration of Public
Schools . Callahan ’ s work engaged in an intensive
investigation of educational history covering the
period 1910 to 1929 and intended to explore the
predominance of the business model and practices in
educational administration . The outcome of his study
included what he described as the predominance of the
business ideology and influence upon the American
education system juxtaposed , unexpectedly , with the
Vulnerability Thesis , of Superintendents———1059
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1059
extreme vulnerability of superintendents . Thus came
about the vulnerability thesis . 
Callahan discussed the uniquely American pattern
of local control and financial support as a backdrop
that exacerbates the vulnerability of superintendents
in schools . The vulnerability thesis suggests that public
pressure and criticism of the local school is applied
most often to the superintendent , who , being in a position of vulnerability , often lacking tenure or contractual protections , will naturally be pressed to respond
to the public or fiscal pressures by appeasing the critics . This prevents school administrators from making
decisions based upon what is professionally or academically advantageous to the school system and moves
them to proffer a response focused on job retention or
at least justifications to reduce vulnerability . 
The contribution of Callahan ’ s Education and the
Cult of Efficiency , with his vulnerability thesis , has been
credited as an ongoing explanatory theory for past , present , and future superintendent decision making and
behavior and for having a national as well as a local
dimension in its description of school politics . Many
theorists credit the vulnerability thesis with breaking
the traditional Cubberlerian paradigm characterized as
the “ great schoolmen notion ” or “ boosterism .  ” In other
words , the vulnerability thesis redefined governance of
schools , which had been thought of as politically neutral
institutions of progress and equality , as leadership of
institutions by persons who were regularly influenced
by political and financial pressures and power wielding . 
The vulnerability thesis has been applied most
appropriately to governance structures and political
processes within the local school district , which some
believe directly led to the inception of present-day
policy studies in educational administration . School
policy researchers have applied the vulnerability thesis in a variety of ways , both theoretical and practical . 
They have posited : 
• The superintendent ’ s vulnerability led to the struggle
for power between school boards and their executives , role confusion of board members , and the
embracing of the specialist-versus-generalist leadership role by superintendents ; 
• Superintendents ’ vulnerability led to their proclivity to
apply scientific management and quantitative research
as a way of defending themselves from public criticism , an observed trend both in the 1930s and now in
the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 reform era . 
• Superintendents have maintained their jobs based
mostly upon their mental agility in convincing
boards and the general public of their awareness of
issues and work toward shaping public response , 
while couching their comments in the rhetoric of
national educational politics . This speaks more
toward the superintendent as politician rather than
educational leader . 
• Successful superintendents have recognized the
importance of knowing how to predict and control
political conflict and thus have not only valued the
inclusion of more practical coursework in traditional
administrator preparation programs , like management , 
finance , law , and politics , but are also turning in
greater numbers to practitioner-led alternative licensure programs focused on political survival skills . 
The vulnerability thesis has also led to the inception of several organizational governance theories , 
perhaps most closely tied to the inception of Laurence
Iannaccone and Frank Lutz ’ s dissatisfaction theory of
American Democracy . Dissatisfaction theorists suggest that their theory empirically tests the real definition of the vulnerability thesis , that is , whether
political pressure can force superintendent turnover . 
Far from being merely a theory meant to encourage
the formulation of strategies for job security in the
superintendency , the vulnerability thesis is a major
paradigm shift that turns our eye toward political
structures and governance mechanisms in local school
districts . Some have suggested that with federally
mandated reform and decentralization of fiscal and
policy decision making , the ensuing lessening of
superintendent vulnerability may lead to districts
unresponsive to the citizenry . Raymond Callahan , 
conversely , called for reform that would lessen superintendent vulnerability leading to high turnover and
possible instability in a school district . As this
dichotomy of thought surrounding the application of
the thesis exemplifies , the vulnerability theory stands
as a seminal treatise that ushered in a new paradigm
and redefined the field of educational governance and
policy studies . 
—Thomas L . Alsbury
See also accountability ; boards of education ; governance ; 
leadership , distributed ; leadership , theories of ; leadership
effectiveness ; management theories ; power ; productivity ; 
risk takers , in educational administration ; role ambiguity ; 
role conflict ; superintendency
1060———Vulnerability Thesis , of Superintendents
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1060
Further Readings and References
Callahan , R . E .  ( 1962 )  . Education and the cult of efficiency : A
study of the social forces that have shaped the administration of the public schools . Chicago : University of Chicago
Press . 
Iannaccone , L .  ( 1996 )  . Callahan ’ s vulnerability thesis and 
 “ dissatisfaction theory .  ” Peabody Journal of Education , 
71 ( 2 )  , 110–119 . 
Iannaccone , L .  ,  & Lutz , F . W .  ( 1970 )  . Politics , power , and policy : The governing of local school districts . Columbus , 
OH : Merrill . 
Lutz , F . W .  ,  & Iannaccone , L .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1978 )  . Public participation in local school districts . Lexington , MA : Heath . 
Provenzo , E . F . Jr .  ( 1990 )  .  “ The emperor ’ s new clothes ”  : 
Raymond Callahan ’ s Education and the cult of efficiency . 
In W . E . Eaton ( Ed .  )  , Shaping the superintendency : A reexamination of Callahan and the cult of efficiency ( pp . 1–10 )  . 
New York : Teachers College Press . 
Vulnerability Thesis , of Superintendents———1061
V-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1061
 WALK-THROUGHS , 
OF CLASSROOMS
A walk-through or “ walk-about ” of a classroom has
come to be considered a brief , structured visitation to
a classroom while it is in use , in which the observer is
comparing what is seen to a preestablished perspective or norm . Walk-throughs are not open-ended 
 “ blank-slate ” visitations . While walk-throughs can be
announced or unannounced , a preference is usually
made for the unannounced visitation . Walk-through
approaches vary in the following areas : use of a prestructured format or checklist type of feedback to the
teacher , the extent to which the hierarchy of relationships is reinforced or changed , and the extent to which
the approach aims at conformity to preestablished
norms of practice or encourages professional growth
from such norms . 
Classroom supervision is a part of a school or school
system ’ s discursive practice . Such a practice creates the
social identities of the participants , frames the communication between them , and positions the participants
within the patterns of communication . This interlocking context is part and parcel of the “ institutional gaze ” 
or organizational disciplinary / normative practices in
any organization . In schools , the normative gaze has
been historically performed by the school principal . 
The teacher is universally perceived as a subordinate
partner in this relationship . Traditional evaluation practices preserve this superior / subordinate relationship , 
providing the principal with the institutional means to
discipline teachers in the performance of their duties . 
Classroom observations have then been correctly
perceived by teachers as an exercise in organizational
discipline and as such are generally feared . Since they
are part and parcel of maintaining normative control , 
classroom visitations are rarely perceived by teachers
as a vehicle to engage in a true collegial and professional
dialogue with the principal or anyone else performing
the observational function . 
Some approaches to classroom walk-throughs
freeze the current practices of evaluation in schools . 
The emphasis of these approaches is to find a more
time-effective means of performing the traditional
evaluative function by reducing its scope , finding
means of recording observations by routinizing and
standardizing the classroom visitation so that it can be
recorded more easily mechanically . This may be done
by use of a palm pilot or similar device . This approach
is an emphasis on technique , as opposed to changing
the professional culture of a school . And the outcome
is still a piece of paper such as composite checklists or
other such evaluative forms . 
One different approach to classroom walk-throughs
was developed in 2004 by Carolyn Downey and is
based on a contrary idea of the exchange between principals and teachers as a fulcrum for creating a reflective teaching practice . A true reflective teaching
practice is centered on creating adult-to-adult relationships in a collaborative dyad in which the emphasis is
not on institutional compliance to preordained norms , 
but on pushing the borders of the teacher ’ s expertise
via self-analysis . The teacher should be stimulated to
engage in a search for improved concepts , skills , and
understandings within a relationship of support and
inquiry . This approach is very different from installing
newer techniques of supervision in which conformity
1063
W
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1063
is the expected outcome . Such a process in the
Downey model is near paperless and is not aimed at
supplying the data for traditional evaluation forms . 
Most walk-throughs or walk-abouts gather information
about the activities of the teacher , the students , the curriculum , and the context in which the teaching / learning
process is occurring . The walk-through is concerned
about the curricular decision-making points within a
classroom , though they vary greatly in how such decisions are generated and how they are judged , recorded , 
and discussed . Key differences among the models
emerge in response to the following questions : 
• Is the emphasis within the walk-through approach on
doing more evaluations within the current structure
of evaluation as opposed to changing it ? 
• Is the emphasis on the walk-through model on technique and efficiency as opposed to engaging in a
reflective conversation with the teacher about his or
her practice ? 
• Is the emphasis on filling out forms and checklists to
gather data to support traditional evaluative activities ? 
• Is the emphasis of the approach aimed at maintaining a
superior-subordinate relationship between the principal
and teachers , or does it see an adult-to-adult relationship ? 
• Does the approach always insist that there is a “ correct ” 
or “ right answer ” to matters of professional practice ? 
A person considering using a walk-through or
walk-about model in his or her school or school system should consider each of these possibilities before
adopting one and select the model that is compatible
with the aims and objectives of the institution . 
—Fenwick W . English
See also accountability ; alignment , of curriculum ; curriculum , 
theories of ; decision making ; empowerment ; leadership , 
teacher ; performance evaluation systems ; principalship ; 
professional development ; rational organizational theory
Further Readings and References
Annunziata , J .  ( 1997 )  . Linking teacher evaluation and professional development . In J . Stronge ( Ed .  )  , Evaluating
teaching : A guide to current thinking and best practice 
( pp . 288–301 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Downey , C .  , Steffy , B .  , English , F .  , Frase , L .  ,  & Poston , W .  
( 2004 )  . The three-minute classroom walk-through : 
Changing school supervisory practice one teacher at a
time . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Mezirow , J .  ( 1991 )  . Transformative dimensions of adult learning . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
 WASHINGTON , BOOKER T . 
Booker Taliaferro Washington ( 1856–1915 ) was born a
slave in Franklin County , Virginia in 1856 . His duties
included taking water to slaves working in the fields . 
Later , he worked in the salt and coal mines of West
Virginia , but at the age of 16 , Washington entered the
Hampton Normal and Industrial Institute in Virginia . 
He was noted for his abilities by former brigadier general in the Union Army , Samuel Chapman Armstrong , 
the principal , who then mentored and trained him
in the Hampton model of Negro education . The
Hampton Institute prepared teachers for training Black
workers across the South , a systematic approach to
mitigating the disenfranchisement and economic subordination of African American people . Armstrong
was committed to economically and politically stabilizing the South and advocated a belief that Black
people were most suited for manual labor and the
vocational trades . Despite persistent protest emanating from the Black press and Black leaders interested
in higher and professional education , the 1880s saw
industrial programming surge with the course of studies offered in Black colleges and secondary schools . 
Booker T . Washington was chosen to lead a new
school in Tuskegee , Alabama . 
On July 4 , 1881 , Washington formally opened
Tuskegee Institute . The school not only launched its
teacher training and industrial trades curriculum , it
offered extension courses for the community surrounding the school and annual conferences for farmers , and
developed popular night classes for laborers . Tuskegee
grew rapidly , from its first student body of 30 . With an
emphasis on skilled trades and an all-Black faculty , 
Tuskegee became , 25 years later , one of the largest and
best-supported educational institutions in the United
States . It seeded an extensive network of other industrial schools by preparing educators who migrated
throughout the country and spread many of the same
beliefs as Washington and the Tuskegee Institute . 
Washington ’ s 1895 speech at the Cotton States and
International Exposition , in Atlanta , moved U . S . 
President Grover Cleveland to write a letter of commendation for the Black speaker . Washington ’ s message was clear : being patient with existing conditions , 
while staying rooted in the South . Blacks should
eschew civil rights , political power , and attempts for
racial equity . The future for Black development , according to Washington , was in the security of industrial
1064———Washington , Booker T . 
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1064
training , starting businesses , acquiring land , and
developing the necessary skills of good conduct , 
thriftiness , and cleanliness . Wielding more political
power than any other Black American of the era , 
Washington offered answers to the postslavery problems of poverty and lack of education for African
Americans , the problem of the relationship between
the Black and White races , the “ Negro Question .  ” 
Downgrading civil and political rights in the list of
Black priorities , Washington ’ s leadership supported
an agenda of solidarity and institution building , 
small-business development and industrial education . 
Opposition to this accommodationist view was
expressed by many , including the president of Atlanta
University , John Hope ; William Trotter , founder of the
Boston Guardian ; W . E . B . Du Bois and members of
the Niagara movement , an activist group of professionals and college-educated African Americans that
promoted an end to racial discrimination in education
and public life . But Washington ’ s voice often dominated the public discourses , especially in the South . 
Washington gradually built a national constituency , 
later called the “ Tuskegee Machine ,  ” composed of artisans , farmers , fraternal orders , educators , small-business
owners , and newspaper editors . This machine influenced
not only educational decisions but also larger political
decisions made through favors and political clout . 
Washington , as the most influential Black educator
of the time , was able to garner enormous financial
resources for Tuskegee and other Black institutions . 
White philanthropists George Eastman and John D . 
Rockefeller supported his efforts by providing for
libraries and dormitories . Andrew Carnegie gave buildings to 29 Black schools because of Washington ’ s
influence . He also served as a conduit and gatekeeper
for federal appointees serving the Black community . 
In 1900 , Washington founded the National Negro
Business League , promoting entrepreneurship , and in
1901 , he published Up From Slavery , his autobiography . Until his death in 1915 , Booker T . Washington
was a prominent , powerful leader , not only influencing Black education but also shaping national social
policies for many years to come . 
—Khaula Murtadha
See also Bethune , Mary McLeod ; Black education ; Cooper , 
Anna Julia ; Coppin , Fanny Jackson ; critical race theory ; 
cross-cultural education ; cultural politics , wars ; Du Bois , 
W . E . B .  ; higher education ; minorities , in schools ; multiculturalism ; politics , of education ; Woodson , Carter G . 
Further Readings and References
Franklin , V .  ,  & Anderson , J .  ( 1978 )  . New perspectives on
Black educational history . Boston : G . K . Hall . 
Harlan , L .  ( 1972 )  . Booker T . Washington , the making of a Black
leader , 1865–1901 . New York : Oxford University Press . 
Marable , M .  ( 1998 )  . Black leadership : Four great American
leaders and the struggle for civil rights . New York : 
Columbia University Press . 
White , J .  ( 1985 )  . Black leadership in America : 1895–1968 . 
New York : Longman . 
 WEB-BASED TEACHING
AND LEARNING
Web-based teaching and learning ( WBTL ) has experienced a dramatic change in delivery technologies over
the past few years . Computer-aided teaching and
learning and the World Wide Web allow significantly
faster interactions between student and faculty and
among students during the teaching and learning
process . WBTL is a system that has features and capabilities such as synchronous or asynchronous discussions
and chat rooms , e-mail , Web-based conferencing , 
hypermedia capabilities , and development options , 
such as Web-CT , that permit students or instructors to
complete tasks such as giving presentation , responding through threaded discussion , and conducting discussions through chat rooms . 
As Web-based teaching and learning systems
become more commonplace , it is vital that the knowledge base for understanding how to design and deliver
Web-based instruction becomes understood and implemented because of the dramatic change in course and
program delivery systems . As an example , research
has looked at how student-driven learning ( constructivist ) and cognitive models of learning on the Web are
defined . The knowledge base of the student model
takes both domain and pedagogical knowledge into
account . Numerous models are available online , and
the options are endless as one searches for sites on
almost any topic in education ; however , there are
advantages and disadvantages of online programs . 
One of the advantages of online teaching and learning is the ability to access the program or course anytime and anywhere in the world where there is Web
access . In discussing the issue of getting to “ know ” 
students , instructors find it very easy to communicate
with students , in addition to tracking their progress on
Web-Based Teaching and Learning———1065
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1065
a daily basis . Another positive can be the cost per
pupil ; however , class size obviously is the determiner . 
Limitations or disadvantages include the problems
encountered by students and instructors with network
connections and the data feed . Kevin Kruse wrote that
low bandwidth , which will be solved in the coming
years , can make the operations perform very slowly . 
In addition , the lack of multimedia in many programs
detracts from the potential of compelling programs . 
As an example , a University of California-Berkeley
site lists a four-tier model for managing course Web
sites . Tier 1 is what is described as an “ enterprise-level
integrated course Web site management system .  ” Tier
2 includes “ in-depth course Web sites .  ” Tier 3 includes
the “ standard course Web page template for faculty .  ” A
faculty member or graduate students generally create
these pages . Tier 4 is designated as a “ minimal administrative course Web page .  ” Generally , minimal course
Web pages would be generated by the departmental
administrative staff , and support the other tiers ’ sites . 
Typical teaching and learning online systems feature student and faculty tools . Instructor tools may
include online grade books , grade reporting , quiz or
survey options , student access tracking , e-mail ( individual and group )  , and a complete course system , 
including syllabus , projects , references , instructions , 
and support systems information . Student tools might
include real-time chat rooms , grade reporting , cooperative work areas , self-evaluation options , and e-mail
capabilities to the instructor , to individual students , or
to all students . 
If administrators , faculty , or students are interested
in comparing the various teaching and learning systems on the market , there are a number of sites that
are available online to do so . For example , Online
Educational Delivery Applications contain comparative data on a large number of teaching-learning systems . There is a Web site that compares WebCT and
CourseInfo , which lists the functions of each , such as
a bulletin board and online quizzes . There are many
pitfalls in attempting to find and implement the best
choice in hardware and software . 
Some of the problems linked to finding and testing
software and hardware include the following . The
choice of the management system is the biggest hurdle to overcome . It is often difficult for faculty and
administrators to agree on the platform best suited to
online operations . In addition to the wide range of systems available , new or enhanced products flood the
market constantly . Program and course developers
need to be cognizant of the product development
cycle . Generally , it is a full-time job just to keep up
with the best choices . 
—C . Daniel Raisch
See also computers , use and impact of ; digital divide ; instructional technology ; learning , online
Further Readings and References
Berge , Z . L .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1999 , January-February )  . Interaction
in post-secondary Web-based learning . Educational
Technology . Retrieved September 18 , 2005 , from http :  /  / 
www . saskschools . ca / ~parkland / interaction . htm
Beshears , F . M .  ( 2000 , November )  . Web-based learning management systems . Presentation at the Web-based Learning
Management System Training Workshop . Retrieved March
1 , 2005 , from 
web_based_lms . html
Brown , P .  ,  & Schwarz , G .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 2005 )  . Media literacy : 
Transforming curriculum and teaching . Chicago : National
Society for the Study of Education / Blackwell . 
EduTools .  ( n . d .  )  . Available at utools . info / course / 
compare
Kruse , K .  ( n . d .  )  . Using the Web for learning : Advantages and
disadvantages . Retrieved February 15 , 2005 , from http :  /  / 
e-learningguru . com / articles / art1_9 . htm
 WEBER , MAX
Max Weber ( 1864–1920 )  , a prominent German economics scholar , was a founding theorist in the field of
sociology . His Verstehen doctrine , controversial and
widely debated , presupposed that to understand a particular economic or social phenomenon , a person must
be capable of interpreting actions and not be satisfied to
merely describe a situation based on actions . As part of
the “ interpreting ” process , he specified four behavioral 
 “ Ideal Types ”  : rational means to rational ends , rational
means to irrational ends , guided by emotion , and
guided by custom or habit . Weber ’ s other economic
research included studies of capitalism in the context
of idealism and materialism , Economy and Society , and
his best-known writing , The Protestant Ethic and the
Spirit of Capitalism , where he posited that seeds of capitalism are germinated in the Protestant work ethic and
that advanced capitalism creates a new middle class
whose livelihood is based on human capital rather than
labor . 
Weber , one of the first to observe and write on
bureaucracies , posited that bureaucracies function
according to six principles : Jurisdictional areas are
ordered by rules ( administrative regulations and
1066———Weber , Max
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1066
laws )  ; lower offices are supervised by higher offices ; 
official documents ( files ) are the basis for management ; officials must be trained and educated to do the
job ; management requires a full-time official , and
management follows rules . While compared to today ’ s
theories of leadership , these six principles seem rudimentary , Weber posited these concepts in an era when
existing management practices dated back to the
Middle Ages and management precepts were based on
loyalty to kings and to the church . As a part of distinguishing between charismatic , traditional , and legal
forms of authority , Weber encouraged economists and
sociologists to evaluate ( people and situations ) based
on facts rather than values . 
Born in Erfurt , Prussia ( Germany )  , Weber was
raised in a home where the Calvinist beliefs of his
mother and the political aspirations of his father frequently conflicted . In 1882 , Weber enrolled in the
University of Heidelberg . Two years later , he left the
university to fulfill his military obligation . During his
military service , Weber strengthened bonds with
Hermann and Ida Baumgarten ( his maternal aunt and
uncle )  , whose influence on Weber ’ s intellectual development was substantial . At the conclusion of his military service and at the behest of his father , Weber
returned to his father ’ s home , where he lived until
1893 , when he married . During the time he resided
with his father , Weber completed his studies at the
University of Berlin , served as a legal apprentice , and
also served as a university assistant . 
After his father ’ s death in 1897 , Weber began experiencing increased nervousness , and in 1898 , he suffered a nervous breakdown . During the next 5 years of
his illness , Weber suffered sudden relapses and was
institutionalized intermittently . By 1903 , Weber was
able to work as a private scholar but did not return
to university teaching until after World War I . In the
17 years from the onset of his mental illness until his
death , Weber studied the relationship between
Calvinist morality and compulsive processes . Weber ’ s
work remains significant in educational leadership as
the cornerstone of examining bureaucracy and its
many facets , which remain controversial today . He
was the first sociologist to understand that the universe has no true meaning . In this sense , he was postmodern before postmodernism . 
—Brenda R . Kallio
See also bureaucracy ; chain of command ; charisma , of leaders ; 
class , social ; division of labor ; hierarchy , in organizations ; 
infrastructure , of organizations ; job descriptions ; line and
staff concept ; management theories ; organizational theories ; 
organizations , types of , typologies ; postmodernism ; principalship ; rational organizational theory ; restructuring , of
schools ; role ambiguity ; role conflict ; salary and salary
models ; school improvement models ; site-based management ; social psychology ; superintendency
Further Readings and References
Collins , R .  ( 1986 )  . Max Weber : A skeleton key . Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Diggins , J .  ( 1996 )  . Max Weber : Politics and the spirit of
tragedy . New York : Basic Books . 
Eisenstadt , S . N .  ( 1968 )  . Max Weber : On charisma and institution building . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 
Samir , E .  ( 2005 )  . Toward a Weberian public administration : 
The infinite web of history , values , and authority in administrative mentalities . Halduskultuur ( An Interdisciplinary
Public Administration Journal )  , 6 , 6–59 . 
Schroeder , R .  ( 1992 )  . Max Weber and the sociology of culture . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
 WOLF , MONTROSE
The work of Montrose Wolf ( 1935–2004 ) had a significant impact on educational practice . His pioneering efforts in applied behavior analysis formed the
foundation of current classroom management procedures , educational research design , and intervention
methods for persons with antisocial behaviors , emotional disorders , and mental retardation . 
Wolf was born on May 29 , 1935 , in Houston , Texas . 
He earned his doctorate in 1962 from Arizona State
University . In that same year , he accepted a postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Washington
Institute for Child Development , where he remained
until 1965 . In 1965 , Dr . Wolf joined the Department of
Human Development and Family Life at the University
of Kansas , a position he held until his retirement in
2000 . In 1996 , he received the Father Flannigan Award
for Service to Youth , joining such notable former
awardees as Mother Teresa and Dr . Jonas Salk . 
Wolf was one of the “ founding fathers ”  ( many professionals consider him the founder ) of applied behavior analysis and the founding editor of the Journal of
Applied Behavior Analysis . His work , along with that
of Don Baer , Todd Risley , and Vance Hall , brought
behaviorism out of the laboratory and into a focus
on solving significant human problems in applied
settings . This focus was drawn from a foundation of
Wolf , Montrose———1067
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1067 
( a ) theories of learning that should guide research and
practice ,  ( b ) the nature and types of data to be gathered ,  ( c ) the types of designs to be employed in structuring research activities , and ( d ) facilitation of the
generalization of functional skills and behaviors to
new environments and situations . 
Wolf developed many intervention techniques still
employed in educational settings today . These include 
 “ time out ,  ” the “ token economy ,  ” and the “ Good
Behavior Game .  ” Wolf also developed and articulated
the concept of social validity in research . In essence , 
social validity is a position that any research activity
should address issues or problems of social importance . 
That is , it should address “ real problems of real people .  ” 
Wolf felt that social validity constituted the foundation
or “ heart ” of all meaningful research . In addition , Wolf
was instrumental in the development of two of the major
single-subject research designs . The reversal design and
the multiple baseline design were both presented and
explained by Wolf and his colleagues in 1968 . 
Wolf ’ s work is significant in that it addresses both
educational research and practice . Much of special
education methodology is rooted in his research . In
addition , classroom management in both regular and
special education draw much of their practice from
Wolf ’ s research . His work provided the model for
much of what is current practice in these fields . 
—J . M . Blackbourn
See also behaviorism ; child development theories ; classroom
management ; cognition , theories of ; conditioning theory ; 
constructivism , social ; curriculum , theories of ; feedback ; 
learning , theories of ; psychology , types of ; social psychology ; special education
Further Readings and References
Risley , T . R .  ( 1997 )  . Montrose M . Wolf : The origin of the
dimensions of applied behavior analysis . Journal of
Applied Behavior Analysis , 30 , 377–381 . 
Wolf , M . M .  ( 1978 )  . Social validity : The case for subjective
measurement or how applied behavior analysis is finding its
heart . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 11 , 203–214 . 
 WOMEN IN EDUCATIONAL
LEADERSHIP
Women have provided significant leadership since
they began entering school work in appreciable
numbers during the mid-1800s . Much of this leadership , however , has been informal , with men holding the
overwhelming majority of formal leadership positions . 
Essentially , school work largely has been polarized and
stratified by sex , with large numbers of women teaching and relatively few men serving in administrative
positions . Despite this strong tendency , there have
been two periods during which the proportion of
women school leaders increased notably . The first
occurred during the turn-of-the-twentieth-century
women ’ s suffrage movement , as women attained
elected county and state superintendencies , appointed
principalships , and other administrative positions in
precedent-setting numbers . 
After a precipitous decline during the cold war
years , once again women appear to be moving into
school administrative and other leadership positions at
an impressive rate . In 2000 , women held 13% of all
school superintendencies , up from a mere 3% during
1970 . Women hold about one third of principalships
nationwide , many at the elementary level . Women
currently account for 39% of school board memberships as well . They also serve in a variety of other
important district , state , and federal positions . Finally , 
the professional preparation of educational leaders in
postsecondary institutions is undertaken by a professorate increasingly composed of women . 
Despite these real and important gains , however , 
women still do not serve in formal school leadership
positions in proportions comparable to their representation in teaching . Although men held only 21% of all
teaching positions in 2000 , they accounted for 87% of
superintendent positions . The reasons for this longstanding imbalance , a critically important component
of women ’ s experience in educational leadership , 
must be understood in historical context . 
HISTORICAL CONTEXT
School supervisors and superintendents appeared in
schools around the United States when large numbers
of women began teaching during the mid-1800s . 
School board members , all of whom were men , 
unfailingly chose men for these administrative duties , 
which included keeping an eye on teachers and performing routine school chores that school board
members no longer wanted to handle themselves . As
board proxies , early supervisors and superintendents
traveled between far-flung schoolhouses to inspect the
work of teachers , repair buildings , ensure availability
1068———Women in Educational Leadership
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1068
of instructional materials , and assure board members
that school resources were used well . 
Women rarely held these early administrative positions for several reasons . First , by tradition , women did
not hold positions of authority over men . This practice
was informally but powerfully enforced throughout the
country . Second , women did not have legal status to
vote . Until the late 1800s , women generally were
barred from public office if they also could not vote , 
though there were a few exceptions . Third , many states
and territories did not accord women the right to own
property or participate in civic affairs on their own
behalf . Instead , male family members automatically
received these rights . If women legally could not
represent themselves , they were even less likely to be
permitted to represent schools . 
Even with these and other early restrictions on
women ’ s potential administrative service , though , a
pressing shortage of qualified male educators after the
Civil War compelled some midwestern school districts
to experiment with hiring women superintendents . 
Julia Addington , chosen to lead her county district in
Iowa in 1869 , may have been the first female superintendent . Her opponent immediately challenged her
victory , however , because as a woman , she technically
was not a citizen . A few years later , Iowa changed its
law to permit women to hold any public school office . 
Illinois law first permitted women to hold school
offices in 1873 . That same year , 10 women sought and
won elected county superintendencies . 
As women began attaining county superintendencies in midwestern and western states and territories , 
word quickly spread that they provided outstanding—
and relatively inexpensive—service . Also , growing
numbers of states and territories lifted their legal restrictions on women ’ s public service . Suffrage activists , 
who long had championed the cause of women superintendents , publicly lauded the emerging successes of
these pioneering school leaders , holding such educators out as examples of the fine service women could
provide if simply allowed . Ella Flagg Young , who was
chosen to serve as superintendent of the Chicago
Schools in 1909 , symbolized to suffragists the highminded public service that women might offer if only
given the chance . 
In large part because of steady suffrage-related victories , the number of women holding elected county
superintendencies rose dramatically around the turn of
the century . Women held 228 of these positions in
1896 . By 1913 , the figure had risen to 495 . Several
women even won election to state superintendencies . 
A full decade after passage of national women ’ s suffrage , women held 862 county superintendencies , or
an astonishing 27% of all such positions . Local superintendencies did not yield to women ’ s campaigns as
easily , however . Local superintendents typically were
appointed by their school boards rather than popularly
elected . School boards rarely appointed women to
local superintendencies , doing so only when acceptable male candidates were unavailable or if such a
choice did not place women in authority over men . 
As suffrage-inspired women attained expanding
numbers of elected county superintendencies and even
a few state superintendencies , a powerful campaign to
take the superintendency “ out of politics ” emerged
around the country . After Colorado granted women
suffrage , women ran for and won surprising numbers
of county superintendencies . Male school leaders
immediately organized the Colorado Schoolmasters ’ 
Club , which worked to “ remove the schools from politics ” by converting elected superintendencies to
appointed ones . The pattern of women ’ s suffrage victories followed by campaigns to eliminate elected
school offices repeated itself around the country . Then , 
after enactment of national women ’ s suffrage , leaders
of the National Education Association ( NEA ) and
other prominent groups lobbied against elected superintendencies , arguing instead for the selection of educational experts prepared in the leading graduate
programs of the time , programs that admitted few , if
any , women . In the end , the political backlash against
women ’ s suffrage era gains in educational leadership
succeeded impressively . By the mid-twentieth century , 
most elected superintendencies had become appointed
ones , and women held exceedingly few of these . 
A number of other changes occurred after WWII that
further contributed to women ’ s declining presence in
school leadership positions of all kinds . In a sharp postwar gender repolarization of men ’ s and women ’ s roles , 
individuals who crossed gender-specific boundaries
encountered bracing social resistance . Laws penalized
persons who wore gender-nonconforming clothing in
public settings . Informal though powerfully enforced
practices kept women out of jobs deemed as fitting for
men and vice versa . Men who wished to teach young
children and women who aspired to school leadership
positions were discouraged . During an era consumed
with fear of homosexuals , school boards also increasingly sought married rather than single persons for high
school principalships and superintendencies . Because a
Women in Educational Leadership———1069
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1069
sizable number of the women who had attained school
administration positions were unmarried , their prospects
for continuing in the work dimmed . 
As millions of male veterans returned from combat
seeking civilian employment , school boards actively
recruited them to serve as teachers with the promise of
rapid promotion . Many received coaching offers , which
included desirable salary supplements unavailable to
women . Veterans who taught often pursued graduate
preparation in educational administration with the full
support of G . I . Bill benefits . These shifts together contributed to an increase in the number of men who chose
to teach following World War II . Many of these men
then rose quickly into principalships . In the case of elementary principalships , they tended to displace women . 
One report indicated that women had held the majority
of elementary principalships as late as 1950 but that
their numbers had declined to an astonishing 4% by
1960 . Women lost superintendencies as well . In 1950 , 
women held 9% of all superintendencies , including
local , intermediate , and state positions . By 1970 , however , their representation in that position had dropped to
a mere 3% . This change is partly attributable to a postwar consolidation movement that saw the elimination
of many of the intermediate or county districts that had
supported women superintendents . 
Aspiring women school leaders lost further ground
as national school administrator organizations initiated a wave of reforms intended to upgrade the profession . In the past , women who had attained school
administrative positions tended to rise through the
ranks , demonstrating their skill in the classroom
before assuming ever-greater responsibilities . By midcentury , the practice of promoting school administrators from within a district largely had been replaced
by efforts to attract and hire trained experts from the
outside . At the same time , professional preparation
programs in educational administration had expanded
considerably in size and number after the war . Faculty
in these programs sought to increase the stature of the
still relatively new academic field by employing scientific methods in emerging scholarship . Many educational administration preparation programs also
limited the number of women who could be admitted . 
Not surprisingly , few women could be found among
the faculties of these institutions . A University
Council for Educational Administration ( UCEA ) 
study reported in 1971 that women accounted for only
2% of all faculty members in educational administration preparation programs . 
CURRENT CONTEXTS
These declining conditions for women reversed during
the 1970s and then slowly began improving to facilitate an increase in the number of women holding formal school leadership positions . Women ’ s liberation
activists issued calls for more women school leaders . 
Betty Friedan , President of the National Organization
for Women , cowrote an article published in a 1971
issue of the American School Board Journal , telling
school leaders that they would be on the front lines of
the battle to end sex discrimination , both by changing
the demographics of school leadership and by altering
school climate . As feminist organizations gained
strength , they appealed to courts to enforce Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which enabled women to
sue on account of sex discrimination in employment . 
The enactment of Title IX of the Educational
Amendments of 1972 provided another avenue for
pursuing redress of grievances . This legislation stipulated that educational programs could lose federal
funds if they discriminated on the basis of sex . The
threat of financial loss compelled educational institutions to respond to charges of systematic sex discrimination more vigorously than they had in the past . One
important consequence of this legislation was that educational administration preparation programs dropped
their severely restrictive quotas on the number of
women who could be admitted . In 1972 , the year that
Title IX passed , women accounted for only 11% of all
doctoral degree recipients in educational administration . A decade later , however , the percentage reached
around 40% , a figure that has increased steadily since . 
After women gained full access to educational
administration preparation programs in the wake of
Title IX , the androcentric scholarship of the field
faced feminist opposition . In 1986 , Charol Shakeshaft
and Marjorie Hanson challenged the editors and readers of the influential Educational Administration
Quarterly to publish work by and about females in
schools . Shakeshaft ’ s seminal work , Women in
Educational Administration , followed a year later . 
Since then , a burgeoning body of research that places
gender at the center of analysis has been written by
scholars such as Catherine Marshall , Margaret
Grogan , Marilyn Tallerico , Flora Ida Ortiz , Susan
Chase , Colleen Capper , Xenia Montenegro , Sandra
Gupton , Michelle Young , Cryss Brunner , Linda Skrla , 
and many others . Essentially , this work has broadened
the discourse of the field to include an array of different
1070———Women in Educational Leadership
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1070
underlying philosophical beliefs , new understandings
about leading , expanded ways of building relationships
with school communities , and innovative approaches
to developing and implementing curricula . 
Along with the expansion of the scholarship of the
field , women ’ s representation in school superintendencies increased from 5% in 1990 to 13% in 2000 . 
Though this increase occurred relatively quickly , the
percentage of women superintendents still pales in
comparison with the 79% of teachers who are women . 
Furthermore , women , who now account for the majority of degree recipients in educational administration
preparation programs , are not moving into school
leadership positions at comparable rates . 
Contemporary researchers have posited a number of
factors that continue to affect women ’ s access to formal
school leadership positions . School board members and
executive headhunters employ recruiting and screening
processes that privilege nonminority men . The leadership styles expected by school boards and districts often
do not align well with those valued by many women . 
Both subtle and overt discrimination still greet women as
they navigate higher in school bureaucracies . A number
of women , who still bear a disproportionately large share
of family maintenance responsibilities , simply choose
not to enter administrative work because of its additional
heavy demands . And even as newspaper headlines at the
turn of the millennium announced impending dire shortages of qualified school administrators , school boards
were urged to recruit in the corporate and military sectors
rather than among the administratively credentialed
women still serving in the classroom . 
Despite these problems , women are expanding
rapidly into school leadership positions in some parts
of the country . In places where administrator salaries
have not kept pace with inflation with those of comparable fields , men , who typically enjoy greater
employment choices and higher salary options than
women , have been leaving the field or retiring . Even
in areas where administrator salaries have remained
competitive , the demands of the job , always heavy , 
have increased substantially in recent years . Those
privileged with choice tend to move on . Ultimately , 
however , the women and men who choose to become
school leaders in these conditions are bringing new
styles of leadership , fresh notions for improving
school quality , and extensive classroom experience to
their service . The decades ahead will reveal if this current broadening of the demography of school leadership , which greatly resembles that of a century ago , 
will continue until there is full equity , will level off , or
will cycle back downward , as happened in the midtwentieth century . The coming years also will show
the degree to which the intellectual underpinnings and
practice of educational leadership will expand to
reflect those of the field ’ s newest members . 
—Jackie M . Blount
See also Addams , Jane ; boards of education ; Cooper , Anna
Julia ; Coppin , Fanny Jackson ; cultural politics , wars ; discrimination ; feminism and theories of leadership ; gender
studies , in educational leadership ; leadership , theories of ; 
leadership styles ; Mendez , Felicitas ; minorities , in school ; 
Montessori , Maria ; politics , of education ; power ; principalship ; recruitment , of school administrators ; sexism ( glass
ceiling )  ; Sizemore , Barbara A .  ; superintendency ; Supreme
Court , United States , key cases in education law ; universities , preparation of educational leaders in ; University
Council for Educational Administration ; Young , Ella Flagg
Further Readings and References
Blount , J .  ( 1998 )  . Destined to rule the schools : Women and the
superintendency , 1873–1995 . Albany : SUNY Press . 
Brown , K .  ,  & Wynn , S .  ( 2004 )  . Why leadership-skilled women
teachers are saying “ No ” to the principal ’ s role : A matter
of individual choice or institutional constraint ? Journal of
School Leadership , 14 , 686–712 . 
Glass , T .  , Bjork , L .  ,  & Brunner , C .  ( 2000 )  . The study of the
American school superintendency , 2000 . Arlington , VA : 
American Association of School Administrators . 
Hess , F .  ( 2002 )  . School boards at the dawn of the 21st century . 
Report prepared for the National School Board Journal . 
Retrieved January 1 , 2005 , from < 
site / docs / 1200 / 1143 . pdf > 
Iowa teachers .  ( 1894 , January 18 )  . Journal of Education , 39 , p . 44 . 
McCarthy , M .  ,  & Kuh , G .  ( 1998 )  . A new breed of educational
leadership faculty members . Journal of School Leadership , 
8 , 360–372 . 
National Education Association .  ( 2003 )  . Status of the American
public school teacher , 2000–2001 . Washington , DC : Author . 
Shakeshaft , C .  ( 1987 , 1989 )  . Women in educational administration . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . 
Tallerico , M .  ( 2000 )  . Gaining access to the superintendency : 
Headhunting , gender , and color . Educational Administration Quarterly , 36 , 18–43 . 
 WOODSON , CARTER G . 
In 1926 , Carter G . Woodson ( 1875–1950 ) organized
the first Negro History week celebration in the second
week of February . The week was later expanded to
Woodson , Carter G . ———1071
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1071
Black History Month . Often referred to as the “ Father
of Black history ,  ” Woodson wrote the classic text The
Miseducation of the Negro in 1933 . Educator and
noted historian of African American history , Woodson
was born to former-slave parents , December 19 , 1875 , 
in New Canton , Virginia . His father , James Henry
Woodson , and his mother , Anne Eliza Riddle
Woodson , raised nine children . Woodson worked in
the coal mines of West Virginia , having little formal
education before the age of 20 . After completing high
school , Woodson entered Berea College , in Kentucky , 
known at the time for its coeducation of the races . 
Woodson began teaching in West Virginia in 1898
and subsequently held numerous teaching and educational leadership roles , including serving as an instructor at Miner Normal College ( later to become the D . C . 
Teacher ’ s College )  . From 1900 to 1903 , he served as
principal of Douglass High School , and from 1909 to
1918 , Woodson taught French , Spanish , English , and
History at the M Street School in Washington , D . C . 
In 1912 , Woodson was awarded the doctorate of philosophy in history from Harvard University , the second
African American to have obtained this distinction . 
Woodson cofounded the Association for the Study of
Negro Life and History in 1915 and served as the founding editor of the association ’ s Journal of Negro History , 
launched in 1916 . 
Between 1921 and 1925 , Woodson published four
books , including Early Negro Education in West
Virginia , The History of the Negro Church , The Negro in
Our History , and Black Orators and their Orations . 
Other texts by Dr . Woodson include The Education of the
Negro Prior to 1861 : A History of the Education of the
Colored People of the United States From the Beginning
of Slavery to the Civil War , and African Myths Together
With Proverbs , a supplementary reader composed of folk
tales from various parts of Africa that was adapted for the
use of children in the public schools . His journal publications include numerous articles in the Journal of Negro
History , Howard University Record , Crisis , American
Historical Review , and Negro History Bulletin . He also
published widely about educational reform in the press , 
including articles in the Chicago Defender , engaging
topics such as “ Is the Educated Negro a Liability ?  ”  ;  
 “ Service Rather Than Leadership ”  ; and “ More Teachers , 
Texts , Needed for Growth of Race History .  ” Awarded the
Spingarn Medal for his leadership and historical scholarship , Woodson died in 1950 , in Washington , D . C . 
—Khaula Murtadha
See also Afrocentric theories ; Bethune , Mary McLeod ; Black
education ; Coppin , Fanny Jackson ; cross-cultural education ; 
desegregation , of schools ; discrimination ; diversity ; Du Bois , 
W . E . B .  ; elementary education ; equality , in schools ; equity
and adequacy of funding schools ; governance ; history , in curriculum ; individual differences , in children ; law ; minorities , 
in schools ; multiculturalism ; Washington , Booker T . 
Further Readings and References
The Carter G . Woodson collection of Negro papers and related
documents , 1803–1936 . Archival manuscript material , 
Washington , D . C .  , Library of Congress . 
Conyers , J . L .  ( 2000 )  . Carter G . Woodson : A historical reader . 
New York : Garland . 
Bennett , L .  ( 1988 )  . Before the Mayflower : A history of Black
America . Chicago : Johnson . 
 WORK TASK MEASUREMENT
The topic of work task measurement may be approached
from several different perspectives . Typically , one thinks
of task measurement as a component of assessment that
addresses objective criteria , while the concept of assessment includes both objective and subjective information . Measurement refers to the process by which
something is differentiated and described in precise and
generally quantitative terms . More specifically , measurement is the process of quantifying objective criteria
to express the relative nature or the presence or absence
of some characteristic , such as individual attributes , performance , behaviors , or cognition . In a business and
industry environment , one views work measurement as
the time it takes to complete a given task when it is performed by a qualified worker . Predetermined times for
completion of a task are set based on time-and-motion
studies of qualified workers performing the tasks . Task
performance may be assessed by direct observation . An
experienced evaluator may use a rating scale and a stopwatch to determine the proficiency with which one
completes a given unit of work based on predetermined
times and / or standards . 
In an educational context , measurement is the
process of using students ’ responses to some stimuli
in order to make judgments about students ’ knowledge , skills , or dispositions . In one sense , measurement may be thought of as a data collection activity
that requires that numbers be assigned in a systematic
way to represent some characteristics of individuals . 
However , measurement in the social and behavioral
1072———Work Task Measurement
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1072
sciences goes beyond such objective data collection
instruments to describe some phenomenon by observation . In many of these situations , some variables
cannot be measured directly with finely tuned instruments because some behaviors cannot be observed
directly . For example , job requirements of workers in
the service sector focus on nonstandardized tasks to
be accomplished rather than specific number of hours
worked or procedural steps to be performed . In addition , the increase in flexible working hours makes
measurement more challenging . Consequently , the
measurement must be inferred from a sample of indicators of the behaviors . The paradox is that using indicators of behaviors makes true measurement more
difficult and introduces a greater degree of measurement error than when using variables that can be
assessed directly . Common measuring devices such
as those used to assess objective quantities , such as
height , weight , and age , are not easily discernable . For
example , one ’ s mathematical abilities , perceptions of
work , and value of others cannot be assessed with the
same precision as blood pressure and growth rate . 
Work task measurement may be described in relation to data , people , and things . Each of these elements is involved to some extent in every work task . 
Clearly , there are differences in work task measurement due to measurement restrictions in many areas
and in the qualitative and quantitative differences in
task performance . For example , tasks that include
complex human variables such as working effectively
as a team player are obviously more difficult to measure than are simple laboratory experiments . Although
realistic work situations may be simulated , the nature
of the task itself varies from one situation to another
in the course of normal work . Consequently , task performance and measurement have to be modeled on
more than one level , using more than one technique . 
A variety of methods for measuring work tasks
have been developed . One of the most common methods is to base the measurement on predetermined
objectives . The first step is to conduct an analysis of
the work such that the work to be done is portioned
into logical and discrete components or elements . In
other words , one would be hard-pressed to measure
any task without prior knowledge of the task or its
associated indicators . Three common methods for
measuring work tasks are based on analyses of procedures , hierarchical tasks , and concept mapping . These
methods are grounded in taxonomies for identifying
learning domains ( cognitive or intellectual , psychomotor
or physical , and affective or dispositions )  , such as
those in Bloom ’ s taxonomy of educational objectives
and Gagné ’ s levels of learning . 
The basic idea of procedural analysis is to divide
the task into mental and / or physical steps necessary to
complete the task . Procedures to be analyzed may be
simple , requiring an individual to follow some basic
steps in a sequential order , or they may be complex , 
requiring decision points along the way to completing
the task . The person performing the analysis will
arrange the steps in a logical order and present them
in a readable format , such as a flowchart showing
decision points along the way or in outline form . The
completed procedure itself or associated steps may
then be used as the basis for work task measurement . 
An analysis of hierarchical tasks requires that a
given task be analyzed and divided into enabling skills 
( subordinate skills ) or elements of the task . The elements are arranged in a sequence that shows the hierarchical relationship among the tasks in terms of what
an individual must know or be able to do to perform
the task . Work task measurement may take place at
any point in the hierarchical arrangement . The important point is that the subordinate skills are arranged
from most basic to complex , with the idea that an individual who can perform at the higher levels will also
be able to perform at the lower levels . 
Work task measurement may be based on a conceptual graph , which is similar to concept mapping
with the exception that elements of the graph may
include specific goals or events . Predetermined questions may be used to elaborate the information
included on the graph . 
Measurement theory is a branch of applied statistics designed to describe , categorize , and evaluate
measuring instruments in an attempt to improve their
usefulness , accuracy , and meaningfulness in real-life
situations . The mental and / or physical steps that one
must go through to complete a task are the major concerns . One should always keep in mind the purpose to
be served by the measurement and the degree of accuracy needed to accommodate that purpose . Only then
can an appropriate measurement instrument be
selected or designed . One should consider the following criteria when selecting a measurement technique :  
( a ) purpose of the measurement and decisions to be
made ,  ( b ) level of accuracy required ,  ( c ) level of detail
required in the measurement ,  ( d ) time constraints ,  ( e ) 
resources ( i . e .  , special laboratories or materials
required )  , and ( f ) cost of the measurement . Furthermore , 
Work Task Measurement———1073
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1073
in all cases , measurements should reference the objectives ( work or task ) to be measured . Also , the circumstances or conditions under which the work is to be
performed or demonstrated , along with appropriate
time requirements , should be defined . In addition , the
acceptable level of performance or a predetermined
level of proficiency should be identified . Any qualifiers related to the work to be measured should be
included . Work hours , responsibilities , and job tenure
are becoming increasingly varied . Such variability
demands that more appropriately designed and
detailed measuring instruments and methods be developed to measure work tasks more systematically and
accurately . 
—Marie Kraska
See also accountability ; bureaucracy ; division of labor ; 
economics , theories of ; goals , goal setting ; hierarchy , in
organizations ; job descriptions ; leadership , task-oriented ; 
management theories ; operational definitions ; performance
evaluation systems ; personnel management ; power ; productivity ; quantitative research methods ; rational organizational theory ; resource management ; role ambiguity ; role
conflict ; role theory ; span of control ; table of organization
Further Readings and References
Aft , L . S .  ( 2000 )  . Work measurement and methods improvement . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley-Interscience . 
Bond , T . G .  ,  & Fox , C . M .  ( 2001 )  . Applying the Rasch model : 
Fundamental measurement in the human sciences . 
Chicago : Institute for Objective Measurement . 
Booher , H . R .  ( 2003 )  . Handbook of human systems integration . Wright-Patterson AFB , OH : Human Systems
Information Analysis Center . 
Niebel , B . W .  ,  & Freivalds , A .  ( 2003 )  . Methods , standards , 
and work design ( 11th ed .  )  . New York : McGraw-Hill . 
 WORKING CONDITIONS , 
IN SCHOOLS
The mandate to improve the nation ’ s schools has
focused attention on school reform , curriculum , testing , accountability , teacher quality , and a host of
related issues . With the improvement of educational
performance high on the nation ’ s agenda , attracting
and retaining quality teachers has become a high priority . Little attention , however , has been paid to the
relationship between working conditions , teacher
retention , and teaching outcomes . 
The term school working conditions includes both
the physical and emotional aspects of “ life ” within a
school , including adequacy of the building , facilities , 
teaching resources , cleanliness , air quality , noise control , thermal conditions , administrative leadership and
organization , student discipline , safety , teacher autonomy , and teacher support . 
Working conditions tend to mirror the socioeconomics of the school ’ s attendance area , varying in accordance
with school location , age , size , and the percentage of
low-income students in the school . According to a 2000
report from the National Educational Association , most
of the nation ’ s public schools are on average 40 years old
with one third of them in need of repair . A large proportion of older schools are located in large urban centers
and remote rural areas that serve a high proportion of
poor children . Some of these older schools have crumbling infrastructures that contain environmental hazards , 
such as asbestos , mold , lead , dust , inadequate lighting , 
ventilation , and thermal conditions . Inadequacy and
scarcity of teaching materials and equipment often contribute to inferior working conditions . 
Schools in higher-socioeconomic areas are usually
new , well maintained , climate controlled , and filled
with abundant teaching materials . However , overcrowded conditions of some suburban and urban
schools have necessitated the addition of portable classrooms and the attendant problems associated with
isolation from the main school , poor ventilation , high
noise levels , and concerns about hazardous chemicals
emitted from the building materials . 
Numerous studies demonstrate links between
school conditions and student achievement . After
controlling for socioeconomic status , test scores of
students attending older schools are consistently
lower than students in newer buildings . In addition to
the factor of building functionality , attendance at an
old , ill-equipped school may convey a message to
students that they are less valued than their counterparts in more affluent areas . 
Not surprisingly , schools with good working conditions are more likely to attract and retain experienced teachers and administrators , while schools with
inferior conditions experience continual turnover and
usually employ the least-experienced personnel . 
Beginning teachers hired to work in schools with
unfavorable conditions usually migrate to different
schools or leave the profession . Valuable time , attention , and resources are wasted recruiting , hiring , and
inducting new personnel . 
1074———Working Conditions , in Schools
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1074
Although research on the linkage between school
working conditions , teachers ’ retention , and student
outcomes is available , policymakers have given little
attention to the findings . Recent research chronicles
those relationships . 
In the late 1980s , The U . S . Department of
Education ’ s National Center for Educational Statistics
conducted the Schools and Staffing Survey ( SASS ) and
its supplement , the Teacher Follow-Up Survey ( TFS )  . 
Findings of the study revealed that teachers worked
longer than a 40-hour work week ; received salaries
lower than many other professionals ; felt they had little
control over curriculum , textbooks , and student discipline ; and were concerned about school safety . 
Teachers ’ perceptions of working conditions varied considerably depending on school size , location , and percentage of low-income students in the school . Results of
the study focused attention on the issue of working conditions and paved the way for additional research . 
Subsequent research included that of Ingersol and
Smith , whose 2003 study revealed that teacher dissatisfaction and turnover were fueled by inadequate
administrative support , lack of faculty influence , intrusions into teaching , and no opportunities for advancement . A 2003 survey of teachers in North Carolina by
the North Carolina Professional Teaching Standards
Commission supported many of those findings . 
Teachers wanted involvement in decisions , protection
from intrusion into teaching duties , clerical assistance , 
time for curriculum work , and for new teachers , time
to work with mentors . Analysis further revealed that
satisfaction levels varied according to school characteristics . Teachers in schools with higher accountability scores , higher graduation rates , and more fully
licensed personnel were more satisfied with their
working conditions . Teachers serving in schools with a
higher proportion of poor students reported that schools
were in need of physical repairs . They expressed a
need to work with administrators who empowered
them to select teaching strategies that matched student
needs and learning styles . 
Schneider ’ s 2003 study of teachers ’ working conditions in Chicago and Washington , D . C .  , public schools
revealed working conditions that adversely affected
academic outcomes and teachers ’ health . Teachers surveyed reported dissatisfaction with indoor air quality , 
thermal comfort , poor lighting , dirty and inoperable
windows , dirty restrooms , and high noise levels . They
also reported that schools were too large and classrooms for science and the arts were inadequate . 
A survey of 900 teachers in Texas regarding highstakes testing revealed that although teachers reported
stressing more of the tested curriculum , they also
reported that such tests did not motivate students to
learn more , nor were the tests accurate measures of
student learning or school effectiveness . Teachers in
England actually boycotted the national test . 
These recent studies clearly document the relationship between school conditions , teacher retention , and
teaching outcomes . Inferior working conditions make
it difficult for teachers to perform well , difficult for
students to learn , and increase the likelihood that
teachers will leave the school or profession . In some
schools , health and safety of teachers and students are
adversely affected as well . If national school reform is
based on the premise that quality teachers and teaching are the keys to student learning , then the working
conditions of the nation ’ s teachers need to become
part of reform initiatives . 
—Barbara L . Brock
See also class , social ; climate , school ; differentiated staffing ; 
equity and adequacy of funding schools ; esprit ( school
climate )  ; expectations , teacher and student cultures ; flow
theory ; hazards , environmental , in schools ; merit pay ; productivity ; reform , of schools ; satisfaction , in organization
and roles ; school plant management ; school safety ; stress , in
school administration ; student teaching ; values of organizations and leadership ; violence in schools ; workplace trends
Further Readings and References
Environmental Protection Agency ’ s Indoor Air Quality ( IAQ ) 
Tools for Schools Kit .  ( n . d .  )  . Retrieved June 16 , 2004 , from

Ingersol , R . M .  ,  & Smith , T . M .  ( 2003 )  . The wrong solution to
the teacher shortage . Educational Leadership , 60 ( 8 )  , 
30–33 . 
National Center for Education Statistics .  ( 1996 )  . An overview
of the schools and staffing survey ( SASS )  . Washington , DC : 
U . S . Department of Education , Office of Educational
Research and Improvement . 
Robertson , S .  ( 1996 )  . Teachers ’ work , restructuring , and postfordism : Constructing the new “ professionalism .  ” In
I . Goodson & A . Hargreaves ( Eds .  )  , Teachers ’ professional
lives ( pp . 28–55 )  . London : Falmer Press . 
Schneider , M .  ( 2003 , August )  . Linking school working conditions to teacher satisfaction and success . National
Clearinghouse for Educational Facilities . Retrieved April
18 , 2004 , from facilities
Southeast Center for Teaching Quality .  ( 2003 )  . Creating working conditions so teachers can help all students achieve : 
Teaching in the Southeast . Best Practices & Policies , 3 ( 2 )  , 
Working Conditions , in Schools———1075
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1075
1–2 . Retrieved April 18 , 2004 , from 
quality . org
North Carolina Professional Teaching Standards Commission .  
( 2004 )  . Governor Mike Easley ’ s Teacher Working
Conditions Initiative . Retrieved April 18 , 2004 , from

 WORKPLACE TRENDS
Workplace trends refers to aspects of the work environment such as structural arrangements , roles , relationships , procedures , policies , or employment conditions
that appear to be undergoing transformation but are not
yet fully integrated into the workplace as a whole . The
trends may become permanent elements of most workplaces in which the profession or industry operates , may
become adopted by a minority of these workplaces , or
may be tried in a few of them and then dropped . 
Workplace trends generally mirror what is occurring within a professional field , industry , or society . In
educational settings , these trends are directly related
to the social , political , economic , and educational
contexts in which they operate . Among the primary
influences on the workplace today are the accountability environment ; family , societal , and workplace
transformations ; teacher and administrative shortages ; 
and the technological revolution . 
ACCOUNTABILITY ENVIRONMENT
In the last few decades , accountability demands on
schools have increased , culminating with the national
No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 legislation . This
law has imposed requirements upon schools and
students , based primarily on student performance on
standardized tests . These expanded accountability
requirements have subjected educational institutions
to increased public scrutiny . The effect on the workplace has been mixed , with two different management
models unfolding . It is too soon to determine which of
these trends will become more prominent or whether
they will continue to coexist . 
In some situations , there has been an increase in
control over teacher autonomy , resulting in teaching
models such as direct instruction , in which teachers
must follow explicit steps and sometimes even scripts
in their teaching . The use of standardized tests to measure performance has also resulted in many systems
adopting more rigid curriculum standards , with directions
that all children must use the same textbooks , giving
teachers little freedom to vary their instruction or
curricular approach . Thus , the workplace has become
more controlled and the role of the teacher more
constricted . 
In other settings , schools and systems have decided
to restructure the workplace to make it more collaborative . Shared leadership that includes teachers , staff , 
parents , and sometimes students has emerged , making
the workplace a center of teamwork and joint decision
making . In some situations , new organizational structures that include team teaching are also being
formed . In such settings , there is often an increase in
partnerships with parents , schools , universities , businesses , and communities focused upon the problems
facing schools and enhancing educational resources
and student success . 
FAMILY , SOCIETAL , AND
WORKPLACE TRANSFORMATIONS
Today ’ s families are much more mobile and much less
cohesive than in the past . Most children come from
single-parent homes or from homes in which both
parents are working and lack the support that came
from extended families in the past . Poverty is on the
rise , and many children are in need of social and health
services that parents cannot always provide . In many
instances , family problems and needs fall on the shoulders of the schools . Seeking to meet these needs , many
schools are changing the workplace to include interagency partnerships with human service providers . 
Such partnerships have resulted in hiring and / or placing
additional personnel in some schools , including nurses , 
social workers , and family counselors . Preschool and
after-school programs have also been added to many
school settings , thus extending the workday of the
school and changing the responsibilities of the school
and school personnel in caring for students . 
Some work policies are also being implemented to
assist those who work in the school to meet their own
family needs . Job sharing and providing child care services on campus are two examples of the types of efforts
being initiated to address employee family needs . 
The Americans with Disabilities Act and PL 94-142
and the changes in the demographics of our country
are adding more diversity to the student body and are
causing schools to reach out to diversify faculty as
well . This diversity in the workplace brings with it new
models for sharing , more professional development
1076———Workplace Trends
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1076
focused on the need to ensure that people understand
and work well with each another , and increases in language and cultural diversity in the workplace environment . This diversity sometimes brings a questioning
about values in the workplace . In educational settings , 
issues such as whose values count , what activities and
holidays will be celebrated and recognized , and what
types of clothing or accessories will be considered
acceptable are topics and concerns affecting the workplace and increasing the daily dilemmas people must
face . 
Increases in violent crime and a rise in terrorism
around the globe have also changed the workplace and
the role of schools in ensuring a safe environment . 
Most schools must now have safety and security plans . 
School personnel are adopting new roles , and new personnel , such as security guards , are being added to the
school setting . Increased screening and more stringent
hiring practices are being added . These changes have
resulted in increased struggles to find a balance between
security and privacy in the workplace . 
All of these issues have added stress to the workplace , making it necessary to add additional psychological and other support services . Some schools now
offer exercise and other health-related services , such
as yoga , to aid employees in dealing with stress and
maintaining a healthy lifestyle . Some systems have
added such benefits to their health plans . 
TEACHER AND
ADMINISTRATOR SHORTAGES
Retirements and large percentages of people leaving
the field are causing a shortage of teachers and administrators in public education . This shortage is expected
to worsen in the next decade . In some settings and
subject areas , shortages already exist . New workplace
structures are being implemented to meet this
demand . Whether these will be integrated into educational environments or be dropped , should there be
fewer shortages in the future , is unknown . 
Among the personnel changes resulting from
shortages of educational professionals is the entry into
the educational workplace of older individuals who
have retired or who are changing careers . Some are
beginning to teach and serve as administrators without
holding formal education degrees . There is also more
involvement of school systems , private enterprise , and
others in the teacher and administrator preparation
and certification process . 
These differences in the types of individuals entering the profession and greater diversity in where and
how they are educated and certified have numerous
effects on the working environment . For example , the
types of professional development experiences that
need to occur have had to be broadened . There is also
an expanded need for mentoring and induction programs to ensure a smooth transition for those not
familiar with the educational setting who are entering
the teaching or administrative ranks . Although not
highlighted in the literature , it appears likely that
schools will need to develop strategies to bring about
open dialogue between people who are entering the
field from nontraditional backgrounds with nontraditional preparation and those who come from more
traditional backgrounds . 
THE TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTION
The technological revolution has caused some workplace trends that will probably expand in the next
decade . Some work , particularly that done by staff , is
being completed from home . Distance education is
also impacting the workplace , adding virtual schools
with students doing work online , sometimes from
home . The type of skills employees of all types need
to adapt to technological change is becoming increasingly complex , making professional development and
online learning an integral part of the workplace . 
Technology has also created a workplace trend that
connects the home and the school and changes the
role of the teacher . The teacher is much more accessible , and communication between home and school
is expanding through numerous technological means . 
The expanded access to information has also changed
the context of teaching and learning , making the
workplace more global for both students and teachers . 
WORKPLACE TRENDS AND THE FUTURE
The accountability environment , our rapidly changing
society , and the increasing use of technology has and
will continue to alter roles , responsibilities , and educational environments . The only known element in
this environment is that change will be continuous and
require flexibility and adaptability in the workplace . 
—Frances K . Kochan
See also achievement gap , of students ; achievement tests ; 
at-risk students ; behavior , student ; diversity ; drug education ; 
Workplace Trends———1077
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1077
empowerment ; fundamentalism ; globalism ; governance ; 
individual differences , in children ; innovation , in education ; 
leadership , participatory ; locus of control ; market theory of
schooling ; No Child Left Behind ; parental involvement ; 
planning models ; politics , of education ; privatization ; productivity ; professional learning communities ; right-wing
politics , advocates , impact on education ; school improvement models ; school safety ; standard setting ; state departments of education ; stress , in school administration ; 
systemic reform ; underachievers , in schools ; voucher plans
Further Readings and References
Anderson , G .  ( 2005 )  . Educational leadership and the new
economy : Keeping the “ public ” in public schools . In
F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 216–236 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Gold , E .  , Simon , E .  ,  & Brown , C .  ( 2005 )  . A new conception of
parent engagement : Community organizing for school
reform . In F . English ( Ed .  )  , The SAGE handbook of educational leadership ( pp . 237–268 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Sage . 
Goldring , E .  ,  & Sims , P .  ( 2005 )  . Modeling creative and courageous school leadership through district-community-university partnerships . Educational Policy , 19 , 223 . 
Jaksec , C .  ( 2004 )  . The difficult parent . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Corwin Press . 
Jukes , I .  , Dosaj , A .  ,  & Macdonald , B .  ( 2000 )  . Net saavy . 
Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Lawrence , C .  ,  & Vachon , M .  ( 2003 )  . How to handle staff misconduct . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Queen , J .  ,  & Queen , P .  ( 2004 )  . The frazzled principal ’ s wellness plan . Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
 WORLD BANK , INFLUENCE
ON EDUCATION
The World Bank was founded in 1944 . With the end
of World War II more than a year away , delegates from
44 of the nations pledged to form the United Nations
met at Bretton Woods , New Hampshire , in July 1944
to discuss pressing international economic problems . 
From this conference emerged two prominent organizations : the International monetary Fund ( IMF ) and
the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development ( IBRD )  , now known as the World Bank . 
As the name reflects , the IBRD was primarily created to assist and provide loans for rebuilding the
war-torn areas of World War II , especially in Europe . 
Currently , the World Bank consists of five institutions : 
the IBRD , the International Development Association 
( IDA )  , the International Finance Corporation ( IFC )  , 
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency ( MIGA )  , 
and the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ( ICSID )  . Also , its focus has changed . 
Since 1950 , it has provided loans for projects and programs in less developed countries . Only developing
nations can now borrow from the World Bank . 
The mission of the World Bank is to reduce poverty
and improve the living standards of people in developing countries . Education is seen as the most important key to achieving this mission . As the largest
financier of education in the world , the World Bank
has provided $42 billion for education loans and credits and currently supports 157 education projects in 83
countries . The World Bank first started lending in education in 1963 ( to Tunisia for vocational training )  , and
its lending has averaged $1 billion a year since then . 
In addition to its loans for education , it offers nonlending services for education in policy and strategy
formulation , mobilizing resources , creating national
consensus for education reforms , and creating capacity to design and implement programs . The World
Bank pursues its education objectives with a range of
expert staff , 40% of which is based in country offices
outside its headquarters in Washington , D . C . 
The World Bank ’ s influence in education is best
understood by examining its several published comprehensive reports on education . These reports summarize its implemented educational programs and
provide information on its objectives in education , its
policies , and its priorities in lending . In the early
1960s , the funds were directed to vocational and technical education , the expansion of general secondary
education , and the construction and equipment for
schools . By the 1970s , the program and loan objectives were extended to primary , secondary , and higher
education . They also included the education of
teachers , technicians , staff , and general support personnel . Later , the focus shifted to topics such as skill
development , mass participation in education , equity , 
and efficiency and to improvement of educational
planning and management . In the 1980s , the World
Bank focused on basic primary education for all
children and educational opportunities for everyone . 
The new focus includes increasing the quantity and
quality of education . It encompasses education that
relates to work and environment , to increasing the
skills and knowledge for performing economics and
social functions , and to developing and maintaining
institutional capacities to design , analyze , manage , 
1078———World Bank , Influence on Education
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1078
and evaluate educational programs to achieve its
objectives . 
Because of the influence of the World Bank , access
to schooling improved markedly . In the 1960s , only
half of the primary school-aged children were enrolled
in primary education . In the 1990s , the ratio exceeded
three fourths . However , the 1990s brought new challenges . The end of the cold war era and the breakup of
the old Soviet nations led to an increase in market
economies , the spread of democratization , globalization , increasing technological innovation , and changes
in public and private roles . In response to these
changes , the World Bank adopted new strategies and
objectives for its educational programs in the 1990s . 
First , the World Bank increased its educational funds
to developing countries , which averaged $6 billion a
year in the first half of the 1990s . Second , it adopted
new programs and involved other institutions in its joint
programs , such as “ Education for All ( EFA )  .  ” The EFA
commitment was made in 1990 by over 150 countries , 
and reaffirmed in 2000 . The EFA program aims at
accomplishing the following objectives , which are
included in the “ Millennium Development Goals ”  : 
• Universal primary education for all children by 2015
• Elimination of gender disparities in primary and
secondary education
• Improvement of early childhood education
• Ensuring equitable access to “ life skills ” programs
• Achieving a 50% increase in adult literacy by 2015
• Improving the quality in education
Education is seen as the key to attaining the “ 2015
Millennium Development Goals ,  ” adopted by 189
countries . These goals require that the following
objectives are met by 2015 : 
• Elimination of poverty and hunger
• Universal primary education
• Gender equality
• Reduction in child mortality
• Improvement of maternal health
• Combating diseases such as HIV / AIDS and malaria
• Environmental stability
• Global partnership
The direction of the World Bank education policies
is toward achieving a good education through three
pillars of education : access , equity , and quality . The
World Bank is seeking access to education at all levels
by all people . It also wants to make sure that people in
the poor areas of the world and girls in all areas will
have adequate education , at least at the basic level . 
Furthermore , the World Bank is focusing on early interventions such as early child development and school
health programs . Innovative delivery systems are integrated in the education programs with an emphasis on
distance education , open learning , and the use of new
technologies to reach more people in the developing
countries . Quality of education is also improved by an
approach called systemic reform , which requires standards in achievement , assessment , and curriculum , 
as well as decentralization of education , and finding
providers and financiers outside the government . In this
process , the World Bank not only works with governments in developing nations as its clients but also
enters partnership with other organizations , such as
UNESCO , the United Nations , and the IMF , to reach its
goals in education . The influence in education of the
World Bank , with its more than 600 projects , is extensive , though not without criticism . Martin Carnoy has
observed that the main strategy of the World Bank
has been the efficiency of resource use . Its main focus
has been on “ finance-driven reform ,  ” which has at its
heart the reduction of public spending on education . 
One thrust of this effort is the privatization of secondary
and higher education and the reduction of per-pupil
costs at the elementary level by increasing class size . 
—Orhan Kara and Ibrahim Duyar
See also accountability ; administration , theories of ; capacity
building , of organizations ; choice , of schools ; competition , 
forms of , in schools ; cost-benefit analyses ; cultural politics , 
wars ; economics , theories of ; global cultural politics ; globalism ; innovation , in education ; leadership , task-oriented ; 
life span development ; management theories ; market
theory of schooling ; multiculturalism ; performance assessment ; privatization ; productivity ; rational organizational
theory ; restructuring , of schools ; school improvement models ; school safety ; social capital ; systemic reform ; systems
theory / thinking ; values of organizations and leadership
Further Readings and References
Carnoy , M .  ( 1999 )  . Globalization and educational reform : 
What planners need to know . Paris : UNESCO . 
Grindle , M .  ,  & Thomas , J .  ( 1991 )  . Public choices and policy
change : The political economy of reform in developing
countries . London : Johns Hopkins University Press . 
Henig , R .  ( 1994 )  . Rethinking school choice : Limits of the market metaphor . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . 
Jones , P . W .  ( 1997 )  . On World Bank education financing . 
Comparative Education , 33 ( 1 )  , 117–129 . 
World Bank , Influence on Education———1079
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1079
Jones , P . W .  ( 1997 )  . The World Bank and the literacy question : 
Orthodoxy , heresy , and ideology . International Review of
Education , 43 , 367–375 . 
World Bank .  ( 2004 )  . Opening doors : Education and the World
Bank . Washington , DC : Author . 
 WRITING , TEACHING OF
Writing , specifically the teaching of writing , has been
exposed to a variety of subjective questions , including
ways to teach writing , what constitutes good writing , 
and ways to keep up with trends in the field . 
Historically , writing has also been included in the early
curriculum , although the need for writing has never
been questioned . 
Approaching writing from a utilitarian point of view
would consider sentence-level reinforcement , extended
prose , and vocabulary as basic elements of writing . In
some programs , there is more emphasis on contextual
meaning . 
The teaching of writing is also connected closely
with reading . Practice in using cohesive devised and
discourse markers ; in relating rhetorical determinants
such as audience , topic , and purpose ; in organizing
texts into various rhetorical structures ; and in deciding
how much information should be made explicit and
how much should be inferred , all contribute to the
process of comprehension . 
Communication with other people in the social world
is the third reason for the teaching of writing . Although
the communicative approach has a strong oral bias , 
directing meaningful discourse to a particular audience
for a specific purpose is as relevant in writing as in oral
expression . Personal or occupation-related correspondence is a genuine need for many students . Collaborative means of producing and monitoring writing of
various types and genres also stimulates authentic communication between student writers . 
Overall , research suggests that the teaching of writing is an effective means of eliciting the use of vocabulary and grammatical structure , of practicing reading
comprehension , and encouraging communication . 
Writing instruction at the discourse level (  “ the rhetorical approach ”  ) basically consists of the paralleling of
formulaic patterns . Rhetorical modes ( narration , 
description , exposition , and argumentation ) are
demonstrated as consisting of component paragraphs 
( introduction , body , conclusion )  , which are composed
according to “ rules ” governing the organization of
sentence elements ( topic sentences , support sentences , 
transitions , conclusion , etc .  )  . 
The patterning method is based upon analysis of
texts composed by others . On the other hand , the communicative approach acknowledges the social function of text , meaning the dynamic effect exerted by the
relationship between the author ’ s purpose in writing
and the audience . Textbooks feature functional tasks 
( inviting , explaining , addressed to specific audiences ) 
in various forms ( messages , reports , advertisements , 
different types of letter writing ) and combine these
with rhetorical-syntactic patterns listed above . The
experiential approach draws upon the need for communication and is based upon students ’ personal
knowledge and affect . Descriptive writing is encouraged by means of group discussions of the individual ’ s personal memories , sensory experiences , and
observations . Dialogues and monologues lead to
reasoned arguments . 
Writing is a complex , recursive process that is subject
to false starts , trial and error , and constant revision . 
Drafting and revising , self- and peer editing , and review
are valuable means of improving text . Writing is no
longer regarded as a tiered skill , moving from smaller
to larger pieces . Research suggests that information
contained in a higher processing stage can influence the
production of a lower stage , as well as vice versa . 
With regard to current curriculum design , it is
doubtful that one “ best ” method exists . Prescriptive
product methodologies have been criticized for being
too simplistic . For example , rather than developing
from thesis statement to support , Standard English
text is varied in structure . Instructional approaches
that prompt students to focus on a single aspect of
their writing , such as syntactic errors , may have the
disadvantage of directing learners ’ attention away
from considerations of the complexity of their composing . However , expectations as to the qualities of 
 “ good ” writing exist , and it is the instructor ’ s responsibility to convey this to the student . 
Trends in the teaching of writing are varied . Some
of the more common trends include collaborative
writing , writing for a profession , and the impact of
technology on writing . Although collaborative theories
have not gained the popularity needed to teach at the
undergraduate level , research has demonstrated many
benefits of teaching collaboration in a writing course . 
Some of the benefits of collaboration are that it promotes a heuristic for discovery both of ideas and of
1080———Writing , Teaching Of
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1080
organizing principles , focuses on writing as problem
writing ; gives writers a sense of audience early in the
process , allows writers to learn that finding a voice
depends on understanding the social milieu in which
they write , allows for editing intervention early in the
process , and parallels the way writing is done in the
professional world . 
Another trend in the teaching of writing involves
writing for special genres . Research shows that collegeaged students often do not recognize key characteristics
in writing for a specific field . Often students will design
drafts that “ look like ” a form by imitating section headings , the number of pages , and so on . Instructors can
promote effective writing in a particular form by offering the following steps : provide samples of the form
and help students identify and analyze key characteristics , create a “ form guide ” that students can use to assist
them in composing , and offer students several opportunities to write in the form . Instructors should offer
several opportunities to develop proficiency . 
The advent of the computer and the Internet have
had a dramatic impact on the research and writing
process . An Internet environment that fosters research
writing can encourage the student to become an active , 
reflective learner by prompting written responses of
various kinds . Computers and word processors contain a variety of tools that help with layout and construction of all types of texts . In using technology , 
authors can look at the text they have just written and
rewrite , reorganize , and redraft with very little effort . 
Redrafting is a valuable way to clarify the writer ’ s
developing purpose and understanding . In a sense , a
word processor allows the writer to “ think on the
screen ” in partnership with technology . In doing so , 
writers can develop their own knowledge in a lasting
way . Researchers note , however , that to realize the
long-term cognitive effects of such a partnership , it
needs to take place within appropriate surroundings
that foster learning . These include the technology , 
activity , goal setting , teacher ’ s role , and the classroom
culture—each of which can dramatically influence the
type of learning within a student . 
—Carolyn N . Stevenson
See also computers , use and impact of ; cultural capital ; curriculum , theories of ; early childhood education ; elementary
education ; learning , theories of ; literacy , theories of ; measurement , theories of ; motivation , theories of ; performance
assessment ; philosophies of education ; reading , history of , 
use in schools
Further Readings and References
Applebee , A .  ( 1984 )  . Contexts for learning to write : Studies of
secondary school instruction . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . 
Dougiamas , M .  ( 1999 )  . Reading and writing for Internet
teaching . Retrieved September 18 , 2005 , from http :  /  / www 
. dougiamas . com / writing / readwrite . html
Greenberg , K .  , Wiener , H .  ,  & Donovan , R .  ( 1986 )  . Writing
assessment : Issues and strategies . New York : Longman . 
Spandel , V .  ,  & Stiggins , R .  ( 1990 )  . Creating writers : Linking
assessment and writing instruction . New York : Longman . 
White , E .  ( 1994 )  . Teaching and assessing writing : Recent
advances in understanding , evaluating and improving
student performance . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Woolever , K .  ( 1991 )  . Reassessing the role of collaborative
learning and teaching writing . In B . W . McClelland & T . R . 
Donovan ( Eds .  )  , Perspectives on research and scholarship
in composition . New York : Modern Language Association
of America . 
Writing , Teaching Of———1081
W-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 48 AM Page 1081
 YEAR-ROUND EDUCATION
Year-round education ( YRE ) is a reorganization of the
traditional school calendar into shorter attendance sessions with more frequent vacations . There is generally
no increase in the number of attendance days , merely
a rearrangement . Various scheduling options are available within the two design types of single and multitrack systems . Configurations are selected based on
need , purpose , budget , or some combination of these . 
The current 9-month school calendar emerged
when 85% of Americans were involved in agriculture . 
Today , only about 3% of American livelihoods are tied
to the agricultural cycle , and air-conditioning makes it
possible for schools to provide comfortable learning
environments year-round . Even rural America is no
longer made up of individuals and families whose
lives revolve around growing crops or tending livestock . With these drastic economic and technological
changes , many find it puzzling that the school calendar remains agrarian based with the extended summer
vacation . 
Educators and parents often voice concerns about
the possible negative impact of summer vacation on
student learning . Harris Cooper wrote in 2003 that the
long summer break disrupts continuous instruction
and can lead to students forgetting the learned material , requiring significant review when the next school
year begins . This can be even more detrimental for
students with special needs . 
Research is clear that extended vacation with
the traditional calendar may result in loss of learned
academic material , especially in math-related areas . 
Therefore , it seems reasonable to theorize that more
frequent and shorter vacations would help reduce this
loss . To that end , many have proposed changes in the
school calendar that would do away with the long
summer break and allow shorter and more frequent
breaks throughout the year , that is , year-round or balanced calendar . 
The first recorded opening of a year-round school
was in Bluffton , Indiana , in 1904 ; the first multitrack
school was in St . Charles , Missouri , in 1969 ; and the
first year-round district was established in 1971 in the
Valley View School District , Romeoville , Illinois . 
Currently , over 2 million students in the United States
are enrolled in some form of year-round education ; 
there are almost 3 , 000 schools in 41 states that operate on a year-round education schedule . 
There are two types of YRE programs—single
track and multitrack . Single-track programs have the
entire staff and student body attending and vacationing on the same schedule . For multitrack programs , 
students and teachers are divided into groups , and each
group is assigned to a track ; the attendance and vacation schedules for each track are different and staggered . 
Multitrack is frequently selected to reduce facilities
overcrowding . 
C . C . Kneese in 2000 and Louis Wildman and
others in 1999 wrote that within these two types of
YRE , several scheduling models are available . The
following are among the most common : 
• 60–20 / 60–15 . In 60–20 , the year is divided into three
60-day sessions with three 20-day vacation periods
between these sessions . The 60–15 model has the
60-day attendance sessions with vacation periods of
15 days . The additional 3–4 weeks of common vacation are added to the schedule . 
1083
Y
Y-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 49 AM Page 1083
• 45–15 / 45–10 . In the 45–15 schedule , there is a cycle
of 45 days of instruction and 15 days of vacation . 
The 45–10 schedule follows the same pattern , with
the vacation sessions being 10 rather than 15 days . 
The additional 4 weeks in the 45–10 schedule are
used for common vacation time . The 45–15 and
45–10 plans account for the largest portion of all
year-round school calendars . 
• Concept 6 . The Concept 6 calendar is divided into
six terms of approximately 43 days each . Students
and teachers attend two consecutive sessions of 43
days each and then have one session off ; this cycle is
repeated , totaling 175 instructional days per student . 
Though research has been done regarding positive
and negative impacts of YRE , results are mixed . 
Advantages of YRE are labeled “ perceived .  ” 
Among the “ perceived disadvantages ” of YRE are 
( a ) increased administrator burnout ,  ( b ) difficulties
in scheduling professional development ,  ( c ) increased
operations costs , and ( d ) scheduling conflicts between
family vacations and school / community activities . In
addition , as written by Elisabeth A . Palmer and Amy
E . Bemis in 1999 , with a multitrack program , there is
often a lack of sufficient time for facilities maintenance , teachers may need to change rooms multiple
times during the year , sometimes it creates difficulties
communicating with parents and staff , and students
often miss school events when they are off track . 
Perceived advantages include increased student
achievement and attendance , decreased teacher absenteeism , and increased positive attitudes for student
and teachers . Results from research on student
achievement is mixed , with some studies showing
significant differences and others not . According to
Palmer and Bemis , teacher absenteeism studies show
some differences , but few are statistically significant . 
Attitudes of students , teachers , and parents become
more positive about YRE the more experience they
have with the system . 
Much has been written about year-round education ; 
however , some of the research to date has been either
incomplete or poorly designed and therefore not particularly conclusive . Students in year-round schools are
likely to perform as well as if not better than their peers
in traditional 9-month programs , especially in upper
elementary schools . However , mixed results on the
effects for different demographic groups have been
generated and need additional investigation . 
Before any policy making occurs , additional
research is needed . However , even without additional
research , student achievement , budgets , overcrowding , and discipline problems are among the reasons
schools and districts choose year-round education . 
—Anita Pankake
See also enrollment projections ; infrastructure , of organizations ; instructional interventions ; learning environments ; 
reform , of schools ; scheduling , types of in schools
Further Readings and References
Cooper , H .  ( 2003 )  . Summer learning loss : The problem and
some solutions . Retrieved from 
digests2003 / cooper03 . pdf . 
Kneese , C . C .  ( 2000 )  . The impact of year-round education on
student learning : A study of six elementary schools . ERS
Spectrum , 18 ( 1 ) 20–26 . 
McGlynn , A .  ( 2002 )  . Districts that school year-round . School
Administrator 59 ( 3 )  , 34–39 . 
Palmer , E . A .  ,  & Bemis , A . E .  ( 1999 )  . Just in time research : 
Children , youth & families—Year-round education . 
University of Minnesota Extension Service , BU-07286 . 
Retrieved from tion / familydevelopment / components / 7286-09 . html . 
Wildman , L .  , Arambula , S .  , Bryson , D .  , Bryson , T .  , Campbell , 
K .  , Dominguez , T .  , et al .  ( 1999 )  . The effect of year-round
schooling on administrators . Education , 119 ( 3 )  , 465–474 . 
 YOUNG , ELLA FLAGG
Ella Flagg Young ( 1845–1918 )  , who served as superintendent of the Chicago Schools from 1909 to 1915 , 
arguably was one of the greatest public school educators in U . S . history . From 1862 , when she began
teaching , until 1915 , when she retired at the age of 70 , 
Young amassed formidable public education experience . She became the first woman to lead a major
school district in the United States when she assumed
the Chicago superintendency . During her years in
office , the school system faced severe city budget
shortfalls , political corruption , rapid enrollment
growth , a range of social problems , and a new teacher
union movement . She addressed these withering challenges with a series of innovative programs that
district employees enthusiastically adopted and educators around the country emulated . A year into her
superintendency , she also became the first woman
elected to the presidency of the powerful National
Education Association , a role that placed her squarely
in the national spotlight . For two decades , she served
1084———Young , Ella Flagg
Y-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 49 AM Page 1084
as well on the Illinois State Board of Education , where
she influenced the direction of tax-supported schooling in the state . 
After earning her PhD under the direction of John
Dewey , Young briefly served as an immensely popular
professor at the University of Chicago . She authored
five volumes describing her educational theories , 
including perhaps her most important work , Isolation
in the School , in 1901 . In this volume , she described
how industrialism typically filtered into schools , 
resulting in rigid compartmentalization that alienated
students and school workers alike . This segmentation
accompanied an overall mechanization of schooling , 
which included clear differentiation among categories
of students and divisions of responsibilities among
workers , clock-driven scheduling , and vertically
increasing hierarchies . She argued that this mechanization robbed persons of their humanity , creativity , 
and intelligence because it made no room for it . 
Instead , such qualities were reserved for those better
placed within the hierarchy . An unfortunate and necessary consequence of this system , she argued , was
that those vested with power also were those most
removed from the situations over which their judgment was directed , thereby minimizing the possibility
of responsible decision making . Ultimately , this system thrived on isolation or division between people as
well as between thinking and doing . 
Young ’ s views expressed in Isolation ran contrary
to those of most school administrators of the time , 
who instead valued adopting industrial practices to
improve efficiency in schools . While many administrators argued that they needed more power to run
schools , Young contended that power needed to be
distributed among all members of school communities , 
especially school workers and students . Such individuals only develop skillful decision making when they
are required to make meaningful decisions . Her belief
that teachers needed more power was controversial
among administrators at a time when teachers had
begun organizing in Chicago . However , she held that
if teachers were imbued with the authority to create
and implement their own ideas , then the profession
would attract a highly talented pool of candidates
while simultaneously discouraging those more disposed toward dry , rote , and punishment-driven pedagogies . Young also strongly believed that teachers
needed time within the school day and space for
engaging in the intellectual , legislative , and logistical
functions of running their schools . Essentially , Young
articulated in Isolation the general principles by which
schools truly could function as democratic institutions
in an increasingly industrialized , segmented , and alienated society . 
Although John Dewey served as Young ’ s doctoral
adviser while she wrote Isolation , Young heavily influenced Dewey ’ s ideas about democracy and education . 
Indeed , he regarded her as the “ wisest educator ” he had
ever encountered . Dewey , in 1951 , wrote that Young
showed him how democracy in education might be
implemented and what its ramifications might be . 
Young also strongly influenced Dewey to focus his
efforts on teachers , an important component of his work
that he generally ceased when he moved to New York . 
Young instituted a range of important innovations
during her career . She nurtured professional study
groups that met in teachers ’ and administrators ’ homes . 
These Ella Flagg Young Clubs fostered enhanced professionalism , pride , and esprit de corps among teachers
and administrators . When social problems emerged in
schools , Young advocated careful scientific analysis
combined with a search for practical yet ethical solutions . For instance , she implemented the first public
school sex education program in the nation , created
student social spaces in school buildings , required
school desegregation , provided penny lunches for
students—in a manner that eliminated any possible
humiliation for those who were impoverished ( as she
had been in childhood ) —and launched groundbreaking programs to address the unique needs of girls . As
the leader of several innovative teacher preparation
programs throughout her career , she was known as a
tough but fair instructor and mentor . Previous superintendents and school board members commended her
as having contributed dramatically to the overall
improved quality of teaching in the city . 
Finally , Young ’ s career successes epitomized
the dreams held by suffragists and other women ’ s
activists . To them , she stood as a towering symbol of
the public good that women might accomplish if given
the opportunity . Her well-documented leadership as
well as her administrative and instructional gifts
reflected well on all women . Because of her extraordinary visibility , Young ’ s work was scrutinized
closely by friends and critics alike as evidence of
women ’ s possibilities in high-level civic work . 
Chicago teachers and administrators , many of them
women , helped propel her into leadership positions . 
They engaged in extensive public support activities
when Young encountered opposition . In turn , she
Young , Ella Flagg———1085
Y-English-4854 . qxd 1 / 11 / 2006 10 : 49 AM Page 1085
supported school workers and women ’ s progressive
causes generally . She endeavored to lead in ways that
were consistent with her stated beliefs . For example , 
she frequently called on school workers to participate
in making critically important decisions . She made
sure that time and space were provided for school
workers to exert meaningful leadership . Though these
strategies were neither easy nor fast , they engendered
deep commitment among Chicago school workers and
quality work . Similarly , her relationships with organized women and the general public were intense , 
mutual , and ongoing . Indeed , the strong support she
gave and in turn received were necessary for her to
conceive and carry out the multiple , complex , and daring progressive reforms that mark her career . 
—Jackie M . Blount