What Does the Research Say About Inclusion ? 
A paradigm shift has occurred in the way students with special needs are served in schools . 
Special education is no longer viewed as ―separate‖ education ( Florian , 2010 )  . Current research 
supports the benefits of inclusive education and recent brain research offers insight into evidencebased strategies that facilitate academic improvement ( Willis , 2007 )  . In an age of accountability , 
schools and teachers are responsible for ensuring the success of all students regardless of socioeconomic status , cultural background , or disability ( Spasovski , 2010 )  . Learning outcomes , rather 
than student differences , are the focus of educators seeking to propel students forward by 
providing rich , accessible , academic experiences ( Florian , 2010 )  . Inclusive education empowers 
teachers and students to think and work collaboratively and promotes the notion that students with 
disabilities can learn alongside same-aged , non-disabled peers in the general education classroom 
( Willis , 2007 )  . Research shows students with learning disabilities taught in such a manner 
demonstrate more independence and are socially better adjusted ( Stainback , Stainback ,  & Forest , 
1989 ; Sapon-Shevin , 2008 )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
3
What is Inclusion ? 
Baltimore County Public Schools ( BCPS ) is committed to improving achievement for all 
students , maintaining a safe and orderly learning environment in every school , and using 
resources effectively and efficiently . Our graduates must have the knowledge , skills , and attitudes 
to reach their potential as responsible , productive citizens in a global economy and multicultural 
society . The Guide for Inclusive Education focuses on the primary concern of all educators : what 
students learn , how they learn , and the degree of their achievements . This handbook is based on 
the principles of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 , the Individuals with Disabilities Act of 
2004 , and Baltimore County Public Schools Blueprint for Progress . 
Inclusion requires a commitment to the belief that each child can learn and succeed , that 
individual differences enrich us all , that students at risk for failure can overcome that risk through 
involvement in a thoughtful and caring community of learners in which each child contributes to 
the learning process , and that effective learning results from the collaborative efforts of all 
stakeholders . 
The term inclusion represents an assumption that children with disabilities will participate and 
progress in the general education curriculum as appropriate , and that preschool children will 
participate in appropriate activities . The Least Restrictive Environment ( LRE ) is the educational 
setting where students with educational disabilities are fully participating members of the general 
education classroom , to the greatest extent appropriate , in their home school . Based on current 
research , students with disabilities can learn and develop when included in the general education 
classroom and when participating in extracurricular school activities with non-disabled peers . 
Providing related services , supplementary aids and services , and program modifications facilitates 
full participation of students with disabilities . Supports are also provided to school personnel . 
Components of Effective Inclusion Include : 
 A philosophy that placement of students with disabilities begins in the general education 
setting with age-appropriate peers . 
 An interdisciplinary team planning approach for the ongoing provision of supports and the 
delivery of instruction . 
 An instructional method that utilizes strategies that teach concepts and engage all students 
in the learning process . 
 An attitude that the administration and faculty accept ―ownership‖ for the success or 
failure of all students within their school community . 
From : All Inclusive : A Collaborative Effort from the MSDE , Division of Special Division of Special 
Education , and Early Intervention Services and the Maryland Coalition for Inclusive Education
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
4
Factors Influencing Inclusion
No Child Left Behind Act of 2001
The purpose of this act is to ensure that all children have a fair , equal , and 
significant opportunity to obtain a high quality education . This purpose can be 
accomplished by the following : 
• Closing the achievement gap between students of different ethnicities , 
socioeconomic classes , genders , and making sure that no child is left behind ; 
• Improving the academic performance of all students by providing equal access to 
curriculum and adequate yearly progress ; 
• Providing a high quality education by ―highly qualified‖ teachers ; 
• Promoting a learning environment that is safe , drug free , and conducive to 
learning ; and
• Ensuring that all students graduate from high school . 
No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 . U . S . Public Law 107 , 110
th Cong .  , 8 January 2001
Reauthorization of Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 2004
IDEA requires that a continuum of placement options be available to meet the needs of 
students with disabilities . The law states , ―To the maximum extent appropriate , children 
with disabilities , including children in public or private institutions or other care facilities , 
are educated with children who are not disabled , and special classes , separate schooling , or 
other removal of children with disabilities from the regular educational environment 
occurs only when the nature or severity of the disability of a child is such that education in 
regular classes with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be achieved 
satisfactorily . ‖
The Reauthorization of IDEA . Section 612 ( a )  ( 5 )  , 2004 . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
5
Blueprint for Progress : Realizing the Vision
Vision Statement : 
Baltimore County Public Schools ‘ graduates will have the knowledge , skills , and attitudes to 
reach their potential as responsible , productive citizens in a global economy and multicultural 
society . 
Mission Statement : 
Baltimore County Public Schools ‘ mission is to provide a quality education that develops the 
content knowledge , skills , and attitudes that will enable all students to reach their maximum
potential as responsible , life-long learners and productive citizens . 
Focused on Quality ; Committed to Excellence . Blueprint for Progress : Realizing the Vision . Adopted by the Board 
of Education , January 14 , 2003 .  ( Most recent update August 2010-2011 )  . 
Maryland State Department of Education , Division of Special Education / Early 
Intervention Services
―The Division of Special Education / Early Intervention Services collaborates with 
families , local early intervention systems , and local school systems to ensure that all 
children and youth with disabilities have access to appropriate services and educational 
opportunities to which they are entitled under federal and state laws ; and assists local 
early intervention systems and local school systems to comply with federal and state 
regulations and to implement policies and procedures through grant funding , 
professional development opportunities , technical assistance , and monitoring . ‖

Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
6
Quality Indicators for Inclusive Education
 School administrators clearly support and actively participate in providing leadership , 
guidance , and policies consistent with an inclusive philosophy . 
 School Improvement Plans address school-based needs for including students with 
disabilities . 
 All students receive instruction within an age-appropriate general education curricular 
framework . 
 Teachers differentiate instruction for a variety of learners ‘ needs by incorporating visual , 
tactile , and kinesthetic materials and experiences . 
 Teachers plan accommodations for students with disabilities , based on their IEP , and 
incorporate those accommodations into lesson plans and everyday instruction . 
 Teachers use evidence-based instructional practices that are based on individual student 
learning styles and needs . 
 General educators , special educators , and related service providers have time for 
collaborative planning . 
 The roles and responsibilities of teachers and other staff are clearly defined . 
 Instructional teams use a student-centered approach to planning and solution-finding 
strategies to solve problems . 
 Students with disabilities receive most , if not all , of their special education and related 
services ( e . g .  , physical therapy , occupational therapy , and speech / language therapy ) 
within the general education classroom , based on their Individual Education Program 
( IEP )  . 
 All staff view the instruction of students with disabilities as a shared responsibility 
between special and general educators . 
Source : Quality Indicators of Inclusive Education . Maryland Coalition for Inclusive Education 
( MCIE ) October 200
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
7
Inclusive Strategies 
 Scaffold the lesson to provide various levels of support . Gradually remove supports as 
students progress toward mastery . 
 Tier lessons to meet the needs of students at various readiness levels . 
 Vary instructional methods and materials . 
 Cooperative learning
 Graphic organizers
 Study guides
 Build rapport with students , co-teachers , and other adult support . 
 Reinforce effort and provide recognition . 
 Build self-esteem while promoting independence . 
 Set high expectations . 
 Model instruction . 
 Make instruction relevant and meaningful . 
 Offer choice . 
 Monitor progress consistently and continually . 
 Provide frequent , quality feedback . 
References
Stephen D . Kroeger , Cathy Burton , Christopher Preston , ―Integrating evidence-based practices in 
middle science reading‖ , Council for Exceptional Children , 2009 , pp . 6-15 . 
Robert J . Marzano , Debra Pickering , Jane E . Pollock , Classroom instruction that works ,  
( Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development 2001 )  . 
Judy Willis , Brain-friendly strategies for the inclusion classroom ,  ( Alexandria , VA : Association 
for Supervision and Curriculum Development 2007 )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
8
Characteristics of Students with Learning Disabilities
Students within a general education setting often demonstrate many different types of 
characteristics related to disabilities . Listed below are some of the more common areas / 
characteristics : 
Frequently displayed characteristics of students with learning disabilities are : 
 Short attention span . 
 Poor memory . 
 Difficulty following directions . 
 Inability to discriminate between / among letters , numerals , or sounds . 
 Poor reading and / or writing ability . 
 Eye-hand coordination problems ; poorly coordinated . 
 Difficulties with sequencing . 
 Disorganization and other sensory difficulties . 
Other characteristics that may be present in students with learning disabilities are : 
 Performs differently from day to day . 
 Responds inappropriately in many instances . 
 Distractible , restless , impulsive . 
 Says one thing but means another . 
 Doesn ‘ t adjust well to change . 
 Difficulty listening and remembering . 
 Difficulty telling time and knowing right from left . 
 Difficulty sounding out words . 
 Reverses letters . 
 Places letters in incorrect sequence . 
 Difficulty understanding words or concepts . 
 Delayed speech development ; immature speech . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
9
For more information visit the Learning Disabilities of America Web site at 

Common Types of Disabilities in the Inclusive Classroom
Learning Disabilities
Learning disabilities are neurologically-based processing problems . These processing problems 
can interfere with learning basic skills such as reading , writing , or math . They can also interfere 
with higher level skills such as organization , time planning , and abstract reasoning . 
The types of learning disabilities ( LD ) are identified by the specific processing problem . They 
might relate to getting information into the brain ( Input )  , making sense of this information 
( Organization )  , storing and later retrieving this information ( Memory )  , or getting this 
information back out ( Output )  . Thus , the specific types of processing problems that result in 
learning disabilities might be in one or more of these four areas . 
Each individual will have his or her unique pattern of LD . This pattern might cluster around 
specific common difficulties . For example , the pattern might primarily reflect a problem with 
language processing : auditory perception , auditory sequencing / abstraction / organization , auditory 
memory , and a language disability . Or the problem might be more in the visual input to motor 
output areas . Some people with LD will have a mixture of both . 
Input
Information is primarily brought into the brain through the eyes ( visual perception ) and ears 
( auditory perception )  . An individual might have difficulty in one or both areas . 
Auditory Perception ( Also called Receptive Language ) 
The individual might have difficulty distinguishing subtle differences in sound ( called 
phonemes ) or might have difficulty distinguishing individual phonemes at a normal rate . 
Either problem can result in difficulty processing and understanding what is said . 
Individuals might have difficulty with what is called auditory figure-ground . The 
individual may often have difficulty identifying what sound ( s ) to listen to when there is 
more than one sound . 
Visual Perception
Individuals might have difficulty distinguishing subtle differences in shapes ( called 
graphemes )  . They might rotate or reverse letters or numbers ( d , b , p , q , 6 , 9 )  ; thus 
misreading the symbol . Some might have a figure-ground problem , confusing what 
figure ( s ) to focus on from the page covered with many words and lines . They might skip 
words , skip lines , or read the same line twice . Others might have difficulty blending 
information from both eyes to have depth perception . They might misjudge depth or 
distance , bump into things or have difficulty with tasks where this information is needed 
to tell the hands or body what to do . If there is difficulty with visual perception , there 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
10
could be problems with tasks that require eye-hand coordination ( visual motor skills ) such 
as catching a ball , doing a puzzle , or picking up a glass . 
Integration
Once information is recorded in the brain ( input )  , three tasks must be carried out in order 
to make sense of or integrate this information . First , the information must be placed in the 
right order , or sequenced . Then , the information must be understood beyond the literal 
meaning , abstraction . Finally , each unit of information must be integrated into complete 
thoughts or concepts , organization . 
Sequencing
The individual might have difficulty learning information in the proper sequence . Thus , 
the individual might get math sequences wrong , have difficulty remembering sequences 
such as the months of the year , the alphabet , or the times table ; or the individual might 
write a report with all of the important facts but not in the proper order . 
Abstraction
A person might have difficulty inferring the meaning of individual words or concepts . 
Jokes , idioms , sarcasm , or puns are often not understood . The individual might have 
problems with words that might have different meanings depending on how they are used , 
for example , ―the dog‖ refers to a pet . ―You dog‖ is an insult . 
Organization
An individual might have difficulty organizing materials ‘  , losing , forgetting , or misplacing 
papers , notebooks , or homework assignments . The individual might have difficulty organizing the
environment , such as a bedroom . Some might have problems organizing time . They have 
difficulty with projects due at a certain time or with being on time .  ( Organization over time is 
referred to as Executive Function .  ) 
Memory
Three types of memory are important to learning . 
Working memory refers to the ability to hold on to pieces of information until the pieces 
blend into a full thought or concept . For example , reading each word until the end of a 
sentence or paragraph and then understanding the full content . 
 Example of working memory : An individual reads a sentence and holds on to it . 
Then the individual reads the next sentences . By the end of the paragraph , the 
person pulls together the meaning of the full paragraph . This is working memory . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
11
Short-term memory is the active process of storing and retaining information for a limited 
period of time . The information is temporarily available but not yet stored for long-term 
retention . 
 Example of short-term memory : An individual continues to read the full chapter 
and studies it . The Information is retained long enough to take a test and do well . 
This is short-term memory . 
Long-term memory refers to information that has been stored and that is available over a 
long period of time . Individuals might have difficulty with auditory memory or visual 
memory . 
 Example of long-term memory : Unless information is reviewed and studied over a 
longer period of time , it is not retained . With more effort over time , the 
information might become part of a general body of knowledge . It is now part of 
the individual ‘ s long-term memory . 
Output
Information is communicated by words ( language output ) or through muscle activity such as 
writing , drawing , or gesturing ( motor output )  . An individual might have a language disability 
( also called expressive language disability ) or a motor disability . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
12
Language Disability
Language output can be classified as being spontaneous or on demand . 
 Spontaneous language means that the person initiates the conversation . Thoughts have 
been organized and words are found before speaking . 
 Demand language means that an individual is asked a question or asked to explain 
something . The individual must then organize his or her thoughts , find the right words , 
and speak at the same time . 
Most individuals with a language disability have little difficulty with spontaneous language . 
However , during a demanding situation , the same individual might struggle to organize his or her 
thoughts or to find the right words . 
Motor Disability
An individual might have difficulty coordinating teams of small muscles , called a fine motor 
disability . The individual might have problems with coloring , cutting , writing , buttoning , or tying 
shoes . Individuals might also have difficulty coordinating teams of large muscles , called a gross 
motor disability . An individual with a gross motor disability is often awkward when running or 
jumping . 
For more information visit the Learning Disabilities of America Web site at 
. 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
13
Attention Deficit Disorder / Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder ( ADHD ) 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder ( ADHD ) is covered under the federal disability coding 
of Other Health Impairment . ADHD is a condition that becomes apparent in some children in the 
preschool and early school years . It is hard for these children to control their behavior and / or pay 
attention . 
ADHD is not considered to be a learning disability . It can be determined to be a disability under 
the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA )  , making a student eligible to receive 
special education services . However , ADHD falls under the category ―Other Health Impaired‖ 
and not under ―Specific Learning Disabilities . ‖ Many children with ADHD – approximately 20 
to 30 percent – also have a specific learning disability . 
The principle characteristics of ADHD are inattention , hyperactivity , and impulsivity . There 
are three subtypes of ADHD recognized by professionals . 
1 . Predominantly hyperactive / impulsive type : The individual does not show significant 
inattention . 
2 . Predominantly inattentive type : The individual does not show significant hyperactiveimpulsive behavior . It is referred to as ADD . 
3 . Combined type : The individual displays both inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive 
symptoms . 
Common Signs and Symptoms of ADHD
 Fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes . 
 Forms letters or words poorly ; messy writing . 
 Has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities . 
 Lacks follow– through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork or chores . 
 Avoids or strongly dislikes tasks ( such as schoolwork ) that require sustained mental effort 
 Is forgetful in daily activities . 
 Has difficulty organizing tasks and activities . 
 Loses things necessary for tasks or activities ( pencils , assignments , tools )  . 
 Shows difficulty engaging in leisure activities quietly . 
 Acts as if ―driven by a motor‖ and cannot remain still . 
 Blurts out answers to questions before the questions have been completed or often 
interrupts others . 
Strategies for Addressing ADHD in the Classroom
 Allow a child to change work sites frequently while completing homework or studying . 
 Assign tasks involving movement such as passing out papers or running errands . 
 Use music as a tool for transitioning , song = task . 
 Vary tone of voice : loud , soft , whisper . 
 Stage assignments and divide work into smaller chunks with frequent breaks . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
14
 Teach students to verbalize a plan before solving problems or undertaking a task . 
 Permit a child to do something with hands while engaged in sustained listening : stress 
ball , worry stone , paper folding , clay . 
 Use inconspicuous methods such as a physical cue to signal a child when she or he 
appears inattentive . 
 Provide opportunities for student to show divergent , creative , imaginary thinking and get 
peer recognition for originality . 
 Employ multi-sensory strategies when directions are given and lessons presented . 
For more information visit the Learning Disabilities of America Web site at 

Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
15
Autism Spectrum Disorders
The main signs and symptoms of autism involve language , social behavior , and behaviors 
concerning objects and routines : 
 Communication—both verbal ( spoken ) and non-verbal ( unspoken , such as pointing , eye 
contact , or smiling )  . 
 Social interactions—such as sharing emotions , understanding how others think and feel 
( sometimes called empathy )  , and holding a conversation , as well as the amount of time 
spent interacting with others . 
 Routines or repetitive behaviors—often called stereotyped behaviors , such as repeating 
words or actions , obsessively following routines or schedules , playing with toys or objects 
in repetitive and sometimes inappropriate ways , or having very specific and inflexible 
ways of arranging items . 
Health care providers think of autism as a ―spectrum‖ disorder—a group of disorders with a range 
of similar features . In general , the average age of autism diagnosis is currently three years old . 
Based on their specific strengths and weaknesses , people with autism spectrum disorders ( ASDs ) 
may have mild symptoms or more serious symptoms , but they all have an ASD . 
Currently , the Autism Spectrum Disorders category includes : 
 Autistic disorder ( also called ―classic‖ autism ) 
 Asperger syndrome 
 Pervasive Developmental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified ( or atypical autism ) 
In some cases , health care providers use a broader term—pervasive developmental disorders 
( PDD ) —to describe autism . The PDD category includes the ASDs mentioned above and : 
childhood disintegrative disorder and Rett syndrome . 
Students on the Autism Spectrum may share some or all of the following characteristics , which 
can vary from mild to severe : 
 Communication needs
 Difficulty relating to people , things , and events
 Playing with toys and objects in unusual ways
 Difficulty adjusting to changes in routine or to familiar surroundings
 Repetitive body movements or behaviors
 Difficulty with sensory regulation , sensory processing , and sensory integration
For more information about Autism visit the National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development ( NICHD ) Web site at :  . 
Strategies for Addressing Autism Characteristics in the Classroom
 Provide visual cues . 
 Establish routines and structure in the classroom . 
 Provide visual schedules with frequent reminders . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
16
 Familiarize students with new materials / information prior to using them in a lesson . 
 Use organizers to highlight significant topics . 
 Relate content information to student interests . 
 Reduce the number of transitions throughout the day . 
 Be familiar with the student ‘ s sensory needs / preferences . 
 Give directions step-by-step , verbally , visually , and by providing physical supports or 
prompts . 
 Be as concrete and explicit as possible in your instructions and feedback . 
 Build opportunities for the student to have social and collaborative interactions throughout 
the regular school day . 
 Have consistent routines and schedules . 
 Prepare the student for change by telling him / her what is going to be different and what to 
expect or do .  ( e . g .  , a field trip or assembly ) 
For more information about strategies for Autism visit the Council for Exceptional Web site at :  
. 
cfm & CONTENTID = 2424 . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
17
Emotional Disability
Emotional Disability is a condition that shows signs of one or more of the following 
characteristics over a long period of time and to the degree that adversely affects a child ‘ s 
educational performance : 
 An inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual , sensory , or health factors . 
 An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships with peers and 
teachers . 
 Inappropriate types of behavior or feelings under normal circumstances . 
 A general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression . 
 A tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated with personal or school 
problems . 
 Hyperactivity ( short attention span , impulsiveness )  . 
 Aggression or self-injurious behavior ( acting out , fighting )  . 
 Withdrawal ( not interacting socially with others , excessive fear or anxiety )  . 
 Immaturity ( inappropriate crying , temper tantrums , poor coping skills )  . 
 Learning difficulties ( academically performing below grade level )  . 
Children with the most serious emotional disabilities may exhibit distorted thinking , excessive 
anxiety , bizarre motor acts , and abnormal mood swings . 
Many children who do not have emotional disturbance may display some of these same behaviors 
at various times during their development . However , when children have an emotional disability , 
these behaviors continue over long periods of time . Their behavior signals that they are not 
coping with their environment or peers . 
For more information about emotional disabilities visit the National Dissemination Center for 
Children with Disabilities ( NICHCY ) Web site at :  
. 
Strategies for Addressing Emotional Disabilities
 Provide positive behavior supports . 
 Be familiar with the student ‘ s Functional Behavior Assessment and Behavior Intervention 
Plan . 
 Provide a consistent and structured behavior approach for addressing behavior . 
 Provide social skills instruction . 
For more information consult the section on ―Behavioral Management Strategies in the Inclusive 
Classroom‖ in this guide . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
18
Mild Intellectual Disabilities
Intellectual disability is characterized both by a significantly below-average score on a test of 
mental ability or intelligence and by limitations in the ability to function in areas of daily life , 
such as communication , self-care , and getting along in social situations and school activities . 
Children with an intellectual disability can and do learn new skills , but they develop more slowly 
than children with average intelligence and adaptive skills . There are different degrees of 
intellectual disability , ranging from mild to profound . A person ' s level of intellectual disability 
can be defined by their intelligence quotient ( IQ )  , or by the types and amount of support they 
need . 
Intellectual disability can start anytime before a child reaches the age of 18 years . It can be 
caused by injury , disease , or a brain abnormality . Children with intellectual disabilities may take 
longer to learn to speak , walk , and take care of their personal needs such as dressing or eating . 
They are likely to have trouble learning in school . They will learn , but it will take them longer . 
There may be some things they cannot learn . 
There are many characteristics of an intellectual disability . For example , children with an 
intellectual disability may : 
 Sit up , crawl , or walk later than other children . 
 Learn to talk later , or have trouble speaking . 
 Find it hard to remember things . 
 Not understand how to pay for things . 
 Have trouble understanding social rules . 
 Have trouble seeing the consequences of their actions , 
 Have trouble solving problems . 
 Have trouble thinking logically . 
Strategies for Students with Mild Intellectual Disabilities
 Use concrete language when speaking . 
 Use manipulatives and other concrete models during lessons . 
 Plan for tiered instruction based on ability level of students . 
 Structure and scaffold tasks according to individual levels . 
 Ensure that time expectations / task components are clear and concrete . 
 Include content , process , and product appropriate to the level of the students . 
 Demonstrate what you mean rather than giving verbal directions . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
19
 Break longer , new tasks into small steps . 
 Incorporate adaptive skills into daily instruction
 Provide extended time
For more information about strategies for addressing Mild Learning Disabilities visit the National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development ( NICHD ) Web site at :  
. 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
20
Twice Exceptional Students
Twice exceptional is a term used to describe students who are gifted but also have a disability . 
Students who are twice exceptional often display a discrepancy between their measured academic 
potential and their actual classroom performance . It is not uncommon for gifted children with 
disabilities to use their intelligence to try to circumvent the disability . However , in doing this , the 
disability may appear less severe because the student is using his / her intellect to cope , while the 
efforts expended in coping may hinder other expressions of giftedness . 
For more information on twice exceptional students visit the Council for Exceptional Children 
Web site at : 

gedPageDisplay . cfm & TPLID = 37 & ContentID = 5634 . 
Strategies for Teaching Twice Exceptional Students
 Be aware that many students who have learning difficulties are global learners who prefer 
visual and tactile-kinesthetic formats for learning success . 
 Teach concepts first and details second . 
 Assist the student to identify realistic short term goals for themselves . 
 Connect previous learning to new content . 
 Design lessons that address all senses . 
 Provide specific instruction on organizational strategies . 
 Incorporate technology into the learning process
 Design assessments and provide accommodations so that the assessment truly measures 
the student ‘ s knowledge while limiting the effect the student ‘ s disability has on his or her 
ability to demonstrate knowledge . 
References
Winebrenner , Susan ( 2006 )  . Teaching Strategies for Twice-Exceptional Students . Intervention in 
School and Clinic , 38 ( 3 )  : 131-137 . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
21
Continuum of Services
Federal law requires that ―to the maximum extent appropriate , children with disabilities including 
children in public or private institutions or care facilities , are educated with children who are 
nondisabled ; and special classes , separate schooling or other removal of children with disabilities 
from regular educational environment occurs only if the nature or severity of the disability is such 
that education in regular classes with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be 
achieved satisfactorily .  "  ( Individuals with Disabilities Act of 2004 , Pub . L . No . 108-446 , 20 
U . S . C . 1400 et seq .  ( 2004 )  .  ) 
In order to ensure a Free Appropriate Public Education ( FAPE ) for students , Baltimore County 
Public Schools offers a level of continuum of supports within each of its schools and has also 
identified the following continuum of service delivery model . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
22
Behaviors and Behavioral Management Strategies in the Inclusive Classroom
Effectively managing an inclusion classroom requires that the teachers not only be able to 
implement the additional supports required for the special education students , but also be able to 
manage the behaviors of all students within the classroom . Therefore it is necessary for all 
teachers within an inclusion setting to have a basic understanding of behavioral principles . 
Functions of Behavior : 
Student behavior is often the result of a need that goes unmet . Listed below are some basic 
functions of behavior and possible messages that students use to communicate their needs . 
FUNCTIONS OF BEHAVIOR POSSIBLE STUDENT MESSAGES TO 
INDICATE FUNCTION OF BEHAVIOR
1 . To gain access to social 
interaction 
 “ Play with me .  ”  
 “ Watch what I am doing .  ”  
 “ Can I have a turn , too ?  ”  
 “ I want to be part of the group .  ” 
2 . To gain access to activities , 
objects 
 “ I want to go outside .  ”  
 “ I want what he has .  ”  
 “ Let ’ s play a game .  ” 
3 . To terminate / avoid unwanted 
situations 
 “ I don ’ t know .  ”  
 “ Leave me alone .  ”  
 “ This is too hard .  ”  
 “ I need help .  ”  
 “ I don ’ t want to do this .  ”  
 “ Don ’ t tell me what to do .  ”  
 “ I ’ m bored .  ”  
 “ I need a break .  ” 
Students constantly needing a bathroom break
4 . To gain access to stimulating 
events 
 “ I like doing this .  ” 
Students always choosing the same activities
Gartner , A .  & Lipsky , D . K .  ( 2002 )  . Inclusion : A service , not a place . Port Chester , NY : Dude Publishing . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
23
Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports : 
What is Meant by Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports ? 
Positive behavioral interventions and supports are defined by The TA Center on Positive 
Behavioral Interventions and Supports as a decision–making framework that guides selection , 
integration , and implementation of the best evidence-based academic and behavioral practices for 
improving important academic and behavior outcomes for all students . 
Schools utilizing a Schoolwide Instructional & Positive Behavior Support program break their 
evidence-based best practices into a three-tiered prevention logic . This logic requires that all 
students receive supports at the universal or primary tier . If the behavior of some students is not 
responsive , more intensive behavioral supports are provided , in the form of a group contingency 
( selected or secondary tier ) or a highly individualized plan ( intensive or tertiary tier )  . See graphic 
below : 
For more information visit the Office of Special Education Programs , US Department of Education Web site for 
Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports at :  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
24
Why Do Schools Use Positive Behavioral Supports and Interventions ? 
Research supports that the implementation of Schoolwide Positive Behaviors is associated with 
reductions in problem behavior , reductions in office discipline referrals for problem behavior , and 
reductions in the proportion of students receiving out-of-school suspensions .  ( Horner , R . H .  , 
Sugai , G .  ,  & Anderson , C . M .  ( 2010 )  . Examining the evidence base for school-wide positive 
behavior support . Focus on Exceptional Children , 42 ( 8 )  , 1-12 .  ) 
Federal law also requires the implementation of positive behavioral interventions and supports . 
The use of ―Positive behavioral interventions and supports‖ for students whose behavior impedes 
their learning is required by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 2004 .  ( Individuals 
with Disabilities Act of 2004 , Pub . L . No . 108-446 , 20 U . S . C . 1400 et seq .  ( 2004 )  ) 
Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports in the Inclusive Classroom
Listed below are examples of classroom management strategies that can be used in the inclusive 
classroom : 
Structure Communication
Schedule posted
Rules posted
Clean , organized environment
Room arrangement
Daily jobs for students
Expectations stated positively to students 
[ avoid ―no , ‖ ―don ‘ t , ‖ ―stop‖ ] 
Directions given versus questions
Positive and meaningful communication 
between home and school
Consistency Positive reinforcement
Routines established ( i . e .  , pencil , trash , 
bathroom , drinks , etc .  ) 
Expectations clearly stated and remain the 
same every day
5 : 1 ratio ( praise , incentives , goal setting ) 
Listed below are examples of surface management strategies that can be used in the inclusive 
classroom : 
 Proximity control –moving near a child in a discreet fashion to help monitor the child ‘ s 
behavior . 
 Touch control – i . e .  , hand on shoulder . 
 Frequent circulation – Teacher moves about the room often to check on progress of 
students . Parent checks up on child ‘ s plans when away from home . 
 Planned ignoring – Ignore minor behaviors , not the child , and redirect . 
 Signal interference–parent / teacher uses a prearranged signal to alert the child to his / her 
misbehavior in an effort to stop the behavior before it escalates . 
 Respectful reprimands –Private and discreet interactions with child regarding the 
misbehavior . 
 Humor – Not sarcasm . 
 Prompting Hierarchies : 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
25
o One , two , three . 
o Verbal , gesture , physical . 
o Please , you need , you have a choice . 
 Manners modeling – Using please and thank you . 
 Relationship building : 
o Use child ‘ s name . 
o Learn general likes and dislikes . 
o Learn at least one detail about child ‘ s family or school activity . 
 Respect personal space : 
o Avoid hovering overtop of child . 
o Request permission before touching a child ‘ s belongings . 
 Minimize down time – keep children busy . 
 Assign special home / class jobs as needed . 
 Utilize individual child ‘ s strengths in the classroom or in the home .  
( Baltimore County Public Schools , Office of Special Education ( Fall 2006 )  .  " Improving Student Achievement through 
effective Behavior Management : Strategies for Parents , Teachers , and Support Staff .  "  ) 
Proactive Strategies : 
One of the most successful ways to successfully manage behaviors in the classroom is to 
incorporate proactive strategies on a daily basis that prevent negative behaviors from manifesting . 
Listed below are some proactive strategies for preventing negative classroom behaviors from 
occurring : 
Instructional Strategies 
 Avoid giving difficult problems for independent seatwork . 
 Avoid requiring repetitive tasks . 
 Shorten lessons . 
 Reduce the number of problems on a page . 
 Mix difficult problems with easier ones . 
 Mix tasks that students have mastered with ones that have not been mastered . 
 Provide choices of tasks , materials , activities , etc . 
 Include student preferences whenever possible . 
 State clear expectations at the start of a lesson . 
 Offer frequent breaks . 
Social Strategies 
 Avoid long delays . 
 Change voice intonation regularly . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
26
 Modify schedules to encourage movement and vary types of activities . 
 Schedule non-preferred activities with preferred ones . 
 Provide students with clear and easily understood directions . 
 Schedule preferred activities in daily routines . 
 Provide opportunities for students to sit alone when needed .  
( Gartner , A .  & Lipsky , D . K .  ( 2002 )  . Inclusion : A service , not a place . Port Chester , NY : Dude Publishing .  ) 
Setting Limits : 
Although being proactive can greatly reduce student misbehavior , there will be times when 
behaviors occur and need to be addressed in the classroom . To successfully address student 
behavior , the teacher should set limits on inappropriate behaviors . Effective limits should be 
clear and concise , consistent , and enforceable . 
Steps for Effectively Setting Limits : 
1 . Explain exactly which behavior is inappropriate . 
 Don ‘ t assume that the student automatically knows which behavior is inappropriate . 
2 . Explain why the behavior is inappropriate . 
 Remain calm and confident when explaining why the behavior is inappropriate . 
 Don ‘ t take the inappropriate behavior personally . Remember you are the professional . 
3 . Present reasonable choices or consequences . 
 Consequences should be immediate , logical , short–lived , appropriately related to the 
offensive behavior , escalating , and used to educate the student . 
4 . Allow time . 
 Providing time allows the student to process the choices they were provided and to 
make their decision . 
5 . Enforce the consequences . 
 When enforcing consequences remember to avoid power struggles . 
For more information on effectively setting limits visit the National Crisis Prevention Institute Web site :  
. 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
27
Consequences / Teacher Responses : 
Once limits have been given , it is imperative that consequences be enforced if the student 
misbehavior continues . It is important to remember that consequences must be enforceable in 
order to be effective . 
Guidelines for Consequences
 Make sure the consequence is logically related to the misbehavior . 
 Act : don ‘ t talk . Too much talk interferes with the effectiveness of a consequence . 
 Never get involved with a power struggle . You will always lose . 
 Remain calm . Never act in anger . 
 Be firm , but fair . Don ‘ t deviate from the consequence that was identified in the limit–
setting stage . 
 Focus on the present . Don ‘ t address past behaviors when administering a consequence . 
 Present the consequence matter-of-factly .  
( Saphier , J .  & Gower , R .  ( 1997 )  . The skillful teacher : Building your teacher skills ( 5th ed .  )  . Acton , 
Massachusetts : Research for Better Teaching , Inc .  ) 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
28
COLLABORATION AND CO-TEACHING
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
29
What Does the Research Say About Collaboration and Co-Teaching ? 
Researchers report that co-teaching is a method by which educators can work collaboratively to 
deliver quality instruction ( Murawski & Hughes , 2009 )  . However , it is essential for educators to 
work ―collaboratively . ‖ According to Scruggs , et al ( 2007 )  ,  ( the key components of successful 
co-teaching and collaboration between the general education teacher and the special education 
teacher are their attitude , availability of planning time , voluntary participation , mutual respect , 
administrative support , and a shared philosophy of instruction and behavior management .  ) 
Although co-teaching as an instructional method has been used for two decades , it hasn ‘ t been 
until recently that data and research has been conducted and collected regarding its effectiveness 
on student learning . This has been primarily a result of the Act of 2001and the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act , which hold educators accountable for the learning of all students . 
Recent research indicates co-teaching is in fact an effective means to meeting the needs of 
individual students . In one study by Hang and Rabren ( 2010 )  , students in co-taught classes were 
shown to have higher grades in core courses and attend more school days than those in pullout 
programs . Their teachers also perceived these students to improve upon their overall academic 
performance during their co-taught years . In addition , another positive effect of co-teaching 
indicates that teachers in co-taught classes engage in more active instruction , learn different 
strategies from one another , and are more easily able to differentiate in the classroom ( Hang & 
Rabren , 2010 )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
30
Definition of Collaboration
A collaborative team is a group of individuals who share common beliefs and work toward 
common goals . Collaborative teams build on the strengths of their members and grow and change 
as problems are addressed and solved . Collaborative planning for each school will be unique , 
based upon the needs of the student population and faculty in a given year . Shared decision 
making , flexibility , and creative problem-solving strategies will help teachers in their transition to 
restructured roles . 
Historically , teaching has been a profession in which individuals took responsibility for the 
outcomes of a group of students . It has not been a collaborative activity whereby a group of 
teachers work as colleagues for the purpose of developing creative instructional solutions through 
shared responsibility for the outcomes of a group of students . 
Collaboration is based on the premise that a group ‘ s effectiveness exceeds what individuals may 
accomplish on their own . Collaborative teams benefit by sharing diverse knowledge , ideas , and 
levels of expertise ( Maryland Coalition for Inclusive Education & Maryland State Department of 
Education , 1999 )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
31
Elements of Collaboration
Having a Shared Philosophy 
 All students can learn . 
 Appreciate and understand diverse learning styles / preferences . 
 Classroom procedures are clear and consistent . 
 Behavior is addressed proactively . 
 Student inputs and choices are key . 
 Parents should play a role in the collaborative process . 
Establishing Effective Communication 
 Meet regularly to discuss , plan , and reflect on best practices . 
 All members of the collaborative partnership are included in the decision-making process . 
 Be active listeners to one another . 
 Be respectful of others and their contributions . 
 Accept mutual responsibility for successes and failures . 
Maintaining Positive Attitudes 
 Voice questions and concerns in a productive manner . 
 Share constructive feedback . 
 Be supportive of all collaborative partners . 
 Show flexibility . 
 Acknowledge efforts . 
 Share materials and resources . 
Clarifying Roles and Responsibilities 
 Agree on specific roles and responsibilities . 
 Clearly outline the weekly schedule , objectives , and individual assignments . 
 Share duties equitably whenever possible . 
 Recognize that all collaborative team members are equally important to all students . 
 Provide support to help members fulfill roles . 
 Provide regular opportunities for both teachers to contribute to instruction in class . 
Maximizing Effectiveness 
 Rely on each other for technical expertise , shared resources , and moral support . 
 Know where to find and how to use other supports within the system as needed . 
 Use a collaborative problem-solving process . 
 Clearly state the problem . 
 Brainstorm possible solutions . 
 Select appropriate solutions . 
 Develop a plan to implement solutions : include established responsibilities , 
timeline , and location . 
 Implement the plan : follow established procedures and leave room for flexibility . 
 Reflect on the outcome : evaluate its effectiveness and modify as needed . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
32
Communication for Effective Collaboration
Successful collaboration is more than planning lessons in which both educators are essential . It also 
relies on effective and ongoing communication . The following are some suggested topics for 
discussion to help build and maintain positive working relationships . Most collaborative teams find 
they may have to add a few topics to the list to meet their needs . 
Instructional beliefs : Collaborative teams need to reach an agreement on their beliefs about the 
ability of all students to learn , and the rights of students to experience success in their classroom , 
regardless of their ability level and their own role in student learning . They also must determine 
each team member ‘ s role in student learning . 
Parity Signals : Collaborative teams understand and signal to others that they are equal partners . 
This may be demonstrated by having appropriate desks and storage space , and by using both 
teachers ‘ names on the classroom entrance , schedules , and correspondence . 
Confidentiality : Collaborative teams must agree on which of their activities are public matters 
and which are to be considered confidential classroom matters . The issues of confidentiality and 
trust are essential to the success of collaboration . Events of the day should not be replayed in the 
hallway , lunchroom , or other public areas unless agreed upon by the co-teaching team . 
Noise : Educators tolerate varying levels of noise in the classroom . Discuss preferences and 
instructional style related to noise , and reach an agreement on what is acceptable . Develop a 
signal to indicate when noise is approaching an unacceptable level . 
Routines : Collaborative teams clearly define organizational and instructional routines . By 
determining the system of organization and routines before co-teaching , the team avoids conflict . 
Issues such as the handling of materials , attendance , grading , monitoring student progress , 
homework policies , and developing organizational strategies for students ‘ daily work and 
notebooks may be topics for discussion . 
Discipline : Collaborative teams define for one another their beliefs relative to student behavior 
and discipline . Agree on classroom rules . Establish the consequences for both acceptable and 
unacceptable behavior . 
Feedback : Collaborative teams need to periodically review and discuss shared efforts in the 
classroom or school environment to maintain their professional relationship . Consider aspects of 
instruction that have been successful , as well as those that need refinements . Debrief in a manner 
that is concise , specific , and geared to change . 
Pet Peeves : Most educators have pet peeves related to the students and the classroom 
environment that may interfere with positive working relationships . Share pet peeves , respect 
differences , and discuss possible alternatives . 
Source : Cook , L .  & Friend , M .  ( November 2005 ) Co-Teaching : Guidelines for Creating Effective 
Practices . Focus on Exceptional Children . 28 ( 3 ) 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
33
Guide Questions for Creating Effective Collaborative Relationships
Instructional Beliefs
 What are our overriding philosophies about the roles of teachers , paraeducators , and students ? 
 How do our instructional beliefs affect our instructional practice ? 
Parity Signals
 How will we convey to students and others that we are equal partners in the classroom ? 
 What steps can we take to ensure a sense of parity during instruction ? 
Confidentiality
 What information about our teaching do we want to share with others ? 
 Which information should not be shared ? 
 Which information about students can be shared with others ? 
 Which information should not be shared ? 
Noise
 What noise level are we comfortable with in the classroom ? 
 What procedures should we follow when the noise reaches an unacceptable level ? 
 At what points in the lesson is it appropriate to have more / less noise ? 
Classroom Routines
 What are the instructional routines for the classroom ? 
 What are the organizational routines for the classroom ? 
Discipline
 What is acceptable and unacceptable student behavior ? 
 Who will intervene when students exhibit unacceptable behavior ? 
 What are the rewards and consequences used in the classroom ? 
Feedback
 What procedures can we establish for giving each other feedback ? 
 What steps can we take for voicing , acknowledging , and addressing both positive and 
negative feedback ? 
Pet Peeves
 What aspects of teaching and classroom life do we each feel strongly about ? 
 How can we identify our pet peeves in order to avoid them ? 
 How can we establish compromise so that we both feel that our values are being 
acknowledged ? 
Source : Cook , L .  & Friend , M .  ( November 2005 ) Co-Teaching : Guidelines for Creating Effective 
Practices . Focus on Exceptional Children . 28 ( 3 ) 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
34
The Collaborative Continuum
Special Education Self-Contained : If a student is in a class that is 
only for students with special needs ( IEPs )  , there are still 
opportunities for collaboration . Special educators can combine their 
classes with other classes occasionally for activities / units , or students 
without special needs might come to the special education class for 
specific activities ( referred to as ―reverse mainstreaming‖ or ―push 
in‖ )  . 
Special Education ―Pull Out‖ : Sometimes a student is in a general 
education class but is ―pulled out‖ by a special educator or service 
provider ( e . g .  , speech / language pathologist ) for additional help . This is 
generally not considered very collaborative and often results in the 
student missing out on general education content . However , educators 
can work to be collaborative by communicating about what each of 
them is doing and determining when it is best for the student to be
―pulled out‖ , and if there are other students who would benefit as well 
( including those without IEPs )  . 
Co-Teaching : If a class is co-taught , then students with and without 
disabilities are in the same general education class and teachers are 
working collaboratively to meet all needs . This provides more direct 
support to students than in-class support or monitoring , but requires 
students to meet the higher expectations and standards ( both academic 
and behavioral ) of the general education class . 
In-Class Support : In-class support is when the special service 
provider ( special education , Title I , speech , etc .  ) comes into the 
general education classroom to help as needed . This may occur daily , 
weekly , or monthly . There is generally les collaboration and 
communication when this occurs , although the more there is , the better 
for students and teachers . 
Monitoring : Indirect , rather than direct support , is offered to students 
through the collaboration and communication of educators and support 
personnel . Service providers may only pop into classes occasionally to 
check up on the student to ensure success and provide the general 
educators with suggestions , accommodations , and necessary support . 
Wendy W . Murawski , Co-teaching in the Inclusive Classroom : Working Together to Help All of 
Your Students Succeed ,  ( Bellevue , WA : Bureau of Education and Research , 2008 )  . Level of Support Needed
Least
Most
Level of Collaboration Needed
Most
Least
Least
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
35
Roles and Responsibilities for Effective Collaboration
One of the most important elements of effective team collaboration is defining the roles and 
responsibilities of each team member . It must be emphasized that flexibility and fluidity are key 
components when defining the roles and responsibilities of collaborative team members . The 
members ‘ roles and responsibilities may be modified throughout the year to form a variety of 
collaborative relationships . Exactly who does what from one day to the next is determined by the 
needs of the students and the complementary skills of the educators involved . Over the next few 
pages , roles of professionals and how they can support classroom instruction are outlined . 
Administrator : 
 Includes department chairs , assistant principals , principals , and district staff . 
 Manages the educational program of all students . 
 Participates as a member of collaborative problem-solving teams that provide solutions to 
barriers inhibiting successful inclusion of students . 
 Secures resources to enable staff to meet the needs of all students . 
 Conducts formal and informal evaluations to provide constructive feedback . 
 Offers instructional support as needed . 
General Educator : 
 Highly qualified teacher . 
 Plans collaboratively with special educators and other members of the staff to meet the 
needs of all learners . 
 Shares responsibilities with special educators and other support personnel for teaching and 
assessing assigned students . 
 Seeks support of special educators and other support personnel for students experiencing 
difficulty in learning . 
 Monitors and evaluates class / student performance . 
 Supervises paraeducators , related service providers , and other support staff in providing 
services to meet student needs . 
 Gives paraeducators and other support staff directions on how to support instruction and 
facilitate activities during class . 
 Encourages students to be tutors and social supports for one another . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
36
Special Educator : 
 Highly qualified teacher who also provides services for students with special needs ( IEPs )  . 
 Plans collaboratively with general educators and other support personnel to meet the 
instructional and assessment needs of all learners . 
 Co-teaches with general educators in the general education classes . 
 Communicates regularly with general education teachers and other special educators for 
updates on student progress . 
 Monitors and evaluates student performance including progress toward IEP goals and 
objectives . 
 Supervises paraeducators and other support staff in providing services to meet student 
needs . 
 Gives paraeducators and other support staff directions on how to support instruction and 
facilitate activities during class . 
 Encourages and trains students to be peer tutors and social supports for one another . 
Related Service Provider : 
 Offer behavior intervention and support . 
 Provide curriculum modification and support . 
 Assist with in-class accommodations . 
 Consult one-on-one with staff about best practices for students with special needs . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
37
Teaching Actions During Co-Teaching
Both teachers are actively engaged in teaching , alternating the instructional lead . 
If one of you is doing this… The other can be doing this…
Lecturing / Providing direct instruction to 
the whole class . 
 Modeling note taking on the board / overhead ; ensuring ―brain 
breaks‖ to help students process lecture information . 
 Circulating , providing one-on-one support as needed / proximity 
control of student behavior . 
 Modeling metacognitive processes that students should be 
engaged in . 
 Observing for signs of confusion in facial expressions / written 
work . 
 Asking questions of teacher lecturing to reflect student needs . 
 Providing clarifications and elaborative explanations and 
reminding students of strategies that might be helpful in 
understanding / retaining ( Repeat , Rephrase , Redirect )  . 
Taking roll  Collecting and reviewing last night ‘ s homework ; introducing a 
social or study skill . 
Passing out papers  Reviewing directions ; modeling first problem on the assignment . 
Giving directions orally  Writing down instructions on board ; repeating or clarifying any 
difficult concept . 
Checking for understanding with large 
heterogeneous group of students
 Checking for understanding with small heterogeneous group of 
students . 
Working with half the class on one piece of 
an activity
 Working with the other half of the class on note taking / makeup work , or a different activity . 
Facilitating a silent activity  Circulating , using proximity control for behavior management ; 
checking student work for common errors and working with 
small groups to further student understanding . 
Running last minute copies or errands  Reviewing homework ; providing a study or test-taking strategy . 
Re-teaching or pre-teaching with a small 
group
 Monitoring large group as they work on practice materials . 
Facilitating sustained silent reading  Reading aloud quietly with a small group ; previewing upcoming 
information . 
Reading a test aloud to a group of students  Proctoring a test silently with a group of students . 
Creating basic lesson plans for standards , 
objectives , and content curriculum
 Providing suggestions for modifications , accommodations , and 
activities for diverse learners . 
Facilitating stations or groups  Also facilitating stations or groups . 
Explaining a new concept  Conducting role play or modeling concept . 
 Asking clarifying questions . 
Considering modification needs  Considering enrichment opportunities . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
38
Adapted from : Murawski , W . W .  ( 2003 )  . Co-teaching in the Inclusive Classroom : Working 
Together to Help All Your Students Find Success . Bellevue , WA : Institute for Educational 
Development . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
39
Paraeducator : 
 Paraeducators consist of both Instructional Assistants ( IAs ) and Adult Assistants 
( AAs )  . 
 Observe and record student progress . 
 Observe and chart student behavior . 
 Read tests and / or directions .  * 
 Assist with written tasks .  * 
 Facilitate students ‘ active participation .  * 
 Modify or adapt instructional materials . 
 Reteach or reinforce concepts to a small group using alternate materials .  * 
 Set up learning centers . 
 Provide cues or prompts to enhance student attention or behavior .  * 
 Provide positive reinforcement and support .  * 
 Help students develop and monitor organizational skills .  * 
 Read textbooks or stories to students .  * 
 Monitor classroom assessments . 
 Assist in preparation of materials .  * 
 Review lesson plans with the teacher . 
 Provide accommodations to students with IEPs .  * 
 Consult with teacher regarding individual students . 
 Monitor or facilitate testing . 
 Maintain confidentiality of all student information .  * 
 Celebrate accomplishments .  * 
Adapted from : Maryland Coalition for Inclusive Education presentation to BCPS paraeducators , 
June 2002 , ―20 Things Paraeducators Can Do to Assist Teachers and Students‖ 
* Indicators show responsibilities for which Adult Assistants are qualified , all other suggestions 
are specific to Instructional Assistants only . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
40
Adapted from : Murawski , Wendy W . Collaborative Teaching in Secondary Schools : Making the CoTeaching Marriage Work . Corwin , 2009 . 
Teacher / Paraeducator Actions During Co-Teaching
If the teacher is doing this… The paraeducator can be doing this…
Greeting students at the door .  Taking roll . 
 Collecting last night ‘ s homework . 
 Passing out papers . 
 Setting up individualized student stations . 
 Getting supplies ready . 
 Directing students to begin . 
Lecturing / providing direction instruction to the 
whole class . 
 Modeling note taking on the board or overhead . 
 Circulating . 
 Providing support as needed . 
 Providing proximity control . 
 Observing for signs of confusion in facial 
expressions / written work . 
 Asking questions of teacher lecturing to reflect 
student needs . 
 Refocusing students . 
 Referring students to posted rules to remind them 
to stay on task . 
 Collecting data / point sheets on students . 
Giving directions orally .  Writing down instructions on board or overhead . 
Checking for understanding with large 
heterogeneous group of students . 
 Checking for understanding with small 
heterogeneous group of students . 
Working with half the class on one piece of an 
activity . 
 Working with the other half of the class on ( note 
taking ) make-up work or a different activity that 
the teacher has planned and provided . 
Facilitating a silent activity .  Circulating , using proximity control , checking 
student work for common errors , and working with 
small groups to further student understanding . 
Circulating , using proximity control for 
behavior management , checking student work 
and working with small groups to further 
student understanding . 
 Facilitating a silent activity . 
Providing a study or test-taking strategy .  Running last-minute copies or errands . 
 Reviewing homework . 
 Checking agenda books . 
Reteaching or pre-teaching with a small group .  Monitoring large group as they work on practice 
materials . 
Monitoring large group as they work on 
practice materials . 
 Reteaching a small group . 
Facilitating sustained silent reading .  Reading aloud quietly with a small group
 Setting up Kurzweil . 
Reading a test aloud to a group of students .  Monitoring a test silently with a group of students . 
Facilitating stations or groups .  Also facilitating stations or groups . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
41
The following descriptions of roles and responsibilities for parents and students below are not 
limited to what is written here , they are only guidelines . Regularly communicating with the 
general educator in the student ‘ s classes is critical for knowing what roles parents and students 
play in the classroom and schoolwide . 
Student : 
 Engages actively in instruction , advocacy , and decision making for self . 
 Works with other students in cooperative learning arrangements . 
 Complies with school and classroom rules and procedures and employs effective work 
habits . 
Parent : 
 Provides support to the instructional team and student . 
 Maintains an open line of communication with the school community . 
 Promotes regular school attendance , compliance with school and classroom rules and 
procedures , and appropriate work habits for school success . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
42
Creating Time for Collaborative Planning
Time to collaborate during the school day is a critical ingredient for implementing any 
educational innovation . It is also critical for planning the implementation of special education 
services and support in general education classes . Teachers and related services staff need to 
share their expertise , clarify barriers to implementing services , find solutions to behavioral and 
academic challenges presented by students , and design plans for individuals and groups of 
students . 
Lack of time for adults to collaborate is a persistent barrier to implementing quality education 
services . Individual team members may be assigned to support the same student or several 
students . If teachers do not have the same understanding of their roles and expectations , they may 
not have the same vision for the student ‘ s program . Without time for discussion , adults who serve 
students in the same classroom may not be equal partners , may not be as effective as they could 
be , and may inadvertently work at cross-purposes . Although finding collaborative planning time 
may be one of the most difficult problems for schools to solve , it is central to successfully 
supporting all students and is the means to finding practical solutions ( MCIE , 2006 )  . 
Finding Collaborative Planning Time
 Identify and preserve a regularly scheduled time , convenient to all team members , to plan , 
problem-solve , and discuss topics of concern . 
 Invite special education teachers to join grade-level planning meetings to collaborate on 
issues of instruction and curriculum for students with support needs . 
 Use faculty meetings on alternate weeks for team meetings . 
 Use part or all of some faculty meetings for sharing or for problem solving ; have the 
principal facilitate . 
 Schedule meeting time on a schoolwide basis so common prep time can be scheduled for 
all members of grade-level teams . 
 Plan , schedule , and use collaboration days during the school year . 
 For one day each week , schedule a common lunch period ; ideally this lunch period should 
be scheduled before or after a common prep period . 
Source : Maryland Coalition for Inclusive Education & Maryland State Department of Education 
( 2006 )  . Collaborative Team Practices . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
43
Coordinating Schedules
 Have principals and teachers design a collaborative planning schedule . 
 Designate and coordinate planning times for grade / department planning schedule . 
 Restructure school planning teams ( grade level and department ) so special education 
teachers are members . 
 Establish common lunch or recess schedules by grades . 
 Use parallel block scheduling ( Myers , 2008 ) to create common planning opportunities . 
 Have principals arrange master schedule so a given grade level has back-to-back specials 
twice a week to assist in planning . 
 Hire a floating , trained , substitute teacher to rotate among classes and free up 30-45–
minute blocks of the classroom teacher ‘ s time . 
 Advocate annually with central office when the school calendar is planned to have 
professional time reserved for teaming . 
 Use teacher / staff on a rotating basis at early morning , dismissal , and duty-free lunchtime 
to block out time for grade level teams to meet . 
 Utilize professionals in the school who do not have assigned class groups to plan and 
deliver instructional activities to provide release time . 
 Substitute collaborative planning meetings for other duties ( lunch duty , hall duty , etc .  )  . 
Source : Snell , M . E .  , Janney , R .  , Elliott , J .  , et al ( 2005 )  . Collaborative Teaming .  ( 2nd Ed )  . 
Baltimore : P . H . Brookes Publishing . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
44
Co-Teaching 
Definition
Co-teaching occurs when two or more licensed professionals jointly deliver purposeful instruction 
and share accountability for a single heterogeneous group of students in a common physical 
space .  
( Adapted from Friend , 2008 ) 
History of Co-Teaching
According to Conderman , et al ( 2009 )  , the public school classroom of the early 1900s focused on 
homogenous groupings of students with the idea that ―one size fits all‖ ( p . vi )  . The teacher 
presented instruction in one way , to all students , and hoped that each would eventually learn and 
succeed . Students with disabilities were taught in isolated classrooms and had little interaction 
with their general education peers . However , as a result of the civil rights movement , the case of 
Brown vs . Board of Education in 1954 ruled that separate was not equal and helped to pave the 
way for the full inclusion of students with disabilities into general education classroom 
( Murawski , 2010 )  . 
Other legislations soon followed , including Section 504 of the Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 
1973 which prevents discrimination against all individuals with disabilities in federal funded 
programs , especially public schools ( Friend & Bursuck , 2002 )  . Moreover , this legislation allows 
students who do not qualify to receive services through special educational , to receive other types 
of assistance to help them succeed in school ( Friend & Bursuck , 2002 )  . 
Most currently , the 2002 legislation No Child Left Behind ( NCLB )  , and the amendments to the 
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA ) in 1997 and 2004 , have made ensuring the 
success of every student an increasingly hot topic in education today . The inclusion of students 
with disabilities into regular classroom settings with the already diverse population of students in 
each class presents the teacher with the ever-growing challenge of providing appropriate 
instruction that meets the individual needs of all learners . Also , Murawski ( 2010 ) states , the 
additional requirement that students with disabilities participate in all statewide assessments is 
forcing educators to make changes in the way in which curriculum and instruction is delivered to 
students . It is indeed a task too large for any one person , and thus , has resulted in the growing 
popularity of co-teaching . 
Rationale for Co-Teaching
 Provides greater intensity of instruction and opportunities for student engagement . 
 Increases understanding and respect for student diversity and the development of a 
heterogeneously based classroom community . 
 Minimizes instructional fragmentation and provides more time on task . 
 Fosters a sense of support among professionals . 
 Provides opportunities to capitalize on the diverse knowledge and instructional strengths 
of one another . 
 Provides increased instructor-to-learner ratio . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
45
 Increases opportunities for ongoing assessment to monitor student progress and respond to 
student needs . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
46
Planning for Co-Teaching 
Planning for co-teaching requires positive interdependence among co-teaching team members , 
mutual respect , face-to-face exchange , and trust . 
Tips for Co-Planning : 
DISH is an acronym used to describe the characteristics of effective co-planning . 
• Defined Roles –A distribution of leadership among team members . Roles may rotate at each 
additional meeting . 
• Individual Accountability – there is shared ownership for planning and delivery of 
instruction with established ground rules . 
• Social Skills – requires your planning team members to utilize the problem-solving process 
and to be solution oriented . 
• Have an Established Agenda –start with the positive aspects of the relationship , complete the 
necessary tasks , and provide timely responses to questions / requests . 
Sources : 
Snell , M . and Janney , R .  ( 2000 )  . Collaborative Teaming , Baltimore , Brookes . 
Villa , R .  ( 2002 )  . Collaborative Planning : The Co-Teaching Model , National Professional 
Resources , Inc .  , videocassette . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
47
Recommendations for Effective Co-Planning 
What / How / Who Approach to Co-Planning
What are we 
teaching ? 
General 
Educator 
Leads
 What is the lesson ‘ s 
objective ? 
 What are the essential 
questions and key 
vocabulary ? 
 What are the essential skills 
necessary to meet the 
objective ? 
5 minutes
How will we 
structure the 
lesson to 
maximize student 
learning ? 
A Dialogue 
Between 
Special 
Educator and
General 
Educator
 Which instructional 
strategies will we use 
during instruction ? 
 What materials will we 
need for this lesson ? 
 Which co-teaching format 
will best meet the needs of 
the learners in this lesson ? 
 How will we assess this 
objective ( formally and 
informally )  ? 
7 minutes
Who are our 
students and how 
will the lesson be 
differentiated to 
meet the needs of 
all learners ? 
Special 
Educator 
Leads
 Who are the students and 
what are their specific 
strengths and needs ? 
 How might we differentiate 
to meet the needs of all 
learners ? 
 What types of behavioral or 
academic modifications 
might we need to make ? 
5 minutes
Adapted from ( Murawski , 2010 ) 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
48
Co-Teaching Models
The co-teaching models described in this section serve as examples of what co-teaching might 
look like in the inclusive classroom . All approaches may be modified in a variety of ways to 
address subject matter , students ‘ maturity levels , and teachers ‘ skill and creativity . Additional 
resources related to the implementation of the co-teaching models represented in The Guide for 
Inclusive Education are provided in the bibliography . 
 Team Teaching
 Parallel Teaching
 Alternative Teaching 
 Station Teaching
 One Teach – One Assist
Please visit the link below for a video highlighting each of these co-teaching models . 
Power of 2 : Part 1 – ―Chapter 6 : Classroom Practices‖

Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
49
Implementing the Co-Teaching Models
What is it ? When can it be used ? How can it be used ? 
Team Teaching –Both teachers 
deliver the same instruction at the 
same time . Instruction is 
delivered in a large group setting . 
Both teachers speak freely ; 
instruction is a ―conversation . ‖
 During a lesson in which 
instructional conversation is 
appropriate . 
 In co-teaching situations where 
the teachers have considerable 
experience and a high sense of 
comfort with content and each 
other . 
 In science , one teacher explains 
the experiment while the other 
demonstrates using necessary 
materials . 
 In social studies , teachers 
debate U . S . foreign policy 
issues . 
 In English , teachers act out a 
scene from a piece of literature . 
 As the steps in a math process 
are taught , one walks through 
the steps while the other does a 
―Think Aloud‖ activity . 
 One teacher talks while the 
other models note taking on the 
board or overhead . 
Alternative Teaching– One 
teacher works with a small group 
while the other instructs the rest of 
the class . The small group can be 
used for pre-teaching , re-teaching , 
enrichment , or assessment . 
Groups should be heterogeneous , 
and the teacher who works with 
the small group should alternate . 
 In situations where students ‘ 
mastery of concepts taught ( or 
about to be taught ) varies 
tremendously . 
 When enrichment is desired . 
 The large group completes a 
practice exercise related to the 
concepts just taught ; the small 
group receives additional direct 
instruction . 
 The large group checks 
homework ; the small group is 
pre-taught vocabulary related 
to the day ‘ s lesson . 
Parallel Teaching–Co-teachers 
split the class and both teach the 
information simultaneously . They 
can teach in the following ways : 
 Same content , same way . 
 Same content , different way . 
 Different content . 
 When a lower adult-student 
ratio is needed to improve 
instructional efficiency . 
 To foster student participation 
is discussions . 
 For activities such as 
reteaching , drill , practice , and 
test review . 
 If the group is divided in half , 
the use of science materials can
be more closely monitored . 
 If students are split into two 
groups , more students would 
have a chance to share their 
alternative ending to a story . 
 If each teacher takes a group of 
students and presents 
environmental issues – one from 
the point of view of business and 
industry and one from the point 
of view of environmentalists , the 
class can later have a spirited 
discussion on the topic . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
50
What is it ? When can it be used ? How can it be used ? 
Station Teaching– Content , 
materials and instruction are 
divided into three or more 
stations .  ( Students may have to 
work independently .  ) Students 
rotate around the room , visiting 
each station for a specific period 
of time . 
 When several topics comprise 
instruction . 
 In lessons , in which part of 
planned instruction is review . 
 During language arts 
instruction , one station will 
address comprehension of a 
recently-read piece of 
literature , one station will focus 
on editing of a writing 
assignment , and one station 
will consist of an activity 
related to a skill being taught . 
 In social studies , stations can 
examine the geography , 
economy , and culture of a 
region or country . 
 In math , students can be taught 
a new process at one station 
while reviewing applications of 
already– presented concepts at 
other stations . 
One Teach , One Assist–One
teacher takes primary 
responsibility for instruction while 
the other teacher circulates around 
the room . Co-teachers should 
alternate who teaches and who 
assists . 
 When the lesson lends itself to 
delivery by only one teacher . 
 When one teacher has 
particular expertise for the 
lesson . 
 In new co-teaching situations . 
 To check student progress . 
 This approach can allow one 
teacher the opportunity to 
become comfortable with the 
content , co-teaching partner , 
and flow of the class . 
 While one teacher takes 
primary responsibility for 
instruction , the other teacher 
can observe student application 
of a new skill . 
 While one teacher delivers the 
lesson content , the other may 
observe specific work habits 
and behavior . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
51
Team Teaching 
Both teachers provide the instruction and share the responsibility for planning . Teachers work as 
a team to present the material to the whole class at the same time . Teachers may take turns 
teaching parts of the lesson or one teacher may teach while the other models , demonstrates , or 
writes on the board . 
Strengths : 
• Rewarding and energizing for students and teachers . 
• Students benefit from the talents of both teachers . 
• Interactive teaching ( teachers can role-play , model appropriate behaviors , model 
discussions , conduct a debate , facilitate games , etc .  )  . 
• Provides greater opportunities for student engagement . 
• Behavior management is easier when two teachers are ―watching‖ . 
Drawbacks : 
• Requires a considerable amount of co-planning . 
• Requires a high level of mutual trust and respect between the teachers . 
• Time is a factor as lessons tend to take longer when two teachers teach . 
Source : 
Murawski , Wendy W . Collaborative Teaching in Elementary Schools : Making the Co-Teaching 
Marriage Work . Corwin , 2010 . 

© 2008 2Teach , LLC
Teacher A
Looks Like…
Teacher B
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
52
Parallel Teaching 
The teachers plan instruction jointly . Each teacher instructs one half of the heterogeneously 
grouped class . Parallel Teaching may be used in three ways : 
1 .  ) Both teachers teach the same content in the same way . 
2 .  ) Both teachers teach the same content in different ways . 
3 .  ) Both teachers teach different content . 
Strengths : 
 Both teachers are equally and actively engaged in instruction . 
 Lower student / teacher ratio . 
 Teachers may feel encouraged to vary their instructional strategies and activities with 
smaller groups . 
 Allows for close supervision and monitoring of students ‘ behavior and achievement . 
 Each teacher may choose to plan his / her own group ‘ s lesson which reduces the time spent 
co-planning . 
 Allows for flexible grouping of students . 
Drawbacks : 
 Some teachers may not be comfortable
with the content they are required to teach . 
 Limited space and increased noise level may 
cause conflicts . 
 Timing is essential so that both groups 
finish at the same time to reduce chaos . 
 Teachers may tend to always group special 
education students together . 
Source : 
Murawski , Wendy W . Collaborative Teaching in Elementary Schools : Making the Co-Teaching 
Marriage Work . Corwin , 2010 . 

To view a model of Parallel Teaching , please visit the link below from www . teachertube . com
―Bevis Elementary Parallel Co-Teaching‖

Teacher A Teacher B
Looks Like…
© 2008 2Teach , LLC
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
53
Alternative Teaching 
One teacher works with a small group while the other instructs the larger group . The small group 
can be used for preteaching , reteaching , enrichment , or assessment . The students in the small 
group will vary , depending upon the needs that the small group will provide . 
Strengths : 
 Enables a smaller student / teacher ratio . 
 Teachers can identify and teach a specific skill to specific students . 
 Promotes differentiation of content , process , and product . 
Drawbacks : 
 Potential to stigmatize students with disabilities if they are always instructed in the smaller 
group . 
 Noise factor . 
 Requires careful time management . 
Source : 
Murawski , Wendy W . Collaborative Teaching in Elementary Schools : Making the Co-Teaching 
Marriage Work . Corwin , 2010 . 
Looks Like…
Teacher A
Teacher B
© 2008 2Teach , LLC
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
54
Station Teaching 
Instructional content , materials , and activities are divided into segments at separate locations in 
the classroom—usually three or more . These segments are commonly referred to as ―stations . ‖ 
The stations may be completed by students independently or manned by the teachers . Students 
then rotate through each station within the allotted time . Teachers should divide the 
responsibility for the planning and instructing of stations . 
Strengths : 
 Stations help students focus on one specific topic for a shorter amount of time . 
 Materials can be easily reused by each group that visits the station . 
 Lower student / teacher ratio
 Stations give the opportunity to present material in different ways to meet a variety of 
learning styles . 
 Teachers can choose to plan and present the content for which they are most comfortable . 
Drawbacks : 
 Noise and activity level . 
 Students may have difficulty generalizing and making connections between the learning 
from each station . 
 Requires a great deal of advanced planning and gathering of materials . 
 Teachers need to find time for co-planning . 
 Pacing and timing of groups as they move between stations . 
Source : 
Murawski , Wendy W . Collaborative Teaching in Elementary Schools : Making the Co-Teaching 
Marriage Work . Corwin , 2010 . 
Looks Like… 

Group 1 Group 2 
Group 3
Teacher A Teacher B
Independent Station
To view a model of Station Teaching , please visit the link below from www . teachertube . com
―Station Teaching 7th Grade Writing‖

© 2008 2Teach , LLC
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
55
One Teach - One Assist
Two teachers are present , but one functions as the lead teacher as the other circulates to monitor 
student performance . The lead teacher takes responsibility for planning and implementing 
instruction . The second teacher provides adaptations and modifications to students , monitors 
classroom behavior and management , and offers any other support that may be needed by the lead 
teacher . Teachers should change roles often . 
Strengths : 
 Most similar to traditional teaching methods . 
 Requires little time for co-planning . 
 Supporting teacher can monitor students who are struggling with the lesson and report this 
information to the lead teacher . 
Drawbacks : 
 Unequal teaching and planning responsibility , unless teachers alternate the lead teacher 
role . 
 Traditional style of teaching may not be effective for all students . 
 Too often , one teacher becomes merely a teacher ‘ s assistant . 
Source : 
Murawski , Wendy W . Collaborative Teaching in Elementary Schools : Making the Co-Teaching 
Marriage Work . Corwin , 2010 . 
Looks Like… 

Teacher A
Teacher B
© 2008 2Teach , LLC
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
56
DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION / 
UNIVERSAL DESIGN FOR LEARNING
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
57
Differentiated Instruction and Universal Design for Learning ( UDL ) 
Research on Differentiation
―The best teachers have always recognized that every student is unique , and to a degree , 
deserves and requires special attention and adaptation of learning experience to fit these unique 
needs , interests , and abilities‖ ( George , 2005 , p . 189 , bold-faced type added )  . 
Differentiation of Instruction ( DI ) has been shown to improve test scores on both classroom and 
statewide assessments . For example , Mastropieri and Scruggs , et al .  ,  ( 2006 ) assert that in
peer tutoring , ―combined with differentiated science activities , students appear to learn more 
content than when taught more traditionally , without peer-mediated learning activities‖ ( pp . 135-
136 )  . 
Broderick , Mehta-Parekh , and Reid ( 2005 ) note that ―Teachers who use DI expect students to 
bring a variety of experiences , abilities , interests , and styles to their learning ; they acknowledge 
that these affect students ‘ performance in the classroom ( and take diversity into account ) when 
planning and delivering rigorous and relevant , yet flexible and responsive , instruction ― ( p . 196 )  . 
The authors also write , ―When teachers effectively differentiate instruction—constantly assessing 
students ‘ understandings , teaching responsively , and enabling students to demonstrate 
competence in varied , meaningful ways—disabled ( and other ) students can participate 
successfully as full members of heterogeneous inclusive classrooms‖ ( Broderick , et al .  , 2005 , 
p . 200 )  . 
Sources : 
Broderick , Alicia , Mehta-Parekh , Reid , D . Kim ( Summer , 2005 )  . Differentiating instruction for 
disabled students in inclusive classrooms . Theory into Practice 44 ( 3 )  : p . 196 . 
www . jstor . org / stable / 346998 . Accessed 7 / 18 / 11 . 
George , Paul S .  ( Summer 2005 )  . Differentiated instruction . Theory into Practice 44 ( 3 )  : pp . 185-
193 . Retrieved from :  . Mastropieri , 
M .  , Scruggs , T .  , Norland , J .  , Berkeley , S .  , McDuffie , K .  , Tomquist , E .  , and Connors , N .  ( 2006 )  . 
Differentiated curriculum enhancement in inclusive middle school science : Effects on classroom 
and high-stakes tests . The journal of special education , 40 ( 3 )  : 130-137 . Retrieved from : 

Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
58
Using Differentiated Instruction to Meet the Needs of All Learners
Differentiation of instruction provides opportunities to meet the needs of a diverse school 
community . The talents of all learners find challenge while creating a balance between equity 
and excellence . 
Equity Excellence
Inclusive and Flexible
―Differentiating instruction , a comprehensive approach to teaching , enables the successful 
inclusion of all students , including the disabled , in general education classrooms ”  ( Broderick , 
Mehta-Parekh and Reid , 2005 )  . 
―Having access to a variety of approaches to teaching and learning gives teachers agility in 
reaching out to students . It will nearly always be the case that some students prefer certain 
instructional approaches over others . The teacher who regularly employs a range of strategies is 
more likely to connect what needs to be learned with the full range of students‖ present in a 
classroom . 
―In addition , through careful observation of students as they work in a range of instructional 
settings , a teacher can continue to develop insights about approaches that are most successful for 
particular learners , as well as for the class as a whole‖ ( Tomlinson and McTighe , 2006 , p . 53 )  . 
Sources : 
Broderick , Alicia , Mehta-Parekh , Reid , D . Kim ( Summer , 2005 )  . Differentiating instruction for disabled 
students in inclusive classrooms . Theory into Practice 44 ( 3 )  : p . 196 . www . jstor . org / stable / 346998 . 
Accessed 7 / 18 / 11 . 
Tomlinson , Carol Ann and McTighe ( 2006 )  . Integrating Differentiated Instruction + Understanding by 
Design . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . 
Image from davidshoebridge . org
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
59
Differentiation and Diverse Student Populations
 ―The primary goal of quality curriculum design is to develop and deepen student 
understanding . ‖
 Students learn and ―grow at different rates and require varied support systems‖ in the 
attainment of their intellectual potential . 
 ―Evidence of student understanding is revealed when students apply ( transfer ) knowledge 
in authentic contexts . ‖
 Differentiated instruction takes into account a student ‘ s ―current point of proficiency , 
interests , and learning preferences‖ ( Tomlinson and McTigh , 2006 , p . 4 )  . 
 Students differ in their readiness to learn , based on age , language , ―life experiences , 
aptitudes , attitudes , interests‖ and other factors . 
 Teachers need to ―build on all students ‘ strengths , talents , and prior knowledge‖ 
( Broderick et al .  , 2006 , p . 196 )  . 

Professional Library
Click on link for additional resources 
from the BCPS professional library 
. 
Sources : 
Broderick , Alicia , Mehta-Parekh , Reid , D . Kim ( Summer , 2005 )  . Differentiating instruction for 
disabled students in inclusive classrooms . Theory into Practice 44 ( 3 )  : p . 196 . Retrieved from : 
www . jstor . org / stable / 346998 . Accessed 7 / 18 / 11
Carol Ann and McTighe ( 2006 )  . Integrating Differentiated Instruction + Understanding by 
Design . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . 
Image : 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
60
The Hallmarks of a Differentiated Classroom – Guidelines for Getting Started
Use assessment to guide instruction . 
Pre-assess students to find out what they know . Use the data from the pre-assessment to plan units 
and lessons . Continually assess the students throughout each unit , using different assessment 
forms for students to demonstrate what they know . 
Be clear about learning goals . 
Specify to students what they need to know , understand , and gain from each lesson or unit . This 
will help improve learning gaps and continue learning . 
Group students effectively . 
When forming small groups within the classroom , students can be grouped homogenously for 
readiness , based on similar learning needs . This will allow teachers to reteach previous lessons 
and monitor progress . The goal of flexible grouping is to balance the need to teach students where 
they are and provide them with opportunities to interact in meaningful and productive ways with 
a wide range of peers . 
Use time , space , and materials flexibly . 
Arrange the room so students are able to work in a variety of ways and match materials to the 
learner . 
Involve students in understanding the nature of the classroom . 
Allow your students to be involved in the responsibilities of the classroom . The goal of the 
classroom is to provide supports for students so they are able to grow academically . 
Seek specialists ‘ active partnership in the classroom . 
Collaborating with building specialists will benefit individual students . 
Differentiation is proactive rather than reactive . 
Plan for student differences ; do not plan for all students . Make sure lesson plans are tiered to fit 
all students ‘ needs in the classroom . 
Adapted from Differentiating in Practice A Resource Guide for Differentiating Curriculum . Carol 
Ann Tomlinson and Caroline Cunningham Eidson Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development , Copyright 2003 . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
61
Planning for Differentiated Instruction—Content , Process , Product 
Content Process Product 

Source : Tomlinson , Carol Ann ( 2003 )  . Fulfilling the Promise of the Differentiated Classroom . 
Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . Photographs from 
Yahoo images
―what teachers teach ( or , 
what we want students to 
learn ) and how to gain 
access to that body of 
knowledge . ‖
how students ―make sense 
of , or come to understand , 
the information , ideas , 
and skills‖ from 
instruction . 
―assessment or 
demonstrations of what 
students have come to 
know , understand , and be 
able to do as the result of 
an extended sequence of 
learning . ‖
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
62
Differentiating Content ( What a student should know , understand , and apply ) 
Teachers must differentiate content to teach ―essential and enduring‖ knowledge to 
students with diverse backgrounds and ability levels . 
• Use high-level instruction , based on ―understanding the ‗big ideas ‘ and core processes . ‖
• Apply scaffolding methods , such as KWL or Concept Mapping ( prereading )  . 
• Find content materials that include visual media and the Internet . 
• Maintain essential concepts , materials , and skills necessary for all learners in unit and 
daily instructional planning . 
• Present information using whole-to-part or part-to-whole approaches . 
• Reteach only those students needing additional demonstration . 
• Use visuals or graphic organizers . 
• Have students use manipulatives or role-playing as a way of understanding a text or oral 
explanation 
• Use recorded passages of text or use small-group instruction to enable students with 
encoding difficulties . 
• For ESL students provide text in native language while the student is learning English . 
Sources : Tomlinson , Carol Ann and McTighe ( 2006 )  . Integrating Differentiated Instruction + 
Understanding by Design . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development . 
Spencer-Northey , Sharon ( 2005 )  . Handbook on Differentiated Instruction for Middle and High 
School . Larchmont , NY : Eye on Education .  ( The above information comes from chapter 2 , pp . 
39-74 )  . In addition , see Tomlinson , Carol Ann ( 2001 ) How to differentiate instruction in mixedability classrooms . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
63
Differentiating Process ( Helping students make sense and take ownership of the content ) 
• Provide varied options for exploration and evaluation of content . 
• Provide authentic learning opportunities . 
• Discover student interests when planning learning processes . 
• Appeal to multiple intelligences , differentiating by learning profile . 
• Plan for tiered lessons , appealing to varied levels of ability and interest . 
• Adjust the level of the task presentation . 
Sources : Tomlinson , Carol Ann and McTighe ( 2006 )  . Integrating Differentiated Instruction + 
Understanding by Design . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development . Tomlinson , Carol Ann ( 2003 )  . Fulfilling the Promise of the Differentiated 
Classroom . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
64
Differentiating Product ( Helping student demonstrate and extend what has been learned ) 
• Product assignments should cause students to rethink , apply , and expand on all the key 
concepts , principles , and skills of the unit ( or segment of learning ) that the products 
are designed to reflect . 
• Products call for more thought and ingenuity when they are based on issues , concepts , 
or problems rather than on topics . 
• Product assignments should necessitate and support creativity , including opportunities 
for written , visual , and oral presentations of knowledge . 
• Products demonstrate understanding in ―highly flexible‖ ways . 
• Authentic products include elements of research , scientific method , and interpretation 
of findings often reflecting processes applied by professionals in the particular field to 
complete the product . 
• Keep track of student progress through timelines , check-in dates , logs , and journals , in 
an effort to maximize proficiency during a given block of time . 
• Use rubrics setting a clear standard of high expectations , continually modeling and 
talking about what constitutes excellence . 
• Balance clear directions that support success with freedom of choice that supports 
individuality of interest and knowledge . 
• Acknowledge varied readiness levels by developing ―variation on a theme‖ 
differentiated versions of a product that are likely to challenge a full range of 
readiness . 
• Use formative and summative evaluations as vehicles to promote growth and success . 
Communicate with parents regarding timelines , rationale for the product , and how 
parents should ( and shouldn ‘ t ) help . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
65
Content Strategies : Offer varied approaches to
―input‖ in order to meet students ‘ needs . 
Concept-BasedTeaching – an emphasis on key concepts and principles to be acquired . 
Curriculum Compacting – a three-stage process including : 
• Initial assessment prior to study
• Analysis of results for areas of skill mastery or need
• Development of investigative learning activities to advance areas of need
Varied Text , Leveled Readers and Resources – the materials provided meet varying readiness , 
interest levels , and learning styles . 
Learning Contracts – an agreement among all parties regarding the content and skills to be
acquired . 
Mini-lesson – Use of Small-Group Instruction – the reteaching of a targeted content based on
students ‘ readiness , interests , or learning profile . 
Audio / Video Recorders and Assistive Technology – the use of prerecorded text , video 
presentations , and / or technology .  ( Reading pens , PixWriter , IntelliTalk II
E-reader , Kurzweil , audacity , MP3 Players ) 
Notetaking Organizers – the use of outlining strategies , graphic organizers emphasizing key ideas , 
and visual organizers such as checklists to provide a coherent means for attending to task
Manipulatives – the hands-on-support which allows the student to operate on a more concrete level of 
understanding
Highlighted Print Materials – student can expend energy focusing on the essential portions of the
content rather than becoming discouraged by what seems to be an insurmountable amount of print . 
Process Strategies : Present opportunities for learners to 
process content or ideas in a way that is meaningful . 
Problem-BasedLearning – presents students with a complex or unclear problems . Students should
define the problem , seek additional information , make decisions about the solution , assess the
solution ‘ s effectiveness , and communicate the process to others . 
Independent Study – used to develop talent and interest in the content material with tailor-made
activities that are designed to meet students at their current readiness level for independence . 
Stations / Learning Centers – allows students to work with different tasks and materials designed to
teach , reinforce , or extend a particular skill using an exploratory approach to learning . 
Tiered Lessons – provides diverse routes of access to content using varying degrees of difficulty in
order to ensure that all students come away with pivotal skills and are appropriately challenged . 
The following Process Strategies are highlighted in Baltimore County Public Schools ‘ curriculum
guides : 
Learning Logs and Journals Role-Play Cognitive / Semantic Webbing
Model Making Jigsaw Cubing
Literature Circles Think-Pair-Share Labs
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2012
66
Product Strategies : cause students to think about , 
apply , and expand on key understandings and skills . 
Sources : Fulfilling the Promise of the Differentiated Classroom : Strategies and Tools for 
Responsive Teaching Carol Ann Tomlinson Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development . Copyright 2003 . 
How To Differentiate Instruction in Mixed Ability Classrooms . Carol Ann Tomlinson . 
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . Copyright 2001 . 
 Design a Web page
 Develop a solution to a 
community problem
 Create a public service 
announcement
 Write a book
 Generate and circulate 
a petition
 Create a diorama
 Design a game
 Build a model
 Conduct an interview
 Design and conduct an 
experiment
 Write a letter to the 
editor , main character , 
or significant person
 Create a family tree
 Design a cartoon or 
storyboard
 Formulate and defend a 
theory
 Train someone else
 Make a learning center
 Present a mock trial
 Write a series of songs
 Create a subject 
dictionary
 Choreograph a dance
 Present a news report
 Develop a photo / video 
journal
 Design and make 
costumes
 Design a cereal box
 Develop a questionnaire
 Write a biography
 Conduct an 
ethnography
 Develop an 
advertisement
 Compile a brochure
 Design and make a quilt
 Hold a press conference
 Collect and analyze 
 Develop a collection
 Create a musical 
instrument
 Analyze data and 
develop a graph or chart
 Write a critique or 
review
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 67
Adapting and Modifying Curriculum Documents
A modification alters content knowledge as well as assessment administration practices . 
Modifications include changes in instructional level , content , and performance criteria . 
Examples of Modifications : 
• Use of a word bank for vocabulary assignments . 
• Use of a cloze passage for written response . 
• An outline in place of an essay . 
• Picture symbols on classwork and assessments . 
• Spelling support from a spell-check program . 
• Use of a video on a topic instead of reading . 
• Simplified questioning . 
• Use of small group instruction . 
• Chunking of instruction . 
• Reducing the amount of questions . 
• Use of a timer to monitor students . 
• Use of a leveled reader . 
Remember , modifying is simplifying the core concepts and skills ; NOT watering down 
content material . 
Teachers should consult student IEP when making modifications , and must be approved by 
IEP team . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 68
Learning Environment Differentiation
All students require a stimulating learning environment that recognizes , honors , and values the 
diversity of learners and engages all students . The environment fosters a sense of community and 
stimulates learning using a variety of resources . 
Teacher as Facilitator of Learning – Provides for student-centered learning opportunities , 
including strategies for differentiated instruction , while incorporating higher level questioning 
strategy . 
When planning an environment for differentiated instruction , a teacher should consider : 
 Physical Space – Room arrangement ( desks arranged in semicircles , clusters , or rows 
split in the middle and facing each other )  , preferential seating , lighting , noise reduction , 
learning centers , interest centers , technology centers , and informal areas 
 Movement – Structure classroom activities that allow purposeful movement and offer 
flexible work areas for individuals 
 Flexible Grouping Strategies – Student grouping based on readiness , interests , and 
learning styles . May include whole-class , small-group , individual , and teacher-student 
conferences . Provides for co-teaching opportunities . 
 Variety of Resources – Print ( texts , adaptive texts , ancillaries )  , school ( teachers , support 
staff , peers )  , community ( speakers , private and public partnerships )  , technology , low and 
high tech materials ( computers , calculators , assistive technology )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 69
Learning Styles and Preferences
The terms learning styles and learning preferences are frequently used interchangeably . 
Learning preferences refer to the conditions in which students prefer to work and learn , such as 
the classroom situation , grouping , and whether the lesson is more or less teacher driven . 
Preferences also signify how students receive , perceive , process , understand , and internalize new 
knowledge . The following charts feature characteristics of various learning styles and 
preferences . 
Visual Learners ( input ) 
Charts , graphs or
Diagrams
Sight words picture 
clues 
Silent reading lists
Sequential ( Analytical ) 
Understanding
Graphic organizers , outlining
Timelines
Part-to-whole connections
Using rules or procedural guidelines
Self-directed / independent activities
Global Understanding
Interpersonal connections
Whole-to-part connections
Projects
Think-pair-share
Peer learning
Auditory learners ( Input ) 
Verbal-Linguistic Intelligence
Discussion
Memorization
Phonics
Oral reading
Hearing anecdotes or stories
Cooperative learning
Kinesthetic Learners
Playing games
Role-Play
Mime
Learning while moving
Action using larger muscles
Active
Doing , discussing
explaining
Active experimentation
Team competition
Working in groups
Reflective
Deductive learning
Reflective observation
Learning logs / journals
Using think time
Intrapersonal and introspective
Tactile Learners ( input ) 
Learning by doing
Using manipulatives
Drawing , designing , or building 
models
Writing / tracing
Using texture
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 70
Learning Preferences divide into two categories : 
• Field Dependent—tend towards the concrete , with more teacher and group interaction
• Field Independent—tend towards abstract
Learning Preferences 

The following charts identify means for how teachers view themselves as learners in order to 
accommodate the needs of students . 
A Field Dependent ( Concrete ) Learner : 
• Experiences in a global fashion , adheres to structures . 
• Learns material with social content best . 
• Attends best to material relevant to own experience . 
• Requires externally defined goals and reinforcements . 
• Needs organization provided . 
• More affected by criticism . 
• Uses observational approach for concept attainment ( learns best by examples )  . 
• Likes group projects , sharing , and discussions . 
• Likes personal examples , anecdotes , stories . 
• Likes praise and assurance . 
• Prefers frequent interaction with teacher . 
A Field Dependent Teacher : 
• Prefers teaching situations that allow interaction and discussion with students . 
• Uses questions to check on student learning following instruction . 
• Uses student-centered activities . 
• Viewed by students as teaching facts . 
• Provides feedback ( especially positive feedback )  . 
• Strong in establishing a warm and personal learning environment . 
A Field Independent ( abstract ) Learner : 
• May tend to perceive analytically . 
• Makes specific concept distinctions , little overlap . 
• Impersonal orientation . 
• May need explicit training in social skills . 
• Interested in new concepts for their own sake . 
• Has self-defined goals and reinforcement . 
• Can self-structure situations . 
• Less affected by criticism . 
• Uses hypothesis-testing approach to attain concepts . 
• Prefers clear grading criteria with specific feedback . 
• Requires less interaction with teacher . 

Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 71
A Field Independent Teacher : 
• Prefers engaging students by establishing routines in order to work through 
• ideas . 
• Uses questions to introduce topics and probe student answers . 
• Uses teacher-organized learning situations . 
• Viewed by students as encouraging to apply principles . 
• Gives corrective feedback using error analysis . 
• Strong in organizing and guiding student learning . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 72
Learning Styles and Preferences
The following chart outlines the different learning styles and how to best teach those students . 
Learning styles are how a student receives , processes , and understands new information . 
Remember not all students learn the same , it is important to take in the different learning styles 
when planning daily instruction . 
Modality Descriptors Learn Best Through the Use of .  .  . 
Visual Learners 
( input ) 
 Learn by observation . 
 Can recall what they have seen . 
 Can follow written or drawn 
instructions . 
 Like to read . 
 Use written notes . 
 Benefit by visualizing , watching 
TV / video / films . 
 Charts , graphs , diagrams , and flow 
charts . 
 Sight words . 
 Flashcards . 
 Visual similarities and differences . 
 Pictures and graphics . 
 Maps . 
 Silent reading . 
 Written instructions . 
 Computer-assisted learning . 
Auditory Learners 
( input ) 
Verbal-Linguistic 
Intelligence
 Prefer listening and taking notes . 
 Listen for patterns . 
 Consult peers to ascertain that 
they have the correct details . 
 Can recall what they have heard . 
 Can follow oral directions . 
 Repeat words aloud for 
memorization . 
 Use oral language effectively . 
 Discussion , dialog , debate . 
 Memorization . 
 Phonics . 
 Oral reading . 
 Hearing anecdotes or stories . 
 Listening to tapes or CDs . 
 Cooperative learning groups . 
Kinesthetic Learners 
( input ) 
 Are often physically adept . 
 Learn through experience and 
physical activity . 
 Benefit from demonstration . 
 Learn from teaching others what 
they know . 
 Playing games . 
 Role-playing . 
 Read body language / gestures . 
 Mime . 
 Drama . 
 Learn or memorize while moving 
( pacing , stationary bike , finger or whole 
body games )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 73
Tactile Learners 
( input ) 
 Learn by touching and 
manipulating objects . 
 Often learn inductively rather 
than deductively . 
 Tend toward psychomotor over 
abstract thinking . 
 Prefer personal connections to 
topics . 
 Follow directions they have 
written themselves / that they 
have rehearsed . 
 Benefit from demonstrations . 
 Learning by doing . 
 " Hands-on .  " 
 Creating maps . 
 Building models 
 Art projects . 
 Using manipulatives . 
 Drawing , designing things . 
 Writing / tracing . 
Active  Can be impulsive . 
 Risk-takers . 
 Do not prefer lectures . 
 Prefer group work . 
 Tend to be interpersonal . 
 Not inclined to too much note 
taking . 
 Prefer " doing , discussing , explaining " 
vs . listening and watching . 
 Prefer active experimentation . 
 Like acting and role playing . 
 Like team competition . 
Reflective  Prefer to think about concepts
quietly before any action . 
 Learn by thinking . 
 Like writing . 
 Tend to be intrapersonal and 
introspective . 
 Tend toward deductive learning . 
 Prefer reflective observation . 
 Intrapersonal skills valued . 
 Journals . 
 Learning logs . 
Global Understanding  Make decisions based on 
intuition . 
 Spontaneous and creative ;  " idea " 
person . 
 Often a risk-taker . 
 Tend to reach conclusions 
quickly . 
 Intake information in large 
chunks rather than details . 
 Nonlinear thinkers . 
 " See the forest before they see 
the trees .  " 
 Interpersonal connection important to 
them . 
 Stories and anecdotes . 
 Seeing the " whole " rather than in parts . 
 Highly interesting project and materials . 
 Functional games and activities . 
 Think-pair-share ; Praise-questionpolish . 
 Teacher feedback ; person-to-person 
communication . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 74
Analytical 
Understanding
 Sequential , linear learners . 
 Prefer information in small 
chunks , steps . 
 Can follow the rules for 
mathematic equations . 
 Prefer a logical progression . 
 " See the trees before they see the 
forest .  " 
 Intrapersonal skills valued . 
 Journals . 
 Learning logs . 
 Sequentially organized material , 
timelines , diagrams . 
 Moving from " part " to the " whole .  " 
 Puzzles , logic games . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 75
Tips for Working with the High Achiever
High achievers are those who are motivated to do well in school . They frequently have learning 
needs that differ from other students , just as developmentally delayed students have different 
learning needs . 
How can teachers meet the needs of high achieving students ? 
• Assess what they have already learned before teaching them . 
• Engage the students in the academic planning . 
• Reduce the amount of drill and repetition to a bare minimum . 
• Utilize curriculum compacting and / or learning contracts . 
• Engage students in high-level independent study projects , preferably involving real 
problems in the community . 
• Involve the students in community service projects . 
• Do not have the high achieving students teach the slower students . They may learn 
in a different manner and may be poor teachers . The students may be held back in 
their own learning when they are used as teachers ‘ helpers . 
• Set high standards for students , using rigorous coursework . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 76
Flow Chart for Differentiating a Lesson
The following flow chart is an effective tool for planning instruction in diverse classrooms . 
This planning tool provides a framework for including all students as engaged participants in 
the learning environment . 
Step 2
Select State Curriculum / Common Core standards and identify the 
unit / summative assessment . 
Step 3
Assess prior knowledge of skill or concept . 
Step 1
Select the unit / chapter / topic to be taught . 
Step 4
Select the objective and identify the assessment . 
Step 5
Choose or identify the instructional framework you will use in 
planning the lesson ( strategic learning model , WOW , 5E ’ s , or other 
curriculum based formats )  . Develop the lesson plan . 
Step 6
Using pre-assessment data , learner characteristics ( readiness , interests , 
learning profile , learning style ) and / or IEP content , choose one or 
more appropriate differentiation strategies for content , process , 
product , and learning environment . Assign specific instructional 
roles for teaching team ( co-teach relationships )  . 
Content
Do I need to adjust the 
content / curriculum for the 
student ( s ) to be successful 
within the lesson ? 
Process
What instructional 
strategies would enhance 
the student ’ s / students ’ 
understanding of the 
content / curriculum ? 
Product
Does the formative 
assessment need to be 
modified in order for the 
student ( s ) to demonstrate 
understanding ? 
Learning Environment
Do I need to make changes 
in the instructional 
environment to facilitate 
student learning and 
authentic engagement ? 
Step 7
Evaluate the effectiveness of the instruction based on student 
performance during the lesson with the assessment . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
77
General Accommodations / Assistive Technology
General Accommodations and Assistive Technology tools provide a means of supporting students in the general education setting by facilitating
student access to the content . 
Skill Area Method Accommodations Material Accommodations
Low-Tech Tools
Assistive Technology
High-Tech Tools
Reading • Extra time for completion 
• Shortened assignments 
and simplified text
• Chapter outlines
• Highlight key concepts
• Story frames
• Before , during ,  & after strategies
• Echo reading
• Mapping
• Visual , Auditory , Kinesthetic , 
Tactile ( VAKT ) 
• Graphic organizers 
• Structured study guides
• KWL chart
• Peer support
• RTI
• Reading Intensive Programs 
( Wilson and SIPPS ) 
• Magnifying bars
• Page magnifiers
• Colored acetate sheets
• Colored stickers for
visual cues
• Word window
• Sentence Cards
• Word cards
• Tactile letters and words
• Colored paper clips to
mark pages
• Post-it tape flags
• Highlighters
• Page fluffers
• Page Up
• Books on tape / computer
• Reading pens
• Language masters
• Electronic ―talking‖
dictionary
• Augmentive and
Alternative Communication devices 
( AAC )  ( communication boards , 
speech output ) 
• Software ( Kurzweil
Intellitalk III , Start-to-Finish Series , 
Don Johnston .  ( high interest / low 
readability ) 
• MP3 Player
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
78
General Accommodations / Assistive Technology
General Accommodations and Assistive Technology tools provide a means of supporting students in the general education setting by facilitating
student access to the content . 
Skill Area Method Accommodations Material Accommodations
Low-Tech Tools
Assistive Technology
High-Tech Tools
Math
• Reduced number of problems
• Eliminate the need to copy 
problems 
• Enlarge worksheet for 
increased work space 
• Avoid mixing operational signs 
on the page / row
• Provide extended / adjusted time 
• Use procedural checklists
• Highlight operational signs
• Use graph paper for set-up
• Use raised number lines
• Incorporate ―real-life‖ tasks
• Utilize mnemonic devices
• Include VAKT opportunities
• Use color coding strategies
• Use peer-support or cross-age 
tutoring
• Manipulatives ( counters , 
base 10 blocks , pattern 
blocks , 2-color counters , 
linking cubes , algebra 
tiles , number tiles ) 
• Flash cards ( part-to-whole , 
array ) 
• Flannel board and numbers
• Tactile numbers / signs
• Automatic number stamps
• Fact charts
• Personal chalk 
boards / white boards
• Highlighters
• Desktop references with 
visual cues for facts , 
procedures , and / or formulas
• Rulers as number lines
• Hundreds charts
• Hand-held calculator
• Calculator with printout
• Talking calculator
• Math tape recorder with 
musical cues , mnemonics , 
auditory feedback for 
flashcard drill activities
• Math software programs 
 ( IntelliTools , MathPad , Math 
Pad Plus , Access to Math ,  
Don Johnston , IntelliMathics ) 
• ―Coinulator‖
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
79
General Accommodations / Assistive Technology
General Accommodations and Assistive Technology tools provide a means of supporting students in the general education setting by facilitating
student access to the content . 
Skill Area Method Accommodations Material Accommodations
Low-Tech Tools
Assistive Technology
High-Tech Tools
Written Expression
• Provide extended / adjusted time 
for completion 
• Modified assignments
• ―Writer ‘ s Corner‖ ( a study 
carrel for reduced distractions ) 
• Provide graphic organizers with 
sentence starters
• Provide story frames
• Utilize oral compositions with a 
―scribe‖
• Use oral proofreading to check 
for meaning and clarity
• Utilize mnemonic devices
• Include VAKT 
opportunities
• Use color coding strategies
• Use peer-support or cross-age 
tutoring
• Note cards
• Word cards / picture 
symbols
• Magnetic word cards and 
board for composition
• Personal dictionary or 
Quick-Word
• Personal chalk 
boards / white boards
• Highlighters
• Desktop references
• Raised lined paper
• Tape recorder for oral prewriting , composition , and / or 
editing
• Electronic 
dictionary / thesaurus
• Electronic ( speaking ) 
spelling device
• Electric eraser
• Word processor / keyboard / 
computer
• Speech output 
communication system
• Communication boards
• Software Programs : 
Kidspiration 
Inspiration Co : Writer 
Write : Outloud 
Draft : Builder 
Kurzweil IntelliTalk 
III IntelliPics Studio 
Type to Learn
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
80
General Accommodations / Assistive Technology
General Accommodations and Assistive Technology tools provide a means of supporting students in the general education setting by facilitating
student access to the content . 
Skill Area Method Accommodations Material Accommodations
Low-Tech Tools
Assistive Technology
High-Tech Tools
Handwriting
• Provide colored paper
• Use paper with alternate line spacing
• Provide near- point copies
• Use tracing , talk-through , dot-to-dot 
strategies for letter form practice
• Include opportunities for Visual ,  
Audio , Kinesthetic , and Tactile 
learning ( VAKT ) 
• Use short answer response 
opportunities
• Vary response formats
• Use peer-support and cross-age 
tutoring
• Photocopy notes
• Allow preferred writing style 
( manuscript / cursive ) 
• Pencil holders / grips
• Large-sized pencils and 
crayons
• Acetate sheets and 
transparency markers
• Paper stabilizers
• Arm stabilizers / arm guide
• Desktop references
• Name stamp
• Computer labels preprinted 
with frequent information 
such as student name
• Slant board
• Stencils / templates
• Correction tape / fluid
• Word processor , computer 
or Alpha-Smart
• Speech output 
communication system
• Communication boards
• Custom keyboards
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
81
General Accommodations / Assistive Technology
General Accommodations and Assistive Technology tools provide a means of supporting students in the general education setting by facilitating
student access to the content . 
Skill Area Method Accommodations Material Accommodations
Low-Tech Tools
Assistive Technology
High-Tech Tools
Daily Organization
• Utilize a color-coded schedule with 
picture graphics
• Use color coding system to 
coordinate notebook , book covers 
with schedule
• Take a photograph of desk / locker / 
paper organization to use as a visual 
reference
• Streamline required materials
• Use peer-support or cross-age 
tutoring
• Provide checklists for task 
completion
• Flag key tasks / appointments using 
―post-its‖ or highlighters
• Maintain a regular structure to class 
assignments or procedures
• Agenda books
• Pocket folders / notebooks
• Clipboards
• Stapler
• Storage cubicles
• Picture based schedules
• 3-hole punch
• Pencil cases
• PDAs ( Personal Digital
Assistants ) 
• Electronic calendars
• Auditory signals
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
82
General Accommodations / Assistive Technology
General Accommodations and Assistive Technology tools provide a means of supporting students in the general education setting by facilitating
student access to the content . 
Skill Area Method Accommodations Material Accommodations
Low–Tech Tools
Assistive Technology
High–Tech Tools
Visual Processing
• Enlarge worksheets
• Enlarge reading materials
• Have worksheets free of 
blotches / streaks
• Change font on worksheets / tests
• Double space worksheets / tests
• Use wide margins on worksheets
• Use different colors of paper
• Change lighting
• Use different line spacing / color
• Utilize darker lines on paper
• Utilize raised lines on paper
• Limit amount of information on a 
page
• Use ―finger-for-spacing‖
strategy
• Provide peer support
• Magnifying glass
• Magnifying bars
• Page magnifiers
• Slant boards
• Easel
• Paper holders
• Workstation copy holder
• Stencils
• Rulers
• Colored acetate sheets
• Colored stickers for visual cues
• Post-it tape flags
• Highlighters
• Word window
• Line marker
• Anti-glare shield on paper
• Book light
• Additional lighting
• Word processor / Alpha- Smart
• Down linking to a computer
• Enlarged font
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
83
General Accommodations / Assistive Technology
General Accommodations and Assistive Technology tools provide a means of supporting students in the general education setting by facilitating
student access to the content . 
Skill Area Method Accommodations Material Accommodations
Low-Tech Tools
Assistive Technology
High-Tech Tools
Visual Motor Integration
• Encourage outlining
• Dictate ideas into a tape 
recorder
• Practice keyboarding skills
• Access computers for organization 
of information and editing
• Practice handwriting and letter 
formation
• Talk aloud while writing
• Extend the time for written tasks
• Allow students to begin projects 
and assignments early
• Allow dictation of some 
assignments or tests ( or parts 
thereof ) 
• Train a ― scribe‖ to write verbatim 
statements and allow the student 
to make changes without 
assistance from the scribe
• Eliminate ―neatness‖ and / or
―spelling‖ as grading criteria
• Separate the writing into stages
• Raised line paper
• Graph paper
• Colored paper
• Colored ink / pencil
• Spellchecker
• Highlighters
• Copies of notes / drills
• Do not use Scranton tests
• Pencil grips
• Page marker / line marker
• 14 pt . type on all student 
papers
• Uncluttered planned work 
space on worksheets
• Lines for writing on 
worksheets
• Two single-sided papers 
instead of one double-sided 
paper
• Speech recognition
software
• Augmentive 
communication device
• E-mail homework assignments 
or call home to record on 
answering machine
• Alpha Smart
• Computer
• MP3 Player
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
84
General Accommodations / Assistive Technology
General Accommodations and Assistive Technology tools provide a means of supporting students in the general education setting by facilitating
student access to the content . 
Skill Area Method Accommodations Material Accommodations
Low-Tech Tools
Assistive Technology
High-Tech Tools
Auditory Processing
• Keep directions simple–only 
provide one step at a time
• Give directions both orally and 
visually–to show what you 
mean
• Speak slowly–especially when 
the child is hearing information 
for the first time
• Maintain eye contact while 
speaking
• Limit background noise when 
teaching new information or 
giving directions
• Build listening skills
• Provide a signal for the start of 
new tasks
• Have a notetaking buddy who will 
make sure that
information is clear
• Have child repeat back 
information or instructions to 
build comprehension skills
and to make sure messages are 
understood correctly
• Provide a quiet work space
• Provide notes or use a tape 
recorder when delivering new 
information
• Proximity to instruction
• Copies of notes for orally
presented material
• Visual cueing cards
• Post-it notes
• Written reminders
• Agenda book
• Picture cues
• Color coding
• Kurzweil software
• Tape recorder
• Communication device
• Sign language / cueing
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
85
Incorporating Assistive Technology into Differentiated Instruction
The Baltimore County Public Schools Office of Assistive Technology has many resources available to 
meet the needs of students with various communicative disabilities . 
Kurzweil 3000
Kurzweil 3000 is a computer-based screen reader , able to read Microsoft Word and other documents . 
Follow this link to find out more information about this resource :  
. 
Follow this link to request digital content to use with the Kurzweil 3000 system :  
. 
Communication Notebooks
Communication notebooks consist of picture cards stored in archival page sleeves , providing access 
through tactile and visual stimuli . These include Pull-Off Notebooks ( symbols for tactile learners )  , 
Topic Notebooks ( visual aids to close gaps in verbal communication )  , and Full-Sized and Small 
Notebooks for assistance with vocabulary . 
Follow this link to find out more information about this resource :  
. 
Eye–Gazed Frame
An Eye–Gazed Frame is a low-tech , augmentative communication strategy used to supplement other 
systems . 
Follow this link to find out more information about this resource :  
. 
The Office of Assistive Technology is able to provide additional resources , and can be contacted by 
phone ( 410-887-2299 )  , or through Baltimore County Public Schools Intranet at 
. 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
86
The Research Behind the Universal Design for Learning 
 “ As educators , our aim is simply not to make information accessible to students , but to make learning 
accessible ”  ( Rose & Meyer 2002 )  . 
The Universal Design for Learning focuses on how the brain works and how students learn by using all 
areas of the brain . The research process for the UDL began in 1990 , when researchers started seeing 
how technology could be incorporated in school curriculum in order to support all students . The 
research behind UDL breaks the brain into three separate learning networks . These networks are the 
recognition network , strategic network , and affective network . The recognition network allows us to 
understand new concepts and process information . The strategic network enables us to execute a given 
task , and the affective networks allow us to engage and work with a task presented ( Rose & Meyer 
2002 )  . The goal of the UDL is to take a learning curriculum and allow it to be accessible for all students 
by using a wide range of representation . 
Maya Eagleton describes the UDL as ―It recognizes the promise of technology to meet the needs of 
individual learners because of the inherent and nearly limitless flexibility of technology itself . National 
legislation requires attention to Universal Design ( UD ) in curriculum and assessment development . ‖
Educators can have a universal classroom by using the UDL , differentiation , assistive technology , 
integration of technology , and media literacy tools . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011
87
Rationale for Universal Design for Learning
The Universal Design for Learning ( UDL ) allows teachers to reach all learners . Today ‘ s classrooms are 
significantly diverse and it is the responsibility of the teacher to make sure all students are learning . The 
UDL incorporates learning styles with technology to reach all learners . ―The task for educators is to 
understand how students learn and use the technology available in this digital age to provide selected 
supports where they are needed and position the challenge appropriately for all learners‖ ( Rose & 
Meyer )  . By having a universally designed curriculum teachers can best support the diverse learning 
styles that make up a classroom . 
Mission of UDL
―UDL provides a blueprint for creating instructional goals , methods , materials , and assessments that 
work for everyone–not a single , one-size-fits-all solution but rather flexible approaches that can be 
customized and adjusted for individual needs . ‖1
Source : www . udlcenter . org 

Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 88
Exploring UDL—Links to Cast / UDL Videos
The following video presentations , from the National Center for Universal Design for Learning , 
will help educators gain a greater understanding of the principles of UDL . Click on link to view 
these four video presentations while expanding your knowledge about UDL . 
UDL at a Glance
The rationale of Universal Design for Learning is premised in the lowering of barriers
for students with different strengths and needs . The rationale draws on brain
research about the three brain networks of recognition , skills and strengths , and
caring and prioritizing . 
UDL Guidelines Structure
UDL Center Director David Rose uses diagrams to explain the sequence of instruction under 
Universal Design for Learning . He explains that the intention of UDL is to view instruction on a 
horizontal , and not linear , continuum . Students should move from comprehension , to executive 
function , and finally to engagement for the affective domain . 
Introduction to UDL
David Rose discusses the history of Universal Design for Learning—based on the premise that 
teachers need to blend digital media with the presentation of curriculum . In other words , change 
the means of delivery to meet the diverse population of a classroom , rather than trying to change 
the students . 
Principles of UDL 
Discusses how teachers can design activities to align with the functions of the three brain 
networks ( recognition , skills and strengths , caring and prioritizing )  . Educators should use 
―multiple means of representation‖ using the tools available to reach students at varied levels . 
Click on this link to watch the video . 

Videos and information from CAST / UDL web site ,  , refer to link 
for more information . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 89
Principles of Universal Design for Learning
The UDL has three main principles : 
1 . To support recognition learning , providing multiple , flexible methods of presentation .  
( What ) 
2 . To support strategic learning , providing multiple , flexible methods of expression and 
apprenticeship .  ( How ) 
3 . To support affective learning , providing multiple , flexible options for engagement .  ( Why ) 
Principle 1 – Provide Multiple Means of Representation ( What ) 
Educators should present information so that is in a format for all learning styles . 
Provide Options for 
Perception
Provide Options of Language 
and Symbols
Provide Options for 
Comprehension
• Options that customize the 
display of information
• Options that provide 
alternatives for auditory 
information
• Options that provide 
alternatives for visual 
information
• Options that define 
vocabulary and symbols
• Options that clarify syntax 
and structure
• Options for decoding text or 
mathematical notation
• Options that promote crosslinguistic understanding
• Options that illustrate key 
concepts nonlinguistically
• Options that provide or
activate background 
knowledge
• Options that highlight critical 
features , big ideas , and 
relationships
• Options that guide 
information processing
• Options that support memory 
and transfer
Source : David H . Rose and J . W . Gravel ,  “ Universal design for Learning ”  , International 
encyclopedia of education , 2010 ,  < www . udlcenter . org > accessed on July 26 , 2011 . 
Source : David H . Rose and Anne Meyer , Teaching Every Student in the Digital Age Universal 
Design for Learning ,  ( Alexandria , VA : Association for the Supervision and Curriculum 
Development , 2002 )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 90
Principle 2 – Provide Multiple Means of Action and Expression
Differentiate the ways students can express what they know . 
Provide Options for Physical 
Action
Provide Options for 
Expressive Skills and 
Fluency
Provide Options for Executive 
Functioning
• Options in the mode of 
physical response
• Options in the means of 
navigation
• Options for accessing tools 
and assistive technologies
• Options in the media for 
communication
• Options in the tools for 
composition and problem 
solving
• Options in the scaffolds for 
practice and performance
• Options that guide effective goalsetting
• Options that support planning and 
strategy development
• Options that facilitate managing
information and resources
• Options that enhance capacity for 
monitoring progress
Principle 3 – Provide Multiple Means of Engagement
Differentiate how students are motivated to learn . 
Provide Options for 
Recruiting Interest
Provide Options for Sustaining 
Effort and Persistence
Provide Options for SelfRegulation
• Options that increase 
individual choice and 
autonomy
• Options that enhance 
relevance , value , and 
authenticity ; and 
• Options that reduce threats 
and distractions . 
• Options that heighten salience of 
goals and objectives
• Options that vary levels of 
challenge and support
• Options that foster collaboration 
and communication
• Options that increase 
mastery-oriented feedback
• Options that guide personal
goal-setting and expectations
• Options that scaffold coping 
skills and strategies
• Options that develop self- 
assessment and reflection
Source : David H . Rose and J . W . Gravel ,  “ Universal design for Learning ”  , International 
encyclopedia of education , 2010 ,  < www . udlcenter . org > accessed on July 26 , 2011 . 
Source : David H . Rose and Anne Meyer , Teaching Every Student in the Digital Age Universal 
Design for Learning ,  ( Alexandria , VA : Association for the Supervision and Curriculum 
Development , 2002 )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 91
ASSESSMENT AND GRADING OPTIONS
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 92
Research
Rick Stiggins ( 2007 ) suggests assessments have two common purposes : assessment of learning 
and assessment for learning . Assessment of learning is summative and evaluative . Assessment 
for learning is ongoing , formative , and informative ( pre-assessments )  ( Stiggins , 2007 )  . The 
method of assessment ( selected response , written response , performance assessment , etc .  ) must 
match the purpose for assessing the student in order to be effective ( Fisher & Frey , 2007 )  . Each 
form of assessment provides teachers with valuable data . However , ongoing , formative , and 
informative assessments provide real-time diagnostic data crucial for providing feedback and 
adjusting instruction to meet the needs of all learners ( Chapius , Stiggins ,  & Commodore , 2010 )  . 
Multiple , varied assessments help to establish a more complete picture of what students know 
and are able to do based on the idea students have multiple intelligences and learning styles 
( Popham , 2008 )  . According to Thomas Guskey ( 2007 )  , high quality corrective instruction that 
helps students eliminate errors should follow well-developed assessments . Good assessments are 
clear and address specific learning targets . 
For more information on assessment and data analysis , go to :  


Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 93
Pre-Assessment 
Pre-assessments are designed to explore the students ‘ background knowledge and skills related 
to a concept . These assessments precede instruction . They may be designed to pre-assess the 
students ‘ attitudes , beliefs , and / or misperceptions about their background knowledge and skills . 
The teacher utilizes pre-assessments for the purpose of establishing an entry point or readiness 
level for daily instruction . Pre-assessments / diagnostic assessments may be administered 
individually , with a partner , or in small groups . Pre-assessment data should not be factored into 
the students ‘ cumulative grade ( Tomlinson & Moon , 2011 )  . 
Benefits of Using Pre-Assessments 
For Teachers : 
• Provides information about the range and depth of student understanding . 
• Assists in the planning of instruction that targets student achievement based on readiness , 
interest , and learning preferences . 
• Cues teachers to address misconceptions about content . 
• Allows teachers to provide specific feedback . 
For Students : 
• Activates prior knowledge . 
• Provides pathways for students to construct new knowledge . 
• Connects new information with what they already know . 
• Provides opportunities to reflect on prior experiences . 
Types of Pre-Assessments
• Prompts , questions , or surveys
• Word Sort using vocabulary words related to the concept
• Pictures / visuals related to the concept
• Gallery Walks : Have questions posted on chart paper , and have small groups circulate to 
generate prior knowledge . 
• K-W-L tasks
Note : Check your curriculum guides for additional pre-assessment / diagnostic tools . 
Source : Maryland Assessment Consortium 2002
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 94
Formative Assessment 
Formative assessments provide information to guide instruction and facilitate student learning . 
Formative assessments should be ongoing throughout the lesson each day . Information gained 
from formative assessments allows the teacher to monitor student progress and make necessary 
instructional adjustments . Feedback relative to students ‘ performance is a key component of 
effective formative assessments . Research shows students who understand the learning 
objectives and assessment criteria in addition to having opportunities for reflection on their work 
demonstrate greater improvement than those students who do not ( Tomlinson , 2008 ; Popham , 
2008 )  . Similarly , students with learning disabilities who are taught to use self-monitoring 
strategies related to their understanding of reading and writing tasks show performance gains . 
Formative assessments include both formal and informal methods . 
Types of Formative Assessments
• Quizzes , quick-writes , or exit slips . 
• Draft work samples . 
• Think Aloud or Think-Pair-Share activities . 
• Student portfolio review . 
• Student self-assessments . 
• Use of higher order questions throughout the lesson to determine student ‘ s ability to apply 
and analyze what he or she knows . 
• Observation using pre-established criteria to monitor student understanding . 
See ―Ongoing Informal Assessments‖ in the appendix for more examples . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 95
Summative Assessment 
Summative assessments provide evidence of the students ‘ enduring learning . Summative 
assessments are conducted at the end of a unit of instruction , course , or grade level to determine 
the degree of mastery or proficiency based on identified achievement targets . Summative 
assessments are evaluative in nature , generally resulting in a score or a grade . 
Types of Summative Assessments
• Unit tests or final exams . 
• Culminating projects or performances . 
• Work portfolio analysis . 
• Benchmarks and short cycles ( Please refer to content offices for specific information 
.  ) 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 96
Testing 
The Office of Assessment is responsible for coordinating , implementing , and providing 
information about federal , state , and county-mandated testing programs within the school 
system . Among these are the Maryland School Assessment ( MSA )  , Alternate Maryland School 
Assessment ( ALT-MSA )  , High School Assessments ( HSA )  , and Modified High School 
Assessments ( Mod-HSA )  . The office also provides links to information and contacts for the 
Baltimore County Public Schools ' Short-cycle and Benchmark Assessment Program . You may 
access the Office of Assessment by going to 
. 
Testing accommodations provide the means for assessing students ‘ abilities rather than the 
students ‘ disabilities . Approved MSDE Testing Accommodations are provided in the Appendix . 
You may also access the Maryland Accommodations Manual at 

E978F6D508AA / 16337 / MDAccommodationsManual_21108 . pdf . 
Sources : 
Frederiksen , J . R .  & White , B . J .  ( 1997 )  . Reflective Assessment of Students ‘ Research Within an 
Inquiry-Based Middle School Science Curriculum . Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the American Educational Research Association , Chicago , IL . 
Popham , J .  ( 2008 )  . Transformative Assessment . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision 
and Curriculum Development . 
Tomlinson , C . A .  ( 2008 )  . Learning to Love Assessment . Educational Leadership , 65 ( 4 )  , 8-13 . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 97
Assessment Options 
Student progress monitoring is an essential facet of the instructional process . Assessments should 
serve as one of the instruments through which students demonstrate and extend what they have 
learned . Just as daily instruction is differentiated to meet diverse student needs , the assessment 
tools should reflect a variety of formats to evaluate learning goals and objectives . It is most 
important that the teacher consistently and continually examine and evaluate the effectiveness of 
the assessment tools utilized in his / her instructional programs . The following assessment options 
are presented for teacher use : 
• Selected response format ( multiple choice , true / false ) quizzes and tests . 
• Written / oral responses to academic prompts ( short-answer format )  . 
• Performance assessment tasks , yielding : 
�extended written products ( essays , lab reports )  . 
�visual products ( PowerPoint presentations , murals )  . 
�oral performances ( oral reports , foreign language dialogues )  . 
�demonstrations ( skill performance tasks )  . 
�long-term ―authentic‖ projects ( exhibitions )  . 
• Portfolios . 
• Reflective journals or learning logs . 
• Informal / ongoing observations of students . 
• Formal observations of students using observable indicators or criteria . 
• Student self-assessments . 
• Peer reviews and peer response groups . 
Sources : 
Brookhart , S .  ( 2011 )  . Multiple measures in classroom assessment . Better : Evidence-based
Education , spring , 10-11 . 
Andrade , H .  ( 2011 )  . Promoting learning and achievement through self-assessment . Better : 
Evidence-based Education , spring , 12-13 . 
Key Questions Related to the Use of Assessment Tools
• Do I utilize assessments that effectively evaluate the learning goal or objective ? 
• Do I utilize assessments that collect appropriate evidence of student learning ? 
• Do I utilize assessments that include adequate opportunities for the student to demonstrate 
understanding of the knowledge and skills targeted in the instruction ? 
• Do I utilize assessments that are varied and comprehensive ? 
• Do I utilize assessments that include accommodations and modifications as identified in the 
student ‘ s IEP / 504 Plan ? 
Based on Marzano , R . J .  ( 2007 )  . The Art and Science of Teaching : A Comprehensive Framework 
for Effective Instruction . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 98
Scoring Tools and Rubrics
There are a variety of ways to assess student work . The chart below identifies characteristics , 
benefits , and drawbacks of each tool . 
Type Characteristics Benefits Drawbacks
Checklists
List of criteria ( What 
should be included or 
not included ?  ) 
Criteria can be 
weighted . 
Quick to use . 
Easy for students to 
use to access their 
own work . 
Little control over 
quality of criteria
Rating Scales
Similar to checklists , 
but includes a general 
quality rating of 
elements . 
Criteria can be 
weighted . 
Quick to use for 
teachers and students . 
Some control over 
quality of elements
Same as above
Avoid using middle 
ground . 
General / Holistic 
Rubric
Describes levels of 
performance of 
criteria by grouping 
criteria together . 
Clarifies expectations 
for students ; can be 
holistic or analytic . 
Students can use to 
assess their own work . 
Can be used for 
interdisciplinary tasks . 
May be too generic . 
Analytic Rubric
Allows discrimination 
among areas of 
performance 
( weights )  . 
Clarifies expectations 
among sub-categories . 
Provides more 
specific feedback on 
performance . 
Requires more time to 
score . 
Activity-Specific 
Rubric
Divides performance 
into criteria . 
May be holistic or 
analytic . 
Students can use to 
assess their own work . 
Applies to only one 
assignment / task . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 99
After you have selected the most appropriate tool for the assignment , consider the following : 
�How will you introduce the rubric or scoring tool to the students ? 
�How will you teach the students to use the rubric or scoring tool ? 
�How will you guide the students as they learn to self-assess using the rubric or scoring 
tool ? 
Note : Please refer to content offices for specific rubrics used in each subject area . 

Andrade , H .  ( 2008 )  . Self-Assessment through rubrics . Educational Leadership , 65 ( 4 )  , 60-63 . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 100
Anchor Papers 
Anchor papers define what a response looks like at each point in the scoring process . Anchor 
papers can be identified by individual teachers or as a team . Identifying anchor papers allows for 
more collaboration between teacher and scoring consistency . It also provides a quick reference to 
use when scoring , and enables teachers to clarify learning and performance expectations . The 
models below explain the process for identifying anchor papers . 
Model 1 
Based on Scoring Criteria 
 Review the scoring tool to become 
familiar with the range and criteria for 
each score point . 
 Follow a consensus process to evaluate 
student responses using the scoring tool . 
 Sort the scored responses into groups 
corresponding with the score points . 
 Select several responses that best 
illustrate the distinguishing characteristics 
for the top score point . These are the 
anchors . 
 Repeat the process for the other score 
points . 
 Use when the task has been validated 
through reviews , field-testing , and 
revision . 
 Use when the scoring tool has been 
validated . 
Model 2 
Based on Student Responses 
 Follow a consensus process to sort 
student responses into three groups : 
―high , ‖ ―medium , ‖ or ―low‖ quality . 
 Decide on the distinguishing 
characteristics of the ―high quality‖ 
responses . 
 Use these characteristics to identify the 
criteria for the top score point of the 
scoring tool . 
 Select several responses that best 
illustrate the distinguishing characteristics 
for the top score point . These are the 
anchors . 
 Repeat the process for the other groups 
of student responses . 
Use when the task and scoring tool are 
being tried for the first time . 
 Use when the scoring tool is in draft 
form and has not yet been validated . 
Reprinted with permission . Jay McTighe and Marcella Emberger , ―Assessment for collaborative 
learning : Powerful designs for professional learning‖ ,  ( Oxford , OH : National Staff Development 
Council , 2004 )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 101
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 102
Adapted Physical Education ( Adapted PE ) 
Adapted Physical Education means that physical education has been modified to meet the needs 
of children with disabilities . 
Adaptive Skills
Adaptive skills are skills needed to live , work , and play in the community . When identifying a 
child with an intellectual disability , deficits in adaptive skills must be present . There are ten areas 
of adaptive behaviors : self-care , communication skills , self-direction , social skills , leisure skills , 
home or school living , functional academics , community use , work , and help and safety . 
Americans with Disabilities Act ( ADA ) 
Prohibits discrimination and ensures equal opportunity for persons with disabilities in 
employment , state and local government services , public accommodations , commercial facilities , 
and transportation . The ADA requires that reasonable accommodations be provided in meeting 
the needs of individuals with disabilities . Additional technical assistance regarding the ADA is 
available through the ADA Technical Assistance Program . 
Source : 
Annual Review 
Annual Review means that the IEP Team reviews the child ' s IEP periodically but not less than 
annually to determine whether the annual goals for the child are being achieved and they revise 
the IEP as appropriate . 
Assistive Technology Device ( AT Device ) 
Assistive Technology Device is any item , piece of equipment , or product system , whether 
acquired commercially off the shelf , modified , or customized that is used to increase , maintain , 
or improve the functional capabilities of a child with a disability . 
Assistive Technology Service 
Assistive Technology Service is any service that directly assists a child with a disability in the 
selection , acquisition , or use of an assistive technology device . 
Augmentative Alternative Communication Devices ( AAC Devices ) 
Augmentative and alternative communication ( AAC ) includes all forms of communication ( other 
than oral speech ) that are used to express thoughts , needs , wants , and ideas . We all use AAC 
when we make facial expressions or gestures , use symbols or pictures , or write . 
People with severe speech or language problems rely on AAC to supplement existing speech or 
replace speech that is not functional . Special augmentative aids , such as picture and symbol 
communication boards and electronic devices , are available to help people express themselves . 
This may increase social interaction , school performance , and feelings of self-worth . 
Source : American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 103
Autism 
Autism is a developmental disability significantly affecting verbal and nonverbal communication 
and social interaction , generally evident before age 3 that adversely affects a child ' s educational 
performance . Other characteristics often associated with autism are engagement in repetitive 
activities and stereotyped movements , resistance to environmental change or change in daily 
routines , and unusual responses to sensory experiences . The term does not apply if a child ' s 
educational performance is adversely affected primarily because the child has an emotional 
disturbance . A child who manifests the characteristics of autism after age 3 could be diagnosed 
as having autism if the criteria are satisfied . 
Sources :  
 
 
. cfm & CONTENTID = 2424
Adequate Yearly Progress ( AYP ) 
Adequate Yearly Progress is the gain that schools , school systems , and states must make each 
year in the proportion of students achieving proficiency in reading / language arts and math . 
Behavioral Intervention Plan ( BIP ) 
The Behavioral Intervention Plan is the plan that is developed as an outcome of the FBA . It 
should focus on positive supports and strategies to address the events , environmental factors , 
and / or actions that trigger the behavior to teach the student a replacement behavior or skill that 
serves the same functional intent for the student . In addition , it includes information to address 
how to implement the BIP consistently across settings . 
Case Manager 
A case manager is the educator designated to coordinate all services for a student with an IEP . 
Child with a Disability 
A child with a disability is a child evaluated in accordance with §§300 . 530-300 . 536 as having 
mental retardation , a hearing impairment including deafness , a speech or language impairment , a 
visual impairment including blindness , serious emotional disturbance ( hereafter referred to as 
emotional disturbance )  , an orthopedic impairment , autism , traumatic brain injury , another health 
impairment , a specific learning disability , deaf-blindness , or multiple disabilities , and who , by 
reason thereof , needs special education and related services . 
Co-Teaching
Co-teaching occurs when two or more licensed professionals jointly deliver purposeful 
instruction and share accountability for single heterogeneous group of students in a common 
physical space . 
Collaboration
Interpersonal collaboration is a style for direct interaction between at least two co-equal parties 
voluntarily engaged in shared decision making as they work toward a common goal ( Cook & 
Friend , 2010 )  . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 104
Common Core State Standards
The Common Core Standards is a state-led effort coordinated by the National Governor ‘ s 
Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers . On June 21 , 2011 , the Maryland 
State Board of Education unanimously accepted Maryland ‘ s Draft Common Core Curriculum 
Frameworks for English / Language Arts and Mathematics , which define the essential skills and 
knowledge that students need to know and be able to do in order to achieve the academic goals 
of the Common Core State Standards . 
Source : 
Deaf-Blindness
Deaf-blindness means concomitant hearing and visual impairments , the combination of which 
causes such severe communication and other developmental and educational needs that they 
cannot be accommodated in special education programs solely for children with deafness or 
children with blindness . 
Deafness
Deafness means a hearing impairment that is so severe that the child is impaired in processing 
linguistic information through hearing , with or without amplification , which adversely affects a 
child ' s educational performance . 
Developmental Delay
Children aged 3 through 9 experiencing developmental delays . The term ―child with a disability‖ 
for children aged 3 through 9 may , at the discretion of the State and LEA and in accordance with 
§300 . 313 , include a child :  
( 1 ) Who is experiencing developmental delays , as defined by the State and as measured by 
appropriate diagnostic instruments and procedures , in one or more of the following areas : 
physical development , cognitive development , communication development , social or emotional 
development , or adaptive development 
( 2 ) Who , by reason thereof , needs special education and related services
Differentiation 
Differentiation is an approach to teaching in which the teacher strives to do whatever is 
necessary to ensure that struggling and advanced learners , students of various cultural heritages , 
and children with differing backgrounds and experience learn to their greatest potential . 
Emotional Disability ( ED ) 
Emotional disability is defined as follows :  
( 1 ) A condition exhibiting one or more of the following characteristics over a long period of time 
and to a marked degree that adversely affects a child ' s educational performance :  
( a ) An inability to learn that cannot be explained by intellectual , sensory , or health factors .  
( b ) An inability to build or maintain satisfactory interpersonal relationships with peers and 
teachers .  
( c ) Inappropriate types of behavior or feelings under normal circumstances .  
( d ) A general pervasive mood of unhappiness or depression . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 105 
( 2 ) A tendency to develop physical symptoms or fears associated with personal or school 
problems . The term includes schizophrenia , but does not apply to children who are socially 
maladjusted , unless it is determined that they have an emotional disability . 
Source : 
Extended School Year ( ESY ) 
Extended School Year service means special education and related services that are provided to a 
child with a disability beyond the normal school year of the public agency in accordance with the 
child ‘ s IEP , and at no cost to the parents of the child . 
Free Appropriate Public Education ( FAPE ) 
Free Appropriate Public Education means special education and related services that have been 
provided at public expense which meet the standards of the State educational agency and are 
provided in conformity with the individualized education program required under section 614 ( d )  . 
Functional Behavioral Assessment ( FBA ) 
Functional Behavioral Assessment is the process of gathering information that reliably predicts 
the conditions and / or circumstances surrounding a student ' s behavior that is considered 
inappropriate . This assessment is a collaborative , student-centered , problem-solving process . 
Hearing Impairment 
Hearing impairment is an impairment in hearing , whether permanent or fluctuating , that 
adversely affects a child ' s educational performance but that is not included under the definition 
of deafness in this section . 
Home and Hospital 
These are educational services provided to a child who cannot attend school because of a 
temporary physical or emotional condition . 
Inclusion
Inclusion is the process by which a student with an educational disability is placed as a full 
participating member of a general education class , to the extent appropriate , in his / her home 
school . 
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA ) 
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA ) is a law ensuring services to children 
with disabilities throughout the nation . IDEA governs how states and public agencies provide 
early intervention , special education , and related services to more than 6 . 5 million eligible 
infants , toddlers , children , and youth with disabilities .  
* Infants and toddlers with disabilities ( birth-2 ) and their families receive early intervention 
services under IDEA Part C . Children and youth ( ages 3-21 ) receive special education and 
related services under IDEA Part B . Source : 
IEP ( Individualized Education Program ) 
An Individualized Educational Program is a written statement for a child with a disability that is 
developed , reviewed , and revised in a meeting in accordance with §§300 . 341-300 . 350 . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 106
IEP Team 
The IEP Team is a group of individuals composed of the parents of a child with a disability , at 
least one regular education teacher of said child ( if the child is or may be participating in the 
regular education environment )  , at least one special education teacher , or where appropriate , at 
least one special education provider of said child , an individual who can interpret the 
instructional implications of evaluation results , other individuals who have knowledge or special
expertise regarding the child ( including related services personnel , as appropriate ) and , whenever 
appropriate , the child with a disability . 
Intellectual Disability
Intellectual Disability means general intellectual functioning , adversely affecting a student ‘ s 
educational performance that : 
1 . Is significantly subaverage . 
2 . Exists concurrently with deficits in adaptive behavior . 
3 . Is manifested during the developmental period . 
K-W-L
Abbreviated from Know-Want-Learn this is instructional strategy partially completed before the 
reading or teaching of a material , and partially afterwards . Students fill out two sections ,  " What I 
Know " and " What I Want to Know " beforehand , and then fill out " What I Learned " after the 
reading . Source : 
Learning Preferences 
Learning preferences are an indication of the conditions in which students prefer to work and 
learn . 
Learning Styles 
Learning styles are an indication of how students mentally receive , perceive , process , 
understand , and internalize new knowledge . 
Least Restrictive Environment ( LRE ) 
Each public agency shall ensure the following :  
( 1 ) That , to the maximum extent appropriate , children with disabilities , including children in 
public or private institutions or other care facilities , are educated with children who are 
nondisabled .  
( 2 ) That children with disabilities are educated alongside children without disabilities as much as 
appropriate . ―Appropriate‖ means that the education fits the child ‘ s special needs and allows 
the child to make educational progress . The regular education classroom is the first 
placement choice the IEP team must consider .  
( 3 ) That special classes , separate schooling , or other removal of children with disabilities from 
the regular educational environment occurs only if the nature or severity of the disability is 
such that education in regular classes with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot 
be achieved satisfactorily . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 107
Multiple Disabilities
Multiple Disabilities means concomitant impairments ( such as mental retardation-blindness , 
mental retardation-orthopedic impairment , etc .  )  , the combination of which causes such severe 
educational needs that the student cannot be accommodated in special education programs solely 
for one of the impairments . The term does not include deaf-blindness . 
Natural Supports 
Natural Supports refers to the use of pre-existing materials or people that are typically available 
as a first option in providing support . 
Nonpublic 
This is placement of a student with a disability in an accredited private special education school 
at public expense . 
Orthopedic Impairment
Orthopedic Impairment means a severe orthopedic impairment that adversely affects a child ' s 
educational performance . The term includes impairments caused by congenital anomaly ( e . g .  , 
clubfoot , absence of some member , etc .  )  , impairments caused by disease ( e . g .  , poliomyelitis , 
bone tuberculosis , etc .  )  , and impairments from other causes ( e . g .  , cerebral palsy , amputations , 
and fractures or burns that cause contractures )  . 
Other Health Impaired 
Other Health Impaired means having limited strength , vitality , or alertness , including a 
heightened alertness to environmental stimuli , that results in limited alertness with respect to the 
educational environment , that :  
( 1 ) Is due to chronic or acute health problems such as asthma , attention deficit disorder , or 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder , diabetes , epilepsy , a heart condition , hemophilia , lead 
poisoning , leukemia , nephritis , rheumatic fever , and sickle cell anemia .  
( 2 ) Adversely affects a child ' s educational performance . 
Program Modifications and Supports 
Program Modifications and Supports are the modifications and supports needed to help the 
student advance toward annual goals , be involved in the general curriculum , participate in 
extracurricular and nonacademic activities , and be instructed with other students with and 
without disabilities . Examples include , but are not limited to , adapted assignments , specialized 
classroom seating , testing modifications , staff training , physical modifications of the classroom , 
and individual assistance as determined by the IEP team . 
Response to Intervention ( RTI ) 
Response to Intervention is a system used at each school to screen , assess , identify , plan for , and 
provide interventions to any student at risk of school failure due to academic or behavior needs . 
Section 504
To be protected under Section 504 , a student must be determined to :  ( 1 ) have a physical or 
mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities ; or ( 2 ) have a record 
of such an impairment ; or ( 3 ) be regarded as having such an impairment . Section 504 requires 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 108
that school districts provide a free appropriate public education ( FAPE ) to qualified students in 
their jurisdictions who have a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more 
major life activities . 
Source : 
Specific Learning Disability ( SLD ) 
The term Specific Learning Disability means a disorder in one or more of the basic 
psychological processes involved in understanding or using language , spoken or written , that 
may manifest itself in an imperfect ability to listen , think , speak , read , write , spell , or do 
mathematical calculations . SLDs include conditions such as perceptual disabilities , brain injury , 
minimal brain dysfunction , dyslexia , and developmental aphasia . The term does not include 
learning problems that are primarily the result of visual , hearing , or motor disabilities ; of mental 
retardation ; of emotional disturbance ; or of environmental , cultural , or economic disadvantage . 
Supplementary Aids and Services 
Supplementary Aids and Services are aids , services , and other supports that are provided in 
regular education classes or other education-related settings to enable children with disabilities to 
be educated with non-disabled children to the maximum extent appropriate in accordance with 
§§300 . 550-300 . 556 . 
Special Education 
Special Education is specially designed instruction , at no cost to the parents , intended to meet the 
unique needs of a child with a disability , including instruction conducted in the classroom , in the 
home , in hospitals and institutions , and instruction in physical education . 
Speech or Language Impairment 
Speech or Language Impairment means a communication disorder , such as stuttering , impaired 
articulation , language impairment , or a voice impairment , that adversely affects a child ' s 
educational performance . 
Systematic Instruction in Phoneme Awareness , Phonics , and Sight Words ( SIPPS ) 
The SIPPS program , a solution for struggling readers , is a decoding curriculum that teaches the 
prerequisites for developing reading fluency and comprehension . 
Testing Accommodations 
An accommodation is defined as that which is needed by the student to take tests given as part of 
the State ‘ s or jurisdiction ‘ s ongoing assessment program . The intent of test accommodations is to 
mediate the effect of a student ‘ s disability so that the construct of the test is measured , not the 
effect of the disability on the skills and processes being assessed . Test accommodations must be 
aligned with and be part of daily instruction . 
Three Year Re-Evaluation 
Three Year Re-Evaluation means the review of existing evaluation data on the child , including 
evaluations and information provided by the parents of the child , current classroom-based 
assessments and observations , and teacher and related service provider observations . The 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 109
following factors are considered in identifying what additional data , if any , are needed to 
determine whether the child continues to have a disability : 
 The present levels of performance and educational needs of the child 
 Whether the child continues to need special education and related services 
 Whether any additions or modifications to the special education and related services are 
needed to enable the child to meet the measurable annual goals set out in the individualized 
education program of the child and to participate , as appropriate , in the general curriculum 
Transition Services 
The term ―transition services‖ means a coordinated set of activities for a child with a disability 
that : 
1 . Is designed to be within a results-oriented process , that is focused on improving the academic 
and functional achievement of the child with a disability to facilitate the child ‘ s movement 
from school to post-school activities , including post-secondary education , vocational 
education , integrated employment ( including supported employment )  , continuing and adult 
education , adult services , independent living , or community participation ; 
2 . Is based on the individual child ‘ s needs , taking into account the child ‘ s strengths , 
preferences , and interests ; and
3 . Includes instruction , related services , community experiences , the development of 
employment and other post-school adult living objectives , and , when appropriate , acquisition 
of daily living skills and functional vocational evaluation . 
Traumatic Brain Injury
Traumatic Brain Injury is an acquired injury to the brain caused by an external physical force , 
resulting in total or partial functional disability or psychosocial impairment or both , that 
adversely affects a child ' s educational performance . The term applies to open or closed head 
injuries resulting in impairments in one or more areas such as cognition ; language ; memory ; 
attention ; reasoning ; abstract thinking ; judgment ; problem-solving ; sensory , perceptual , and 
motor abilities ; psychosocial behavior ; physical functions ; information processing ; and speech . 
The term does not apply to brain injuries that are congenital or degenerative , or to brain injuries 
induced by birth trauma . 
Universal Design for Learning ( ULD ) 
The Universal Design for Learning is a set of principles for curriculum development that gives 
all individuals equal opportunities to learn . 
Visual-Auditory-Kinesthetic-Tactile ( VAKT ) 
A multi-sensory approach to academic instruction that incorporates visual , auditory , kinesthetic , 
and tactile learning opportunities . 
Visual Impairment
Visual Impairment including blindness is an impairment in vision that , even with correction , 
adversely affects a child ' s educational performance . The term includes both partial and total 
blindness . 
Baltimore County Public Schools
Office of Special Education 2011 110
Wilson Language Program
The Wilson language program is a Tier III intervention , in reference to RTI . Based on OrtonGillingham principles , Wilson is a highly-structured remedial program that directly teaches the 
structure of the language to students who have been unable to learn with other teaching 
strategies , or who may require multisensory language instruction . 
