Online classes : 5 reasons students benefit from ' cameras off ' 

By Tabitha Moses , The Conversation

Updated 0830 GMT ( 1630 HKT ) September 16 , 2020
Online classes that require cameras to stay on may pose challenges for students . 
Online classes that require cameras to stay on may pose challenges for students . 
The views expressed in this commentary are solely those of the writers . CNN is showcasing the work of The Conversation , a collaboration between journalists and academics to provide news analysis and commentary . The content is produced solely by The Conversation .  
 
( CNN ) As the 2020 to 2021 school year gets underway -- both at the K through 12 and college level -- many students find themselves attending online classes via Zoom or similar teleconferencing platforms . 

Although sticking with remote instruction may be the correct decision from the standpoint of public health , it is not without problems . 
As a researcher who studies behavior and the brain , I have found the evidence suggests that online instruction can pose a range of challenges for students if they are required to keep their cameras on during class . Here are five reasons why I believe students should be allowed to keep their cameras off instead . 
1 . Increased anxiety and stress
Online , students are often expected by their teachers to look at the screen for the entire class and stay focused on the video feeds of their classmates . This can result in feelings of prolonged eye contact , which can feel threatening and uncomfortable . Feeling as though everyone is watching can be distracting as students focus on how they may appear to others . 
This discomfort is enhanced by the fact that the faces on the screen are often large and appear very close . This can trigger the body ' s " flight or fight " response , leaving students feeling on edge and impairing their concentration . 
READ MORE : 3 ways to get kids to tune in and pay attention when schools go virtual
2 .  ' Zoom fatigue ' 
While " Zoom fatigue " may sound no different than regular fatigue , science suggests that it is different and that constant video engagement may exacerbate the problem . 
Most of us learn much from nonverbal cues . The face-only format of online video still results in missing many nonverbal cues such as hand gestures , and requires people to work harder to interpret the ones they can see . 
The face-only format also leads people to focus more on verbal cues , which can be tiring . When there are many faces on the screen , most people try to pay attention to all of them -- a type of multitasking called continuous partial attention . 
People have trouble doing this . Switching quickly between tasks can impair memory and decrease the ability to perform tasks . The multitasking required for engaging in a class with multiple active video chats is no different . These problems result in participants being less engaged and feeling drained . 
READ MORE : How parents can help kids get used to wearing a mask at school
3 . Competing obligations
While it would be ideal for all students to sit at home in a quiet room free of distractions during online classes , this won ' t always be the case . Students across all stages of education may be responsible for taking care of other family members or even their own children . 
Access to child care is even more limited than usual during the pandemic . This may mean that some students multitask by caring for their kids or siblings while attending an online class . These responsibilities may be distracting for others and embarrassing to the students involved . It is worth noting that these competing obligations are not specific to students . Many teachers also have to deal with these same concerns . 
READ MORE : 4 weird things that happen when you videoconference
4 . Right to privacy
At school , students are not required to disclose details about their personal lives to their peers , but some of this privacy is lost in video-based classrooms . To turn on video means allowing others into their home . 
Many of these online platforms are not secure -- as evidenced by the " Zoombombers " who have infiltrated classes , often disrupting instruction and sharing participants ' personal information . The information provided by students could be accessed by others and the content of the video could expose the location of the student ' s home and with whom they live . 
This concern is about more than just discomfort at others learning personal details . For some students , exposing this information can endanger their lives or their families . For example , 1 in 15 children are exposed to intimate partner violence each year and some may be fleeing abusive situations . 
Additionally , there are an estimated 3 . 2 million undocumented children and young adults in the US , and many more children who live with undocumented relatives . Online video risks exposing this information to authorities . 
With the development of sophisticated facial recognition software , these concerns are amplified , especially when branches of law enforcement may have access to this technology . 
READ MORE : 3 ways to promote social skills in homebound kids
5 . Financial means and other kinds of access
Requiring students to use video during class makes assumptions about the ability or students or their families to pay for the requisite technology . Approximately 1 in 5 students live below the federal poverty line and lack access to the technology needed for online classes -- from computers or tablets to Wi-Fi . 
While some public school districts have made efforts to distribute tablets and laptops to students , there are other financial burdens that need to be considered . At the start of the pandemic , about 14% of students did not have internet access . 
Although internet service providers made efforts to increase access , many households may not have the bandwidth required for video streaming . 
Furthermore , more than 1 . 5 million students attending public schools or going to college experience homelessness in a given year . Students may not want to share information about their living situation with their classmates , but a requirement to use video may force them to do so since their peers might realize what ' s going on when students have to connect to class from their cars or local establishments . 
The problems listed here are not comprehensive and do not begin to address the additional concerns for students who require classroom accommodations . This discussion has also not touched on the situations that teachers face . Many educators struggle without a way to see and engage with their students regularly and have tried to use video for this purpose . 
The Conversation
These concerns about required video in online classes are not aimed to prevent teachers connecting with students . The goal is to ensure that students feel comfortable and safe while learning online . There are many ways to engage with students through distance learning and it may take time to find a system that works best for everyone . But , based on my research , I believe that required video should not be part of it . 
Tabitha Moses is a doctoral candidate of medicine and of philosophy at Wayne State University . 