PREFACE 
This book originates in a discussion with a potential doctoral candidate. He had 
taken a class with me the previous year on the foundations of educational 
administration theory and we had remained in contacted ever since. On this 
particular day we were discussing French social theory, particularly the work of 
Pierre Bourdieu and to a lesser extent Michel Foucault, and the mobilisation of 
critical social theory in contemporary educational leadership, management and 
administration studies. After careful discussion, we had reached a point where we 
had highlighted the commonly used theoretical resources of Bourdieu and Foucault 
and the tell-tale signs of a Bourdieusian or Foucauldian study. It was at this point 
that the potential student turned to me and asked, this is all good and well, but what 
would a student of yours do? 
So began an intellectual pursuit. What would a student of mine do? If I was to 
be more than a guy who used Bourdieu in educational leadership, management, 
and administration, what was I to offer a potential doctoral, masters or honours 
candidate? There are many others who very competently think with Bourdieu in 
educational leadership, management and administration – and I am thinking 
specifically of Helen Gunter and Pat Thomson, among others. It was during this 
time I was to make two key intellectual connections, one more fleeting and the 
other enduring. In the case of the former, while working at the University of 
Newcastle (Australia), I was fortunate to work in the Faculty of Education and Arts 
when Lisa Adkins was appointed as the BHP Billiton Chair of Sociology. Lisa 
came to Newcastle via Goldsmiths (University of London), Manchester, the 
Australian National University and Kent. While best known for her work on gender 
and labour, it is in her engagement with Bourdieu that was most insightful. Rather 
than mapping an intellectual terrain with Bourdieusian resources, Lisa was 
adamant that Bourdieu was writing in a different time and space and therefore the 
challenge of the contemporary scholar is to bring Bourdieu’s social theory face-toface with key problems of the twenty first century. In doing so, my engagement 
with Lisa inspired the mobilisation of theoretical resources to think anew the 
contemporary condition. There remain substantial traces of Bourdieusian thinking 
in my work. However, it is not a strict adherence, nor is it restricted to the popular 
resources of fields, habitus, and capital. 
The second key connection was to Colin Evers and Gabriele Lakomski, two 
scholars I hold in the highest regard. This connection developed following my 
acceptance to give a public lecture at the University of New South Wales (where 
Colin is currently located). Colin and Gabriele are well known for their natural 
coherentism research programme in educational administration. Unlike many, dare 
I say most, people working in educational leadership, management and 
administration, Colin and Gabriele have systematically built a research programme 
over 25 years. Despite working in different institutions, Colin and Gabriele have 
consistently supported and encouraged me to push my thinking and develop a 
programme of research. This sounds straight forward. However, in a contemporary 
PREFACE 
x
academy that is obsessed with only publishing in the ‘right’ outlets and privileges 
(at many places anyway) the bringing in of money, the systematic development of 
a comprehensive and sophisticated research programme is about playing a longterm scholarly game more so than the short turnaround of institutional research 
assessment exercises. Arguably the greatest moment of scholarly pride I have 
experienced was during the annual Educational Leadership, Management and 
Administration (ELMA) theory workshop I host when Colin and Gabriele 
commented that my work was programmatic and they liked how I was willing to 
put my ideas out there rather than playing it safe behind the names of great 
thinkers. At least that is how I recall it. The combination of thinking a new and 
building a generative programme is what I have sought to do in this book. 
Educational Leadership Relationally is an intellectual project which aims to 
explicitly articulate my distinctive brand of scholarship for educational leadership, 
management and administration. I am not claiming to have developed a completely 
new form of scholarship. The work I present in the following pages is very much 
rooted in Bourdieusian thinking, among others. What I have sought to do is bring a 
collection of intellectual resources face-to-face with the contemporary conditions 
of educational leadership, management and administration. These include new 
forms of administration and regulation, changing understandings of the local, and 
the challenges of researching objects to which we have substantial investment. 
This comes at a time when educational leadership, management and 
administration as a disciplinary space is under renewed stress. This stress is 
theoretical, methodological and one of relevance. I have sought to bring matters of 
methodology, beyond the simplistic division along paradigmatic lines (quantitative/ 
qualitative), to the fore to enable dialogue and debate. In my work I aim to 
develop, argue, and defend, a distinctive brand of scholarship for educational 
leadership, management and administration. This is not an ahistorical scholarship. 
Rather it is one with a significant intellectual heritage drawn from social theorists 
Pierre Bourdieu, Luc Boltanski, Gaston Bachelard, who themselves drew on many 
others. It also calls upon leadership studies by Mary Uhl-Bien and others working 
in the broader relational agenda, and understandably educational administration 
thinkers such as Colin Evers, Gabriele Lakomski, Helen Gunter, and Richard Bates 
among others. 
What I offer is not a definitive theory of educational administration, or a finite 
set of theoretical resources, instead, I offer a research programme for scholarship in 
educational administration. It is less focused on delivering a theory and more 
focused on a way to study. Attention is therefore given to epistemology and 
ontology to generate a relational approach. In particular, I propose this work as a 
counter to the scholarly bias, or anti-intellectualism in educational administration 
that others such as Helen Gunter have written about. My work also goes beyond 
the simplistic binaries of the introductory research methods courses of 
contemporary university programmes. In short, I reject the entity based thinking 
that partitions theoretical and research practices into isolated stages and territories. 
One of the hallmarks of generative research programmes are their ability to not 
only transcend the temporality and socio-spatial conditions of the intellectual 
PREFACE 
xi
context and empirical terrain of its initial articulation and to produce new ways of 
thinking, but to think itself and even to out-think itself. This book is not free from 
contradictions, gaps, tensions, puzzlements, and unresolved questions, many of 
which I have tried to openly acknowledged, and perhaps at times accentuated, in 
the pages that follow. What will become clear is that I oppose the orthodoxy of 
educational leadership, management and administration as a scholarly discipline. I 
seek to challenge the rhetoric that dominates the space as a domain of intellectual 
inquiry and in particular what I see as the closing of boundaries between research 
traditions. As a result, this book is an invitation – an invitation to think with, 
beyond and where necessary against me in advancing a relational approach to 
educational leadership, management and administration scholarship. I will have 
achieved my purpose if this work serves a stimulus for others to mobilise in their 
own analysis. In this sense, I encourage others to use it, engage with it, change it, 
protest it, most of all, think with it. 
Scott Eacott 
Sydney, October 2014 

xiii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
As noted previously, this book is an output – but far from final word – of an 
intellectual journey to articulate an approach to scholarship for educational 
leadership management and administration. As a result, the ideas presented in this 
book have been tested out in various forums and appeared in parts in other 
publications. 
 The ideas proposed throughout the chapters have been presented at various 
conferences, including but not exclusively, the Australian Association for Research 
in Education and the Australian Council for Educational Leaders, and have been 
the basis of presentations I have given at the University of Newcastle, University 
of Queensland, Australian Catholic University and the University of New South 
Wales. A version of Chapter Two appears in a special issue of Educational 
Philosophy and Theory, and a version of Chapter Seven appears in Journal of 
Educational Administration and History. Sections of Chapter Three appear in 
International Journal of Educational Management. 
 In addition to such formal outputs, I would like to acknowledge colleagues both 
near and far who have stimulated my thinking in relation to this work. 
 To my colleagues in the School of Education (North Sydney) at the Australian 
Catholic University, and in particular Tania Aspland, Charles Burford and Judith 
Norris, your contributions to my thinking through regular conversation and often 
debate, have helped push my thinking in new and exciting ways. 
 To my former colleagues at the University of Newcastle, notably Robert Parkes, 
Zsuzsanna Millei, Eva Bendix Petersen, and Tom Griffiths, whose collegial 
support and pursuit of scholarship in a contemporary academy that frequently 
discourages such activity is much appreciated and I would not be where I am today 
without you. 
 My network of colleagues further afield, in particular Colin Evers, Gabriele 
Lakomski, Richard Niesche and Jane Wilkinson, your contribution to my work, 
though implicit, is great. Colin and Gabriele, you are model scholars. Although we 
may hold different world views, the guidance and support I have received – and 
continue to – from you both are invaluable. The productive ways in which you 
demand me to push my thinking and asking questions of myself and others is 
outstanding. Jane and Richard, I consider you to be my partners in this intellectual 
endeavour. We have come into positions of prominence in the discipline nationally 
at a key junction. The collegial support you provide is much appreciated, as is your 
encouraging yet demanding attitude to pushing the boundaries of knowledge 
production. 
 Finally, I need to acknowledge my wife Amy and children – Daniel and 
Madelyn. Your understanding, particularly during what can be the challenging and 
stressful moments of writing a book is much appreciated. Your love and support 
are what makes the effort worthwhile. 
 

1
CHAPTER ONE 
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
INTRODUCTION 
Fenwick English (2006) argues that advancing scholarship in educational 
administration requires criticism of it, philosophically, empirically and logically, 
suggesting that we do not search for core pillars but the contested grounds on 
which educational leadership is defined moment-to-moment. As a domain of 
inquiry, educational administration has a rich history of epistemological and 
ontological debate. From the work of Andrew Halpin and Daniel Griffiths in the 
1950-1960s in what is known as the Theory Movement, through to Thomas Barr 
Greenfield’s critique of logical empiricism in the 1970s, the emergence of Richard 
Bates’ Critical Theory of educational administration in the 1980s, and Colin Evers 
and Gabriele Lakomski’s naturalistic coherentism in the 1990-2000s, debates about 
the ways of knowing, doing and being in the social world have been central to 
advancing scholarship. However, in the most recent decade, at least since the 
publication of Evers and Lakomski’s work, questions of the epistemological and 
ontological preliminaries of research have become somewhat marginalised. This is 
not to suggest that such discussions are not taking place, but rather that they have 
been sporadic and piecemeal. This is further embodied in the context of various 
traditions of educational administration research (e.g. critical, humanistic, 
instrumental, scientific) rarely, if ever, engaging with one another. 
Given the relative absence of epistemological and ontological debate in 
contemporary educational administration thought and analysis, Izhar Oplatka 
(2010) argues that it is timely to once again engage with such matters. This book 
explicitly establishes the importance of the interplay of theory and methodology in 
the scholarship of educational leadership, management and administration. Fusing 
multiple analytical frames, I outline and defend a particular ‘scientific’ view of 
scholarship before using that perspective to criticise existing administrative 
theories and develop a distinctive alternative, one that I label a relational 
programme in educational administration. This is not to be confused with just 
another adjectival approach to leadership, management and administration 
scholarship. The argument that I am building is for a relational approach to 
scholarship in educational administration and the rationale for this is grounded in a 
recasting of administrative labour in the contemporary social condition. 
The intellectual heritage of my relational project is eclectic, drawing heavily on 
French social theory such as the work of sociologists Pierre Bourdieu (critical) and 
Luc Boltanski (pragmatic), management scholars such as Peter Dachler, Dian 
Marie Hoskings, and Mary Uhl-Bien, but also critical management studies, 
political science, policy analysis, organisation studies, and given my own 
disciplinary location, recognised educational administration thinkers such as 
CHAPTER 1 
2
Richard Bates, Colin Evers and Gabriele Lakomski, Thomas Greenfield and 
contemporaries such as Helen Gunter, Pat Thomson, John Smyth and Fenwick 
English. Centrally, in bringing critical pluralism to scholarship I engage with what 
I see as the key theoretical problem of the legitimation of the social world and its 
empirical manifestation in the organisation of schooling. I mobilise the label 
‘scientific’ in the Francophone (or even continental European) sense, that which 
adheres to rigorous inquiry through the explicit interrogating of a large scale 
theoretical problem embedded within an empirical problem, as opposed to the 
more conservative Anglophone tradition – primarily that of North America – which 
privileges the exhibitionism of method and analysis. In doing so, this book delivers 
an elaborated, and coherent, discussion from the fragmented discourses of 
contemporary educational leadership, management and administration thought and 
analysis to sketch an alternate research programme. Importantly, this book is not a 
critique of the field – something that is already too frequent enough. Rather, it is 
devoted to sketching an alternate research programme for advancing scholarship. 
Specifically, I aim to: 
– To break new ground methodologically for the ‘scientific’ study of educational 
leadership, management and administration. 
In working to this aim, this book is arguably the most ambitious book since Evers 
and Lakomski’s three book series: Knowing educational administration (1991), 
Exploring educational administration (1996), and Doing educational 
administration (2000). Importantly, I interpret this aim widely and my discussion is 
based on the following guiding questions: 
– What are the large scale theoretical, and empirical, problems on which 
educational administration is based?; and 
– How can we study them? 
These questions, I believe, are vital as the domain of educational administration 
faces increasing questions of its relevance and status within education, and as 
education itself faces increasing challenges from both within, and beyond. The 
arguments put forth in this book clearly stem from my intellectual pedigree in 
critical social theory – that which is frequently assigned the label of ‘sociology’ or 
‘organisation studies’ more so than educational leadership, management and 
administration. However, in order to engage with the aim and guiding questions of 
the programme, I am not going to apply or map the intellectual terrain of 
educational administration using a critical social theory lens, i
 as this is not 
desirable or helpful for my purposes, as such an approach would leave the existing 
theorisation of educational administration intact. Rather, what I offer is a 
theoretical intervention that enables one to see educational administration in new 
ways. Such an approach settles many of the popular assumptions of contemporary 
educational leadership, management and administration thought and enables a new 
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
3
understanding of the relationship between schooling, policy and broader socioeconomic conditions. 
OUTLINING THE ARGUMENT 
The canonical literature of educational administration, as is so often the case, 
comes from a bygone era. Classic administration works, such as Frederick 
Winslow Talyor’s (1911) The principles of scientific management, Chester 
Barnard’s (1968) Functions of the executive, and Herbert Simon’s (1976) 
Administrative behavior, were written at a time of industrial expansion and in the 
case of the latter two, shifting post-war socio-political conditions. Influential 
educational administration texts such as those written by Andrew Halpin (1966), 
Daniel Griffiths (1959a, 1959b, 1965, 1985, 1988), Thomas Greenfield (see 
Greenfield & Ribbins, 1993), Christopher Hodgkinson (1978, 1996), Richard Bates 
(1980a, 1980b, 1983), William Foster (1986), and Colin Evers and Gabriele 
Lakomski (1991, 1996, 2000), were also written in a different time and space. This 
is not to suggest that ontological and epistemological arguments are bracketed to a 
particular historical period, rather I argue that if we are to advance scholarship in 
educational leadership, management and administration we need to recognise that 
the research object has shifted over time and by virtue, our ways of knowing said 
object must change to. 
The challenge for educational leadership, management and administration 
scholarship as engaged with in this book aligns with three markers: first, the 
changing image of what is essentially a modern institution, the school, in 
contemporary (post-modern?) times; second, the critique of ‘science’, or what will 
become clear, logical empiricism, from scholars, primarily from the critical school; 
and finally, the contemporary, although arguably enduring tensions of 
administration polarising individualism and collectivism and agency and structure. 
The relational research programme, as proposed in this book aims to reformulate 
the image of school administration by seeking to get beyond the tensions just 
mentioned. What in particular is the narrow attribution of ‘science’ with logical 
empiricism and Theory Movement inspired scholarship. Although notions of 
science in educational administration have been critiqued by: the humanists (e.g. 
Greenfield, Hodgkinson) for privileging the objective and failing to account for the 
subjective; the emancipatory critical theorists (e.g. Bates) for being an instrument 
of control; and the critical sociologist (e.g. Gunter) for its apolitical approach, this 
querying of science however is primarily on the basis of the limited mobilisation of 
science in educational administration and its relations with the social. The binaries 
of objectivity and subjectivity, as with individualism and collectivism, and agency 
and structure, are hardly productive theoretical spaces. Therefore, as with Evers 
and Lakomski’s research programme, I accept the various criticism of empiricist 
epistemology raised by the scope of alternate perspectives, but argue that they do 
not seriously affect the value of science as a scholarly endeavour. 
I seek to pursue, and even increase, anchorage in a rigorous empirical science, 
which seems to me to represent a fundamental contribution of the work developed 
CHAPTER 1 
4
in the framework of this relational programme, by offering theoretically rich 
descriptions of the activities of actors in particular administrative situations. To this 
end, it seems unproductive to engage in a power explanation whose mechanical 
utilization risks crushing the narrative prior to any data being generated. To be 
brief, my move therefore consists in re-orienting from a critical sociological lens to 
the search for a description which attests to the unstable character of 
administration. This is not to suggest an abandonment of the project of the critical, 
however, through attention to close up descriptions of disruptions in production,ii
one is better placed to craft accounts that can productively theorise educational 
administration in ways that can inform our understanding of how schools are 
constructed and exist in the social. The programme is inherently pragmatic, 
exploiting the resources supplied by current intellectual threads in history, 
philosophy, sociology, geography, literature, psychology, often taking different 
paths but focused on in situ activities in schools. Coming together in this way, by 
its very nature involves compromise, and the union is one that is eternally fragile. 
This approach to knowledge production mirrors the knowledge dynamic in which 
its object is embedded and embodies. In doing so, it moves beyond the mapping of 
directives and influences to an explicit interrogation of the messiness of the social. 
Such a move is incompatible with modernistic accounts which present educational 
leadership, management and administration as a coherent and focused body of 
work (fieldiii), marked with a past, present and future (English, 2002). Theoretically 
this enables us to break down the hierarchal world view that dominates much of the 
discourses of administration, management and leadership, that which reduces 
asymmetries in the social to single measures (e.g. class, gender) or binaries 
(dominate – dominated), to a relational way of thinking. 
This move plays out in both the relations that the researcher has with the 
research object and also in the empirical. The intimate relationship between the 
researcher and the research object is magnified in educational leadership, 
management and administration (and arguably other domains within the 
professions) given that most, if not all, academics working in the area have 
previously held administrative positions in organisations and have a long 
association with such institutions, therefore heightening the embedded and 
embodied nature of their engagement. In the empirical, while the theme of 
colonisation has been replaced by globalisation in broader discourses, I argue that 
the image of the school, and by virtue, school administration, has for the most part 
not moved beyond the image of a colonised social group of educators working at 
some distance from the centre of education governance embedded within the state 
bureaucracies. This is despite policy moves focused on empowering schools and 
their communities. 
Foregrounded in this argument is the role of ontology and epistemology. Core to 
my argument is that the centralist mindset of education research – even that which 
explicitly speaks back to it – limits our way of conceptualising the school and by 
virtue, theorising educational leadership, management and administration. I argue 
that there is a need to move beyond the linearity of rational action and 
consciousness. As is frequently witnessed when a centralist mindset is mobilised, 
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
5
and especially so when an emancipatory account is put forth that in the process of 
building its argument further embeds the centralist agenda, it is difficult to move 
beyond a somewhat deterministic narrative being constructed. In the case of 
educational leadership, management and administration, this more often than not 
translates into seeing the school as the local face of a state agenda. The 
mobilisation of labels such as neo-liberalism, managerialism, and new public 
management, are too broad a brush stroke to sustain meaningful advances in 
knowledge anymore. Far too much is gathered in the sweep of the labels and the 
usage has diffused to such an extent that it is rarely productive in the space. The 
agenda of the relational research programme that I am advancing in this book has a 
chance to move beyond this limitation. I investigate how the production of 
knowledge about the legitimacy, effectiveness, efficiency, and morality of 
administration connects with the practices of administration. In doing so, questions 
are raised regarding the extent to which ‘new’ forms of administration – leadership, 
participatory, distributed, and so on – are generative or thwarting of new 
knowledge. Such a move is not surprising given that for the most part scholars, at 
least those who take such matters seriously, are looking for an alternate ontology as 
the Newtonian/Cartesian universe inhabited by self-interested, atomistic 
individuals – that which fits nicely with managerialist accounts of administration – 
does not logically fit prescriptions for collaborative practice nor the image of the 
school as a nebulas unit. A relational focus enables scholarship to move beyond 
internal tensions and external pressures by opening up the school and engaging 
with the dynamic relations that it both holds with other social institutions and those 
which constantly redefine its very existence. As a means of highlighting the key 
features of my argument, below I list five central features of the relational 
programme explored in this book: 
– The centrality of ‘administration’ in the social world creates an ontological 
complicity in researchers that makes it difficult to epistemologically break from 
our spontaneous understanding of the social world; 
– Rigorous ‘scientific’ scholarship would therefore call into question the very 
foundations on which the contemporarily popular discourses of ‘leadership’ 
‘management’ and ‘administration’ in education are constructed; 
– The contemporary social condition cannot be separated from the ongoing, and 
inexhaustible, recasting of administrative labour; 
– Studying educational administration ‘relationally’ enables the overcoming of the 
contemporary, and arguably enduring, tensions of individualism and 
collectivism, and structure and agency; and 
– In doing so, there is a productive – rather than merely critical – space to theorise 
educational administration. 
In light of this, the primary point of departure I make with mainstream educational 
leadership, management and administration scholarship is my attention to matters 
of epistemology and ontology, or knowledge production. However, rather than 
locate this work in a philosophy of science space, I explicitly bring this into 
CHAPTER 1 
6
discussion with contemporary discourses of educational leadership, management 
and administration. This move enables the argument to speak across intellectual 
(e.g. education, management, organisational studies) and socio-geographic 
boundaries through the provision of a theoretical argument that is not confined to 
any one empirical problem, space or time. Adopting this analytical strategy enables 
an interdisciplinary approach to scholarship while also fusing multiple lenses for 
the specific intent of opening new lines of inquiry and renewal in a field of 
knowledge production – educational leadership, management and administration – 
under question for its scholarly value within the academy. 
TOWARDS A RELATIONAL RESEARCH PROGRAMME 
Despite relationship-orientated perspectives being around since the earliest forms 
of scholarship on leadership, management and administration, the term ‘relational’ 
leadership is surprisingly new (Uhl-Bien, 2006). James Hunt and George Dodge 
(2000) consider relational perspectives, and the approaches within them, to be at 
the forefront of emerging leadership scholarship. In the time since Hunt and 
Dodge’s claim, relational approaches have solidified a place in the intellectual 
space of broader leadership scholarship (Dinh et al., 2014). The significance of a 
relational approach is often argued for as a means of generating scholarship that 
has more relevance to the world of practice (Bradbury & Litchenstein, 2000). Key 
thinkers in this space include Peter Dachler and colleagues, Dian Marie Hoskings, 
and Mary Ulh-Bien. 
There are two major schools in the broader relational scholarship: entity; and 
relational. Although both ‘entity’ and ‘relational’ approaches view leadership as a 
social process, what they mean by process, particularly with respect to their 
ontology and epistemology, is quite different (Uhl-Bien, 2006). An entity 
perspective is consistent with an epistemology of an objective truth and a Cartesian 
dogma of a clear separation between mind and nature (Bradbury & Litchenstein 
2000). Relationship-based leadership from this perspective is focused on 
individuals and their perceptions, intentions, behaviours, personalities, 
expectations, and evaluations relative to their relationships with others. In contrast, 
a relational perspective views knowledge as socially constructed and socially 
distributed, not as mind stuff constructed or accumulated and stored by individuals. 
As Dachler and Hoskings (1995) argue, ‘[t]hat which is understood as real is 
differently constructed in different relational and historical/cultural settings’ (p. 4). 
The distinction between the entity and relational schools of thought are important. 
Consistent with my argument through this entire book, the identification of work 
within a relational space does not suggest a homogenous approach. 
Helen Gunter (2010) argues that there is an emerging, or arguably re-emerging, 
sociological stream of scholarship in educational leadership, management and 
administration. The relational research programme that I am building and 
defending in this book fits within this sociological tradition of educational 
leadership, management and administration scholarship. I am of course not the 
only individual playing in this space. David Giles and colleagues in the Flinders’ 
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
7
Leadership And Management in Education (FLAME) research group (Flinders 
University, Adelaide, Australia) are building an agenda around ‘relational’ 
leadership (see Giles, Bell, Halsey, & Palmer, 2012). The point of departure, or 
‘distinction’ to think with Bourdieu, in my work is both empirical and theoretical. 
Whereas Giles and colleagues seek to operationalise a ‘relational’ approach, adding 
yet another adjectival leadership, and in doing so, aligning with an entity approach, 
I am not seeking to map an intellectual terrain using existing theories adopted from 
elsewhere yet alone operationalise them. Rather, my argument is built upon what I 
see as the demise of theoretical advancements in educational leadership, 
management and administration. As a domain of scholarly inquiry, there is a 
proliferation of adjectives that exist beyond the need for any concrete referent and 
a denouncement of the heroic individual through ‘new’ organisational forms, yet 
the celebration of the individual ‘turnaround’ leader at unprecedented levels. The 
volume of critique regarding the impact of the expansion of the manageralist 
project has never been greater yet the aspirational tone of narratives of individual 
and/or collective autonomy has never received wider popular appeal. The 
relational approach I am advancing seeks not to map the existing terrain but to 
recast it. My intellectual project – an ongoing and generative one – is to recast 
educational administrative labour and the relations between the researcher and the 
researched. 
While this is undoubtedly a theoretical monograph, something that is unpopular 
in the literatures of educational leadership, management and administration, it is 
not a theory. The theoretical and methodological frame I build is largely based on 
the work of others. Importantly, I have sought to mobilise multiple analytical 
frames in my analysis of educational administration. For the most part, I have 
sought to explicitly name the frameworks from within which I construct various 
claims, but in some parts this is more subtle. 
Although it is difficult to accurately pinpoint the genesis of an intellectual 
project, this book is grounded in a Bourdieusian inspired scholarship, particularly 
the methodological perspective first sketched out in a text written by Pierre 
Bourdieu, Jean-Claude Chamboredon and Jean-Claude Passeron (1991[1968]) 
entitled The craft of sociology: epistemological preliminaries (le métier de 
sociologue). However, my use of Bourdieusian theorising is neither with utmost 
loyalty or reverence. Bourdieu never explicitly wrote about educational 
administration, but most importantly, as James Ladwig (1996) argues, built within 
the very French, Durkheimian sociological tradition, Bourdieu’s theoretical and 
methodological stance begins from the epistemological presumption that (in 
Poincare’s words) ‘facts do not speak’. The result being that for Bourdieu, 
‘scientific’ knowledge does not come into being through deduction or induction 
rather through social construction. He believes that social science is not about 
reality, nor is it about how reality is experienced, instead social science must focus 
on how reality is constructed in a dialectic between objects and subjects. As I will 
touch on elsewhere throughout this book, Bourdieu’s belief in science is not the 
science of mainstream Anglophone employment, that which is mostly tied to 
logical empiricism and displaying an ‘exhibitionism of data and procedures’ rather 
CHAPTER 1 
8
he believes ‘one would be better advised to display the conditions of construction 
and analysis of these data (Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992[1992], p. 65). Bourdieu’s 
view of science, or more specifically scientific inquiry, sees it as an act of 
distinction from ordinary language and the under-problematised view of the social 
world as it is. 
As I have argued previously, research in educational leadership, management 
and administration – or anywhere for that matter – is a political activity (Eacott, 
2013). Therefore, what I have sought is to ground my work in a methodological 
tradition that explicitly pays attention to the relations between the researcher and 
the researched – the epistemological preliminaries of scholarship – as much as it 
does the relations between the empirical foci of research. It is the contention of this 
book that the relational approach I am building and defending offers important 
resources for engaging with both of these levels. 
The type of analysis made possible by this relational approach offers a means of 
crafting theoretically charged descriptions illuminating the situated nature of 
administration and illuminating the embodied and embedded location of the 
educational leadership, management and administration scholar. Struggles for 
legitimacy are at the core of institutional labour, whether that is the principal 
working in a school or an academic in a university. These tensions are 
performative in that they only exist in practice and cannot be solely reduced to the 
structural arrangements of the empirical. The contested terrain that is the struggle 
for legitimacy is inexhaustible and as such, is a forever unfinished project. The 
binds that hold a group, organisation, institution and so on together are therefore 
problematic, active and by virtue of these qualities, fragile. However, as Les Back 
(2009) argues, what makes sociology interesting is engaging in the task of the 
interpretation of meaning that inevitably must be left open. He contends that the 
slippages, the insights, as well as the blindness, are what make it valuable and 
where the incomplete record is nonetheless compelling. These features though are 
not necessarily consistent across all research traditions. 
Working from the above, this book contains a theoretical intervention 
demonstrating how a relational approach can be used to theorise educational 
leadership, management and administration. My appropriation of multiple 
analytical frames is guided by my singular (theoretical and empirical) task of trying 
to describe what I see happening in the scholarship of educational leadership, 
management and administration. 
This multi-analytic approach recasts the image of the school, the administration 
of schooling, and its relationship with a range of other social institutions and 
bodies. The move I make is beyond that of merely mapping the various relations 
that schooling has to external bodies (not to mention the arrays of internal 
dynamics at play). Here I want to explicitly state two differences between my 
argument and that of mainstream educational leadership, management and 
administration discourses. First, for me, the contemporary focus of ‘leadership’ is 
an epistemic, and not empirical, research object; and second, the school, as a unit 
of analysis, is now located in a floating territory no longer defined by the 
downward linearity of state policy and/or ties to the ‘local’. Following the former, 
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
9
from this point on I am going to adopt the label ‘educational administration’. I am 
well aware that this is unpopular and for many seen as an historical label (as is 
‘educational management’), but I do it for two reasons: i) I believe it to be too 
cumbersome to continually mobilise the rather lengthy ‘educational leadership, 
management and administration’ label, therefore having a very pragmatic goal of 
increasing readability; and ii) conceptually, as I build my argument I believe it will 
become clear that ‘educational administration’ enables a broader perspective for 
interrogating the theoretical problem and opening new directions for scholarship. 
In presenting this work, I argue that the developments, dynamics, and ruptures 
inherent within the relational research programme have a significance that lies well 
beyond the boundaries of educational administration, beyond its immediate parents 
(education and public administration), and into the larger family of studies of 
society (sociology). This is partly because theory travels better across boundaries, 
especially geographic but also cultural boundaries, than empirical research (Miller, 
2011). Importantly, this means that while the examples I use throughout the book 
are primarily Australian, this is much more than an Australian story. 
MORE THAN AN AUSTRALIAN STORY 
This book, and somewhat understandable given my own geographic location, is 
unashamedly Australian. As an intellectual home, Australia has a rich tradition of 
contributing to educational administration scholarship, particularly from a socially 
critical perspective (Bates, 2010; Gunter, 2010). More than just contributing, 
Australian scholars have a rich history in disruptive scholarship, that which 
challenges the hegemonic discourses, including that of fellow Australian scholars. 
At the same time that Brian Caldwell was selling the virtues of the self-managing 
school (see Caldwell & Spinks, 1988, 1992 1998), John Smyth and colleagues 
were critiquing the movement on the basis of its social impacts (see Smyth, 1989, 
1993). Elsewhere, Smyth’s Deakin colleague Richard Bates’ (1980a, 1980b) 
Critical Theory offered a viable alternative to the logical empiricism of the UScentric Theory Movement and the Thomas Greenfield inspired humanist movement 
(see Greenfield & Ribbins, 1993), Colin Evers and Gabriele Lakomski’s (1991, 
1996, 2000) natural coherentism proposed a post-positivist perspective that 
challenged many of the criticisms of ‘science’ in educational administration, and at 
a more specific level, Peter Gronn (then of Monash, but now at Cambridge via 
Glasgow) engaged in a methodological debate with Ross Thomas (long time 
Journal of Educational Administration Editor) over the value of observational 
studies (Gronn, 1982, 1984, 1987; Thomas, 1986; Thomas, Willis, & Phillipps, 
1981). This book speaks both to the intellectual history of Australian educational 
administration scholarship and the contemporary context. 
There is little doubt that on a global scale managerialist discourses have become 
the orthodoxy of the contemporary condition. Therefore, despite being 
intellectually located within a rich Australasian tradition, the arguments put forth in 
this book speak to a global audience. The underpinning of academic scholarship is 
the process of grounding new theorisations and empirical examples in the existing 
CHAPTER 1 
10
body of knowledge. Through my engagement with theoretical tradition and the 
lived experience in the empirical, this book seeks to not merely contribute to acts 
of recognition, such as recognising the various roles played by anointed leaders in 
educational institutions, rather by providing means of cognition. That is, ways of 
thinking about educational administration grounded in histories but not bounded by 
historical categories, images and metaphors. As I have argued though, the 
intellectual project from which this book speaks is dynamic. This book is neither 
the beginning nor end of a research programme. I argue that both as individual 
chapters and as a whole, this text offers theoretical interventions that enable one to 
see the leadership, management and administration of educational institutions in 
new ways. Ways which are not limited to any one specific socio-geographic 
location but rather theoretically charged. As noted previously, theory travels far 
better across boundaries, both geographical and cultural, than empirical research. 
Offering a research programme of questioning the status quo of knowledge 
production and practice, this book sketches areas of relevance and possible 
theoretical development that serve to extend current debates, in fruitful directions. 
In doing so, and to borrow from Peter Berger (1966), this book is an invitation to 
the reader, and therefore warrants a generative reading, but it will become clear 
that ‘the reader will need to go beyond this collection if the invitation is to be taken 
seriously’ (p. 7). Therefore, I encourage the reader to think with, beyond, and 
where necessary, against what I argue in the spirit of the intellectual enterprise. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK 
This book seeks to model the research programme in which it espouses. As a 
result, the book is more or less divisible into three parts – although such 
partitioning is problematic as it artificially partitions the social world in ways not 
experienced apart from in the book form itself. The first part establishes the 
importance of epistemological issues and stresses the need for an epistemological 
break with ordinary language. This discussion takes place across two pivotal 
chapters in the book, Problematising the intellectual gaze and The (im)possibility 
of ‘leadership’. In the former, I argue that educational administration can credit its 
genesis, and level of esteem, to the administration of schooling becoming a public 
concern. That is, once society, or at least enough people, began to see 
administration as a key leverage point for improving outcomes (social and 
economic), there was demand for systematic inquiry. However, those who did the 
inquiring were frequently affiliated with school systems, administrators 
themselves, or as the current profile of the academy suggests, academics who 
themselves are former administrators. I contend that this does particular things to 
the intellectual gaze of the scholar through a form of ontological complicity. While 
epistemological debates once raged in educational administration, there is a 
somewhat uncritical engagement with the epistemological preliminaries in 
contemporary scholarship. As it stands, there is an awful lot of talking past one 
another with a number of completely contradictory viewpoints, arguments and 
interpretations whirling around the pages of publications, but more importantly, the 
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
11
lack of any really meaningful dialogue between them. I am not trying to suggest a 
need to congeal around a core set of problems and/or theoretical resources as 
diversity – assuming robust and rigorous scholarship – is a healthy sign for a 
domain of inquiry. Rather as Robert Donmoyer (2001) argues, and Martin Thrupp 
and Richard Willmott’s (2003) book Education management in managerialist 
times demonstrates, as a domain of inquiry, educational administration exists in a 
state of tacit agreement where those with whom we disagree, we treat with benign 
neglect. In picking up this debate, and arguing for what I see as one of the key 
issues at play, in The (im)possibility of leadership, I model the notion of the 
epistemological break through an interrogation of ordinary language and the 
construction of ‘leadership’ as the contemporarily popular buzzword. 
Having undertaken the intellectual work to problematize the intellectual gaze of 
the educational administration scholar and destabilised the contemporarily popular 
notion of ‘leadership’, Chapter Four Recasting administrative labour explicitly 
reconstructs the research object of educational administration on the basis of the 
epistemological break undertaken in the previous chapter. Mobilising a relational
approach to understanding the social world, this chapter revises the 
conceptualisation of the school, and by virtue its administration, by locating it 
within a floating territory that is no longer defined by the downward linearity of 
bureaucratic policy directives or explicit ties to the ‘local’. Such locating work 
speaks to, but also challenges, notions of autonomy, policy, and community, 
among others. In doing so, schools and administrators are constituted as much 
more than the local face of a state agenda. 
If this book is to have an audience beyond itself, then it is vital that I can 
demonstrate further how this approach to scholarship plays out. In what could be 
described as the second part of the book, I begin by engaging with an outlining of 
the empirical focus of the relational approach. Working with the notion of ‘worth’, 
taken loosely from Luc Boltanski and colleagues, this chapter blends the seemingly 
fragmented discourses of ‘value’ and ‘values’ to offer a renewed research object 
for educational administration. I further bring the relational research programme to 
life through the following two chapters. First, I engage with how the relational 
differs from two relatively recent Australian studies on school leadership. This 
nuancing is less about how one approach is better than the other, but instead about 
demonstrating how the relational facilitates the asking of new questions. This 
chapter is then followed by one where I begin to outline how the relational 
approach could be mobilised to think through the principalship in the context of 
autonomy. Importantly, as the relational is a generative research programme, what 
I offer is ‘a’ (not ‘the’) relational approach. It is not necessarily better than other 
approaches, although I am a little bias here, but offers a different way to think 
through the organising of education. 
Before concluding the book I devote a single chapter – although later than one 
may expect – to develop an argument for the perspective put forth thus far in the 
context of contemporary thought and analysis in educational administration. This 
work will bring the discussion into direct conversation with, and in some cases 
opposition to, other perspectives. The location of such a chapter is important. 
CHAPTER 1 
12
Rather than foregrounding this explicit chapter and then outlining the relational 
research programme, I feel it is important to do the work first and then outline how 
this engages with, and opens up, current perspectives to new ways of thinking. The 
previous chapters serve as supporting evidence for the claims in this chapter 
regarding the strength of the alternate programme being proposed. 
To bring the discourses of the text into a coherent argument, the final chapter 
Conclusion revisits the arguments put forth and essentially captures the key points 
of the narrative constructed. Moving beyond simply bookending with the 
introduction, this chapter is an explicit invitation to others to join the relational 
research programme being proposed. It asks for a generative reading, other case 
studies in different locations (both in time and space) to advance our 
understanding, and importantly, for others to work with, beyond and where 
necessary against what I have proposed in the interests of the intellectual 
enterprise. This book is not the final word on the relational research programme, 
rather just an articulation. 
NOTES 
i
 It is important for me to acknowledge at this point that Helen Gunter (1999, 2000, 2002, 2004) has 
already eloquently used Bourdieu to do this work, using England as her geographic anchor. ii The term ‘disruptions in production’ is mobilised as a deliberate means of moving beyond the 
reproductive nature of education as advocated by critical sociologists such as Bourdieu and 
numerous contemporary educational administration scholars. iii Being of a Bourdieusian persuasion, I cannot mobilise the notion of ‘field’ to discuss educational 
administration as a domain of inquiry. This is a matter that I shall return to in later chapters in 
relation to the study of disruptions in production. 
REFERENCES 
Back, L. (2009). Portrayal and betrayal: Bourdieu, photography and sociological life. The Sociological 
Review, 57(3), 471-490. 
Barnard, C. (1968). Functions of the executive. Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press. 
Bates, R. J. (1980a). Educational administration, the sociology of science, and the management of 
knowledge. Educational Administration Quarterly, 16(2), 1-20. 
Bates, R. J. (1980b). New developments in the new sociology of education. British Journal of Sociology 
of Education, 1(1), 67-79. 
Bates, R. J. (1983). Educational administration and the management of knowledge. Melbourne: Deakin 
University Press. 
Bates, R. J. (2010). History of educational leadership and management. In P. Peterson, E. Baker, & B. 
McGraw (Eds.), International encyclopedia of education (3rd ed., pp. 724-730). Oxford: Elsevier. 
Berger, P. (1966). Invitation to sociology: A humanistic perspective. Harmondsworth: Pelican. 
Bourdieu, P., Chamboredon, J.-C., & Passeron, J.-C. (1991[1968]). The craft of sociology: 
epistemological preliminaries (R. Nice, Trans.). New York, NY: Walter de Gruyter. [Originally 
published as Le métier de sociologue: préalables épistémologiques (Paris: Mouton).] 
Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. (1992[1992]). An invitation to reflexive sociology. Cambridge: Blackwell 
Publishers. [Originally published as Résponses: pour une anthropologie réflexive (Paris: Seuil).] 
Bradbury, H., & Litchenstein, B. (2000). Relationality in organizational research: exploring the ‘space 
between’. Organization Science, 11(5), 551-564. 
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
13
Caldwell, B.J., & Spinks, J. (1988). The self managing school. Lewes, UK: Falmer Press. 
Caldwell, B.J., & Spinks, J. (1992). Leading the self-managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Caldwell, B.J., & Spinks, J. (1998). Beyond the self-managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Crossley, N. (2003). From reproduction to transformation: social movement fields and the radical 
habitus. Theory, Culture & Society, 20(6), 43-68. 
Dachler, H. P., & Hoskings, D. M. (1995). The primacy of relations in socially constructing 
organizational realities. In D. M. Hosking, H. P. Dachler, & K. J. Gergen (Eds.), Management and 
organization: relational alternatives to individualism (pp. 1-29). Aldershot: Avebury. 
Dinh, J. E., Lord, R. G., Gardner, W. L., Meuser, J. D., Liden, R. C., & Hu, J. (2014). Leadership theory 
and research in the new millennium: current theoretical trends and changing perspectives. The 
Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 36-62. 
Donmoyer, R. (2001). Evers and Lakomski’s search for leadership’s holy grail (and the intriguing ideas 
they encountered along the way). Journal of Educational Administration, 39(6), 554-572. 
Eacott, S. (2013). Research as a political activity: the fallacy of ‘leadership’ data speaking for 
themselves. In S. Eacott & R. Niesche (Eds.), Empirical leadership research: Letting the data speak 
for themselves (pp. 215-229). Niagara Falls, NY: The Untested Ideas Center. 
English, F. W. (2002). The point of scientificity, the fall of the epistemological dominos, and the end of 
the field of educational administration. Studies in Philosophy and Education, 21(2), 109-136. 
English, F. W. (2006). The unintended consequences of a standardised knowledge base in advancing 
educational leadership preparation. Educational Administration Quarterly, 42(3), 461-472. 
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (1991). Knowing educational administration: Contemporary 
methodological controversies in educational research. London: Pergamon Press. 
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (1996). Exploring educational administration. Oxford: Elsevier. 
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (2000). Doing educational administration. Oxford: Elsevier. 
Foster, W. (1986). Paradigms and promises. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books. 
Giles, D., Bell, M., Halsey, J., & Palmer, C. (Eds.). (2012). Co-constructing a relational approach to 
educational leadership and management. South Melbourne: Cengage. 
Greenfield, T., & Ribbins, P. (Eds.). (1993). Greenfield on educational administration: Towards a 
humane science. London: Routledge. 
Griffiths, D. E. (1959a). Administrative theory. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
Griffiths, D. E. (1959b). Research in educational administration: an appraisal and a plan. New York: 
Teachers College. 
Griffiths, D. E. (1965). Research and theory in educational administration. In W. W. Charters (Ed.), 
Perspectives on educational administration and the behavioral sciences (pp. 25-48). Eugene, 
Oregon: Center for the Advanced Study of Educational Administration. 
Griffiths, D. E. (1985). Administrative theory in transition. Melbourne: Deakin University. 
Griffiths, D. E. (1988). Administrative theory. In N. J. Boyan (Ed.), Handbook of research on 
educational administration (pp. 27-51). New York: Longman. 
Gronn, P. (1982). Neo-Taylorism in educational administration? Educational Administration Quarterly, 
18(4), 17-35. 
Gronn, P. (1984). On studying administrators at work. Educational Administration Quarterly, 20(1), 
115-129. 
Gronn, P. (1987). Obituary for structured observation. Educational Administration Quarterly, 23(2), 78-
81. 
Gunter, H. (1999). Researching and constructing histories of the field of education management. In T. 
Bush, L. Bell, R. Bolam, R. Glatter, & P. Ribbins (Eds.), Educational management: Refining theory, 
policy and practice (pp. 229-245). London: Paul Chapman. 
Gunter, H. (2000). Thinking theory: The field of education management in England and Wales. British 
Journal of Sociology of Education, 21(4), 623-635. 
Gunter, H. (2002). Purposes and positions in the field of education management. Educational 
Management Administration & Leadership, 30(1), 7-26. 
CHAPTER 1 
14
Gunter, H. (2004). Labels and labelling in the field of educational leadership. Discourse: Studies in the 
Cultural Politics of Education, 25(1), 21-41. 
Gunter, H. (2010). A sociological approach to educational leadership. British Journal of Sociology of 
Education, 31(4), 519-527. 
Halpin, A. (1966). Theory and research in administration. New York, NY: Macmillan. 
Hodgkinson, C. (1978). Towards a philosophy of administration. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Hodgkinson, C. (1996). Administrative philosophy: Values and motivation in administrative life. New 
York, NY: Pergamon. 
Hunt, J., & Dodge, G.E. (2000). Leadership déjà vu all over again. The Leadership Quarterly Review of 
Leadership, 11(4), 435-458. 
Ladwig, J. G. (1996). Academic distinctions: Theory and methodology in the sociology of school 
knowledge. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Miller, H.T. (2011). Is bureaucracy no longer the technically superior form of organization? 
Administrative Theory and Praxis, 33(3), 447-452. 
Oplatka, I. (2010). The legacy of educational administration: A historical analysis of an academic field. 
Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Simon, H. A. (1976). Administrative behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Free Press. 
Smyth, J. (Ed.). (1989). Critical perspectives on educational leadership. London: Falmer Press. 
Smyth, J. (Ed.). (1993). A socially critical view of the self-managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Taylor, F. W. (1911). The principles of scientific management. New York, NY: W. W. Norton. 
Thomas, A.R. (1986). Seeing isn’t believing? Neither is hearing! In defense of observational studies. 
Educational Administration Quarterly, 22(1), 29-48. 
Thomas, A.R., Willis, Q., & Phillipps, D. (1981). Observational studies of Australian school 
administrators: Methodological issues. Australian Journal of Education, 25(1), 55-72. 
Thrupp, M., & Willmott, R. (2003). Educational management in managerialist times: Beyond the 
textual apologist. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press. 
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: exploring the social processes of leadership and 
organizing. The Leadership Quarterly, 17(6), 654-676. 
15
CHAPTER TWO 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
INTRODUCTION 
Administration has been a central element in the trajectory of human society. As 
Peter Gronn (2010) notes, above a certain numerical threshold, humans, much like 
many examples in the animal kingdom, tend to establish hierarchies and the selforganisation of numerous (collaborating) societal groups proves difficult. Although 
frequently thought of as little more than a technology of control, administration and 
its key activity of policy, are intimately connected to our understanding of the 
social world. What remains rarely, if ever, addressed, at least in educational 
administration discourses, is the extent to which being embedded, and embodying, 
this world view shapes the intellectual gaze, and by virtue, ‘scientific’ inquiry. In 
this chapter I mobilise Bourdieusian social theory to challenge the nature of 
scientific inquiry in educational administration. Although Bourdieu never wrote on 
educational administration per se, and earlier claims that his work is minimally 
used in educational administration despite his theoretical attention to the 
relationship between individual agency and structural determinism (Lingard & 
Christie, 2003), the increasing use of Bourdieusian social theory is part of the reemergence of a sociological approach to educational administration (Gunter, 2010). 
However, while Bourdieu has been used to interrogate aspects of educational 
administration, such as school reform (Gunter, 2012), professional standards 
(English, 2012), leadership preparation and development (Eacott, 2011), strategy 
(Eacott, 2010), autonomy (Thomson, 2010), educational leadership at large 
(Thomson, 2015), or even the intellectual field of educational administration 
(Gunter, 2002), the focus of this chapter on epistemological preliminaries through a 
Bourdieusian lens is rarely, if ever mobilised, in educational administration. 
Much of the Bourdieusian inspired work in educational administration gives 
primacy to his thinking concepts of field, habitus, and capital, and this is 
understandable given the centrality of these concepts to his theory of practice.i
After all, establishing boundaries for the topic, exploring the dispositions of key 
players, and the value of items – both material and symbolic – within the game is 
important for building an argument. However, what this does though is to highlight 
the need to engage with the epistemological preliminaries of the work. For 
example, Bob Lingard and Shaun Rawolle (2010) argue that school leaders, 
interpreted as principals, sit at the intersection of multiple fields and that the work 
of leaders, or leadership practice, is the mediation and expression of cross-field
effects. Embedded within this argument is that school leaders need to be multilingual to engage with the discourses of multiple fields. Pat Thomson’s (2010) 
contribution on the other hand is that headteacher practice is caught between 
different social fields. In making this argument, Thomson articulates how the work 
CHAPTER 2 
16
of headteachers is both within the individual school (as a sub-field of the larger 
field of schooling) and beyond, where headteacher practice is about advancing – 
through the acquisition of capital – both the school and the individual in the 
broader social space. Pivotal to Thomson’s argument is the boundary work of 
headteachers and the constant negotiations in which school leaders’ push for 
greater autonomy. Both contributions add to our knowledge of educational 
administration, however, in advancing theory of educational administration I see 
two major limitations: first, the centrality of the principal/headteacherii (even if 
defined relationally); and second, the argument for a field of educational 
administration. 
Neither Thomson or Lingard and Rawolle claim to be describing any role other 
than the principal, yet contemporary thought in educational administration is that 
leadership, management or administration is no longer – if it ever was – the 
property of a single individual or title within an organisation. This challenges, if 
not forces, us to problematise the very concept of administration and the 
identification of administrators, and by virtue, non-administrators. The long 
standing problematic matter of the separation – which was the original stimulus for 
the establishment of departments of educational administration and the domain as a 
topic of inquiry – needs to be acknowledged and engaged with. In making an 
argument for a field of educational administration, there is the constitution of what 
Ron Kerr and Sarah Robinson (2011) label an ‘elite field of leaders’,iii where a 
class habitus serves to stratify the social world through links to organisational, not 
necessarily social, positions. The primacy given to Bourdieu’s thinking tools in 
such studies, as opposed to his epistemological arguments, leads to a situation 
where it is difficult to get beyond the reproductive nature of the administration of 
schooling. Therefore, much of the Bourdieusian work in educational administration 
does not move past the role of the state in maintaining existing asymmetrical power 
relations of the social world, something primarily achieved through schooling (see 
Bourdieu, 1996[1989]; Bourdieu & Passeron, 1990[1970]). 
There has been intense critique of the administration, or policy, of contemporary 
Western democratic-capitalist societies, particularly in sociology, management (at 
least in critical management studies), and education, among other domains of 
inquiry. This critique, especially in educational administration,iv has privileged the 
empirical problem over the large-scale theoretical problem – that is, the monopoly 
of legitimation of the social world – embedded in the research object. I do not 
mean this in the sense that invokes the (false) dichotomy of theory and practice, 
rather, as a means of highlighting the intimate relations of the theoretical problem 
and empirical object in the scientific enterprise. Through the explicit privileging of 
the empirical, robust discussion around the ways of perceiving the social world are 
censored, or even dismissed as unnecessary intellectualism. Following the work of 
Pierre Bourdieu, it is the contention of this chapter that an important element of 
scholarship is to take as one’s object the social work of construction of the preconstructed object (Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992[1992], p. 229). I build my 
argument on two key points, first, the centrality of administration in our 
understanding of the social world, and second, the intellectual gaze of the 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
17
embedded actor, to argue for a re-thinking of scientific inquiry in educational 
administration. As with Bourdieu, I seek to cast doubt on orthodoxy, or, to make 
the familiar strange. This is a necessary, and important, task when working in the 
social world that the researcher is involved. Importantly, such a move requires 
explicit attention to the epistemological break of the embodied agent, and the 
construction of the research object, rather than just the confirmation, or 
disconfirmation, of the researcher’s model of reality (see Bourdieu, Chamboredon, 
& Passeron, 1991[1968]). To engage with these issues, I do not offer a fully 
articulated theory, research programme or even ‘how to’ description, that is the 
intent of the book at large. Rather I sketch an argument centred on the need to 
interrogate the construction of the research object as a means to extend current 
debates on leadership, management and administration of educational institutions 
in new and more fruitful directions. 
SOME PRELIMINARIES 
My use of the label ‘science’ in both this chapter and throughout the entire book is 
deliberately provocative. It is through the mobilisation of this label that I seek to 
both engage with, and contribute to, the discourses of educational administration. 
As with Bourdieu, I have a belief in science. An alignment with the view of 
science, and more specifically scientific inquiry, as an act of distinction from 
ordinary language and the under-problematised view of the social world as it is. 
Therefore, for me, science is, and should be, the goal of all inquiry into the social 
world. 
The labels of ‘science’ and ‘scientific’ have a long association with educational 
administration. The establishment of departments of educational administration in 
US universities aligns loosely with the publication of Frederick Winslow Taylor’s 
(1911) The principles of scientific management, and these principles were strongly 
advocated for by leading figures at the time, including George Strayer at Teachers 
College Columba, Edward Elliot at Wisconsin, Franklin Bobbit at Chicago, and 
Ellwood Cubberly at Stanford.v
 Taylor, like other classic administration thinkers 
such as Lyndall Urwick and Henri Fayol, was a practitioner-researcher rather than 
scientist-scholar, mindful that binaries are rarely productive. However, the 
prominence of ‘science’ and the ‘scientific’ study of educational administration 
were at its peak during the so called Theory Movement of the 1950-1960s. 
Primarily through the work of Andrew Halpin and Daniel Griffiths, this US-centric 
school of thought, whose genesis is commonly attributed to the annual meeting of 
the National Conference for Professors of Educational Administration (NCPEA) in 
Denver Colorado during August 1954, but owes many of its underlying principles 
to Herbert Simon’s (1945) Administrative behavior, marked the beginning of a 
systematic traditional (natural) science approach to educational administration. 
This new ‘scientific’ movement drew heavily on the (early) writing of Herbert 
Feigl – linked to the Vienna Circle – and sought to characterise educational 
administration inquiry through ‘objectivity, reliability, operational definitions, 
coherent or systematic structure, and comprehensiveness’ (Griffiths, 1959, p. 45). 
CHAPTER 2 
18
Interestingly, the Theory Movement sought to break educational administration 
inquiry away from the atheoretical knowledge of the practitioner-researcher, yet 
did this not by embedding (social) theory per se, but rather rational technique of 
inquiry. In doing so, ‘science’ was constituted through the neutrality and apparent 
distance between observer and research object. Significantly, it also privileged 
methods over methodology. 
Twenty years later, at the 1974 International Intervisitation Programme at 
Bristol, England, Thomas Barr Greenfield challenged the American pragmatic 
empiricism of the Theory Movement and the epistemological assumptions of an 
objective science of administration.vi Greenfield’s core epistemological claim is 
that all our knowledge of reality, natural and social, contains an irreducible 
subjective component. That is, objectivity is a myth – in both the natural and social 
sciences. In arguing for a subjectivist/phenomenological approach to educational 
administration scholarship, he called for a ‘humane science’ (see Greenfield & 
Ribbins, 1993). Through the rejection of objectivity and submitting his argument to 
the subjectivity of social phenomena, Greenfield does however leave himself in a 
situation where anything goes – a situation which is arguably equally problematic. 
He was not alone in the critique of logical empiricist inquiry, as Richard Bates’ 
(1980, 1983) Critical Theory of educational administration also made the claim – 
so too have sociological approaches to educational administration (see Gunter, 
2010). Significantly, these critiques led to many believing that the pursuit of a 
science of educational administration was neither worth pursuing, or even possible. 
In contrast, Colin Evers and Gabriele Lakomski (1991, 1996, 2000, 2012) have 
consistently argued that it is not science that is the problem, but rather the model of 
science. They contend that it is the narrow operationalisation of science as logical 
empiricism that is the problem, not the pursuit of scientific study. 
What remains in educational administration, and education at large for that 
matter, is the canonical opposition between theory and practice, most profoundly 
inscribed in the division of labour between administrators/teachers, those physical 
located in schools and school systems, and academics/scientists, those who occupy 
the hallow halls of the university. It is this (false) dichotomy between theory and 
practice, and its impact on the intellectual gaze of the educational administration 
scholar that I seek to problematise. Particularly, my argument is that it is scientific 
inquiry that separates the practitioner/researcher from the scientist. That is, there is 
something about the way of thinking, without reducing this to an essentialist 
argument, which creates a distinction. It is not that the scientist and 
practitioner/researcher think about different things, in this case the administration 
of schooling, rather, my argument is that these groups – and the line of 
demarcation is not easily identified, or maintained – think differently about 
such matters.vii Importantly, scientific language, that employed by the scientist, is 
separate from ordinary language (and this also goes for the mobilisation of 
‘science’ as a label) and therefore troubles common sense. As such, scientific 
inquiry is a powerful means of political intervention, and the genesis of creativity 
and innovation. Yet as Fenwick English (2006) reminds us, intellectual (scientific) 
work ‘is never efficient, perhaps not even cost effective, but then, true discovery 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
19
and significant intellectual and practical breakthroughs rarely are’ (p. 470). As a 
means of interrogating and problematising the intellectual gaze of the educational 
administration scholar, I build my argument around three key points: first, the 
embodied agent of the educational administration scholar; second, the scientific 
break from the pre-scientific world; and finally, the need for epistemological 
vigilance. 
EMBODIED AGENTS 
A central issue in the scholarship of educational administration is that 
administrators are, as are all social actors, spontaneous sociologists (Bourdieu & 
Wacquant, 1992[1992], p. 66). This is particularly so in the professions, such as 
education, but also law, business, architecture, engineering and medicine.viii In the 
case of educational administration, most, if not all, academics are former 
administrators at school and/or systemic levels. Further to that, many hold 
administrative positions in the academy, further blurring the boundary between the 
native (naive) perception of the spontaneous sociologist and the research objects 
constructed through the ‘scientific’ method of the scientist. Following Bourdieu, 
this does two (considerably overlapping) things, first, the doxic modality through 
which the social world is perceived is the result of the internalisation of the 
objective structures of the social world in the cognitive schemata through which 
they apprehend the social world. Alternatively, the social world exists in the body 
as much as the body exists in the social world. Second, there exists a belief, or 
illusio, in administration, and most importantly, the stakes of the task at hand. That 
is, administration functions only in so far as it produces a belief in the value of its 
product (e.g. policy, security, order), and means of production (e.g. governance). 
What I have brought to attention here is the importance of engaging with the 
epistemological (and ontological) preliminaries which shape, and in turn are 
shaped by, scholarship in educational administration. 
In relation to my first point, the doxic modality, there is great difficulty in 
studying the social world in which one is involved. The tensions of this 
engagement are highlighted in Bourdieu’s (1988[1984]) Homo academicus, among 
others. As noted above, resulting from the occupation of a particular position in the 
social (and physical) space, and the trajectory – both professional and personal – 
that got them there, educational administration academics are frequently, if not 
always, immersed in an in situ brand of scholarship. The individual’s social history 
of education, and specifically of educational institutions, and the history of the 
singular relationship with these institutions, significantly, often in spite of 
ourselves, orients our thought.ix This blurs the boundaries of the empirical and the 
epistemic, as ‘educational administration’ as the research object is the 
institutionalisation of a point of view grounded in a pre-reflexive belief in the 
undisputed value of the object itself. This brings to the fore the need for an 
epistemological break – a point I shall return to later – in the scientific enterprise. 
As Bourdieu (2000[1997]) notes: 
CHAPTER 2 
20
… it is clear that, to secure some chance of really knowing what one is doing, one has 
to unfold what is inscribed in the various relations of implication in which the thinker 
and his thought are caught up, that is, the presuppositions he engages and the 
inclusions or exclusions he unwittingly performs. (p. 99) 
It is the epistemic unconscious, that which is the history – however opaque – of the 
individual, and the intellectual field, that shapes the scientific enterprise. 
Administrative theory, most of the time, align with a Western pattern of thought 
that centres on administration (social order) and management (control) of 
populations and/or environments. This administration and management is exercised 
by more or less arbitrarily defined populations, produced through the successive 
partitioning of an initial category that is itself pre-constructed: ‘first-year female 
small school principals’, who administer or manage over more or less arbitrarily 
defined populations, produced through the successive partitioning of an initial 
category that is itself pre-constructed: ‘disadvantaged students in regional areas’. 
This brings me to the second, but deeply interwoven, point of ‘investment in the 
object’. The original investment in, or belief in the value of, educational 
administration has no specific origin, because it always precedes itself. Therefore, 
even though the positive or negative relations that one may have with educational 
institutions, that which appear to create a distance between object and subject, the 
difficulties in recognising this ontological complicity limits the intellectual 
enterprise. As it is, the scientist frequently credits the research object with his/her 
vision of things as a result of the pre-reflexive conditioning. That is, the academic, 
s/he who is embedded and embodies educational administration rarely calls into 
question the value of educational administration. To challenge the value, or worth, 
of educational administration would be to not only question the very core of the 
domain, but to question the value of the self and one’s role in the social fabric. The 
researcher, who is therefore implicated in the world, is unable to withdraw from the 
world in order to construct a re-creation of it through a manuscript or lecture. 
Furthermore, although somewhat deterministic, I would argue that education 
researchers for the most part, struggle to move beyond the innate desire to 
‘educate’. Therefore, much of the work in education seeks to ‘teach’, hence the 
implicit adoption of Taylor’s (1911) ‘one right method’ – that which is 
contemporarily translated into ‘best practice’ – and the eternal quest for how best 
to prepare and develop school administrators for the purpose of bringing about 
change (generally towards some performative measure operating within the 
managerialist project). 
The intellectual gaze of the researcher is significant here. What is arguably the 
raison d’être of the ‘applied’ domain, the advancement of practice, that which is 
perpetuated in part by the submission of many researchers and administrators to the 
managerialist discourses of the contemporary world and by the inertia of the 
academic/practical problematic handed down in the technicist classes of the 
contemporary school leadership preparation and development programme – 
whether they be based in universities or beyond – simply must be engaged with. I 
raise this point not as an iconoclastic attack, or privileged intellectualism, rather 
because I believe that, for the most part, educational administration researchers, for 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
21
all their research and voluminous literature, do not ask themselves these questions. 
By avoiding asking oneself about the stimulation and provocation of your 
questioning, the individual scientist, and the domain at large, is significantly 
limited as to what it can say about the social world. There is of course substantial 
risk, at least intellectually, and arguably career wise, in trying to know, and make 
known, what the world of educational administration knowledge may (or does) not 
want to know, especially about itself. In building my argument here, I contend that 
administration may derive its most substantive scientific work not from producing 
countless lists of best practice and essential traits or behaviours, but rather through 
a constant effort to undertake a sociological informed critique of its own 
reasoning.x
 That is, I am stressing a critical engagement with not only the limits of 
thought, but also on the conditions in which that thought is exercised. 
Understandably, an initial question may be to ask ‘But what scientific profit can be 
discovered from such an exercise?’ I argue that most, if not all, educational 
administration researchers enter the academy to effect change, to change the way 
of the world toward some inherently ‘good’ orientation. Critically engaging with 
thought enables the researcher to break with the intimate relation that one has with 
the social world – at least to a certain extent – and engage with that which is 
opaque to us due to familiarity. 
As Bourdieu (1988[1984]) notes, there is a need to get ‘increasingly closer to 
the originary of the ordinary’ (pp. xi-xii). The educational administration 
researcher does not stand outside of the social world they analyse, nor do they look 
down on it from above. Rather, they themselves are agents in the social world, and 
the pre-constructed notions of educational administration, the management of 
systems, teachers, students, and buildings, derive their self-evidence and their 
legitimacy from the actions of subjects. Following Bourdieu, the social world that 
educational administration inquiry deals with is something that the subject 
themselves make, modify and transform through their activity. The individual, or 
research team, who studies schools has a ‘use’ for them, one that may have little in 
common with the parents who seek to find a ‘good’ school for their child, or the 
system or government looking to leverage performance. What I am doing here is 
not suggesting any one perspective is better than the other, although to say I am 
neutral here is also misplaced, but rather to stress that the internal politics of 
scholarship matters. For example, the Critical School, particularly that coming out 
of Deakin University (see Tinning & Sirna, 2011), has an explicit social justice 
agenda focusing on the adversarial role of education and the emancipatory power 
of learning/education. In what may appear similar to the novice researcher, or 
wider public, the School Effectiveness and School Improvement (SESI) movement 
has a belief in the transformational power of schooling – primarily through upward 
social mobility – that can be achieved through the perpetual improvement of 
student outcomes. However, unlike the Critical School, there is no questioning of 
the value of the measures (see Thrupp & Willmott, 2003). The School Based 
Management (SBM) movement, which is gaining renewed traction in Australian 
education policy, as with elsewhere, is built on a romantic belief in ‘participation’ 
at the local level and frequently exhibits a denial of power relations in the social, 
CHAPTER 2 
22
yet invokes a level of common sense logic that is difficult, if not impossible, to 
refute. As Bourdieu notes, in the social sciences, even the least competent and 
intellectually equipped scholar (Bourdieu, following Alain, actually uses the label 
‘dumbest’) can use common sense and find support, especially beyond the 
academy (see Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992[1992]). What this raises is the need to 
engage with the pre-scientific world and the construction of the research object. 
THE PRE-SCIENTIFIC WORLD AND THE BREAK 
Educational administration, like the sociologies of the professions (e.g. education), 
primarily owes its existence to the currency of public concern over particular social 
issues (e.g. schooling, education policy). Such inquiry however rarely achieves any 
scientific status while it remains in the realm of the pre-scientific, that of public 
concern or technocratic management. The researcher can, and I would argue that 
this is common in educational administration, avoid engaging with the 
epistemological break required for scientific study by remaining in the prescientific world of the wider public. This is most overt in the solicitation of 
researchers for the production of marketable products such as the 
‘leadership/management by ring binder’ genre (see Halpin, 1990; Gunter, 1997), 
that which can prove to be very profitable, materially and symbolically, for those 
who opt to serve the dominant vision. However, educational administration cannot 
claim to be studied scientifically, – note that my argument is for the scientific study 
of, not a science of – without breaking from the orthodoxy of the pre-scientific 
world. This is not to discredit, or reject, the practical sense of the spontaneous 
sociologist, as it is this orthodoxy that is the beginning of the scientific enterprise, 
yet as Bourdieu argues, the choice of problem, the elaboration of concepts and 
analytical categories function as a ratification of the doxa unless the crucial 
operation of scientific construction breaks with the social world as it is (see 
Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992[1992], p. 248). Therefore, what is required of the 
researcher, is submitting to scientific scrutiny everything that makes the doxic
experience of the world possible. This includes not only the pre-scientific 
representation of the social but also the cognitive schemata that underlie the 
construction of the image. 
If to the contrary, one is to accept at face value the doxa to construct the 
research object, you can find lists, directories, role statements, capability 
frameworks, among others, already constituted by ‘professional’ bodies. I am well 
aware of the critique, often quickly invoked, that educational administration, and 
the professions in general, differ from the natural sciences as it is required to be 
accessible in a way that is not expected of physics. Yet, I am reminded here of 
Gaston Bachelard’s (1984[1934]) saying ‘the simple is never anything more than 
the simplified’, and Bourdieu’s consistent refusal to make his work more 
accessible on the basis that what he was discussing is complex and to make it 
simple is inappropriate. xi The professionalisation of educational administration 
knowledge however mobilises, if not relies on, a kind of quasi-scientific 
rationalisation of orthodoxy – it is worth thinking through this in relation to the 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
23
Theory Movement. In this case, scientific work is little more than an instrument for 
legitimising power relations as they are. This is a particularly significant matter 
given the embedded and embodied nature of educational administration inquiry, 
and the notion that the scientist is at stake in his/her own object. Therefore, if the 
scientist seeks to construct techniques or instruments that make it possible to 
manipulate the social order or populations, then inquiry is in the service of 
‘administration’ and scientists serve that master as social engineers. The question 
that this raises is whether educational administration can constitute itself through a 
refusal to submit to social demands for instruments of legitimation and 
manipulation? I also want to draw attention here to the use of ‘administration’. I 
mobilise this term, following Bourdieu, to stress that in heavily administered 
societies, much like a gravitational field, even the person perceived to have 
absolute power – or decision making authority – is him/herself held within the 
constraints of administration. That is, nobody knows anymore who is the subject of 
the final decision, and the place of the decision is both everywhere and nowhere. 
This is counter to the illusion of ‘the’ decision maker and the countless case studies 
aimed at investigating how decisions came to be through merely the 
phenomenological manifestations of the exercise of power (see Bourdieu, 
2005[2000]). However to simply denounce bureaucratic administration, or more 
specifically hierarchy, does not get us anywhere, rather, what we need to ask is 
how such a vision of the social world is possible. 
What we experience in the empirical is an ensemble of administration. Often in 
the form of government departments, school systems, schools, faculties, and so on, 
within which individual actors, and categories of actors (e.g. bureaucrats, 
principals, teachers, students), struggle over a particular form of authority, that 
which is constituted through the power to rule or legitimise actions through 
legislations, regulations, policy and administrative measures.xii The history of such 
administration is characterised by a set of negotiations between rival claims of 
administrative control and individual agency. As such, the administration of 
schools, and school systems, depends on its bureaucratic past for legitimate 
authority while also constantly seeking to reform and renew itself. Alternatively, 
educational administration is a space where existing holders of the legitimacy of 
discourses come into direct contact with new contenders. The struggle for 
legitimacy, as with the researchers’ struggle with the taken for granted of the 
immediate, is always in play. To avoid inquiry becoming little more than the 
advancement of the current state of affairs nothing can be defined or assumed a 
priori. That is, the popular practice, especially with graduate students, of 
operationally defining objects and subjects is not appropriate. In addition to being a 
direct rejection of logical empiricism, such a claim raises questions regarding the 
use of theory in educational administration, particularly if the researcher is to work 
with open concepts, and theory being a means of working through the empirical 
world. For one, as I demonstrate in the following chapter (see also Eacott, 2013a), 
the contemporarily popular label of ‘leadership’ relies on an a priori assumption of 
its existence yet a simultaneous a posteriori labelling of where it occurs. 
Specifically, while there seems to be little doubt about the ‘realness’ of leadership, 
CHAPTER 2 
24
its identification is most frequently limited to the performative markers of the 
managerialist project of the state. The tautology of such research, where a site has 
been identified where leadership is enacted and then the findings are correlated 
against the very measures that we used to identify it in the first place seems 
somewhat lost, or at least not problematic, for mainstream scholarship in 
educational leadership, management and administration. I return to this matter 
again in Chapter Six while critiquing Stephen Dinham’s AESOP work and the 
International Successful School Principals Project, in particular the Australian 
contributions from David Gurr and Lawrie Drysdale. 
The use of ‘theory’ – although arguably a bastardised mobilisation of such label 
– in educational administration is frequently limited to the representation of 
experimental laws, or causal relations, and the ‘research’ is constituted as a distinct 
part of the process, with a somewhat naive demarcation of the empirical object, 
theoretical problematising, construction of the research object, and so on. Such 
research is of greater frequency in the project management style of contemporary 
academic life in the entrepreneurial university, as opposed to the longevity of the 
research programme – where one continually delves deeper into an area, not just 
picking up where one project or others have left off, but rather, better informed and 
with increasingly sophisticated ways of knowing and being in the world, 
scholarship is continually delving deeper into the research object, its construction 
and constant re-construction. In contrast, the project management approach, that 
which is most frequently limited to the inquiry of public concern, constitutes the 
researcher as a technician (e.g. a quantitative expert, or worst still, a software 
package expert, e.g. SPSS) who has the mobility to shift research objects according 
to the latest national priorities of large scale funding regimes, the whims of 
government or corporate juggernauts. This is an important aspect to engage with 
for any potential ‘scientific’ scholarship. With reduced research funding in many 
national contexts, many researchers or research teams are falling under the control 
(at least fiscal) of large firms seeking to secure a monopoly, or to use Michael 
Porter’s (1985) term ‘competitive advantage’, through the commercialisation of 
profitable products. The relocation, or redistribution, of research funding to the 
commercial sector reflects administration – both at large, and specifically research 
– constituted in the model of the firm, embodying the market ideology or neoDarwinism of the corporation. If we are to break from this solicitation, scientific 
inquiry requires, if not demands, freedom. Following Michel Foucault, I contend 
that this freedom is not synonymous with liberation and/or autonomy. The problem 
is not ‘Let’s liberate our researchers’ but rather engaging with the practice of 
freedom by which one could define what is scientific inquiry and the researcherresearched relationship. To sustain such freedom, researchers need to combat and 
systematically resist the infiltration of ordinary language and spontaneous 
understanding of the social world. The common-sense or taken for granted of the 
social does however consistently re-appear (if it ever disappears) and there is a 
requirement of constant vigilance in scholarship. Such vigilance is particularly 
difficult in 6000 word journal articles, or 20 minute conference presentations, not 
to mention the temporal nature – or privileging of ‘clock’ time – in university and 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
25
academic ranking systems of publication output. What remains though is that the 
empirical is inexhaustible, something that objective science struggles to grasp and 
engage with, and theory is not something that the researcher applies to the 
empirical, rather it is a way of working through and with the empirical. 
EPISTEMOLOGICAL VIGILANCE 
Epistemological vigilance is particularly necessary in the social sciences, where the 
separation between the everyday language and opinion of the spontaneous 
sociologist and the scientific discourse of the researcher is more blurred than 
elsewhere (Bourdieu, Chamboredon & Passeron, 1991[1968]). It is familiarity with 
the social world, the ongoing struggle with the spontaneous understanding of the 
everyday that is the central epistemological obstacle for educational administration 
as it continuously produces conceptualisations (e.g. organisational structures, 
leadership) and at the same time, the conditions which serve to legitimise and 
sustain them. As a result, the inexhaustible intellectual project of getting beyond 
the everyday is never finally won. Herein lies a core difference between the 
‘natural’ and ‘social’ sciences, although such a binary is not necessarily productive, 
the separation experienced between the laboratory and everyday life for the 
physicist is substantively more difficult – and dare I say impossible – for the social 
scientist. This is partially because the intellectual resources of disciplines, in this 
case educational administration, rarely provide the necessary tools to meaningfully 
break from the ordinary language of the everyday. In doing so, it is rare for 
disciplines, particularly those related to the professions (e.g. educational 
administration) to ask questions of their canonical thrusts (e.g. ‘leadership’). 
All of the techniques and procedures of advanced research cannot completely 
overcome the embedded and embodied nature of the educational administration 
scholar. Due to the (social) relationship that the educational administration scholar 
has with the research object, scholarship is never a pursuit of pure truth (if such a 
thing is possible). Therefore, it is inappropriate to craft a scholarly narrative as 
though it exists separate to the socio-political, cultural and temporal conditions in 
which it is brought into being. Neglecting to subject ordinary language, the primary 
instrument in the ongoing (re)construction of objects in the social world, to a 
rigorous and robust epistemological/ontological critique runs the risk of mistaking 
objects pre-constructed in and by ordinary language for data (Bourdieu, 
Chamboredon, & Passeron, 1991[1968]). The masking of the everyday origins of 
such data through the mobilisation of scientific language (e.g. the ‘quality’, 
‘improvement’, ‘effective’ discourses) is infrequently called into question (except 
arguably in the critical stream of educational administration research) as the 
descriptions provided create a sense of comfort through the recognition of 
familiarity with lived experience. As Bourdieu et al. (1999[1993]) note: 
The positivists dream of an epistemological state of perfect innocence papers over the 
fact that the crucial difference is not between a science that effects construction and 
one that does not, but between a science that does this without knowing it and one 
that, being aware of the work of construction, strives to discover and master as 
CHAPTER 2 
26
completely as possible the nature of its inevitable acts of construction and equally 
inevitable effects those acts produce. (p. 608) 
Gaston Bachelard (1984[1934]) denies science the certainties of a definitive 
heritage and reminds us that it (science) can only progress by perpetually calling 
into question the very principles of its own constructs. Similarly, as noted at the 
opening of this book, Fenwick English (2006) argues that advancing scholarship in 
educational administration requires criticism of it, philosophically, empirically and 
logically, suggesting that we do not search for core pillars but the contested 
grounds on which educational leadership is defined moment-to-moment. The 
arguments of Bachelard and English, among others, are significant. Historically, 
discourses of educational administration, primarily through the mobilisation of the 
‘applied’ field label, have generated – and legitimised – the unproductive, and I 
would say false, binary of theory and practice. For the most part, this is justified 
through a desire to maintain a closeness, or relevance, to practice. Helen Gunter 
(2012) contends that such labels (e.g. theory and practice) have been used and 
abused to shape anti-intellectual cultures within the profession and ‘educational 
leadership industry’ in business and higher education. Notably, an integral feature 
of the managerialist project which dominates the contemporary research 
environment internationally is the discrediting of intellectual work (such as the 
critique and analysis of the construction, deconstruction and reconstruction of 
research objects) as exotic, indulgent and not in the public interest (Gunter, 2013). 
With the othering of intellectual work, often referred to as the 
professionalization of knowledge production, and the embedded and embodied 
nature of the educational administration scholar, I argue that there is a crisis in 
educational administration as a domain of knowledge production. For me, this 
crisis is not centred on divisions resulting from paradigmatic lens, or even 
intellectual traditions. Rather, this crisis is grounded in the relationship between the 
discipline as a domain of knowledge production and its interactions with the wider 
domain of education research and practice. In reflecting on her career working in 
educational administration, Eugenie Samier (2013) notes: 
In the field I eventually settled in, educational administration, significant changes 
were taking place, beginning in the later 1960s and the 1970s and accelerating 
throughout the 1980s and 1990s, with feminist critiques, the School of Critical 
Theory, the emergence of hermeneutics and phenomenology, the transformation of 
organisational behaviour into organisational studies as a broadly encompassing 
pursuit that included culture, micro-politics, aesthetic analysis, and psychoanalysis, all 
spilling into administrative theory as postmodern critiques appeared in English. And 
then … Not nothing, as this might have been a state preferable to the rise of neoliberalism, the New Public Management, and the market model fostered and 
distributed internationally through globalisation. (pp. 234-235) 
If we accept the social world at face value, the orthodoxy of ordinary language 
constructs the research object in such a way that you find lists, directories, role 
statements, capability frameworks, among others, already constituted by 
‘professional’ bodies. This speaks explicitly to the argument of this chapter, the 
data generated (not collected) must not be seen as independent contributions to the 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
27
discourses of ‘leadership’ but rather as social constructions in the political game of 
knowledge creation (Eacott, 2013b). As Jill Blackmore (2004) states, to understand 
how educational administration is ‘perceived, understood and enacted, one has to 
have a sense of the broader social, economic and political relations shaping 
educational work’ (p. 267). 
There is a substantial body of work stressing that as a discipline, educational 
administration is not held in high esteem within the academy at large or even 
education as a broader field of study. If educational administration research is to 
acquire any level of academic credibility within both the academy and wider 
community, then greater attention needs to be paid to the manner in which it 
undertakes its inquiry. An interrogation of the epistemological and ontological 
preliminaries of research, those underlying generative principles, is imperative for 
advancing a rigorous and robust research programme. Attention to the construction 
and ongoing re-construction of the research object in time and space would 
advance our understanding of the administration of organisations in new and 
fruitful directions. Understandably, to challenge ‘leadership’ – as the contemporary 
popular label within the discipline – is to attack one of, if not the, canon of the 
discipline. Unlike the critique of management and/or administration, not to 
mention the demonization of bureaucracy, ‘leadership’ is the current sacred label 
of the discipline. To question its scholarly legitimacy brings to the level of 
discourse the very generative foundations of scholarship and practice, and for most 
reading this book, our identity. This is why we see numerous critiques of the 
various adjectives (e.g. transformational, servant, strategic, distributed, motion) 
used in the rapidly expanding literatures of educational administration, yet 
minimal, if any critique of ‘leadership’ itself. It is as though the scholarly practice 
of reflexivity, or critically turning upon itself, has been neglected for the purpose of 
maintaining a particular relationship with practice. The argument that I am building 
in this chapter, and throughout the book, is that to engage, and arguably combat, 
questions of the quality of educational administration research as a scholarly 
endeavour, greater attention is needed to the ongoing construction of the research 
object and its relations with the researcher. 
CONCLUSION 
This chapter, and the thinking behind it, is not a case of theoreticism – or theory for 
theory’s sake – but rather, if I return to my original provocation, to take as one’s 
object the social work of construction of the pre-constructed object, then this 
chapter can be read as a Bourdieusian epistemological preliminary for the study of 
educational administration. That being said, it is more than merely a didactic 
exercise, this chapter is more than a mere appropriation of Bourdieu into a different 
intellectual space. This chapter, as with the book itself, seeks to explicitly 
reinvigorate epistemological and ontological debate in educational administration. 
The research approach that I am advancing is easily summarised. I am arguing for 
an approach to scientifically study educational administration, one that is able to 
incorporate the embedded and embodied nature of the ‘education’ researcher. To 
CHAPTER 2 
28
do this, I am asking serious questions about the epistemological break in 
scholarship and the construction of the research object, more so than the 
confirmation or disconfirmation of the researcher’s model of reality. 
A social ‘scientific’ approach to educational administration, as advocated for in 
this chapter, must break free of the ambition of grounding in (rational) reason, the 
arbitrary division of the social world (e.g. administrators, non-administrators), 
instead, take for its object, rather than getting itself caught up in, the struggle for 
the monopoly of the legitimate representation of the social world. A chapter such 
as this is both difficult and risky. Difficult in the sense that, as Bourdieu 
(2004[2001]) notes, every word uttered about scientific practice can be turned back 
on the person who utters it. Risky, because as with any argument that directly 
engages with, or challenges, the status quo, there is the very real and likely 
outcome that it will be rejected by the existing guardians of the domain. This goes 
to the argument of the chapter, that is, administration is frequently the site where 
the custodians of the domain come into contact, and frequently confrontation, with 
new contenders. However, my goal is not to merely write a chapter (or book for 
that matter) on the scholarship of educational administration, but to make a much 
more fundamental point about scientific inquiry in educational administration, and 
beyond. Although I have stressed the importance of the break and the construction
of the research object, I have deliberately not provided a set of prescriptive ‘how 
to’ conduct research forever more. Such a claim would actually be counter to the 
thesis of the chapter. Rather, I have sketched areas of relevance that if attended to, 
will advance our understanding of the administration of educational institutions in 
new and fruitful directions. The challenge laid out in this chapter however rests as 
much with the reader as it does me. If but one person in educational administration 
engages with the ideas presented here, then this chapter has been successful, albeit 
limited, in challenging the status quo. 
NOTES 
i
 Following Michael Grenfell (2010), from this point on I adopt the convention of putting Bourdieu’s 
key concepts in italics. This is done as a mental reminder that each of these come with a complex 
and sophisticated theory of practice and should be simply taken and substantiated as analytic 
metaphors. ii I have included both ‘principal’ and ‘headteacher’ here building out of the geographic location 
(Australia and England respectively) of the two works cited, however from this point on I will use 
the label ‘principal’. iii Although, as noted in the previous chapter, despite an initial Bourdieusian approach, Kerr and 
Robinson quickly revert to a common language mobilisation of field. iv There is something of an inherent tension at work in this label. I am aware of the issue of the 
juxtaposition of the diverse disciplines of ‘education’ and ‘public administration’ to create a sub-unit 
defined as a specific domain of reality, that which primarily serves a pragmatic purpose. At the same 
time, there is the matter of conceiving of neighbouring sciences (e.g. administration, psychology, 
sociology, etc) as border conflicts, based on an acceptance of the pre-constructed division of 
(scientific) labour as an actual empirical reality. Furthermore, at its most limited reading, I am aware 
of colleagues who would question my labelling of ‘educational administration’, arguing that the area 
has evolved to ‘management’ and now ‘leadership’. 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
29
v
 Interestingly, Cubberly had no background in the study of education. His own professional 
background was in geology and physical science, yet he taught a range of courses in the educational 
administration programme, including: school administration; school problems; school organisations; 
school statistics; secondary schools; history of education; and relations of ignorance and crime in 
education (Bates, 2010; Tynack & Hansot, 1982). vi Some consider Greenfield’s attack to have actually begun at the 1973 Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (AERA) in New Orleans (see Bates, 1980). This 
supports the argument that it is impossible to demarcate an exact point of origin for thought. As an 
idea, no matter how original, is little more than a reworking of previous thought in a unique time and 
space. vii I do not however hold the assumption that all university based faculty are ‘scholarly/scientific’, or 
vice versa. And in many ways, this is the argument of the chapter. viii My choice of ‘professions’ here is deliberate. While education is frequently, if not always, a low 
status faculty in the academy – lived out on a daily basis through numerous apparatus such as 
research funding regimes, journal rankings, promotion systems, research/post-doctoral fellowships – 
the same lowly status is rarely assigned to other ‘professional’ fields such as medicine and 
engineering. ix My use of the collective noun (e.g. ‘our’) is for two reasons: first, I see myself as equally implicated 
in my argument; and second, it is consistent with the argument of the chapter that one cannot escape 
the social world from which they construct as their research object. x
 Although this may be read as a derivative of Karl Weick’s (1969, 1995) ‘sense-making’ in 
organisations, I stress that my focus is on the epistemological and ontological assumptions of 
scholarship more so than as a framework for engaging with the behaviour of organisations. xi There is a tension here given that in Bourdieu’s later works (see 1998[1996]; 1998[1998], 
2003[2001]) we see an explicit shift towards engaging a wider audience. He begins publishing small 
paperbacks that are accessible to a more diverse readership in terms of price and writing style – most 
being collections of interviews, short speeches, and essays devoted mostly to critique of neoliberalism/globalisation. This strategy brings a broad readership, one beyond the academy, and also 
sparks debate in the French media (see Swartz, 2003). Explicitly, Bourdieu sort to engage as a public 
intellectual by bringing the logic of intellectual life, that of argument and refutation, into public life 
– but only in areas where he felt competent, and preferably on the basis of scientific research (see 
also Lane, 2006). xii Given this context, the under use of Max Weber’s work, particularly that on bureaucracy, in 
educational administration is intriguing. When Weber is mobilised, it is rarely for anything other 
than naming the labeller of the bureaucracy, rather than the sophisticated writings he has on the rise 
of bureaucracy and its function in the administration of populations. There are of course exceptions, 
and I am thinking specifically of Eugenie Samier, but for the most part, Weber is much underutilised in the discussion of educational administration. 
REFERENCES 
Bachelard, G. (1984[1934]). The new scientific spirit (P. A. Heelan, Trans). Boston: Beacon Press. 
[Originally published as Le nouvel esprit scientifique (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France).] 
Bates, R. J. (1980). Educational administration, the sociology of science, and the management of 
knowledge. Educational Administration Quarterly, 16(2), 1-20. 
Bates, R. J. (1983). Educational administration and the management of knowledge. Geelong, Victoria: 
Deakin University Press. 
Bates, R. J. (2010). History of educational leadership/management. In P. Peterson, E. Baker, & B. 
McGraw (Eds.), International encyclopedia of education (3rd ed., pp. 724-730). Oxford: Elsvier. 
Blackmore, J. (2004). Restructuring educational leadership in changing contexts: A local/global account 
of restructuring in Australia. Journal of Educational Change, 5(3), 267-288. 
CHAPTER 2 
30
Bourdieu, P. (1988[1984]). Homo academicus (P. Collier, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. 
[Originally published as Homo academicus (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit).] 
Bourdieu, P. (1996[1989]). The state nobility (L.C. Clough, Trans.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. [Originally published as La noblesse d’état: grandes écoles et esprit de corps (Paris: Les 
Éditions de Minuit).] 
Bourdieu, P. (1998[1996]). On television (P. Parkhurst Ferguson, Trans.). New York, NY: The New 
Press. [Originally published as Sur la télévision (Paris: Raisons d’Agir).] 
Bourdieu, P. (1998[1998]). Acts of resistance: Against the tyranny of the market (R. Nice, Trans.). New 
York, NY: New Press. [Originally published as Contre-feux (Paris: Éditions Liber-Raisons d’Agir).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2000[1997]). Pascalian meditations (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[Originally published as Méditations pascaliennes (Paris: Éditions du Seuil).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2003[2001]). Firing back: Against the tyranny of the market 2 (L. Wacquant, Trans.). 
London: Verso. [Originally published as Contre-feux 2: pour un mouvement social européen (Paris: 
Éditions Raisons d’Agir).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2004[2001]). Science of science and reflexivity (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
[Originally published as Science de la science et réflexivité (Paris: Éditions Raisons d’Agir).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2005[2000]). The social structures of the economy (C. Turner, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: 
Polity. [Originally published as Les structures socials de l’économie (Paris: Éditions du Seuil).] 
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J-C. (1990[1970]). Reproduction in education, society and culture (R. Nice, 
Trans.). London: Sage. [Originally published as La reproduction (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit).] 
Bourdieu, P., Chamboredon, J-C., & Passeron, J-C. (1991[1968]). The craft of sociology: 
epistemological preliminaries (R. Nice, Trans.). Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter. [Originally 
published as Le métier de sociologue : préalables épistémologiques (Paris: Mouton).] 
Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. (1992[1992]). An invitation to reflexive sociology. Cambridge: Blackwell 
Publishers. [Originally published as Résponses: pour une anthropologie réflexive (Paris: Seuil).] 
Bourdieu, P. et al. (1999[1993]). The weight of the world: Social suffering in contemporary society (P. 
Parkhurst Ferguson, Trans.). Cambridge: Polity. [Originally published as La misere du monde 
(Paris: Éditions du Seuil).] 
Eacott, S. (2010). Bourdieu’s strategies and the challenge for educational leadership. International 
Journal of Leadership in Education, 13(3), 265-281. 
Eacott, S. (2011). Preparing ‘educational’ leaders in managerialist times: An Australian story. Journal 
of Educational Administration and History, 43(1), 43-59. 
Eacott, S. (2013a). ‘Leadership’ and the social: Time, space and the epistemic. International Journal of 
Educational Management, 27(1), 91-101. 
Eacott, S. (2013b). Research as a political practice: The fallacy of data speaking for themselves. In S. 
Eacott & R. Niesche (Eds.), Empirical leadership research: Letting the data speak for themselves 
(pp. 215-229). Niagara Falls, NY: Untested Ideas Center. 
English, F. W. (2006). The unintended consequences of a standardised knowledge base in advancing 
educational leadership preparation. Educational Administration Quarterly, 42(3), 461-472. 
English, F. W. (2012). Bourdieu’s misrecognition: Why educational leadership standards will not 
reform schools or leadership. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 44(2), 155-170. 
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (1991). Knowing educational administration: Contemporary 
methodological controversies in educational administration research. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (1996). Exploring educational administration. Oxford: Elsevier. 
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (2000). Doing educational administration. Oxford: Elsevier. 
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (2012). Science, systems, and theoretical alternatives in educational 
administration: the road less travelled. Journal of Educational Administration, 50(1), 57-75. 
Greenfield, T. B., & Ribbins, P. (Eds.). (1993). Greenfield on educational administration. London: 
Routledge. 
Grenfell, M. (2010). Being critical: The practical logic of Bourdieu’s metanoia. Critical Studies in 
Education, 51(1), 85-99. 
Griffiths, D. E. (1959). Administrative theory. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
PROBLEMATISING THE INTELLECTUAL GAZE 
31
Gronn, P. (2010). Leadership: Its genealogy, configuration and trajectory. Journal of Educational 
Administration and History, 42(4), 405-435. 
Gunter, H. (1997). Rethinking education: The consequences of Jurassic management. London: Cassell. 
Gunter, H. (2002). Purposes and positions in the field of education management: Putting Bourdieu to 
work. Educational Management & Administration, 30(1), 7-26. 
Gunter, H. (2010). A sociological approach to educational leadership. British Journal of Sociology of 
Education, 31(4), 519-527. 
Gunter, H. (2012). Leadership and the reform of education. Bristol: Policy Press. 
Gunter, H. (2013). Researching and conceptualising the field. Journal of Educational Administration 
and History, 45(2), 201-212. 
Halpin, D. (1990). Review symposium. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 11(4), 473-476. 
Kerr, R. & Robinson, S.K. (2011). Leadership as an elite field: Scottish banking leaders and he crisis of 
2007-2009. Leadership, 7(2), 151-173. 
Lane, J. F. (2006). Bourdieu’s politics: Problems and possibilities. London: Routledge. 
Lingard, B., & Christie, P. (2003). Leading theory: Bourdieu and the field of educational leadership: an 
introduction and overview of this special issue. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 
6(4), 317-333. 
Lingard, B., & Rawolle, S. (2010). Principal leadership and straddling fields: a Bourdieuian account. 
Paper presented at the Australian Association for Research in Education Conference, Melbourne, 
Australia, 1 December. 
Oplatka, I. (2010). The legacy of educational administration: A historical analysis of an academic field. 
Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining superior performance. New 
York, NY: Free Press. 
Samier, E. (2013). Where have the disruptions gone? Educational administration’s theoretical capacity 
for analysing or formenting disruption. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 16(2), 
234-244. 
Simon, H. (1945). Administrative behavior. New York, NY: MacMillan. 
Swartz, D. L. (2003). From critical sociology to public intellectual: Pierre Bourdieu and politics. Theory 
and Society, 32(5-6), 791-823. 
Taylor, F. W. (1911). The principles of scientific management. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & 
Company. 
Thomson, P. (2010). Headteacher autonomy: A sketch of a Bourdieuan field analysis of position and 
practice. Critical Studies in Education, 51(1), 5-20. 
Thomson, P. (2015). Bourdieu and educational leadership. London: Routledge. 
Thrupp, M., & Willmott, R. (2003). Educational management in managerialist times: Beyond the 
textual apologists. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press. 
Tinning, R., & Sirna, K. (Eds.). (2011). Education, social justice and the legacy of Deakin University: 
Reflections of the Deakin diaspora. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers. 
Tynack, D., & Hansot, E. (1982). Managers of virtue: Public school leadership in America, 1820-1980. 
New York, NY: Basic Books. 
Weick, K. E. (1969). The social psychology of organizing. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
33
CHAPTER THREE 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF ‘LEADERSHIP’ 
INTRODUCTION 
The epistemological vigilance argued for in the previous chapter establishes a 
rationale to problematize, or at least engage with, the contemporarily popular labels 
of any given disciplinary space. In this chapter I take up this task by engaging with 
the current label of choice in educational administration, that being – ‘leadership’. 
My choice to use quotation marks around the word ‘leadership’ is a deliberate 
technique to remind the reader that this label is not a given, yet alone universal. In 
a recent editorial of European Studies in Educational Management, Peter R Taylor 
and John Heywood (2013) observe that the label ‘leadership’ is infrequently used 
in Europe and when it is it requires extended articulation as to its meaning.i
 This 
raises an important point for the contemporary global academy of educational 
administration. That is, despite the apparent popularity in Anglophone literatures, 
‘leadership’ may be more of a particular socio-geographic construct than a 
universal. Therefore, its spread in global educational administration discourses may 
be a part of a new form of imperialism achieved through language rather than 
physical occupation – an epistemic imperialism. My choice of ‘Anglophone’ as 
opposed to the ‘global north’ is purposeful. Consistent with my argument of sociogeographic particularity, I contend that it is potentially an Anglophone grounding 
rather than assuming a coherent set of discourses emanating from a single 
hemisphere. If nothing else, Taylor and Heywood’s observation refutes claims to a 
universal global north on ‘leadership’ in education. 
This brings me to ask questions of ‘leadership’. In particular, I take cues from a 
recent editorial commissioned debate/discussion in Journal of Management Studies
(Birkinshaw, Healey, Suddaby & Weber, 2014), where Klaus Weber argues: 
I believe that our efforts should continue to be aimed at theory development. Our 
understanding of organisations and management is far from complete or conclusive, 
and as students of social processes, we are working with a moving target. As 
academics with a commitment to methodological rigour, we are also not nimble 
enough to simply report on new phenomena, a task I believe we should leave to 
consultants, journalists, and think tanks. The unique role of academic scholarship in 
societal knowledge systems is to systematise, memorise, stabilise, and abstract. That 
means that it is quite natural and appropriate to not always have a conclusive view 
about a specific event or timely phenomenon. We should study fads and fashions, not 
chase them. (p. 51) 
As with management studies in general (see Abrahamson, 1991, 1996; 
Abrahamson & Eisenman, 2008; Abrahamson & Fairchild, 1999; Carson, Lanier, 
Carson, & Guidry, 2000; Gibson & Tesone, 2001), educational administration has 
been prone to populous faddism (Peck & Reitzug, 2012). Even the evolving title 
CHAPTER 3 
34
from administration through to management and now the contemporarily popular 
‘leadership’ reflects the rapidity of changes in the fashions of rhetoric, but also the 
ease through which those in the academy shift to best meet perceived needs (both 
from within and beyond) to be fashionable. While we can argue about the unique 
context of each and every school, there is a certain level of predictability about 
schooling through both space and time, even if the individuals within a school 
change. Indeed the school is one of the canonical institutions of modernity. As 
such, it is frequently discussed in the context of large-scale bureaucratic systems 
and the downward linearity of policy directives from the state (see Gunter & 
Forrester, 2010). However, the contemporary capitalist condition, that of global 
financial uncertainty and the increasing influence of multi-national corporations, 
with consequential shifts in the politics of the nation-state, provides a timely 
opportunity to engage, if not interrogate, common-sense labels that have risen to 
ascendency (Eacott, 2013). In the specific intellectual space that is educational 
administration, this chapter is dedicated to interrogating ‘leadership’ in education 
with the goal of providing fruitful directions for advancing our understanding of 
how educational institutions operate in a particular time and space. While 
recognising that many others have directly engaged with the shifting labels and/or 
raised concern about the seemingly uncritical shift from administration to 
management and then leadership, the shift/s remain, so too does the proliferation of 
adjectival ‘leadership’ and the seemingly insurmountable theory and practice 
binary. 
‘Leadership’ is arguably the most commonly used concept or label in 
contemporary research in, and the practice of, educational administration. 
However, in broader organisational research discourses, while central, the 
scholarly value of ‘leadership’ as a concept remains contested (O’Reilly, Caldwell, 
Chatman, Lapiz, & Self, 2010), with Joel Podolny, Rakesh Khurana and Marya 
Hill-Popper (2004) citing that ‘leadership’ is actually marginalised by dominant 
organisational paradigms and perspectives. Although this critique is enduring (see 
Pfeffer, 1977; Alvesson & Sveningsson, 2003), it remains somewhat absent in 
educational administration. The exceptions that do appear, such as Gabriele 
Lakomski’s (2005) Management without leadership, and papers by Peter Gronn 
(2003) and myself (2013), are situated on the periphery of the discipline and very 
much removed from the hegemonic mainstream. As it stands, if one is to critique 
the value of ‘leadership’ or show a preference for previous labels (e.g. educational 
administration), it has become common place to be accused of being outdated and 
having minimal, if any, value to contemporary thought and analysis. In most cases, 
publishers, or at least reviewers and editors, will often refuse to publish work until 
labels are updated to the contemporary title ‘educational leadership’. That said, 
building from the argument established in the previous chapter around the need for 
an epistemological break with ordinary uses of words, in this chapter I 
problematise ‘leadership’ in the educational administrative context. This 
destabilising of the label is important due to the enduring ambiguity surrounding 
the very definition of ‘leadership’ (see Bedeian & Hunt, 2006) – not to mention its 
relationship to management – and that advocates of ‘leadership’ and its effect on 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF LEADERSHIP 
35
organisational performance frequently, if not always, constitute ‘leadership’ 
through titles/roles in organisational hierarchy. 
Notably, over the past 50 years there has been a shift from ‘leadership’ as 
meaning making to the significance of ‘leadership’ for economic performance. 
This shift results in ‘leadership’ becoming an attribute of organisations 
demonstrating a ‘high level’ of performance. Embodying generative functionalist 
assumptions, such accounts are often limited to detailing personal/group traits, 
behaviours or actions correlated with higher levels of performance.ii In doing so, as 
with Chester Barnard (1968), there is a privileging of communication acts, with 
other activities being given the lesser label of ‘management’, part of what Peter 
Gronn (2003) labels the canonising of ‘leadership’ and demonising of 
management. Additionally, and most significant for education, and specifically 
educational administration, those who view organisations as heavily constrained, 
especially from external influences such as large educational bureaucracies, claim 
that ‘leadership’ is largely irrelevant and, at best, a social construction (Hannan & 
Freeman, 1989; Meindl, 1990). This brings Mats Alvesson and Stefan Sveningsson 
(2003) to assert that while most people seem to have little doubt that ‘leadership’ is 
a ‘real’ phenomenon – not only important but necessary for organisations – few 
acknowledge problems with confusing a socially constructed label with an 
assumed empirical reality. It is in this space that this chapter makes its contribution 
to the body of knowledge. That is, this chapter engages in a theoretical argument 
around the mobilisation of the label ‘leadership’ in educational administration 
discourses. It does not draw upon a specific case study, but given my physical and 
social location I use data drops from the Australian context – this is consistent with 
the argument of the chapter (and book) that context matters. The lack of a case 
study is not to say that there are not implications, for both researchers and 
practitioners, iii as a result of the argument. In fact, it is quite the opposite. 
Challenging the label of ‘leadership’ requires both scholars and practitioners alike 
to justify their own stance on the topic in the face of criticism. It is arguably the 
constant critique and justification of ideas, concepts, practices, and so on, that 
reflects a healthy intellectual community.iv
In this chapter I argue that ‘leadership’ in the context of education is a label of 
the managerialist project of the state and an historical analysis of the rise of 
managerialism in public administration and the emergence of ‘leadership’ as the 
label of choice (as opposed to the previous labels of administration and 
management) supports such a claim. As it is, in the discourses of educational 
administration there is a proliferation of types of ‘leadership’ through an 
assortment of adjectives, yet minimal critique or problematising of the label of 
‘leadership’ itself.v
 It is here where I am drawn to Pierre Bourdieu’s (1988[1984]) 
distinction between ‘real’ or empirical objects and those that become known 
through social analysis, the epistemic. In particular, I explore the relationship that 
educational administration discourses have with the social space. In doing so, I put 
forth a critique of ‘leadership’ as an educational administration concept to argue 
that ‘leadership’ is an epistemic label applied post-event through the a priori
CHAPTER 3 
36
assumption of its very existence. Most significant however, is that the hegemony of 
the discourses fails to recognise the epistemic labelling. 
To make this argument I focus on academic discourses, or specifically, 
scholarship on educational administration. As a social scientist, and by virtue, as 
part of the social scientific community, this chapter (and the book for that matter) 
is intended to be disruptive, an act of political intervention into the hegemonic 
position held by mainstream educational administration scholarship and a 
challenge to the seemingly unlimited elasticity of ‘leadership’ as a label. 
Specifically, this chapter contains two key interventions: the first is the claim that 
‘leadership’ is an epistemic, not empirical, concept; and the second related claim is 
that ‘leadership’ in education is constituted through a particular relationship with 
the social space. To lay out these two interventions it is necessary that I first turn to 
the issue of scholarly education discourses and in particular discourses in 
educational administration. 
THE PROBLEMATIC 
In the performative regimes that constitute the enterprise university, education 
research is arguably at its most critical junction since the establishment of 
university departments, faculties, and/or schools of education. For example, during 
the first iteration of the Excellence for Research in Australia (ERA) exercise in 
2010, the Australian equivalent of the Research Assessment Exercise (RAE)/ 
Research Excellence Framework (REF) in the UK, education featured as one of the 
weakest areas accounting for five percent of the national research productivity and 
only receiving one percent of nationally competitive research income. vi In 
ERA2012, education research accounted for four and a half percent of national 
productivity and received two percent of national research income, once again 
ranking it as one of the lowest (out of 22) research fields. Of course, the weak 
quality profile of education in the academy is nothing new, and is experienced by 
education scholars on a daily basis through numerous apparatus including research 
funding regimes, journal rankings, promotion systems, research and post-doctoral 
fellowships, and so on. Herein lays a significant challenge for education 
researchers. On a global scale, policy makers have embraced the idea of 
experimental/interventional research design (e.g. randomised control trials) as the 
‘gold-standard’ for educational inquiry (Donmoyer & Galloway, 2010). The 
preference for large scale experimental studies designed to reveal, once and for all, 
‘what works’ in education is firmly embedded in assessment criteria for national 
competitive funding regimes. For those working in education, and the broader 
humanities and social sciences, this shift negates forms of research which are not 
easily recognisable in the logical-empiricism paradigm. That being said, for those 
working in educational administration, the privileging of logical-empiricism is 
consistent with the Theory Movement and continues in the ‘scientific’ stream 
(Gunter, 2001) of research.vii 
What remains particularly challenging for educational administration 
scholarship is its relationship to theory, especially in the context of the desire to 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF LEADERSHIP 
37
maintain a closeness, or relevance, to practice. As Helen Gunter (2010) argues, 
theory only seems to matter if it can be directly translated into decisions to be made 
at 9:00am on Monday morning. The apparent relevance of social theorist/ 
philosophers such as Pierre Bourdieu, Gilles Deleuze, Jacques Derrida, Michel 
Foucault, Max Weber, among others, is seen as minimal at best, and in most cases, 
unnecessary. However, it is theory that stops us from forgetting that the world is 
not laid out in plain view and thinking that things speak for themselves – ‘the data’, 
‘practice’, the pure voice of the previously marginalised (MacLure, 2010). This 
type of engagement, or lack thereof, with theory allows for the dominance of a 
particular form of description, a matter which I shall return to later. But for now, 
enough to say that, the explanatory power of the theoretically infused description 
of educational administration is far less seductive than the everyday language 
employed in descriptions of ‘what works’. It is in the pursuit of, and engagement 
with, the ‘what works’ of education that we have the constitution of ‘leadership’ 
through the identification of high performing schools/institutions and then the 
attribution of what individuals playing key roles, frequently limited to titles and 
official positions rather than social positions, did to bring about that performance 
(there is however a general omission of lesser performing schools/institutions in 
such research, and therefore the explanatory power of the work to articulate what it 
is that differentiates between higher and lesser performing schools/institutions is 
significantly reduced – not to mention the apolitical view of ‘high performing’). 
Here we have a major theoretical issue, that is, an a posteriori identification and 
labelling of ‘leadership’ while a simultaneous a priori assumption that ‘leadership’ 
exists. This establishes, and sustains, a particular relationship between the concept 
of ‘leadership’ and the empirical space in which practice takes place, one where the 
location of practice in both time and space is acknowledged, yet under-theorised. 
With the expansion of what Gunter (1997) originally labelled the ‘educational 
management industry’, which could now be more appropriately categorised as the 
‘educational leadership industry’, and the proliferation of school leadership 
preparation and development programmes outside of the academy (see Eacott, 
2011), there is now, more than ever, a need to engage with the knowledge claims 
of ‘leadership’ in educational administration discourses. 
THE REALNESS OF ‘LEADERSHIP’ 
In the broader academy, there is a level of scepticism as to the realness or 
robustness of ‘leadership’ as a concept. The underlying question, and one of 
significant importance for educational administration, is whether one is seeking to 
either reveal or construct ‘leadership’ through scholarship. To reveal implies that 
through scholarship, one can accurately portray an object of analysis as it exists in 
the empirical world. On the other hand, to construct centres on scholarship that 
through the methods of analysis brings an object into being. Pivotal to both 
positions is of course the use of language, or more specifically labels, for objects. 
For Bourdieu (1988[1984]), an empirical object is the ‘real’, that which is 
inexhaustible, and located in the complexity and messiness that is the social world. 
CHAPTER 3 
38
In contrast, the epistemic object, that which comes into being through analysis, 
contains nothing that evades conceptualisation. My mobilising of Bourdieu in this 
space may seem odd, if not problematic. For some, it will be read as the binary that 
is realism and relativism, far less sophisticated than the musing of Weber or 
Deleuze on the use of concepts in the social sciences (see Gane, 2009), or the 
Foucauldian notion of discourse. However, Bourdieu’s distinction is significant in 
the context of educational administration discourses, especially given the failure, 
for the most part, to recognise ‘leadership’ as an epistemic. As it is, the very 
establishment of educational administration as a domain of inquiry was built upon 
the distinction of administration from education, and therefore to challenge the 
very labels that constitute the domain (educational administration, management 
and ‘leadership’) is to destabilise the discipline itself. There are two issues which I 
am going to explore here: first, the cross-over of ‘leadership’ from everyday 
language into scholarly discourses; and second, the somewhat unique constitution 
of ‘leadership’ through the post event attribution yet simultaneous a priori
assumption of its existence. It is through this combination that I argue educational 
administration discourses, for the most part, are unable to recognise its epistemic 
creation. 
Bobby Calder (1977) argues, that ‘leadership’ is a term that originated in 
everyday discourses, and its common-sense meaning has been appropriated into 
scholarly discourses. However, in everyday language, the label ‘leadership’ merely 
identifies, giving little information about the object of which it speaks. As a label, it 
is capable of being arbitrarily applied to almost any object, saying that this object is 
different without specifying in what way/s it differs. In doing so, the label serves as 
an instrument of recognition, and not of cognition (Bourdieu, 1988[1984]). When 
mobilised as an act of recognition, the label ‘leadership’ singles out an individual, a 
team of people, or an institution, generally thought of as acting as a coherent 
whole, to say that they are different without saying in what ways they are different. 
The apparent comfort with assigning the label of ‘leadership’ in everyday 
language, that which provides little in relation to distinctions, leaves the concept, 
much like that of ‘change’, open to the critique of being vacuous, if not 
meaningless. In contrast, the constructed ‘leadership’, an act of cognition, defines 
‘leadership’ by a finite set of criteria or properties which seek to create a 
distinction between those who possess the properties and those who do not. In 
short, ‘leadership’ is mobilised as a label of exclusion, not inclusion. The notion of 
‘leadership’ as exclusive is problematic for those promoting the latest ‘adjectival’ 
‘leadership’ (e.g. teacher, shared, distributed, and so on), where ‘leadership’ is 
apparently something that everyone possesses – effectively reducing ‘leadership’ to 
a meaningless label that offers nothing in relation to social distinctions – raising 
major questions of its scholarly value. A significant move here however is that the 
explicit criteria employed in the construction of ‘leadership’ constitutes a specific 
form of ‘leadership’ that exists in a social space given life through the very criteria 
that produce it. That is, ‘leadership’ is present in a context in which it was already 
decided that ‘leadership’ existed – a rather tautological situation. This plays out in 
very specific ways in the scholarship of educational administration. 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF LEADERSHIP 
39
In the Australian education policy context, whether it be national, federal, or 
state/territory,viii there is a clear message being presented: i) there is a desire to 
improve student outcomes in schooling – it is possible to argue that literacy and 
numeracy outcomes, those reported in national (e.g. National Assessment Program 
– Literacy And Numeracy, NAPLAN) and international (e.g. Programme for 
International Student Assessment, PISA; Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science Study, TIMSS) testing regimes, have become a proxy for schooling; 
ii) teacher quality is a central focus on the basis of school effectiveness and school 
improvement literature citing the teacher as the most influential role in student 
outcomes; and iii) school ‘leadership’ (frequently defined as ‘the principal’, 
although the Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians, 
a national policy, makes mention of ‘principals and other school leaders’) is seen 
as a key driver of this desired perpetual improvement. In a letter to Tony Mackay, 
the incoming chair of the Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership 
(to some extent, potentially the Australian equivalent of England’s National 
College), then Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education, Julia Gillard 
notes: improving teacher quality requires strong leadership from principals and that 
excellent school leadership is a key to improving outcomes for students. Likewise, 
as part of the Gillard Labor government’s education reform agenda, she explicitly 
argues ‘if each of those [Australia’s 9529 schools] schools is to be a truly great 
school, it needs great leadership’. There is a clear assumption at play in this policy 
context, ‘leadership’ matters, and significantly, great schools – those with higher 
than average student outcomes, and especially those achieving higher than average 
value-added (growth) data – have great ‘leaders’.ix Here we have the construction 
of a primary criterion, high student outcomes, a point of cognition, to which there 
is an assumed causal relationship. That is, an a priori assumption that by virtue of 
the institutional, or actually student, performance, ‘leadership’ as an entity, must 
have been enacted in that location. In doing so, researchers, policy makers and 
practitioners alike have constructed the epistemic label ‘leadership’ without 
acknowledging the post event identification of the construction. Through the 
application of this a priori assumption of the existence, or ‘realness’ of 
‘leadership’, and the a posteriori, or post event identification of where ‘leadership’ 
has happened, scholarship pays far more attention to the description of who 
‘leaders’ are, and what they do, than developing the kinds of description which can 
inform theoretical criteria from which its very existence can be engaged with. This 
leads to a neo-trait or neo-behaviour abstraction of ‘leadership’, one where the 
context, in both space and time, remains on the periphery. This distance is 
sustained as ‘leadership’ becomes an entity, one that can be mapped to context but 
remains separate from it. Key aspects of the cognitive process, that which conceals 
the abstraction of the empirical, are the relations with both time and space, 
primarily through temporality. To engage with these matters I turn to Bourdieu’s 
discussion of time, including that mobilised and advanced by Lisa Adkins. 
CHAPTER 3 
40
‘LEADERSHIP’ AND ITS RELATION TO TIME AND SPACE 
What we have come to know as the school and the administration of schooling is 
constituted through the operationalisation and privileging of clock time. The 
temporal rules of schooling construct the school day, terms, semesters, the school 
year, class schedules, and the notion of progression based on time. Just like the 
temporal rules of the economic field, the hegemonic position on time is its 
measurement in terms of an abstraction, separate to events, and reversible through 
units of the clock (see Adkins, 2009, 2011). As with ‘leadership’, time is 
constructed as an entity. Bourdieu (2000[1997]) argues, reinforced through 
ordinary language, time is constituted as a thing, something that an individual or 
institution has, gains or wastes. It is in this space that the administration of 
schooling, frequently reduced to the ‘leadership’ and management of change and 
enacted through the process of planning for the future and embodying the 
principles of perpetual improvement, comes to the fore. Significantly, activities 
such as strategic planning and reporting/funding cycles become not only 
synchronised with the game of schooling, but become the game of school 
administration. In this game, and I am referring to Bourdieu’s notion of ‘the game’ 
as opposed to that of game theory or elsewhere, ‘leadership’, particularly that 
which is ‘successful’ or ‘effective’, is constituted through measures of student 
achievement, those reported through the operationalisation of time. Take for 
example the reporting of student outcomes in Australia, primarily through the 
MySchool website, but also available through the production of Annual School 
Reports – a rather corporate notion – produced for the system, distributed to all 
parents (e.g. shareholders), and publicly available via school websites (as a means 
of marketing/transparency). What we see here is the reporting of annual 
standardised testing (taking place for students in grades three, five, seven, and 
nine), essentially the schools bottom-line, and the value-added data, read ‘growth’ 
or ‘profit’, for those cohorts in-between tests. The centrality of this (economic) 
data for the policy, and arguably wider societal, constitution of what is school 
‘leadership’ and the value judgement of ‘success’ or ‘effectiveness’ is significant, 
especially when viewed in the context of a federal policy agenda that replaced a 
$550 million over five years initiative to support and improve school leadership 
and teacher quality (consistent with the Melbourne Declaration) with two 
programmes, rewards for great teachers ($425 million) and rewards for school 
improvement ($248 million) for the next four years (see McMorrow, 2011). 
Ignoring for the moment the well-rehearsed argument regarding the apolitical and 
ahistorical nature of education policy moves, it seems important to focus on the 
version of time employed in such accounts, especially given the centrality of 
temporality to narratives of leadership. 
Previously I have sought to explore the strategies of administrators and the 
methodological challenges that engaging with such poses for educational 
administration scholars (Eacott, 2010). In doing so, and following Bourdieu 
(1977[1972]), I argue that the limited engagement, or worst still, failure to 
acknowledge, the temporality of practice is to abolish the notion of strategy/ies. 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF LEADERSHIP 
41
Despite making this criticism, I am mindful that educational administration does 
engage, even if implicitly, with notions of temporality. It is the mobilisation of a 
particular type of temporality that is of interest. The construction – or more 
accurately, abstraction – of points of clock time used to delineate the temporal 
dimensions of ‘leadership’, or specific phases or stages, those in which the 
description or causal relationship of practice put forth has but to align itself with, is 
central to mainstream ‘leadership’ research. The underlying assumption is that 
‘leadership’ is a means through which to bring about a better future, achieved 
through the manipulation, read control, of the forthcoming. Such a proposition is 
consistent with those who argue that educational administration is a technology of 
control (see Bates, 1980), and in this particular case, the desire to control the 
future. Therefore, educational administration, and specifically ‘leadership’, is about 
‘influence’x
 over the game and how practice plays out in time. 
Eugenie Samier (2006) argues that educational administration exhibits the same 
‘persistent atemporality’ (Adams, 1992) of its parent discipline, public 
administration, where attention is paid to the history of administrative theory rather 
than the actual history of administration. While she goes on to argue for greater 
mobilisation of history in scholarship, particularly in relation to point-in-time 
discussions of ‘leadership’ (the recognition of the here and now on a temporal 
continuum), my attention here is on the very notion of a delineation of past, present 
and future. Much of the work in educational administration is about the future, and 
the need to be ‘future-focused’.xi As such, the future is conceived as at some 
distance from the present (e.g. the three-year plan for the school), and that our 
desired future can be achieved through prudent action in the here and now. 
Embedded within this thesis are the rationalisation of practice, with direct cause 
and effect, and the dislocation of practice from time. In contrast, for Bourdieu, the 
future is not a distant horizon separated from the present, rather, it is already 
present in the immediate present, a future that is already here. As Adkins (2009, 
2011) argues, the present is already present because players are ordinarily 
immersed in the forthcoming, or more precisely, players practically and prereflexively anticipate the forthcoming as a routine part of action. As an example of 
this thinking, Bourdieu (see Lamaison & Bourdieu, 1986) evokes the image of the 
good football player, stating: 
Nothing is simultaneously freer and more constrained than the action of the good 
player. He quite naturally materializes at just the place the ball is about to fall, as if 
the ball were in command of him – but by that very fact, he is in command of the ball. 
(p. 113) 
What we have here, following Bourdieu, is practice that is not in time, but rather 
makes time. Significantly, as Adkins (2009) notes, time does not operate externally 
to events, but unfolds with events. This conceptualisation of time explicitly 
challenges the delineation of past/present/future, and the commodification of time. 
While sociologically the absence, or at least periphery, of such matters is limiting, 
the why is significant. I argue, and building from an extensive body of work, that 
the ‘leadership’ literature engages in a professionalisation of knowledge focusing 
CHAPTER 3 
42
on being a problem solving toolkit for practitioners as opposed to theory infused 
accounts of practices in schools. Therefore, the operationalisation of temporality is 
consistent with the constitution of schooling – clock time, an external commodity 
that one has, or has not, in the pursuit of the purpose of schooling (usually limited 
to improvements in student outcomes). In short, an entity perspective is the 
orthodoxy of educational administration literatures. The literature, for the most 
part, conforms to what Bourdieu (2005[2000]) calls ‘native theories’ of strategic 
action (in this case, ‘leadership’), expressly produced to assist administrators in 
their decisions, and explicitly taught in preparation and development 
programmes.xii This is not a surprising claim. Over 40 years ago George Baron 
(1969) noted: 
In the United States the study of educational administration, as Hoyle shows, grew 
out of the need for the diffusion of practical knowledge about the administration of 
school systems among the many thousands of superintendents and principals who, 
compared with their English counterparts, were thrown very much on their own 
resources. (pp. 10-11). 
In meeting this stimulus, the gap between the native and research representations is 
less marked and this speaks to the argument in the previous chapter regarding the 
need for epistemological vigilance. For many, the highly practical and immediately 
relevant addresses the problem of the insurmountable theory-practice binary, 
however, there is an inbuilt, although frequently unrecognised, tension regarding a 
professional group who make consistent claims to the uniqueness of each and 
every school, yet seek refuge in scholarship that abstracts both time and space – 
removing context. 
In a study investigating university based educational administration programmes 
in Australia, Richard Bates and I (2008) argue that the most common literature 
used for readings in courses is that associated with ‘change’. Given the 
professionalisation of knowledge and the problem solving focus of educational 
administration, this is not surprising. However, Gronn (2008) is most scathing of 
this trend, labelling ‘change’ a vacuous concept devoid of any particular concrete 
referent or context and simply something ‘out there’. The major shift taking place 
here, or at least reflected in this space, is that the epistemic label of ‘leadership’, 
that which is constructed through policy, scholarship and practice has shaped the 
ontology of leadership, further embedding itself and obscuring the abstraction. 
In this space, leadership is reduced to change.xiii Brian Caldwell (2007) in his 
introduction to a special issue of the Australian Journal of Education on 
‘educational leadership and school renewal’ explicitly states that leadership equals 
change and that no change implies that either leadership was not needed, or failed. 
Such a position is highly problematic, primarily on the basis that it overlooks the 
larger, and long-term, inequities of society and the (re)productive forces in that 
power struggle, but also for how it legitimises a form of scholarship that can 
exclude context. For example, Stephen Dinham (2005), produces a composite set 
of principal leadership attributes and practices contributing to outstanding 
educational outcomes but warns that ‘there is a danger with such attributes or 
factors in that context is not sufficiently recognised’ (p. 354). Likewise, David 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF LEADERSHIP 
43
Gurr, Lawrie Drysdale and colleagues’ ‘Australian’ model of successful school 
leadershipxiv has the objectives of: describing, explaining and categorising various 
kinds of leadership intervention and outlining their relationship and impact on 
student outcomes; providing a conceptual map of the interventions used by the 
school’s leadership; and providing a framework for other practitioners to use as a 
guide to future action, including principal preparation (see Gurr, Drysdale, & 
Goode, 2010). However, the authors themselves note regarding the model that ‘[I]t 
does not explain why these interventions work in some circumstances and not in 
others’ (p. 124). As such, leadership remains a vacuous concept connected to 
attributes, factors, behaviours, interventions, all of which lack a solid grounding in 
a specific context. It is however the context that gives behaviours or interventions 
meaning and significance. Similarly, the values, philosophies or other aspects of 
the individual articulated in neo-trait perspective lists only exist through practice. 
Any separation between the individual actor and their attributes is premature. Or 
more forcibly, they cannot be separated from the self. The lack of attention to the 
situatedness and specificity of contexts leads to a privileging of the directly 
observable features of practice rather than the underlying generative principles. 
The loss of context creates the illusion of ‘leadership’ as a universal construct. 
THE POSSIBILITY OF ‘LEADERSHIP’ 
A consistent message in scholarship across the social sciences and humanities is 
that theories – which include constructs, labels and so on – cannot merely be 
transferred to and adopted in different contexts. As Maria Nicodailou (2008) notes, 
we have all come to appreciate that school leadership is ‘tightly coupled with 
cultural and national (often ethnic) values and contexts, there cannot be a recipe 
that fits all’ (p. 215). Given the apparent failure on the part of educational 
administration discourses to confront the specificity of ‘leadership’, it is perhaps of 
little surprise that the theoretical resources of the discipline have not been put to 
use to engage with the questioning of its scholarly value. This is even less 
surprising if we consider that as a domain of practice and knowledge production, 
‘leadership’ is constituted as a source of new methods of institutional performance 
and social transformation. However, ‘leadership’ discourses are not composed only 
of practical tips and/or recipes for improving the productivity of institutions as one 
improves the performance of machines. They simultaneously have a high moral 
tone, if only because they are frequently normative literatures stating what should 
be the case, not what is the case. This is a matter that I will return to Chapter Five. 
A question, following Bourdieu (2004[2001]), is how can ‘leadership’ 
scholarship not help resolve a problem that it has itself brought into being? For the 
most part, since its inception, educational administration has positioned itself as a 
solution for schooling. As the language has shifted from administration to 
management and now ‘leadership’, few questions have been raised concerning the 
very criteria from which administration differs from management and then to 
‘leadership’. This is why at a certain point of the analysis, the lines of demarcation 
blur. This is why my interest in epistemology and ontology. In the contemporary 
CHAPTER 3 
44
world where new forms of knowledge sharing are reducing boundaries yet also 
reinforcing ties to the local, the limitations of a discourse that is devoid of time and 
space has arguably reached its limit. 
For me, as with many educational administration scholars, the initial point of 
interest centres on the theoretical problem of legitimation of the social world/ 
social order. With a focus on administration, and to a lesser extent, hierarchy and 
structure in the social world, educational administration is interested in 
organisations, but arguably more so, organising. Therefore a few things standout 
for me, if ‘leadership’ is an epistemic as I have just argued, rather than arguing for 
going back to management or administration as a label let’s consider what is the 
actual empirical focus of our inquiry. This brings me back to the notion of 
relations. Not relationships which can be mapped and represented in neat two 
dimensional diagrams, but relations – those active and fragile social arrangements 
between two or more institutions/individuals. If our theoretical problem is the 
legitimation of the social world, and the specific empirical problem is the 
organising of education, then it makes sense to engage with relations. Grounding 
the scholarly narrative in time and space will bring to the level of discourse the 
subtle ways in which constructs such as ‘leadership’ are legitimised. In doing so, 
rather than basing ‘leadership’ on an abstraction of the social world there is a 
strong need to focus on the context, or the situated nature of relations, and a need 
to describe what is taking place, this is especially so during a period when public 
and education policy is recasting administrative labour. 
NOTES 
i
 I do however note Maria Nicodailou’s (2008) paper and a 2009 Special Issue of European 
Educational Research Journal edited by Simon Clarke and Helen Wildy (who incidentally reside in 
Australia) on ‘the Europeanisation of Educational Leadership’. ii While it often goes unrecognised, these accounts frequently attempt to mobilise causal arguments 
from correlational data. This misinterpretation of data is commonly witnessed in public discourses 
on education reform (e.g. school autonomy and student outcomes). iii This binary is far from productive, however, in the interests of locating the argument and its merits, I 
see the need to engage with this commonly mobilised distinction. iv For work on the notions of ‘justification’ and ‘critique’ see the work of the French pragmatists Luc 
Boltanski and colleagues (see Boltanski, 2011[2009]; Boltanski & Chiapello, 2005[1999]; Boltanski 
& Thévenot, 2000, 2006[1991]). v
 I am aware of the critical stream of research that engages, almost exclusively in such matters, but for 
the most part, this problematising is absent. This absence is also why at a certain point in the 
analysis we see the fusion of multiple ‘adjectival’ labels (e.g. distributed, shared, participatory, or 
even leadership, management and administration) as though they are one and the same. vi It would of course be possible to argue that producing five percent of the output on only one percent 
of the funding is a strong outcome. Such an argument however has yet to gain any traction in the 
ongoing research funding and quality debates. vii Helen Gunter’s mobilisation of ‘scientific’ in this cited paper is consistent with the Anglophone, and 
particularly North American, equating of ‘science’ and ‘scientific’ with logical empiricism. Much 
like the demonising of bureaucracy, management, and so on, the critical stream and particularly 
graduate students, are often quick to dismiss or disregard ‘science’ primarily on the basis of an 
assumed equivalence with logical empiricism. The issues raised by Gunter, and others, are actually 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF LEADERSHIP 
45
to do with epistemological differences on the nature of knowledge, therefore, matters of theoretical 
lens and technique rather than science. viii For the non-Australian reader, Australia has an idiosyncratic federal system of governance. While 
education remains a constitutional responsibility of the states/territories, the vertical fiscal imbalance 
of Australian federalism (Lingard 2000; Lingard, Porter, Bartlett & Knight 1995) enables the federal 
government to significantly influence education policy through the threat of withdrawing or 
redistributing funds. Federal intervention into education has increased substantially since the 1970s, 
notably with the Gough Whitlam Labor administration (1972-1975) as part of an equity agenda. 
However, Neil Cranston and colleagues (2010) note a distinct shift in foci of federal intervention 
from the public agenda (e.g. democratic equality) of Whitlam’s equity interventions through to more 
recent moves (by both Labor and Liberal-National coalition governments) aimed at private purposes 
(e.g. social mobility and social efficiency). ix Throughout this policy rhetoric there is frequent reference, at least implicitly, to Jim Collins’ 2001 
book Good to great: why some companies make the leap … and others don’t’. x
 I am aware of the rapidity to read ‘power’ as a negative term in educational administration 
discourses and have therefore opted to mobilise the less provocative label of ‘influence’ here. xi I am thinking here specifically of the edu-prenuers who are often used as keynote speakers at 
professional conferences, such as Michael Fullan (North America), Brent Davies (UK) and Brian 
Caldwell (Australia). xii Bourdieu (2005[2000]) uses the example of ‘management theory’. Literature produced by business 
schools for business schools, and likened that to the writing of European jurists in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries who in the guise of describing the state, contributed to building it. xiii The problematic here is magnified. If we are to buy into the notion that change is everywhere and 
nothing is static, then ‘change’ itself is a somewhat meaningless label. Therefore ‘leadership’ is a 
label of questionable foundations defined by a label that is devoid of any concrete referent or 
context. This raises more questions regarding the constitution of leadership as a label. xiv An interesting tension here is that despite only having case studies from two of the eight 
states/territories, the researchers still name the model ‘An Australian model of successful school 
leadership’ – the representation of the entire nation is questionable and says something about the 
centrality, or lack thereof, of context (see also Drysdale & Gurr, 2011). 
REFERENCES 
Abrahamson, E. (1991). Managerial fads and fashions: The diffusion and rejection of innovations. The 
Academy of Management Review, 16(3), 586-612. 
Abrahamson, E. (1996). Management fashion. The Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 254-285. 
Abrahamson, E., & Eisenman, M. (2008). Employee-management techniques: Transient fads or 
trending fashions. Administrative Science Quarterly, 53(4), 719-744. 
Abrahamson, E., & Fairchild, G. (1999). Management fashion: Life cycles, triggers, and collective 
learning processes. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(4), 708-740. 
Adams, G. (1992). Enthralled with modernity: The historical context of knowledge and theory 
development in public administration. Public Administration Review, 52(4), 363-373. 
Adkins, L. (2009). Sociological futures: From clock time to event time. Sociological Research Online, 
14(4), http://www.socresonline.org.uk/14/14/18.html.
Adkins, L. (2011). Practice as temporalisation: Bourdieu and economic crisis. In S. Susen & B. S. 
Turner (Eds.), The legacy of Pierre Bourdieu: Critical essays (pp. 347-365). London: Anthem Press. 
Alvesson, M., & Sveningsson, S. (2003). The great disappearing act: Difficulties in doing ‘leadership’. 
The Leadership Quarterly, 14(3), 359-381. 
Barnard, C. (1968). Functions of the executive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Baron, G. (1969). The study of educational administration in England. In G. Baron and W. Taylor 
(Eds), Educational administration and the social sciences (pp. 3-17). London: Athlone Press. 
CHAPTER 3 
46
Bates, R. J. (1980). Educational administration, the sociology of science, and the management of 
knowledge. Educational Administration Quarterly, 16(2), 1-20. 
Bates, R. J., & Eacott, S. (2008). Teaching educational leadership and administration in Australia. 
Journal of Educational Administration and History, 40(2), 149-160. 
Bedeian, A., & Hunt, J. G. (2006). Academic amnesia and vestigial assumptions of our forefathers. The 
Leadership Quarterly, 17(2), 190-205. 
Birkinshaw, J., Healey, M.P., Suddaby, R., & Weber, K. (2014). Debating the future of management 
research. Journal of Management Studies, 51(1), 38-55. 
Boltanski, L. (2011[2009]). On critique: A sociology of emancipation (G. Elliott, Trans.). Cambridge: 
Polity. [Originally published as de la critique (Paris: Editions Galliard)]. 
Boltanski, L., & Chiapello, E. (2005[1999]). The new spirit of capitalism (G. Elliott, Trans.). London: 
Verso [Originally published as Le nouvel espirt du capitalisme (Paris: Galliard)]. 
Boltanski, L., & Thévenot, L. (2000). The reality of moral expectations: A sociology of situated 
judgement. Philosophical Explorations, 3(3), 208-231. 
Boltanski, L., & Thévenot, L. (2006[1991]). On justification: Economies of worth (C. Porter, Trans.). 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press [Originally published as De la justification. Les economies 
de la grandeur (Paris: Gallimard)]. 
Bourdieu, P. (1977[1972]). Outline of a theory of practice (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. [Originally published as Esquisse d’une théorie de la pratique, précédé de trois 
études d’ethnologie kabyle (Switzerland: Libraire Droz S.A.).] 
Bourdieu, P. (1988[1984]). Homo academicus (P. Collier, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. 
[Originally published as Homo academicus (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2000[1997]). Pascalian meditations (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[Originally published as Méditations pascaliennes (Paris: Éditions du Seuil).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2004[2001]). Science of science and reflexivity (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
[Originally published as Science de la science et réflexivité (Paris: Éditions Raisons d’Agir).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2005[2000]). The social structures of the economy (C. Turner, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: 
Polity. [Originally published as Les structures socials de l’économie (Paris: Éditions du Seuil).] 
Calder, B. J. (1977). An attribution theory of leadership. In B. M. Staw & G. R. Salancik (Eds.), New 
directions in organizational behaviour (pp. 179-204). Chicago, IL: St. Clair. 
Caldwell, B. J. (2007). Educational leadership and school renewal: Introduction by the guest editor. 
Australian Journal of Education, 51(3), 225-227. 
Carson, P. P., Lanier, P. A., Carson, K. D., & Guidry, B. N. (2000). Clearing a path through the 
management fashion jungle: Some preliminary trailblazing. The Academy of Management Journal, 
43(6), 1143-1158. 
Cranston, N. C., Kimber, M., Mulford, B., Reid, A., & Keating, J. (2010). Politics and school education 
in Australia: A case of shifting purposes. Journal of Educational Administration, 48(2), 182-195. 
Dinham, S. (2005). Principal leadership for outstanding educational outcomes. Journal of Educational 
Administration, 43(4), 338-356. 
Donmoyer, R., & Galloway, F. (2010). Reconsidering the utility of case study designs for researching 
school reform in a neo-scientific era: Insights from a multiyear, mixed-methods study. Educational 
Administration Quarterly, 46(1), 3-30. 
Drysdale, L., & Gurr, D. (2011). The theory and practice of successful school leadership in Australia. 
School Leadership & Management, 31(4), 355-368. 
Eacott, S. (2010). Bourdieu’s strategies and the challenge for educational leadership. International 
Journal of Leadership in Education, 13(3), 265-281. 
Eacott, S. (2011). Preparing ‘educational’ leaders in managerialist times: An Australian story. Journal 
of Educational Administration and History, 43(1), 43-59. 
Eacott, S. (2013). ‘Leadership’ and the social: Time, space and the epistemic. International Journal of 
Educational Management, 27(1), 91-101. 
Gane, N. (2009). Concepts and the ‘new’ empiricism. European Journal of Social Theory, 12(1), 83-97. 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF LEADERSHIP 
47
Gibson, J.W., & Tesone, D.V. (2001). Management fads: emergence, evolution, and implications for 
managers. Academy of Management, 15(4), 122-133. 
Gronn, P. (2003). Leadership: Who needs it? School Leadership & Management, 23(3), 267-290. 
Gronn, P. (2008). The state of Denmark. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 40(2), 
173-185. 
Gunter, H. (1997). Rethinking education: The consequences of Jurassic management. London: Cassell. 
Gunter, H. (2001). Critical approaches to leadership in education. Journal of Educational Enquiry, 2(2), 
94-108. 
Gunter, H. (2010). A sociological approach to educational leadership. British Journal of Sociology of 
Education, 31(4), 519-527. 
Gunter, H., & Forrester, G. (2010). New Labour and the logic of practice in educational reform. Critical 
Studies in Education, 51(1), 55-69. 
Gurr, D., Drysdale, L., & Goode, H. (2010). Successful school leadership in Australia: A research 
agenda. International Journal of Learning, 17(4), 113-129. 
Hannan, M. T., & Freeman, J. (1989). Organizational ecology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Lakomski, G. (2005). Managing without leadership: Towards a theory of organizational functioning. 
London: Elsevier. 
Lamaison, P. & Bourdieu, P. (1986). From rules to strategies: An interview with Pierre Bourdieu. 
Cultural Anthropology, 1(1), 110-120. Also appears in: Bourdieu, P. (1990). In other words: Essays 
towards a reflexive sociology (M. Adamson, Trans.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Lingard, B. (2000). Federalism in schooling since the Karmel report (1973), School in Australia: From 
modernist hope to postmodernist performativity. Australian Educational Researcher, 27(2), 25-61. 
Lingard, B., Porter, P., Bartlett, L., & Knight, J. (1995). Federal/state mediations in the Australian 
national education agenda: From the AEC to MCEETYA 1987-1993. Australian Journal of 
Education, 39(1), 41-66. 
MacLure, M. (2010). The offence of theory. Journal of Education Policy, 25(2), 277-286. 
McMorrow, J. (2011). Waiting for Gonski: What the 2011 Commonwealth budget means for schools. 
Sydney: The University of Sydney. 
Meindl, J. R. (1990). On leadership: an alternative to the conventional wisdom. Research in 
Organizational Behaviour, 12, 159-203. 
Nicolaidou, M. (2008). Attempting a Europeanization of educational leadership: Philosophical and 
ideological dimensions. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 11(2), 211-223. 
O’Reilly, C. A., Caldwell, D. F., Chatman, J. A., Lapiz, M., & Self, W. (2010). How leadership matters: 
The effects of leaders’ alignment on strategy implementation. The Leadership Quarterly, 21(1), 104-
113. 
Peck, C., & Reitzug, U.C. (2012). How existing business management concepts become school 
leadership fashions. Educational Administration Quarterly, 48(2), 347-381. 
Pfeffer, J. (1977). The ambiguity of leadership. The Academy of Management Review, 2(1), 104-112. 
Podolny, J. M., Khurana, R., & Hill-Popper, M. (2004). Revisiting the meaning of leadership. Research 
in Organizational Behaviour, 26, 1-36. 
Samier, E. (2006). Educational administration as a historical discipline: An apologia pro vita historia. 
Journal of Educational Administration and History, 38(2), 125-139. 
Taylor, P. & Heywood, J. (2012). Editorial. European Studies in Educational Management, 2(1), 1-4. 
49
CHAPTER FOUR 
RECASTING ADMINISTRATIVE LABOUR 
INTRODUCTION 
In Western democratic-capitalist societies public administration is undergoing 
considerable restructuring as principles of private enterprise are becoming the 
orthodoxy. At the same time, economic instability (or crisis) is gripping both 
national and global financial markets suggesting a flaw in the system or even that 
capitalism has reached its limits. In this space, David Hartley (2010) argues that 
crisis of capitalism are frequently met with shifts in the rhetoric of management 
and that the relationship between education and these shifts has been little explored 
(see also Carpentier, 2003). Following Hartley, and building on the arguments so 
far in this book, it is timely to engage with the question of ‘What does it mean to be 
an educational administration scholar when the notion of ‘administration’ at the 
school level is under revision?’. It is the contention of this chapter that through a 
theoretical interrogation of recent Australian education policy moves we can find 
important resources for educational administrative theory that can inform 
contemporary thought and analysis on educational administration. 
Having problematized, if not destabilised, the notion of ‘leadership’ in the 
previous chapter, here I begin to build an argument for a relational ontological 
position in educational administration. As noted previously, relational approaches 
are not new to the broader leadership, management and administration literatures, 
or even the educational administration literatures. Although implicit in many early 
works in educational administration, two key texts include Wilbur Yauch’s (1949) 
Improving human relations in school administration and Daniel Griffiths’ (1956) 
Human relations in school administration. Kenneth Leithwood and Daniel Duke’s 
chapter in the second edition of the Handbook of research on educational 
administration (Murphy & Seashore-Louis, 1999) devotes an entire section to 
articulating a relational approach. Roald Campbell and colleagues (1987) label 
Yauch’s work as an important bridge between democratic administration and 
human relations. Don Willower and Patrick Forsyth (1999) note Griffiths’ strong 
orientation to social science and research. These are important observations. They 
demonstrate that for an extended period of time, there have been deliberate 
attempts to bring multiple perspectives together to understand educational 
administration. But this is not exactly the argument that I am making. Leithwood 
and Duke’s (1999) chapter highlights the point I am trying to make while also 
stressing the point of departure my position has from the mainstream. They argue 
‘the distinction between management and leadership contributes little or nothing to 
an understanding of leadership conceived as a set of relationship’ (p. 67). This 
speaks to my critique of ‘leadership’ in the previous chapter. As someone with a 
relational ontological and epistemological position, ‘leadership’ as a construct 
CHAPTER 4 
50
offers me little productive space to work. As a point of divergence though, 
Leithwood and Duke construct their argument around entities, notably, the leader, 
followers, the organisation, and the environment. In this chapter I am going to 
argue that a relational approach breaks down the epistemic boundaries of objects 
(e.g. leaders, schools, systems) and in doing so recasts educational administrative 
labour. 
Importantly, Australia, both geographically and socially located at the periphery 
of the developed world, and therefore far enough removed from the centres of 
power in the global north (see Connell, 2007), is uniquely located as a postcolonial state to engage with notions of administration, social theory, the 
advancement of modern institutions and managerialist policy. This is not to suggest 
that the discussion does not have appeal for an international audience. Arguably, 
many of the matters engaged with are equally relevant across a variety of contexts, 
but this is not a decision for me rather the reader. What I seek to do is provide a 
well-constructed case from a particular time and space. In doing so, I ask for a 
generative reading as this chapter serves to sketch a programme for other empirical 
analyses in situations different from the one I have studied. My argument is built 
on two key points, first, the (re)configuration of the relationship between education 
and the state, and second, the recasting of the relationship between the school and 
community. These shifting social conditions have revised what it means to 
administer schools and recast educational administration in the image of the firm. 
THE POLICY TOPOGRAPHY 
As with most Anglophone nations, Australia is currently pursuing an array of 
highly centralised education reforms such as high-stakes testing regimes, a national 
curriculum, professional teaching standards and increasingly prescriptive 
accreditation requirements for teacher education institutions. At the same time, 
after different degrees of success at state/territory level, on a national level 
Australia is undertaking a large-scale implementation of an empowering local 
schools initiative. Hartley, building on the work of James O’Connor (1973), argues 
that there is a relationship between the rhetoric of management and the capitalist 
condition, most specifically during periods of economic expansion and contraction. 
In doing so he draws on Eric Abrahamson’s (1997) classification of two major 
rhetorics of management: the rational rhetoric which focuses on standardisation, 
hierarchy, audit, performance management and efficiency; and the normative 
rhetoric which appeals to the social and emotional needs of employees, and in the 
context of schooling, I would add stakeholders (e.g. parents, community). In a 
similar argument within organisational sciences, Paul Alder and Charles Heckscher 
(2006) refer to ‘control’ and ‘commitment’ approaches. The questions asked by 
O’Connor, Abrahamson, Alder and Heckscher, and Hartley centre on why different 
rhetoric becomes orthodoxy in certain capitalist conditions. It is in this space that a 
theoretical discussion of recent Australian policy moves can be most fruitful for 
advancing administrative theory, especially given that unlike many nations in the 
RECASTING ADMINISTRATIVE LABOUR 
51
global north, Australia’s economy has maintained growth during recent economic 
downturns.i
Policy such as the Federal Liberal-National Party coalition government’s 
Principal Autonomy, part of the Students First agenda, is presented by government 
as simple formalisations, in legal language, of the social and economic principles 
to which the government claims to conform. Much like how The Melbourne 
Declaration on the Educational Goals for Young Australians (MCEETYA, 2008) 
is couched in both economic (excellence) and social (equity) language. In doing so, 
we see a coming together of the rational and normative rhetoric. The Federal 
Liberal-National government is mobilising the Principal Autonomy reform, 
immediately following the previous Australian Labor Party government’s 
Empowering Local Schools, as a vehicle for improving student performance 
(measured by items such as standardised testing regimes, attendance data) by 
giving principals, parents and each school community – hence my extension of 
Abrahamson’s category earlier – greater oversight in establishing and committing 
to local priorities. Such a move is consistent with contemporary discourses of 
administration regarding the breaking down of bureaucracy and the ‘distribution’ 
of authority.ii The reconfiguration of state/territory education systems, particularly 
public schools, to align with the autonomous schools reform, that which comes 
with substantial federal start-up funds, explicitly replaces large-scale systems with 
smaller individual, and often isolated, firms regulated by the state and, importantly, 
the market. The underlying generative principle at play in this policy context is one 
calling for a new organisational form for the school. This hybrid organisation alters 
the relationship between the state and school administration, but also, school 
administration and others within schools such as staff, students, parents and 
community. That is, it places the existing relationship under revision. 
Building on a series of policy moves enabling greater school choice, and the 
growth of non-government schools under the John Howard led Liberal-National 
coalition administration (1996-2007),iii the role of the state, individual schools, and 
parents have been significantly recast in Australian education through the language 
of markets. With the addition of Principal Autonomy, the state has shifted its role 
from provider to regulator. That is, with greater responsibility at the school level, 
administrators can no longer blame the system when things go wrong. Similarly, 
parents, who theoretically have a choice of which school to send their child/ren, are 
then responsible for the results of their choices and have the opportunity, again at 
least theoretically, to exercise choice in finding the best fit for their 
needs/demands.iv I argue that this does specific things in relation to community 
building and raises questions as to whether the relationship between parents as 
consumers and schools as providers thwarts, if not prevents, the establishment of 
community, or at the very least communal ties. If parents (and arguably students) 
see education as a product, but one with considerable social (and economic) 
leverage attached to it, and schools as the providers of a service, then this 
transactional relationship is not necessarily built on loyalty and trust but rather 
satisfaction and relative worth (that is not criteria based judgement, but a 
comparative or relative judgement against what other providers can offer). There is 
CHAPTER 4 
52
a clear move here to a relational focus, yet a tension between an entity perspective, 
which holds for a transactional way of thinking, or a relational ontology where the 
boundaries between the any potential entities are blurred. 
It is useful to think here with the Italian political theorist Roberto Esposito 
(2010[1998], 2011[2002]) and his contribution on ‘community/immunity 
[communitas/immunitas]’. Working from the Latin word munus,
v
 he argues that 
community [communitas], and specifically communal ties, are a reciprocal, 
inexhaustible, circulating gift that does not belong to anyone in particular. The 
opposite of community is immunity [immunitas]. To be immune is to be free from 
communal duties. For Esposito, modern society places immunity at its core, and 
this brings Luigi Pellizzoni (2011) to argue that immunity is central to 
understanding the specific condition of modernity, and by virtue assessing the 
social implications of the modern on forms of administration. This is timely as the 
contemporary managerialist project replaces organisational forms based on 
community with individualistic or private models. This elevates the importance of 
the contract within the administration of immunity. Such a contract allows for the 
fulfilment of one’s desires without engaging in personal, enduring relationships 
with others (Godbout, 1998). Immunity is very much an entity perspective. To pick 
up on Pellizzoni’s argument, an entity perspective is central to understanding the 
hegemonic ontology of modernity. Educational administration, a disciplinary space 
concerned very much with one of the canonical modern institution, the school, is 
embedded and embodies an entity perspective. Esposito’s community, while 
frequently thought of as concerning less developed social grouping – at least those 
pre-industrial – actually paves the way for more relational ways of seeing and 
knowing the social world. Breaking down entities into more fluid relations enables 
us to think anew of educational administration. 
The community/immunity tension also plays out in a particular way for school 
staff. Principal Autonomy, as with Empowering Local Schools before it, enables 
principals, parents and school communities – note the absence of staff – to have 
greater authority over the management of the school staffing profile including 
determining the right mix of staff, recruitment and staff selection. The corporatist 
model of organisations characterised by life-time employment and security 
(Heckscher, 2001), that which epitomises large centralised public school systems – 
and strongly defended by teachers’ unions – is breaking down and being replaced 
by calls for more fluid and dynamic organisations with scope for entrepreneurship, 
rapid response, choice and greater diversity. The marginalisation of employees, 
who at best are viewed as commodities, is at odds with contemporary discourses 
calling for greater levels of employee participation in organisational decision 
making. The demands for self-management and empowerment made by employees 
since the mid-1900s and for the most part incorporated into the post-Fordist work 
regime of the private and (later) public sector (Boltanski & Chiapello, 2005[1999]), 
has been superseded by a return to a somewhat Tayloristic approach of managerial 
control in the pursuit of the goals of effectiveness and efficiency embedded in a 
neo-Darwinistic context of organisational survival based on adaption and evolution 
to uncertain socio-economic conditions. 
RECASTING ADMINISTRATIVE LABOUR 
53
The literature on empowering schools, at least the advocates, vi make few 
references to broader social and economic trends, apart from commentary 
regarding the proliferation of self-managing schools, school-based management, 
devolution, decentralisation and the like as a global policy trend. Nor does it 
engage with questions of power and its asymmetrical distribution in society. Much 
like the abstraction of ‘leadership’ highlighted in the previous chapter, there is a 
removal from context and the construction of entities. Additionally, there is rarely 
any recognition that causal arguments are being made on the basis of correlational 
data (such as that presented in OECD reports) by academics and/or policy makers. 
An interesting development in this space is Brian Caldwell and Jim Spink’s (2013) 
latest book, The self-transforming school. Early in the text they identify the 
problematic nature of making too much (e.g. causation) from correlation data. 
However, they then proceed to build their argument on correlation data as though it 
provides evidence of a cause and effect between self-management and learning 
outcomes. What gets lost in these instrumentalist accounts that continue with 
minimal, if any, empirical grounding is broader social, economic and political 
relations that shape education work (Blackmore, 2004). This is why John Smyth’s 
(1993) edited collection A socially critical view of the self-managing school is 
considered one of the classic texts of critical studies in educational 
administration. vii As with more recent work (see Smyth, 2008, 2011), Smyth 
explicitly locates educational administration within a broader, more sociotheoretical, policy context. This is an important intellectual move as I would argue, 
policy, that which is forever political, is both product and producer of 
administration. In other words, policy is relational rather than an entity. That is, 
policy is both cause and effect of administration, as it allows actors, in both the 
form of administrators and non-administrators (although such an arbitrary 
demarcation is not particularly productive), to limit the possibilities of ‘legitimate’ 
actions and because administration is updated by the actions through which it 
produces. It is therefore, of little surprise that over the past few decades, 
administration, primarily in the form of government, has sought to emulate the 
most successful players in the game of policy – the firm. Principal Autonomy, as 
the latest iteration of the policy trajectory, has explicitly reconfigured the school, a 
more significant shift for public than private schools, as individual stand-alone 
firms, possibly still connected through networks, but not in the collective form of 
traditional centralised systems. 
POLICY AND ITS RELATIONS 
While policy is frequently conceptualised from an entity perspective that enables 
one to map its ties and chains of interaction between individuals, organisations, and 
the state, I contend we need a more relational understanding of policy. That is, a 
theoretically grounded mobilisation of policy that pays attention to the abstract 
systems of difference and distance within the social space established through the 
asymmetrical distribution of resources within society.viii To do so, there is a need to 
conceive of policy as a human activity, or in other words, a social practice. Policies 
CHAPTER 4 
54
are not meta-physical laws, rather man-made, not an attribute or property of 
administration, but an activity, one that is forever incomplete. Therefore, it is also 
imperative to keep in mind that the scholastic endeavour is never complete or 
settled once and for all. What can be done however is the construction of a 
theoretically grounded description of the specific conditions in which a policy is 
enacted at a particular time and space. This is not to suggest that such description 
should be ahistorical, as this would be as problematic as overlooking relations in 
any socio-theoretical sense. 
There is a substantive matter here that I believe needs to be engaged with in 
educational administrative theory, that is, the relationship between policy and the 
state. This is a key move in going beyond an entity perspective and adopting a 
relational approach to educational administration scholarship. The underlying 
problematic is whether we need to de-centre the nation-state, or at the very least the 
government/governance of nation-states, in a globalised world. For many, the 
nation-state is an unquestioned background assumption in social analysis. This 
speaks to calls for an ‘epistemological break’ in scholarship (see Bourdieu, 
Chamboredon, & Passeron, 1991[1968]) and brings to the fore the difficulty of 
studying the social world in which one is embedded and embodies, as was 
discussed in Chapter Two. My question in this space is: Are we too wedded to the 
idea of the state being at the top of the policy hierarchy to see any alternatives?
That is, in the composition of the scholarly narrative, particular that focused on the 
leadership, management and administration of institutions, is too much primacy 
given to ‘the state’? I mean this in in the same way that Bourdieu (2005[2000]) 
contends that the European jurists of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries who, 
in the guise of describing the state, contributed to building it. Educational 
administration and policy research frequently further legitimise the state as the 
centre of power relations. Priority is given to the influence of the state, as an 
overarching entity, on other dimensions of the social fabric at the expense of seeing 
the dynamism and reciprocity of these relations. It is this dynamism and 
malleability that can enable educational administrative theory to break from being 
grounded in classic structuralism. I contend that too much is made of the 
downward linearity of state influence on education. This is arguably, although I 
make no claims to being an historian of education, as a result of the establishment 
of mass schooling by the state. That is, the very establishment of schooling for all 
citizens was a policy intervention of the state, one which has ever since positioned 
the state/government at the apex of the hierarchy. 
The positioning of the state in the hierarchy of educational administration and 
policy has not been constant, and nor has it been unquestioned. Raymond 
Callahan’s (1962) classic Education and the cult of efficiency outlines the 
infiltration of management discourses, specifically Taylorism, in education policy 
during the first half of the 1900s in the US. While for many, this highlights the 
early colonisation of management discourses in education (see also Bates, 2010), 
and with the subsequent rapid expansion of globalisation discourses, presented as 
an evitable evolution, what if this is not an overlay, or ‘new’ model of educational 
administration but a recasting of administrative labour in schooling, one built upon 
RECASTING ADMINISTRATIVE LABOUR 
55
the model of the firm. The crisis/es in education are not therefore of an economic 
or social nature as they are frequently portrayed, but rather the clash of logics of 
administration. That is, the collision of differing views of schooling. One that 
moves beyond value, that which is discussed in economic terms, and values, those 
with strong ideological undertones. Within such a contested socio-political space, 
the school as a firm seeks to speak back or intervene in the governance of the state 
(primarily through interplay with the mechanisms of regulations and rights, but 
also through advantage achieved through state interventions), its means of 
production (the political act of educating), and a colonised social group of 
educators. In navigating this terrain, and arguably a shifting from schools as 
communities to administration under conditions of immunity, scholars and policy 
makers alike have constituted new units of analysis, the leader, not leadership, the 
teacher, not teaching, and the school, not schooling, as their focal point. This is 
evidenced in policy and research focused on ‘improving’ the leader, teacher or 
school – such as Principal Autonomy. This serves to atomise the education 
profession by dismantling the school education system (see also Smyth, 2008), and 
refocusing attention on individuals or individual units (e.g. the school – as if it acts 
as a coherent whole). This speaks to Alain Touraine’s (2000[1997]) question of 
‘how can we live together in a society that is increasingly divided up into networks 
that instrumentalize us, and into communities that imprison and prevent us from 
communicating with others?’ (p. 14). It also raises the notion that educational 
administrators are participants in a particular social space, or territory, but not full 
members having been dispossessed by the very discourses, notably policy, in 
which they participate. If this is the case, and I argue it is, there is a need for 
rethinking both the administration of schooling, but also what it means to be an 
educational administrator. This speaks directly to questions being asked of the 
contemporarily popular label of ‘leadership’ discussed in the previous chapter. 
I want to turn my attention here to the territory, or scale, of policy and 
particularly Bob Lingard’s (2010) mobilisation of ‘post-Westphalian’ society, by 
which he means the way that political authority is no longer located within the 
borders of the nation-state, but rescaled, creating another layer beyond the nation 
that includes a range of international governmental and, arguably more 
significantly, non-governmental organisations. Whereas in the past (pre-globalised 
world) the state was once the culmination of a concentration of different resources, 
it is this concentration of resources on a global scale, that which defines the 
contemporary capitalist condition, which constitutes the firm, as opposed to the 
state, as the central unit in economic terms. The geographic territory that is the 
nation-state remains important, but operates in different ways and with different 
influences, reworking national sovereignty and the role of the nation-state in 
relation to globalisation of the economy and the enhanced policy relevance of a 
number of international organisations to national policy making and related 
globalised education policy discourses. Recent examples in Australia such as the 
‘mining tax’, ‘carbon tax’, and ‘super profits tax’, changes in the manufacturing 
sector (e.g. moving jobs offshore), and the privatisation of public assets, have 
demonstrated the significant influence of the firm (non-government, frequently 
CHAPTER 4 
56
large multi-national organisations), both collectively and individually, as a policy 
player, often assisted through the media. Importantly, the stakes of the game (e.g. 
employment/economic growth) are simultaneously also the weapons. There is a 
relationship at play here, one built on ‘ontological complicity’ between the 
managerialist discourses of the firm and policy, where all players have come to see 
themselves through the eyes of the firm. Significantly, while managerialist policy 
operates at the collective, it speaks to the individual, most specifically through 
atomising the collective and pitting individual institutions against one another over 
the stakes of the game. 
THE RECASTING OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 
As social institutions, schools are both embedded and embody the unique 
administrative and policy conditions in which they exist. The contemporary 
capitalist condition is one that has given rise to what Luigi Pellizzoni (2011) labels 
‘consumer sovereignty’. This is not surprising given the ubiquitous commercial 
settings that surround us daily, encouraging consumption – resulting from choice – 
as a primary source of well-being. Furthermore, the contemporary capitalist 
condition is one of constant revision, instant change and dynamic institutional 
identities, or as Zygmunt Bauman (2000, 2005) calls it, a ‘liquid society’. Such 
conditions explicitly challenge conservative conceptualisation of schooling based 
on notions of state provision, strong community ties, and stability. The strength of 
the Australian economy, relative to many of the global powers in the north, has 
enabled a hybrid managerial rhetoric to come the fore in the administration of 
education, where notions of the rational interplay with the normative (Eacott & 
Norris, 2014). However, as Bauman argues, the solidity and continuity that is the 
trademark of modern identities has been replaced with the floating and drifting 
selves of contemporary societies. The loosening, but not severing, of ties between 
the state and the school, but most specifically moving beyond the linear downward 
relationship, combined with the reconfigured relations of the school and its 
community calls for a re-thinking of educational administration, one not framed in 
the discourses of hierarchy and downward linear influence. Schools have been 
empowered however the consumer sovereignty of the contemporary world means 
that this empowerment comes with the trade-off of schools bearing responsibility 
for making themselves relevant and valuable for society, and more specifically, the 
consumers of their product. Therefore, unlike its hierarchal past with the state 
adopting a ‘panoptic surveillance’ (see Foucault, 1977[1975]), the contemporary 
capitalist condition has the individual school, and arguably the individual educator, 
vying for attention in the fluidity and diversity of the marketplace. In doing so, the 
‘school community’ – the mythical entity that combines both geographical 
affiliation, but also an emotional attachment to the local – becomes little more than 
a nostalgic imagery of a bygone era where schools, particularly the local public 
school, were a central feature of communal identity. With increased mobility and 
migration, not to mention the explosion of social media enabling virtual 
communities to establish and sustain, the contemporary citizen has far less ties to 
RECASTING ADMINISTRATIVE LABOUR 
57
the local than previous generations. This is not to suggest that schooling is 
ahistorical, rather that ties to the physical, or material, space are not necessarily the 
same as they once were. The school is arguably more than the bricks and mortar 
that constitute the physical building and is instead a set of relations between a 
dynamic group of individuals. These relations are always in motion. 
The central argument of this chapter is that the contemporary capitalist 
condition, shifting policy relations and reconfigurations of community warrants a 
new image of the school, and specifically, school administration. The school, both 
theoretically and empirically, owes a number of, if not all, its most distinctive 
properties to the set of relations it holds with other institutions and society at large. 
The physicality of buildings, fences and the like may serve as material barriers, but 
they are not necessarily the defining properties of ‘the school’. The relations 
between actors and/or materials are not static, rather complex and ambiguous. 
Consequently, the strategies adopted by a school, or school system, cannot be 
attributed to a single actor. The pursuit of the ‘final decision maker’ – he or she 
(but usually a he) who has absolute decision making authority – overlooks that in a 
relational sense, even the individual at the top of a hierarchal structure is 
themselves caught within a web of relations that interplay and influence decisions. 
Importantly, just as the strategies adopted by the school are reflective of its 
position in the broader socio-economic space, so too are they reflective of the 
power positions constitutive of its internal governance. The interplay of the macroand micro-level nature of administration, policy and temporality is needed to 
conceptualise administrative labour. That is, administration is both an 
organisational quality, and a socio-theoretical concept. Structural theories which 
stress reproduction, or social oppression, primarily by the state, do not enable 
productive spaces for the theorising of administration. Or as Søren Jagd (2011) 
argues, in order to give organisational action its proper meaning, it is important to 
see actors as being thrown into situations of radical uncertainty and ambiguity with 
which they try to cope. 
What is privileged in the conceptualisation I am arguing for is the problematic 
and active nature of relations between school administration and wider society. 
Such relations are however fragile as the rule, that which is central to the hierarchal 
mode of administration, has been replaced by the relations. In moving beyond the 
rule there is a need to recognise that the demands that are placed on schools, those 
which are central to the contract, are themselves a social product, constituted 
through schemas of perception and appreciation from all of those who interact with 
them. What I argue is that the managerialist project has been met with its own 
counter revolution, an evolution of the firm to a point where managerialism is no 
longer ruler of the territory, rather just another player. The goal here being to move 
beyond the Marxist inspired social analysis that in the end reduce the social to 
relations of power, and likewise the privileging of self-interested action designed to 
advance social positioning, through to a conceptualisation of school administration 
that is built on locating the work in a socio-theoretical territory. 
Empirically this raises some challenges. Projects become less about scale and 
more about depth. ix But this call is not new. An intriguing question at this 
CHAPTER 4 
58
particular point in time in the Australian context is how Australian schools, and 
specifically educators, are embracing the revision of labour conditions. This is part 
of the problematic and active nature of the relations, as Smyth (2008) points out, 
the passivity of Australians and the high degree of compliance with indirect forms 
of authority. Having long been embedded and embodying their position within the 
hierarchy of education systems and the downward linearity of policy, a timely 
question is ‘How is the evolution of the firm being engaged with by Australian 
educators?’. For me, but hopefully others, this is an intriguing problematic. With 
the predicted mass exodus of the education workforce, most notably among school 
executives, the work of school administrators under revised conditions is both 
timely and topical – at least in the Australian context. 
CONCLUSION 
Public administration, to which I see educational administration closely related, 
like economics, is frequently constituted as a state science. It is embedded and 
embodies state thinking, constantly pre-occupied with the normative concerns of an 
applied science and dependent on responding politically to political demands 
without giving the impression of political involvement. However, the state is a 
social construction, so too are state institutions such as schools. The genesis and 
maintenance of the state is sustained through various systems and structures that it 
sustains in its name, such as schooling, welfare, health services and defence. The 
underlying generative principles of the original social construction exist in every 
social action. That being said, the contemporary capitalist condition has brought 
uncertainty and ambiguity to what is frequently conceived of as a relatively static 
state. In doing so, I argue that it is increasingly difficult to justify a position that we 
can understand the actions of schools, and their constituting actors, with the 
partitioning of the social world into entities and downward linearity from the state. 
In this chapter I have sought to construct an argument for a new image of the 
school, one that illuminates blind spots in contemporary scholarship and calls for 
theoretically and empirically moving beyond the downward linearity of policy 
directives from an all-powerful state and the nostalgic image of the school 
community. In particular, I argue that under the contemporary capitalist condition 
there is a need to think of educational administration, policy, and the school in new 
ways. Challenging the ontological complicity of the spontaneous sociologist, I 
argue that the resources needed to create productive alternatives lies not in the 
work of great thinkers from another time and space, but instead in the intellectual 
enterprise of interrogating the here and now – although this is not an endorsement 
of ahistorical scholarship. This is particularly so because, as illustrated in the 
previous analysis (albeit brief and under-developed), the contemporary conditions 
of labour have brought about a new order of administration, and understanding the 
dynamics of its relations will explicitly contribute to our understanding of 
schooling, policy and administration. With a move towards a relational approach 
as opposed to an entity based perspective to educational administration scholarship, 
the very research object comes under revision. This moves attention away from 
RECASTING ADMINISTRATIVE LABOUR 
59
entities, such as the school, the state, or individual actors with these social 
constructions and instead to the dynamic work of organising schooling. This goes 
beyond individuals and entities and is a phenomena generated in the interactions 
among actors in time and space with particular reference to reciprocity. A 
relational approach explores the space between individuals and phenomena. But 
rather than seeing them as separate, the work of actors is conceived of as 
coevolving in time this needs to be accounted for in educational administration 
scholarship. 
NOTES 
i
 This economic stability has been primarily the result of the value of the mining sector. There is 
evidence to suggest that other parts of the economy have contracted, and continue to (e.g. recent job 
losses in the manufacturing sector and reduced retail spending), but for the most part, Australia has 
avoided the austerity measures required in many other nations – at least for now. ii The problem with mobilising ‘distribution’ as it most frequently is in educational administration 
discourses is that it is still based on a hierarchal conceptualisation of the organisation rather than 
socio-theoretical account of how power operates within, and upon, social groups. iii John Howard’s Liberal-National coalition government removed the cap on new schools in 1997 
leading to the proliferation of non-government schools and a mass exodus of students from public 
schools. There is conflicting data presently in relation to current trends on the movement of students 
across sectors. It is also to be noted that the ‘choice’ agenda currently has bipartisan support in the 
contemporary Australian political conditions. iv A fundamental flaw in the argument for school choice is that the resources required to exercise 
‘choice are not evenly distributed across society, and therefore the individuals and groups who can 
exercise choice are those who already possessed the necessary resources for educational advantage. 
See also Diane Reay (2012). v
 Refers to a special type of gift that requires reciprocation. vi In the Australian context, I am thinking here of Brian Caldwell – arguably the world’s leading 
advocate of self-managing schools and who with Jim Spinks wrote the canonical texts for the 
movement: The self managing school (1988); Leading the self managing school (1992); Beyond the 
self managing school (1998); and its latest contribution [The self-transforming school, 2013] – but 
also lesser known advocates such as David Gamage (2005, 2006). vii For Gunter (2010), the other canonical text for critical studies in educational administration is Bill 
Foster’s (1986) Paradigms and promises. As an Australian scholar, I would add Richard Bates’ 
(1983) Educational administration and the management of knowledge, but I am well aware of the 
contestation over whether it was Bates or Foster who brought Critical Theory into the educational 
administration intellectual space. viii This argument clearly stems from my background using Bourdieusian social theory, but I am not 
going to apply or map this intellectual terrain using a Bourdieusian lens as this is not desirable or 
helpful, as such an approach would leave the existing theorisation of educational administration 
labour intact. Rather, what I offer is a theoretical intervention that enables us to see the school in 
new ways. Such an approach unsettles many of the popular assumptions of educational 
administration and enables a new understanding of the relationship between schooling, policy and 
broader socio-economic conditions. ix For a strict Bourdieusian example of this, see my contribution to the Special Issue ‘Rethinking 
‘leadership’ in education’ I edited for Journal of Educational Administration and History (Volume 
45 Issue 2). 
CHAPTER 4 
60
REFERENCES 
Abrahamson, E. (1997). The emergence and prevalence of employee management rhetorics: the effects 
of long waves, labor unions and turnover, 1875-1992. Academy of Management Journal, 40(3), 491-
533. 
Adler, P. S., & Heckscher, C. (2006). Towards collaborative community. In C. Heckscher & P. S. Adler 
(Eds.), The firm as a collaborative community: Reconstructing trust in the knowledge economy (pp. 
11-105). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bates, R. J. (1983). Educational administration and the management of knowledge. Melbourne: Deakin 
University Press. 
Bates, R. J. (2010). History of educational leadership and management. In P. Peterson, E. Baker, & B. 
McGraw (Eds.), International encyclopedia of education (3rd ed., pp. 724-730). Oxford: Elsevier. 
Bauman, Z. (2000). Liquid modernity. Cambridge: Polity. 
Bauman, Z. (2005). Liquid life. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Blackmore, J. (2004). Restructuring educational leadership in changing contexts: A local/global account 
of restructuring in Australia. Journal of Educational Change, 5(3), 267-288. 
Boltanski, L., & Chiapello, E. (2005[1999]). The new spirit of capitalism (G. Elliott, Trans.). London: 
Verso. [Originally published as Le nouvel esprit du capitalisme (Paris: Editions Gallimard).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2005[2000]). The social structures of the economy (C. Turner, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: 
Polity. [Originally published as Les structures socials de l’économie (Paris: Éditions du Seuil).] 
Bourdieu, P., Chamboredon, J.-C., & Passeron, J.-C. (1991[1968]). The craft of sociology: 
Epistemological preliminaries (R. Nice, Trans.). New York, NY: Walter de Gruyter. [Originally 
published as Le métier de sociologue : préalables épistémologiques (Paris: Mouton).] 
Caldwell, B. J., & Spinks, J. (1988). The self managing school. Lewes, UK: Falmer Press. 
Caldwell, B. J., & Spinks, J. (1992). Leading the self managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Caldwell, B. J., & Spinks, J. (1998). Beyond the self managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Caldwell, B.J., & Spinks, J. (2013). The self-transforming school. London: Routledge. 
Callahan, R. E. (1962). Education and the cult of efficiency. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago 
Press. 
Campbell, R. F., Fleming, T., Newell, L. J., & Bennion, J. W. (1987). A history of thought and practice 
in educational administration. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
Carpentier, V. (2003). Public expenditure on education and economic growth in the UK, 1833-2000. 
History of Education, 32(1), 1-15. 
Connell, R. (2007). Southern theory: The global dynamics of knowledge in social sciences. Crows Nest, 
NSW: Allen & Unwin. 
Eacott, S. & Norris, J. (2014). Managerial rhetoric, accountability, and the school leadership in 
contemporary Australia. Leadership and Policy in Schools, 13(2), 169-187. 
Esposito, R. (2010[1998]). Communitas: the origin and destiny of community (T. Campbell, Trans.). 
Torino: Einaudi. [Originally published as Communitas: origine e destino communita (Giulio Einaudi 
Editore S.p.A.)]. 
Esposito, R. (2011[2002]). Immunitas: The protection and negation of life (T. Campbell, Trans.). 
Torino: Einaudi. [Originally published as Immunitas: protezione e negazione della vita (Giulio 
Einaudi Editore S.p.A.)]. 
Foster, W. (1986). Paradigms and promises. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books. 
Foucault, M. (1977[1975]). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison (A. M. Sheridan, Trans.). 
London: Penguin. [Originally published as Surveiller et punir: naissance de la prison (Paris: 
Gallimard)]. 
Gamage, D. T. (2005). Decentralization and school-based management: A comparative study of selfgoverning school models. Educational Practice and Theory, 27(2), 35-58. 
Gamage, D. T. (2006). Professional development for leaders and managers of self-governing schools. 
Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Godbout, J. (1998). Homo donator versus homo economicus. Revue du MAUSS, 2, 261-282. 
RECASTING ADMINISTRATIVE LABOUR 
61
Griffiths, D.E. (1959). Human relations in school administration. New York, NY: Appleton-CenturyCrofts. 
Gunter, H. (2010). A sociological approach to educational leadership. British Journal of Sociology of 
Education, 31(4), 519-527. 
Hartley, D. (2010). Rhetorics of regulation in education after the global economic crisis. Journal of 
Education Policy, 25(6), 785-791. 
Heckscher, C. (2001). Response to Adler, “market, hierarchy, and trust”. Organization Science, 12(2), 
235-237. 
Jagd, S. (2011). Pragmatic sociology and competing orders of worth in organizations. European Journal 
of Social Theory, 14(3), 343-359. 
Leithwood, K. & Duke, D. L. (1999). A century’s quest to understand school leadership. In J. Murphy 
& K. Seashore Louis (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational administration (2nd ed., pp 45-
72). San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass. 
Lingard, B. (2010). Policy borrowing, policy learning: Testing times in Australian schooling. Critical 
Studies in Education, 51(2), 129-147. 
Murphy, J. & Seashore Louis, K. (Eds.). (1999). Handbook of research on educational administration. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass. 
O’Connor, J. (1973). The fiscal crisis of the state. London: St James Press. 
OECD (2012). Public and private schools: How management and funding relate to their socioeconomic profile. OECD Publishing http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264175006-en 
Pellizzoni, L. (2011). In search of community: Political consumerism, governmentality and 
immunization. European Journal of Social Theory, 15(2), 221-241. 
Reay, D. (2012). What would a socially just education system look like? London: Centre for Labour and 
Social Studies. 
Smyth, J. (2008). Australia’s great disengagement with public education and social justice in 
educational leadership. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 40(3), 221-233. 
Smyth, J. (2011). The disaster of the ‘self-managing school’ – Genesis, trajectory, undisclosed agenda, 
and effects. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 43(2), 95-111. 
Smyth, J. (Ed.). (1993). A socially critical view of the self-managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Touraine, A. (2000[1997]). Can we live together: Equality and difference (D. Macey, Trans.). 
Cambridge: Polity Press. [Originally published as Pourrons-nous vivre ensemble? Egaux et 
differents (Libraric Artheme Fayard). 
Willower, D. J., & Forsyth, P. B. (1999). A brief history of scholarship on education administration. In 
J. Murphy & K. Seahorse Louis (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational administration (2nd
ed., pp. 1-24). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Yauch, W. A. (1949). Improving human relations in school administration. New York, NY: Harper. 
63
CHAPTER FIVE 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
INTRODUCTION 
In the previous chapters I have interrogated ‘leadership’ as a label in the scientific 
enterprise and argued for re-thinking the research object of educational 
administration as the organising of schooling in a particular space and time. In 
doing so, my argument makes redundant the current proliferation of adjectival 
leadership, emphasises the importance of context (but in a way that is beyond the 
superficiality of the cliché mobilisation of this claim in mainstream rhetoric), and 
re-centres discussions on what is administration and how best we can come to 
understand it. An implicit, but hopefully explicit, thesis running in my argument is 
that theory – particularly the epistemological and ontological preliminaries that one 
brings to scientific inquiry – is methodology and methodology is theory. The 
individual data generation techniques, or methods, that we mobilise are just that, 
techniques or methods to generate data from a specific lens. The most important 
aspect at play here is foregrounding the theoretical, or at least epistemological and 
ontological, position being taken into a particular scientific task (e.g. an article, 
book, conference presentation, lecture, project, dissertation and so on). I mean this 
in a way that is beyond the common identification of a quantitative, qualitative, or 
the contemporarily popular mixed methods approaches to research. Alignment with 
quantitative, qualitative or mixed methods, does tell the reader something about the 
way data is generated and analysed, but it does not necessarily guarantee coherence 
with a given epistemological position. This is why it is not uncommon to see 
theory overlayed upon generated data as opposed to being recognised as both a 
product and producer of data, or even a disconnect between claimed data 
generation procedures and the discussion built upon the data. Therefore, while the 
‘paradigm wars’ were about more than technique, rather of a more epistemological 
and ontological nature (see Waite, 2002), the current mobilisation of ‘paradigmatic 
lens’ is not always the case. i
 The most common example being the claim of 
‘qualitative’ research when data might be generated through interviews but then the 
analysis is limited to a frequency count, arguably quantitative, to develop a 
framework for how to do leadership, all the while assuming that researcher and 
participant have the same understanding of leadership. 
If the relational research programme that I am building and advocating for in 
this book is to have a life beyond this text, then it is vital that I can demonstrate 
further how this form of scholarship plays out. Therefore, in this chapter (and 
arguably the remainder of the book) I map out a, but not the, means of mobilising a 
relational approach as a theory and methodology for engaging with empirical 
research. This is an important move as I have argued earlier that my goal is to 
anchor the relational research programme in a rigorous empirical science. In a 
CHAPTER 5 
64
space and time where managerialist discourses have become the orthodoxy to 
which the scholarship and practice of leadership, management and administration 
have become anchored – in both everyday language and scholarship – the potential 
generated by any alternate (note the open nature of this claim) way of knowing, 
doing or being in educational administration is productive. 
THE QUESTION OF MEASUREMENT 
An enduring question in the leadership, management and administration of the 
public sector as a domain of practice and knowledge production, has been the 
question of measurement. In combination with the preparation and development of 
organisational elites/upper echelon, it is possible to argue that the big question of 
administration, and its product and producer – policy, as a scholarly space is 
concerned with improving institutional performance. This was central to the 
argument built in Chapter Three about the construction of ‘leadership’ as a 
concept. Deeply embedded within these questions is what is of value and/or 
valued. The tension operates as both a theoretical and empirical problem and 
understandably, there are significant matters of epistemology and ontology – those 
underlying generative principles of research – at play in any discussion. The 
division most frequently played out is based on the separation of ‘value’, that 
which is most often aligned with the discourses of economics, and ‘values’, that 
which is more often aligned with a moral ‘good’ played out in social relations. 
Such division is reflective of the deeply embodied epistemological tension – or 
residual paradigmatic wars – between objectivity and subjectivity. In this chapter I 
develop an argument for how a relational approach to scholarship in educational 
administration directly engages with, and overcomes, the unproductive binary of 
value/values. Drawing on a range of social theory but particularly the pragmatic 
sociology of Luc Boltanski and colleagues, I mobilise an analytic strategy that 
fuses the notion of ‘value’ and ‘values’ through a central focus on legitimation of 
the social world. This explicitly links the discussion to the construction of the 
school as an object of research as crafted in Chapter Four. Such a framing moves 
beyond the static and often essentialised/deterministic dimensions of values and/or 
the static commodification of value, by foregrounding the process of legitimation, 
and acknowledging the underlying generative morality of judgement. In doing so, 
it blurs the lines between the economic and the moral. Furthermore, I raise 
questions – following on from the previous chapter – as to what exactly is the 
research object that is the focus of educational administration as a domain of 
knowledge production. I argue that rather than individuals, relationships or any 
other object, the empirical project of educational administration is relations (not 
necessarily relationships) between two or more individuals. I contend that 
‘administration’ is a dynamic – and inexhaustible – construct which is defined 
moment-to-moment and therefore the context of administration is brought into 
being through grounding the scholarly narrative in a particular time and space. This 
conceptualisation serves as a theoretical intervention for mainstream discourses of 
educational leadership, management and administration but more importantly, 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
65
serves as a means of opening possibilities for generating new knowledge and ways 
of being and understanding administration. 
CRAFTING AN INTELLECTUAL BRIDGE 
The starting point for this chapter is that the discourses of value and values in 
educational leadership, management and administration are located in different 
scholarly communities. Such partitioning in a scholarly community is nothing new 
or unique. Nor is it without critique (see Evers & Lakomski, 1991). Different 
intellectual traditions – the critical, humanists, scientific, instrumental (Gunter, 
2001) – have their own discourse communities, complete with conferences, 
journals and international networks. This is arguably an evolutionary product of 
scholarly communities, but for the discipline (educational administration) at large, 
as both a domain of knowledge production and one of practice, it poses a 
significant inhibitor to substantive shifts in thinking. This is especially so when as 
noted previously, there is a well identified lack of meaningful engagement across 
research traditions (Blackmore, 2010), and a state of tacit agreement where those 
with whom we disagree, we treat with benign neglect (Donmoyer, 2001; Thrupp & 
Willmott, 2003). Consistent with what Colin Evers and Gabriele Lakomski (1991) 
label the ‘oppositional diversity thesis’, where different epistemological paradigms 
partition educational administration research so that research traditions turn out to 
be radically distinct, presenting different ways of knowing or forms of knowledge. 
As Evers and Lakomski (1991) argue: 
This means that neither educational administration research nor any other form of 
inquiry can provide a rational method for judging between paradigms. As different 
ways of knowing, they are mutually incompatible, competitive ways of researching 
the same territory. (p. 214) 
They go on to name two other views, the complementary diversity thesis and the 
unity thesis. In the former, the epistemologically distinct paradigms, while 
incommensurate, remain, but are complementary, equally appropriate, overlapping, 
and possibly even addressing the same empirical problems. The unity thesis (see 
Walker & Evers, 1988) denies the epistemological diversity of the other two. It 
argues against the notion of incommensurable approaches believing that the very 
idea of paradigms if mistaken. What it is greatest importance here is the potential 
coming together, or means of evaluating knowledge claims. For me, the contested 
terrain that is scholarship in educational administration is symbolic of the argument 
I am building in this chapter focusing on the notion of valuation and engaging with 
the work of legitimation and legitimising of particular claims. 
Value, finding its intellectual heritage in economics, privileges the 
commodification and the measurement of the social world. What is of value is that 
which is rare and desirable, and the (perpetual) accumulation of material wealth is 
a central feature of the contemporary capitalist condition. Value discourses are 
frequently reflective of epistemological and ontological positions of objectivity 
(realism). The logic of justification in value discourses is found in empirical 
CHAPTER 5 
66
concepts derived from direct observation. The intention of such an approach is 
being able to establish claims that can be extended, or scaled up, to explain 
phenomena. While there are numerous examples of phenomenological 
investigations of the ‘turnaround’ school leader, such inquiries still privilege the 
measurement of schools, and by virtue student/staff, performance through abstract 
measures which are at best proxies for the core business of education – learning.ii
The identification of samples on the basis of student performance in large scale 
testing regimes, as though these legitimised numerical figures accurately reflect an 
empirical reality embodies many of the criticisms raised against objectivity as an 
ontological and epistemological stance in the social sciences. Furthermore, 
irrespective of the subsequent methods employed, the generative principles of the 
origin of inquiry demonstrate an apolitical account of knowledge production – 
where the legitimation of the measure/s remains uncritically mobilised. This is 
what makes Martin Thrupp and Richard Willmott’s (2003) account of textual 
apologist so compelling. 
Values on the other hand is a more subjective (relativist) construct that arguably 
gives too much weight to the dispositional properties of individuals and in doing 
so, frequently assumes a static or essentialised version of the social world 
embodied by the self. Values discourses are frequently, and arguably the only 
exception being purely descriptive accounts, situated in an overarching ideology of 
what is ‘right’ and judgements related with such a position. This is also one of the 
reasons that a focus on ‘values’ is often central in discourses based on religious or 
faith-based institutions. In addition, values ideologies often exhibit crisis 
construction, a phenomena more likely to be explored in the disciplines of 
sociology and political sciences. This is where an ideological/political position 
constructs a forthcoming crisis yet simultaneously offers a path to avoiding such 
crisis. In doing so, the original orientation legitimises itself through the justification 
of particular actions as a means of avoiding a crisis that itself created. This is a 
common critique raised against religions. 
It is through the centrality of valuation in both the discourses of value and 
values that I see a potential intellectual bridge – the prospect of unity. The means 
through which a particular set of values is legitimised and becomes hegemonic, 
much like the legitimation of what is of value, provides the generative origins for a 
line of inquiry built around the work of legitimising. Specifically, for education 
administration as a domain of knowledge production, I argue that through 
grounding the scholarly narrative in time and space and a focus on the legitimation 
and justification of actions provides a productive space for understanding the 
organising of education as it is embedded and embodied in the social world. A key 
perspective in bringing this productive space into being is that of pluralism, and the 
relational research programme provides this plurality. 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
67
THEORETICAL RESOURCES 
This book, and particularly this chapter, explicitly fuses multiple analytical frames 
under what I label a relational approach to scholarship in educational leadership, 
management and administration. The intellectual heritage of the relational 
approach I am developing and defending is eclectic, drawing heavily on French 
social theory such as the work of sociologists Pierre Bourdieu (critical) and Luc 
Boltanski (pragmatic), management scholars such as Peter Dachler, Dian Marie 
Hoskings, and Mary Uhl-Bien, but also critical management studies, political 
science, organisational studies, and given my own disciplinary location, recognised 
educational administration thinkers such as Richard Bates, Colin Evers and 
Gabriele Lakomski, Thomas Greenfield, and contemporaries such as Helen Gunter, 
Pat Thomson, John Smyth, and Fenwick English. Centrally, in bringing critical 
pluralism to scholarship I engage with what I see as the key theoretical problem of 
the legitimation of the social world and its empirical manifestation in the 
organising of education. Through this theoretical and empirical focus, the 
relational research programme investigates how the production of knowledge 
about the legitimacy, effectiveness, efficiency, and morality of administration 
connects with the practices of administration. In doing so, questions are raised 
regarding the extent to which ‘new’ forms of administration – leadership, 
participatory, distributed, authentic, and so on – are generative or thwarting of new 
knowledge. Such a move is not surprising given that for the most part scholars, at 
least those who take such matters seriously, are looking for an alternate ontology as 
the Newtonian/Cartesian universe inhabited by self-interested, atomistic 
individuals (entities) – that which fits nicely with managerialist accounts of 
administration – does not logically fit prescriptions for collaborative practice nor 
the image of educational institutions as a nebulas unit. A relational focus enables 
scholarship to move beyond internal tensions and external pressures by opening up 
institutions and engaging with the dynamic relations that they hold with other 
social institutions and those which constantly redefine their very existence. As a 
means of highlighting the key features of this approach, I again outline the five 
features of the relational research programme: 
– The centrality of ‘administration’ in the social world creates an ontological 
complicity in researchers that makes it difficult to epistemologically break from 
our spontaneous understanding of the social world; 
– Rigorous ‘scientific’ scholarship would therefore call into question the very 
foundations on which the contemporarily popular discourses of ‘leadership’ 
‘management’ and ‘administration’ in education are constructed; 
– The contemporary social condition cannot be separated from the ongoing, and 
inexhaustible, recasting of administrative labour; 
– Studying educational administration ‘relationally’ enables the overcoming of the 
contemporary, and arguably enduring, tensions of individualism and 
collectivism, and structure and agency; and 
CHAPTER 5 
68
– In doing so, there is a productive – rather than merely critical – space to theorise 
educational administration. 
The primary point of departure I make with mainstream educational administration 
scholarship is my attention to matters of epistemology and ontology, or knowledge 
production. However, rather than locate this work in a more philosophy of science 
space, I explicitly bring this into discussion with contemporary discourses of 
educational administration. This move enables the argument to speak across 
intellectual (e.g. education, political science, philosophy, economics, management, 
organisational studies) and socio-geographic boundaries through the provision of a 
theoretical argument that is not confined to any one empirical problem or sociogeographic location. Adopting this analytical strategy enables an interdisciplinary 
approach to scholarship while also fusing multiple lenses for the specific intent of 
opening new lines of inquiry and renewal in a field of knowledge production – 
educational leadership, management and administration – under question for its 
scholarly value within the academy. 
The type of analysis made possible by a relational approach offers a means of 
crafting theoretically charged descriptions illuminating the situated nature of 
administration. Struggles for legitimacy are at the very core of institutions (Barley, 
2008). Social institutions, particularly modern institutions such as education, are 
the configuration of individual actors in a particular socio-geographic space. As 
such, groups are an epistemic construction as much, if not more so, than an 
empirical reality. While individual actors exist in the empirical, it is the epistemic 
classification of groups on the basis of a particular attribute (which could include 
physical locality) that gives rise to institutions. These are then extended through the 
production, and maintenance, of material markers. In addition, administrative 
analysis is frequently based on an underlying generative assumption that this 
collection of individuals operate as a coherent whole. However, I, as with many 
others, argue that such configurations of individuals in a particular time and space 
are dynamic contested terrains. The binding attributes of institutions, as social 
groupings, are performative in the sense that they only exist in practice and cannot 
be solely reduced to particular structural arrangements of the empirical. The binds 
that hold a group of individual actors together in the form of a social institution are 
therefore problematic, active, and by virtue, fragile. 
The work of institutional actors is the ongoing construction of the social world 
through the embedding and embodying of it with meaning centred on what is 
legitimate. Therefore, change in institutions can only take place through shifts in 
the logics whereby legitimacy is assessed, or, in other words, the standards 
whereby alternatives are deemed to be appropriate. A relational approach provides 
an analytical lens for interrogating the moment-to-moment social relations that 
define the political activity of educating. Specifically, it opens up analysis that 
breaks down the unproductive binaries that have existed in the scholarship of 
educational administration centred on individualism/collectivism and structure/ 
agency. Furthermore, it brings to the fore the role of description in the scholarly 
narrative. Following Michael Savage (2009), I mobilise ‘description’ not as the 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
69
enduring rhetorical criticism that constructs description as a lowly, if not the 
lowest, form of scholarly work, but rather the rich or ‘thick’ (to think with Clifford 
Geertz (1973), following Gilbert Ryle (1971)) description of the scholarly 
narrative. 
Educational administration, or its contemporarily popular label ‘educational 
leadership’ as both a field of practice and knowledge production, is constituted as a 
source of new methods of organisational performance and social transformation. 
But educational administration is not composed only of practical tips and/or recipes 
for improving the productivity of institutions as one improves the performance of a 
machine. It simultaneously has a high moral tone, if only because it is frequently a 
normative literature stating what should be the case, not what is the case. As a 
result, there are questions to be asked of the legitimacy or realism of this literature, 
and how believable, or empirically defensible, it is when it comes to what ‘really’ 
takes place in institutions. This is especially so when cases presented (e.g. the 
‘turnaround’ narrative) conform to the moral ‘what should be done’ and in doing so 
craft a discourse that confirms the original moral orientation. The grounds on 
which we make claims in scholarship are important and need to be discussed rather 
than remaining implicit, or even silenced, in our work. 
THINKING THROUGH THE EMPIRICAL 
From a relational perspective, education is an ongoing political project that is 
defined moment-to-moment through the constant negotiation and re-negotiation of 
social relations. As noted previously in this book, the legitimising function of 
institutional labour is problematic, active and fragile. Historically, within 
educational administration as a field of knowledge production, substantial, and 
dare I say, far too much, intellectual space in journals, books, theses, at 
conferences, seminars, and graduate school classrooms is taken up trying to 
construct distinctions between ‘leadership’, ‘management’ and ‘administration’ or 
even different forms of all three as a focus of study. From a relational approach, 
the construction of such entities is redundant, if not incoherent. For my purposes 
here, I argue for what is a narrowing of focus, yet simultaneously an opening up of 
possibilities. If the organising of education is a social activity, and I contend there 
is a sufficient body of work to support this claim, and we are to take the dynamic 
and highly situated nature of social relations serious, then a theoretical framework 
that enables the analysis of ordinary work – ranging from the mundane through to 
the highly public – requires attention. Such a theoretical lens needs to account for a 
plurality of legitimate ways of operating and avoid falling into a normative position 
of how things ought to be. With such a framing, the focus of educational 
administration as a scholarly space is therefore on the work that individuals and 
collectives undertake in reaching agreements on what is a legitimate course of 
action. In doing so, scholarship moves beyond the dispositional focus on the 
individual, the ideological stance of the normative and the material needs and 
constraints of systems analysis ever present in the economic discourses of 
efficiency and competition. I contend that the theoretical problem of educational 
CHAPTER 5 
70
administration – the legitimation of the social world – plays out in the 
empirical focus of situated (in time and space) action. This move gives scholarship 
both an individual and collective focus. The weaving together of the macro- and 
micro-level analysis of practice (where there is no final decision maker as all 
actors play a part in a web of relations) illuminates the theoretical problem which 
permeates the discipline, the legitimation of the social world. This legitimation 
plays out in the empirical in many ways, but is ever present, and by virtue 
inexhaustible, in the work of institutional actors. Attention to this situated 
dynamic explicitly brings the individual actors and the context – as a sociopolitical space embedded within a particular time – into conversation. Notably, 
the empirical focus shifts from a focus on individuals (dispositional), behaviours 
(practices), or structural arrangements (material and symbolic) to the rather 
fragile agreements, both active and passive, iii which constitute the work of 
institutions. 
It is the shifting of the research object that is the primary point of departure for 
the argument that I am building. In bringing a relational approach to educational 
administration scholarship, there are the intellectual resources to bridge ‘value’ and 
‘values’ discourses. It is through the primacy of the situated nature of actions – that 
which goes beyond mere ‘contextualisation’ – in combination with the individual 
trajectory of actors that facilitates a theoretically charged narrative. It is this 
attention to relations that makes description – that much maligned label in the 
scholarly community – a worthwhile scholarly pursuit. As Michael Savage (2009) 
writes: 
… it is not about understanding why someone is doing something, rather to relate 
actions to other actions, rather than establish causal relations, this is about unfolding 
an elaborated description of the ongoing politic work of organisations. (p. 163) 
It is the underlying generative principle in Savage’s argument that is important. 
Rather than seeking causality, and generalizability, which includes the pursuit of 
interventions, this scholarship is about detailed and rich accounts of organisations 
and the actors, symbols and materials that constitute them. It is concerned with the 
grounding of actions in a particular time and space. If context really matters, this is 
a (not the) means to bring that into being. This focus on situating the work of 
institutional actors illuminates practice in ways that are lost in the large scale 
aggregation of data in the static cross-sectional project or the single site case study 
of leaders which dominate mainstream educational leadership, management and 
administration studies. 
THEORISING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
In short, what I have argued for so far is a need for a more relational understanding 
of educational administration. Before moving on, two aspects of this argument 
require attention or articulation. First, critical social theory – to which such a 
relational would most frequently been seen in alignment with – is often thought of 
as a critique of institutions and this potentially creates a tension because as a 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
71
domain of knowledge production, leadership, management and administration 
arguably has the highest stakes in institutions/organisations. As it stands, the very 
foundations of administration as a disciplinary body of knowledge are institutions. 
In the discourses of administration, institutions are both necessary and obvious. 
This argument holds whether the narrative is of the heroic institutional leader or the 
uprising against oppressive social institutions. It is this grounding that gives rise to 
the (unproductive) dichotomies of structure/agency and individualism/collectivism 
in discourses. Much of the scholarship building upon critical social theory 
perspectives, including but not exclusively, Max Weber’s conceptualisation of 
bureaucracy, Pierre Bourdieu’s (re)production, Critical theory (notably Richard 
Bates and William Foster in educational administrationiv) and post-modern/poststructuralist concepts of governmentality, performativity, and subjectivity, 
frequently mobilised them in such a way that it is difficult to get beyond the 
internal tensions and external pressures acting upon institutional actors. It is 
however possible to use critical social theory to get beyond critique, particularly if 
shifting focus from relationships to relations. This is the second point requiring 
some articulation. The privileging of relations over relationships is deliberate. This 
focus requires a move away from attempts to map concrete ties and chains of 
interactions between individuals/organisations that can be neatly portrayed in 
diagrams – an entity perspective. To centre relations is to acknowledge that social 
institutions owe as much of their very constitution to the (dynamic) relations they 
hold with other institutions as they do with anything else. Theoretically, this takes 
analysis beyond the reduction of relations to the enactment of power, as is often the 
case with Neo-Marxist accounts, and brings to the fore attention to temporality and 
socio-political space. 
The result is a theoretically grounded mobilisation that pays attention to the 
abstract systems of difference and distance within the social space established 
through the asymmetrical distribution of resources within society. Bringing this 
into conversation with the argument of this book – and particularly this chapter – a 
central generative questions is ‘Why is this action taking place in this particular 
time and space?’. In doing so, the mobilisation of time, or more specifically a 
theory of temporality moves beyond ‘clock time’, that which artificially partitions 
the social world to construct timetables, calendars, schedules and targets and does 
little more than bring our understanding of the social world into alignment with a 
particular narrative of measurement. Temporality, while having a long history of 
scholastic thought, has been the focus of recent scholarly attention in sociology 
(Adkins, 2011; Snyder, 2013), human services (Colley et al., 2012), education 
(Duncheon & Tierney, 2013), and educational administration (Eacott, 2013). 
Mobilising temporality, as opposed to just time, historicises action without a need 
to prescribe a past-present-future model of reality. Through a focus on the situated 
practice of institutional actors, scholarship moves beyond any possible comparison 
based on ‘value’ and/or judgement based on an adherence to a particular ‘values’ 
set. Rather, centring scholarly attention on relations set within a framework of 
temporality and socio-political space facilitates asking the question: ‘Why now?’ 
That is, why are the current actions taking place now (and just as importantly, why 
CHAPTER 5 
72
are other practices not)? The bigger question being, ‘What is it about the unique 
socio-geographic conditions, including the configuration of key actors that is 
producing the contemporary condition?’ This shift requires an engagement with 
the political nature of the socio-geographic space and the events that have led to 
this particular point in time. 
What I am doing here is proposing an intervention built around the theoretical 
problem of the legitimation of the social world and the empirical manifestation of 
that problem in the situated practice of organisational actors. The challenge that 
this lays out for discourses of ‘value’ and ‘values’ is the prospect of delaying 
judgement or even judgement free description. This is not to suggest that the 
scholar is neutral, as all observations are interpretivist, rather that the desire to 
jump from the is to ought should be delayed, if not avoided. This takes me back to 
Helen Gunter and Tanya Fitzgerald’s (2008) introductory paper when taking over 
the editorship of Journal of Educational Administration and History where they 
argue: 
… we are interested in how in particular contexts decisions are made in particular 
ways. We see purposes as inevitably political, and hence we are interested in issues of 
social justice in regard to diversity and the postcolonial legacy. … we would agree 
that the demand for evidence is stifling understandings and explanations of practice, 
and at the same time the self-reverence of a person’s story of their victory in turning 
around a failing school does little to explain who determines whether a school is 
failing and for what purposes. (p. 7) 
The latter part of the quote is reminiscent of Jean-François Lyotard’s (1984[1979]) 
questioning of ‘who decides what knowledge is, and who knows what needs to be 
decided’ (p. 9) and highlights two things: first, those who engage with 
organisations have a purpose/use for them; and second, there is a need to recognise 
that scholars are only one – and by no means are they the most privileged – group 
interested in educational administration research and analysis. With the somewhat 
universal pursuit of improved organisational performance, there is an underlying 
belief that administration research is fundamentally concerned with analysis, 
explanation and causality. This posturing constructs description as a lesser form of 
scholarship. However, it is in describing the social world that those from differing 
epistemological and ontological frames, for example ‘value’ and ‘values’, can 
come together to explore both their dissimilarities, but more importantly, their 
similarities. This is why an empirical focus on the legitimation and/or valuation of 
objects/actions offers substantive potential for advancing our understanding of 
institutions. I argue that in relating actions/actors to other actions/actors offers a 
viable means of advancing our understanding of institutions and the actors that 
constitute them. It overcomes the objectification and commodification critique of 
‘value’ discourses by not imposing an a priori measurement narrative and 
comparative lens. Similarly, there is no overarching set of ‘right’ ‘values’ from 
which all actors/actions are judged. In the case of both ‘value’ and ‘values’, 
scholarship brings an evaluative lens through which the research object is assessed 
– or measured – and then judgement passed (e.g. effective/ineffective, 
right/wrong). To avoid such, what becomes of heightened importance in such 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
73
scholarship is meaningfully locating the descriptions – both the empirical object 
and the intellectual work itself – in a theory of temporality and socio-political 
space. In doing so, the scholarly narrative becomes more about the particular than 
the universal. This is less of a concern in education, where parochial cultural and 
policy conditions prevail (this is despite the effects of global policy borrowing – 
see Lingard (2010) – which exist at a more macro level). As the Savage quote 
earlier argues, such scholarship is about locating actions with other actions and the 
ongoing political work of institutions more so than causality. As a scholarly 
community, building a substantive corpus of situated practices would provide a 
foundation from which inter-tradition dialogue could take place where the focus is 
on the empirical object more so than paradigmatic lens. The debate and dialogue 
that would take place across tradition boundaries would not necessarily break them 
down – and in the contemporary academy, I am not convinced that such an 
outcome is possible even if desirable – but would advance collective understanding 
of what ‘leadership’, ‘management’ and ‘administration’ actually mean and 
provide a pedagogical opportunity for those entering, or outside, the disciplinary 
space to gain insights into such foundational research objects. In doing so, the 
relational approach works on, with, and through the empirical object and 
scholarship itself. 
AGAINST, OR BEYOND, TRADITIONS 
In the previous sections I have outlined a case for why I prefer a relational 
approach to knowledge production in educational administration over other forms. 
What I am now going to do is to justify my position in relation to other key 
positions in the literatures of educational administration. I am also going to engage 
with what I see as the major criticism, or arguably more importantly, the points of 
distinction from these positions. Following Gunter (2001), I am going to show how 
my argument differs from the four main positions taken by those who research and 
write about ‘leadership’ in educational settings. This is not to say that these are the 
only research traditions in educational administration, but they are arguably the 
most dominant. It is important to note, as I have flagged numerous times already, 
that there is minimal dialogue across research traditions. It is also important to 
keep in mind Evers and Lakomski’s (1991) work around the unity thesis – that 
which denies paradigms/traditions. 
Gunter names the following four traditions in educational administration: 
critical; humanist; scientific; and instrumental. With the expansion of the 
managerialist project, especially throughout the Anglophone world, the 
instrumental and scientific are the preferred traditions of policy makers, systems 
and arguably practising educators. There are arguably more traditions, or even 
more nuanced classifications, but for the illustrative purposes of this chapter, this 
grouping will suffice. Structurally I am going to adopt the approach of outlining 
what Gunter (with some additional information from myself) means by each of the 
traditions, follow that with a brief outline of how the relational approach differs, 
and then articulate the key critiques which could come from the tradition and how I 
CHAPTER 5 
74
engage, overcome, or dismiss those. Of particular interest is the foundation of 
knowledge claims. 
The instrumental 
The popularity of the instrumental for policy makers, systems and practitioners is 
not surprising. For the most part, the instrumental provides models of effective/ 
successful systems, cultures, and leadership designed to enable improved or scaledup performance to be operationalised. It is this tradition of research that has led to 
the proliferation of adjectival ‘leadership’, various frameworks, professional 
development packages, and the rise of edu-preneurs.v
 The instrumental research 
tradition adheres to the problem solving approach to educational ‘leadership’, with 
an underlying generative principle that ‘leadership’ matters and is not only 
important but imperative for institutional success. 
From an instrumentalist perspective, my approach is arguably viewed as 
needless intellectualism. As Gunter (2010) argues, for the instrumentalist, if it 
cannot be translated into practice, or making a decision, at 9:00am on a Monday 
morning, it is of little value. The instrumental position legitimises and proliferates 
the unproductive (and I might add, false) binary of theory and practice. But to draw 
on that much over-used, and arguably poorly cited, quote from Kurt Lewin, there is 
nothing as practical as a good theory and vice versa. That being said, the major 
flaw with the instrumental, to which the relational approach explicitly engages, is a 
focus on playing the game better built upon an uncritical acceptance of the social 
world as it is defined in hegemonic discourses. The instrumental does not move 
beyond the ordinary language of the everyday. 
In privileging the delivery of products, packages, models, frameworks and the 
like, the instrumental tradition is prone to de-contextualised (in time and space) 
narratives. This is acknowledged by some working in the instrumentalist 
perspective such as Stephen Dinham (2007) and David Gurr, Lawrie Drysdale and 
Helen Goode (2010), but rarely, if ever, seen as a fatal flaw. It is lack of empirical 
grounding that allows for the blurring of what is meant by ‘leadership’ by those 
like Brian Caldwell (2007) who link it with ‘change’ – that which is another rather 
vacuous concept (Gronn, 2008). It also explains why many of the leading figures in 
this space such as Michael Fullan, Brian Caldwell and Brent Davies remain 
popular with practitioners and professional associations yet attract very little, if 
any, serious scholarly attention. The instrumentalist literature is accessible. It can 
be read as easily by the practitioner as it can by the graduate student or professor. 
As a tradition, the instrumental seeks an audience and applicability with practice – 
a direct and explicit use in the advancement of practice. Significantly, the 
instrumental begins with an acceptance of the world as it is, therefore having a 
belief in ‘leadership’, and then seeks to articulate ways of doing ‘leadership’ better. 
It remains in the pre-scientific space of the spontaneous sociologist and the 
(apolitical) direct observation of the social world. Its knowledge claims are based 
on, and defended by, empirical observation but under a normative position of how 
it ought to be. In contrast, the relational approach recognises ‘leadership’ as an 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
75
epistemic and as a result pays attention to the construction of the research object. In 
other words, rather than employing an a priori assumption of how things ought to 
be and then providing a path to this, the relational seeks to illuminate the various 
means through which the formula for success is constituted and sustained. That is, 
an acknowledgement that the underlying generative principles of the social world 
are not always directly observable and that the scholarly narrative is strengthened 
when problematized. 
The scientific 
As a research tradition, the scientific has a long history in the discipline strongly 
linked to key figures such as Andrew Halpin, Daniel Griffiths, Jack Culbertson and 
notably the Theory Movement. Contemporaries include Kenneth Leithwood, Philip 
Hallinger, Jaap Schereens, the journal School Effectiveness and School 
Improvement, and not surprisingly given the US-centric nature of the tradition, 
Educational Administration Quarterly. The scientific tradition seeks to abstract and 
measure the impact of ‘leadership’ on organisational outcomes. This is particularly 
popular with policy makers and systemic authorities in an era of evidence-based 
practice, data-driven decision making, and the science-into-service agendas. It is 
the grounding in an externalist perspective, where the observations of an external 
reality, one that is not influenced by the researcher or the context in general, and 
where procedures can remove bias and error, that gives strength to claims. The 
popularity of Viviane Robinson’s work (e.g. Robinson, Lloyd & Rowe, 2008) and 
John Hattie’s (2009) is evidence of the preference for scientific work by the 
profession. Consistent with the instrumental, the broad agenda here is discovering 
‘what works’. The key distinction between the instrumental and the scientific is 
that the latter brings an apparent degree of rigor and robustness to the discussion of 
what works. This is based on the quantification of measures, that which aligns with 
classic natural sciences inquiry and an inherent belief that such inquiry is the 
legitimate way of doing research. 
The hegemonic labelling of scientific, not just by Gunter, is however 
problematic. For the most part, it is grounded, if not synonymous with logical 
empiricism. This is to the exclusion of other forms of science such as the postpositivist perspective taken by Colin Evers and Gabriele Lakomski, or the 
Francophone version of science to which I align. This is not a critique of Gunter. 
Her work is useful here in thinking through the different traditions of educational 
administration scholarship. Importantly, it is also a marker of the way in which the 
label scientific is thought of and used in educational administration. Following the 
Theory Movement, the scientific tradition remains grounded in logical empiricism. 
The scholarly activity of description – that privileged within the relational 
approach – is a point of convergence between the natural and social sciences. Both 
claim it as their domain. Through careful attention to the epistemological break 
with ordinary language and the articulation of the relations between the researcher 
and the researched, there are some shared points between the relational and the 
scientific stream. However, my approach, deeply grounded in Bourdieusian 
CHAPTER 5 
76
thinking, is more concerned with bringing a rigor and robustness to the 
construction of the research object as much as it is the generation of data. This 
breaks down any potential distance between the researcher and the researched by 
acknowledging the embedded and embodied nature of scholarship in educational 
administration. 
The distinction between the scientific and the relational approach is the starting 
point. Within the scientific, as classified by Gunter (and others), there is a need to 
define ‘leadership’ in advance and then measure that construct. The empiricist 
nature of the work means that there is grounding of knowledge claims in 
observation of an external world. This particular form of science privileges method 
and procedure. Here is a significant flaw in contemporary thought and analysis in 
educational administration. The application of advanced mathematics, or statistical 
modelling, does not make something more scientific. While the appeals to rigor 
and robustness made possible courtesy of equations and other measures displayed 
in tables and diagrams, this is based on assumptions of a static and knowable 
(measurable) empirical world. What I am arguing here is that we need to decouple 
‘science’ from method. They are not one and the same. Quantitative methods are 
not necessarily scientific and science is not necessarily quantitative. This is a 
residual hangover from the paradigm wars and the simplistic binary of quantitative 
and qualitative methods. Although different techniques may be stronger aligned 
with the knowledge claims of certain traditions, methods and traditions are not the 
same. 
From a relational perspective, it is inappropriate to define once and for all, the 
research object prior to conducting any empirical work. That is, the relational is 
based on a belief in the ongoing and inexhaustible of the empirical and the 
epistemic nature of labels. The messiness of the social is very difficult to engage 
with in the conservative scientific tradition of scholarship in educational 
administration. As with the instrumental, the scientific is orientated towards 
improving practice. This is arguably the raison d’ȇtre of an applied discipline, but 
a key question is whether the only way of achieving this is through the provision of 
pathways. That is, is there merit in a form of scholarship which illuminates the 
ways in which the empirical is legitimised and sustained? I argue that the answer is 
an unreserved ‘yes’. The only way to change the world is to create the conditions 
in which alternates can be conceived. Bringing to the level of discourse the ways in 
which the social world is organised creates these conditions without necessarily 
delivering a prescriptive ‘how to’ approach. The strength of such an approach is 
the power of description to make known the complexity of the social world. It is 
possible to engage in scientific inquiry with relying solely on the quantitative 
measurement of the empirical. This is made possible through the epistemological 
break with the language of the everyday and the mobilisation of appropriate data 
generation and analysis strategies. 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
77
The humanists 
In response to the critique of the Theory Movement – notably from Thomas 
Greenfield – the humanistic tradition is very much concerned with the subjective 
and the phenomenological experience of administration. At its most simply, the 
paradigm wars were divided over two distinct approaches to knowledge 
production: the externalist and the interpretivist. The former has become 
synonymous with the scientific and the latter with a more humanist approach. As a 
tradition, the humanist is common, and accepted by policy makers and systemic 
authorities, as it provides case studies which add credibility (even if cherry picked 
as suggested by Gunter) to initiatives such as the professional standards for 
principals. Studies within the humanist perspective are concerned with the 
subjective understanding of actors. Multiple realities are possible and require 
multiple methods to understand them. Within the discipline at large, despite a 
critical mass of scholarship that falls into this category, it is frequently limited to 
parallel monologues – arguably as a result of its implicit relativism. Even a cursory 
glance at mainstream journals would find multiple articles – potentially in each 
issue – which fail to acknowledge similar works even in the same journal. A 
common critique is that the humanist perspective is too subjective, lacks any 
substantive sense of (comparable) measurement, and offers little to the 
advancement of knowledge in the discipline apart from the accumulation of 
examples/case studies. 
Consistent with critiques often raised against anthropological accounts, and 
thinking here of Clifford Geertz’ work – even if praised in some circles – on the 
Balinese cockfight, that by grounding in the particularities of the local, humanists 
arguably engage in a form of relativism under the guise of subjectivity. That is, in 
privileging the particular, the scholarly narrative is removed, or at least distanced, 
from the broader (globalised) discourses. Somewhat similar to how the scientific 
privileges the external the humanist is frequently limited to the internal world of 
subjects and the interpretation of that by the researcher. In the specific case of 
‘leadership’, there is the mobilisation of a universal or foundational construct 
(‘leadership’) and a focus on the subjective experience of the particular. While the 
humanist provide attention to context that the instrumental and scientific do not, 
the potential separation of the individual phenomenological experience from the 
broader social conditions is problematic. The centring of the experience arguably 
creates a separation between the self and the experience – both constituted as 
entities. 
An enduring problem and remarkably similar across the humanist, scientific and 
instrumental, is the initial belief in ‘leadership’ as a foundation concept and then 
studying its empirical manifestation. This is particularly so when a researcher 
mobilises a pre-existing normative orientation and seeks empirical validation for 
their position. For example, a researcher – arguably on the basis of lived 
experience – believes that the managerialist regime is at odds with the educative 
purposes of schooling and then seeks to investigate how that plays out. For the 
humanist, s/he who seeks to gather and theorise from the experiences and 
CHAPTER 5 
78
biographies of ‘leaders’, this is less of a problem. Closer to the instrumental than 
the scientific, the humanist has traction with the profession through its empirical 
grounding in the day-to-day work of ‘leaders’. This is also a point of departure 
with the critical which is frequently perceived to aspire to an ideal that is somewhat 
removed from the daily realities of education. 
A humanist may argue against the relational on the basis that I seek to give too 
much weight to the construction of the research object as opposed to the research 
subject. But this does not necessarily make the humanist and relational 
incompatible. However, it does imply a separation of object and subject. There is 
an interdependence between the subject and context for the humanist, but they are 
entities. This is contrary to the argument that I am building where I explicitly call 
for the recognition and engagement with the embodied and embedded nature of the 
researcher and the researched. The constructed separation is a flawed position, 
much like the constructed division of the micro and the macro levels of society. 
Such divisions serve the classifiers purposes more so than reflect an empirical 
reality. Therefore, while the humanists privilege the subjective – pitted against the 
perceived objectivity of the scientific – I seek to breakdown this unproductive 
binary. This requires a recognition of the value-laden nature of observations yet 
also entertains the prospect of moving towards a rigorous and robust generation of 
data that can be recognised – even if not completely endorsed by – the objectivist. 
The critical 
The critical tradition according to Gunter draws on the social sciences to map and 
analyse the interplay of structure and agency. Unlike the instrumentalist and 
scientific traditions, the critical engages in a problem posing more so than problem 
solving approach. However, the critical is frequently accused of privileging a 
particular orientation. The perspective is somewhat captured by Richard Bates’ 
(1983) argument that administration can be seen as a technology of control. 
Personally, I feel that a more appropriate notion would have been ‘manipulation’ 
rather than ‘control’. While both words frequently attract negative attention, I 
believe ‘manipulation’ is a more empirically defensible position, and one which 
has examples of both success and failure across time and space. However, by its 
very orientation, the critical is critical of the status quo and in doing so, rarely gets 
beyond replacing an existing master narrative with another. For the most part, I do 
not believe that the critical has overcome this claim except to counter claim that 
others are complicit in the status quo and that the critical seeks an alternate. 
As a tradition, the critical has a rich history in educational administration, 
particularly in Australian and New Zealand and usually linked to the Deakin school 
(both faculty such as Richard Bates, Jill Blackmore, John Smyth, and those who 
did their doctoral work there such as Pat Thomson). Although I would say that the 
relational approach I am arguing for has some connections to all four traditions 
(although possibly not the instrumental), its strongest connection is with the 
critical. Bourdieu is often classified as a critical sociologist (although not by him), 
so this connect should not be surprising. This criticality recognised in Bourdieu’s 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
79
work is grounded in a challenging of, not rejecting, the status quo, employing 
rigorous and robustness methods of inquiry, and engaging in the logic of scholarly 
life – argument and refutation. By refusing to align with a particular a priori 
normative orientation, the relational could be accused of being complicit with the 
status quo. This is however balanced against the privileging of description, that 
which could be used as a foundation for a (not the) alternative. The critical, 
particularly those aligned with Marxist accounts, frequently have an overt politics 
built upon an ideal of how society ought to be. This is not to generalise to all of 
those adopting a critical perspective, however, critiquing society on the basis that it 
does not conform to a pre-existing normative orientation is similar to claims 
against the instrumental, scientific and humanists. 
A major challenge for the critical is moving beyond old theories that have 
passed into common discourses, such as the continued use of Foucauldian notions 
of surveillance and governmentality, or Bourdieusian reproduction. That being 
said, the critical does make visible much of the underlying generative assumptions 
of social conditions and does not accept the social world as it is. Herein lies the 
greatest complexity for the critical. In drawing on the social sciences one is able to 
map the terrain using novel thinkers from elsewhere. This leaves the existing 
terrain unchanged, just described in novel terms. As a result, the critical is often 
constrained within the critique. Unlike the instrumental, the scientific and the 
persuasive humanists, the critical does not necessarily offer the profession 
something tangible. 
The relational approach I am advancing is most strongly aligned with the 
critical primarily on the basis of its grounding in the social sciences. The point of 
departure is the role of critique. This may however have more to do with Gunter’s 
classification – or my interpretation of her work – than it does the critical tradition. 
According to Gunter, the critical is concerned with revealing (which incidentally 
creates a division between the researcher and the researched) and emancipating 
leaders and followers from social injustice and the oppression of power structures. 
The difference is subtle, at best. The relational approach is concerned with the 
legitimation of the social – the various ways in which the contemporary social 
conditions have come to be, and importantly, are sustained. This is not couched in 
a negative perspective, rather one seeking description for the purpose of 
understanding, not judgement. The critical seeks to emancipate from regimes of 
oppression. In contrast, the relational, built upon description, pays attention to the 
construction and ongoing maintenance of the contemporary condition. Rather than 
explicitly seeking emancipation, the relational offers the means for alternatives to 
be promoted through its focus on the genesis of the contemporary. The critical and 
the relational are not so much different, but the distinctions matter. 
CONCLUSION 
Gaston Bachelard (1984[1934]) argues that a key distinction between the social 
and natural sciences is that in the social, research traditions are most important, 
where as in the natural, it is the pursuit of perfect theory. In this chapter, I have 
CHAPTER 5 
80
taken Bachelard’s argument serious, but also sought to directly engage with it. I 
recognise that for the most part, the discourses of ‘value’ and ‘values’ lie in 
different intellectual traditions yet I have sought to construct a (not the) means of 
bringing them together. In doing so, I have taken up the challenge of creating a 
theoretical and methodological opportunity to craft detailed descriptions of the 
work of institutional actors. Through the rigorous and robust descriptions of the 
here and now I believe there is convergence – not a merging – of the social and 
natural sciences. That is, as a scholarly community, the intellectual work of 
educational administration is about constructing better descriptions of what it 
actually means to lead, manage and/or administer. 
My aim in this chapter has been to sketch the outlines of a research programme 
that blends the discourses of ‘value’ and ‘values’, organised on relational 
principles. The basic thesis I have presented is that one can organise a theorising of 
educational administration around description and shifting the research object to 
the situated practice of institutional actors grounded in a particular temporal and 
socio-political space. The infusing of descriptions of the contemporary social 
world with historical understanding and political analysis of social interactions is 
not new. Such an argument has a long intellectual history with conceptualisation of 
society, and by virtue social institutions, from Karl Marx and Max Weber being 
deeply interwoven with historical expositions. Institutions hold an integral position 
in our understanding of the historical and contemporary social world. 
The relational approach I have stressed seeks to advance our understanding of 
social institutions through a focus on situated practice. The subtle shift in research 
object to the practices of legitimation brings the discourses of ‘value’ and ‘values’ 
into debate and dialogue through anchoring in a particular time and space. While it 
is temporality and socio-political space that receive higher levels of attention, it is 
the privileging of legitimation through administration that differentiates this 
research programme from mainstream discourses. Unlike the ‘value’ and ‘values’ 
literatures, under the relational research programme it is inconsistent to prescribe a 
version of a ‘better’, more ‘effective’ or ‘right’ institution as this would require 
alignment with a particular way of thinking to the exclusion, or at least delegitimation, of other ways of being. Instead, the goal is the pursuit of increasingly 
detailed and sophisticated descriptions of how actions relate to one another. 
This intellectual exercise may not appear directly relevant to ‘stakeholders’ – 
whoever this category of vested interest actually are – seeking to embed 
improvements or bring about change but it is important, and important questions 
are by their very nature, always relevant (the same cannot always be said for 
relevant questions, as their relevance does not equate with importance). In 
constructing detailed narratives of the relational features of educational 
administration, there is considerable scope for understanding social institutions in 
new ways. A desire to weave ‘value’ and ‘values’ is not surprising given that 
critiques – from both sides – frequently describe incoherence, or poor fit, between 
the discourses of ‘value’ and ‘values’. 
The usefulness and relevance of a relational approach may only be made 
explicit if we understand legitimising actions as concerning a reworking of 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
81
temporality and socio-political space. Through the provision of rich and 
provocative descriptions, not only in regard to legitimising actions, but also in 
regard to questions of what is legitimised, I seek to mobilise resources to 
understand these events in new terms and unsettle the normative assumptions of 
‘value’ and ‘values’ literatures. 
Pierre Bourdieu (2004[2001]) warns that there is great risk in critiquing 
scholarship, or the field of knowledge production, as every word uttered about 
scientific practice can be turned back on the person who utters it. As noted earlier 
in relation to ‘values’ discourses, this chapter may be read as the construction 
of a crisis in the discipline and that I then provide a path to avoiding such crisis. 
In doing so, I would be committing the same action that I raise in critique of 
‘values’ discourses. Similarly, in building my argument, I have privileged my 
own position in understanding the social world and therefore merely replaced 
one normative narrative with another. While I can defend my position – hence 
the need for this book – these decisions can only be made by others. Have I 
achieved my aim of providing a bridge for the discourses of ‘value’ and ‘values’, I 
believe so. However, in doing so, I have adopted a pluralistic approach and 
deliberately avoided the provision of a prescriptive ‘how to’ do a relational
approach. I see the intellectual work of bringing the discourses of ‘value’ and 
‘values’ – as with the relations that constitute the work of institutions – as an 
ongoing project. What I have done however is to ask questions and provide a 
potential new line of inquiry. 
NOTES 
i
 For an interesting discussion of paradigms in educational administration see the final chapter of 
Colin Evers and Gabriele Lakomski’s (1991) Knowing educational administration entitled Research 
in educational administration: against paradigms. ii I make no claims here to privileging any particular form of learning that is the core business, rather, 
and on the back of a substantive body of work, merely arguing that education is about learning. iii The inclusion of ‘passive’ here is important as an apparent non-decision, or the absence of critique, 
is evidence of complicity with what is underway. That is, it is impossible to simply be a passenger 
along for the ride in an organisation. iv The attribution of who ‘brought’ Critical Theory into the educational administration body of 
knowledge is somewhat contested. This contestation though has more to do with membership of 
scholarly communities than it does anything else. For those located in Australia and much of the 
Commonwealth, Richard Bates is widely recognised as a leading thinker in the space – primarily on 
the basis of his work at Deakin following his move from Massey (New Zealand). For the US-based 
discourse communities of educational administration, William Forster is frequently attributed as a 
leading thinker. For those across communities, both were writing at around the same time and in the 
intent of the relational research programme, the question would be what is it about the sociopolitical space at that particular time that facilitated these two authors from different geographic 
locations to bring a ‘new’ set of intellectual resources to educational administration. v
 The ‘edu-preneur’ is an individual or collective that mobilises educative credibility – through either 
being an ex-practitioner or having worked at a university – with business acumen to market 
products, including consultancies. This was very popular, and potentially lucrative, in the US 
following the launch of No Child Left Behind. It is increasing in Australia due to an increase in funds 
for professional development programmes and the need for educators to undertake a certain number 
CHAPTER 5 
82
of hours of accredited professional learning to sustain their accreditation against professional 
standards. 
REFERENCES 
Adkins, L. (2011). Practice as temporalisation: Bourdieu and the economic crisis. In S. Susen & B. 
Turner (Eds.), The legacy of Pierre Bourdieu: Critical essays (pp. 348-365). London: Anthem Press. 
Bachelard, G. (1984[1934]). The new scientific spirit (P.A. Heelan, Trans.). Boston, MA: Beacon Press. 
[Originally published as Le nouvel esprit scientifique (Paris: Presses Universitaries de France).] 
Barley, S. R. (2008). Coalface institutionalism. In R. Greenwood, C. Oliver, R. Sahlin, & R. Suddaby 
(Eds.), The Sage handbook of organizational institutionalism (pp. 491-518). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. 
Bates, R. J. (1983). Educational administration and the management of knowledge. Geelong, Vic: 
Deakin University Press. 
Bourdieu, P. (2004[2001]). Science of science and reflexivity (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: Polity 
Press. [Originally published as Science de la science et réflexivité (Paris: Éditions Rasions d’Agir)]. 
Caldwell, B.J. (2007). Educational leadership and school renewal: introduction by the guest editor. 
Australian Journal of Education, 51(3), 225-227. 
Colley, H., Henriksson, L., Niemeyer, B., & Seddon, T. (2012). Competing time orders in human 
service work: towards a politics of time. Time & Society, 21(3), 371-394. 
Dinham, S. (2007). The secondary head of department and the achievement of exceptional student 
outcomes. Journal of Educational Administration, 45(1), 62-79. 
Donmoyer, R. (2001). Evers and Lakomski’s search for leadership’s holy grail (and the intriguing ideas 
they encountered along the way). Journal of Educational Administration, 39(6), 554-572. 
Duncheon, J. C., & Tierney, W. G. (2013). Changing conceptions of time: Implications for educational 
research and practice. Review of Educational Research, 83(2), 236-272. 
Eacott, S. (2013). ‘Leadership’, and the social: time, space and the epistemic. International Journal of 
Educational Management, 27(1), 91-101. 
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (1991). Knowing educational administration: contemporary 
methodological controversies in educational administration research. New York, NY: Pergamon 
Press. 
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. London: Hutchinson. 
Gronn, P. (2008). The state of Denmark. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 40(2), 
173-185. 
Gunter, H. (2001). Critical approaches to leadership in education. Journal of Educational Enquiry, 2(2), 
94-108. 
Gunter, H. (2010). A sociological approach to educational leadership. British Journal of Sociology of 
Education, 31(4), 519-527. 
Gunter, H., & Fitzgerald, T. (2008). Educational administration and history part 1: Debating the agenda. 
Journal of Educational Administration and History, 40(1), 5-21. 
Gurr, D., Drysdale, L, & Goode, H. (2010). Successful school leadership in Australia: A research 
agenda. International Journal of Learning, 17(4), 113-129. 
Hattie, J. (2009). Visible learning: a synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to achievement. 
London: Routledge. 
Lingard, B. (2010). Policy borrowing, policy learning: Testing times in Australian schooling. Critical 
Studies in Education, 51(2), 129-147. 
Lyotard, J-F. (1984[1979]). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge (G. Bennington & B. 
Massumi, Trans.). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. [Originally published as La 
condition postmoderne: rapport sur le savoir (Paris: Les Editions de Minuit).] 
STUDYING ADMINISTRATION RELATIONALLY 
83
Robinson, V. M. J., Lloyd, C. A., & Rowe, K. J. (2008). The impact of leadership on student outcomes: 
An analysis of the differential effects of leadership types. Educational Administration Quarterly, 
44(5), 635-674. 
Ryle, G. (1971). Collected papers. London: Hutchinson. 
Savage, M. (2009). Contemporary sociology and the challenge of descriptive assemblage. European 
Journal of Social Theory, 12(1), 155-174. 
Snyder, B. H. (2013). From vigilance to busyness: A neo-Weberian approach to clock time. 
Sociological Theory, 31(3), 243-266. 
Thrupp, M., & Willmott, R. (2003). Education management in managerialist times. Maidenhead, 
England: Open University Press. 
Waite, D. (2002). “The paradigm wars” in educational administration: An attempt at transcendence. 
International Studies in Educational Administration, 30(1), 66-81. 
Walker, J. C., & Evers, C. W. (1988). The epistemological unity of educational research. In J. P. Keeves 
(Ed.), Educational research, methodology and measurement: An international handbook. Oxford: 
Pergamon. 
85
CHAPTER SIX 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
INTRODUCTION 
Building from previous chapter, I am now going to outline how my relational 
research programme differs from the orthodoxy of educational administration 
scholarship. To do so, I am going to engage in an analysis/critique of how my 
articulated position is both similar, yet more importantly, different to the positions 
taken by Stephen Dinham and colleagues in the An Exceptional Schooling 
Outcomes Project (ÆSOP) work and David Gurr, Lawrie Drysdale and colleagues 
in the Australian contribution to the International Successful School Principals 
Project (ISSPP). The selection of these two projects/programmes is for two main 
reasons: first, as an Australian based scholar, and one who firmly believes in the 
need to contextualise work, the selection of two (relatively) recent Australian based 
studies is logical; and second, both of these projects can be identified by the two (at 
least current) markers of research esteem in the Australian, and arguably 
internationally, scholarly community – peer-reviewed publications and research 
funding from the largest and most competitive research grant scheme in the 
country (the Australian Research Council). 
Given that neither Dinham nor Gurr et al. mobilise social theory specifically 
(but more on that later), any form of direct comparison is not possible – nor 
particularly useful. My goal however is not to merely bring one external narrative 
and overlay that upon another, rather, it is to actively engage with how the 
relational research programme that I am building enables the asking of new 
questions that can take scholarship in new and fruitful directions. This works on a 
few different levels. First, it opens up a potential dialogue between multiple pieces 
of Australian based scholarship in the area of educational leadership, management 
and administration. That being said, given the highly competitive nature of the 
academy, a contested space where distinctions are built upon originality and there 
is substantive overlooking of similar works on the same topic (Eacott, 2011a; 
Mulford, 2007), dialogue of this nature is uncommon in Australia.i
 Second, my 
argument – and not surprising given the text thus far – generates new questions 
regarding the narrative constructed as to what it means to ‘lead’. Conceptually, this 
is a very significant matter, especially in a domain that has shifted its foci from 
administration to management and now leadership, combined with the popular 
faddism of adjectival descriptors. Third, and arguably of greatest pedagogical 
value, it enables further articulation of the approach described in the previous 
chapter and a more nuanced account of how it differs from the orthodoxy of the 
domain. To do so, I focus on the epistemological and ontological preliminaries of 
the research – at least those which can be detected from published work. As I have 
CHAPTER 6 
86
stressed throughout this book, the way in which we engage with the concepts of 
research, which we construct, has a major bearing on our argument. Central to this 
move in the selected work is the construction of ‘leadership’ as the research object. 
While I have explicitly engaged with some of the problematic matters of this in 
Chapter Two, in this chapter I get the opportunity to work with some data. 
The central argument of this chapter is that although Dinham and Gurr et al. 
both have school leadership as their research object, the minimal problematizing of 
the very concept limits what one can say about the matter at hand. That is, through 
the unquestioned adoption of leadership as an empirical reality in combination with 
an un-reflexive theoretical stance, means that the very object under investigation 
fails to move beyond the discourses of the everyday. This entrapment in the prescientific world results in serious questions being asked of the research concerning 
what it offers a theory of knowledge and the legitimacy of the school leadership 
research in the wider academy – even if the work is popular with policy makers 
and practitioners. 
DINHAM’S AESOP 
Dinham and colleagues’ ÆSOP work investigates the processes leading to 
‘outstanding educational outcomes in Years 7-10 in New South Wales public 
schools’. It is a collaborative project bringing academics from the University of 
New England and the University of Western Sydney together with the Department 
of Education and Training (as it was then known). The scholarly outputs from this 
work appear, at least, in academic journals (Dinham, 2005, 2007a, 2007b), a seven 
book series edited by Ross Thomas (long-time editor of the Journal of Educational 
Administration) and published by Post Pressed (see Dinham, 2010; Graham, 
Paterson, & Stevens, 2010; Panizzon, Barnes, & Pegg, 2010; Paterson, Graham, & 
Stevens, 2010; Pegg, Lynch, & Panizzon, 2010; Sawyer, Baxter, & Brock, 2010; 
Sawyer, Brock, & Baxter, 2010), and are also loosely drawn upon in another book 
(Dinham, 2008). For the purpose of this analysis, my attention is on the three 
journal papers, and particularly the two appearing in Journal of Educational 
Administration. 
The ÆSOP project foregrounds the notion of ‘outstanding’ educational 
outcomes. This ‘outstanding’ is clearly relational as it is derived from comparison 
with others. It is however an entity perspective as the ‘outstanding’ outcomes is 
constructed as an attribute of a particular organisation and the product of certain 
practices. For the purpose of their research, ‘outstanding’ educational achievement 
was defined using a rubric of the three interrelated domains or principles outlined 
in The Adelaide Declaration on National Goals for Schooling in the Twenty-first 
Century (MCEETYA, 1999) that schools should: i) develop fully the talents of 
students; ii) attain high standards of knowledge, skills and understanding through a 
comprehensive and balanced curriculum; and iii) be socially just (Dinham, 2005, p. 
339). 
The instrumentation and measurement of the ‘more social outcomes’ of 
schooling is never made clear,ii at least across the three journal publications from 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
87
the work cited here. This is not to suggest anything inappropriate, just that it is 
impossible to provide further commentary on these instruments. That being said, 
two things stand out though. First, any decision regarding what is of value and 
privileged in the identified sites is already made in the sampling. Much like the 
critique of value and values earlier, the sample is confirmatory of an original 
normative orientation. The mobilisation, and measurement, of ‘outstanding’ 
educational outcomes and the subsequent construction of a narrative, or more 
specifically the legitimation of that narrative, remains within the discourses of 
ordinary language (the pre-scientific world). I say this because notions of 
‘outstanding’ educational outcomes does little to problematize who it is that 
defines excellence, under what conditions and for what purposes. The abstraction 
of the measure and the use of an adjective to create a distinction – one based on 
comparison rather than criteria – is problematic. At least it is so if one is coming 
from the critical tradition. This is primarily on the basis that the mobilisation of 
‘outstanding’ outcomes is seen as accepting a particular discourse – most 
frequently aligned with neoliberalism and/or managerialism – and then seeing who 
is playing that particular game the best. While I see some merit in this line of 
argument – the critique of managerialist/neoliberal discourses – and have myself 
done this in the past (see Eacott, 2011a, 2011b, 2011c), in this book I am providing 
a more productive way of researching school leadership. But I shall return to this 
shortly as I wish to engage more with Dinham’s work first. 
The mobilisation of the adjective ‘outstanding’ is a significant move in the 
ÆSOP work. The construction and/or legitimation of the narrative are limited to 
the ordinary language of the pre-scientific world rather than that of science and 
scholarship. This does particular work in relation to research design. Dinham 
(2005) outlines the following design: 
… a case study approach whereby quantitative (e.g. public examination performance, 
‘value-adding’ measures) and qualitative data (e.g. nomination from parent groups, 
Principals, DET officers) were used to select a sample of sites where schools appeared 
to be achieving outstanding educational outcomes, either within faculty-based subject 
areas or with cross-school programs, over at least a four-year period. Triangulation of 
quantitative and qualitative selection data occurred with sites selected to provide a 
sample of socio-economic types, rural-urban distribution, size of school and spread of 
subject areas and programs. Use of the ‘Adelaide Goals’ played an important role in 
the selection process, in that evidence of ‘personal’ and ‘social’ achievement was 
sought in addition to academic success. Eventually, 50 sites were selected for study at 
38 secondary schools, with some schools being selected for potentially outstanding 
educational achievements in a combination of academic areas and/or cross-school 
programs. (p. 342) 
In the context of the argument I am building, and the underlying generative 
principles of the relational approach, a central concern with this design and the 
subsequent analysis is the ontological complicity with the administrative entities of 
the social world and the limited, if any, epistemological break with the ordinary 
language of the everyday. Bringing public data (especially when not engaging with 
its discursive properties) into conversation with bureaucrats (systemic officials) 
CHAPTER 6 
88
and stakeholders (parents) to identify sites creates an opportunity to deconstruct the 
very constitution of the research object. By not doing so, or at least not reporting 
doing so, the mobilisation of ‘outstanding’ as though it is some form of universal 
label is problematic. The identification of where ‘outstanding’ outcomes are taking 
place therefore does more work for the legitimation of the existing social order and 
the stratification of schooling (and by virtue, society) on the basis of hegemonic 
discourses of what it means to be an outstanding performer. The research narrative 
does not move beyond the pre-scientific world, despite any claims to adhering to 
sophisticated theoretical/methodological techniques. Rather, the ÆSOP work sits at 
the intersection of confirming a pre-existing normative orientation and the 
legitimation of the orthodoxy. From a relational perspective, what is of interest 
from the ÆSOP work is less the actual argument, but the research itself as an act. 
As a piece of research, the ÆSOP work serves to legitimise the existing ways of 
being. Of interests is the very reason that this type of work was undertaken, and at 
this particular time in this particular place. This goes back to Klaus Weber’s point 
that as scholars we should ‘study fads and fashions, not chase them’ (Birkinshaw, 
Healey, Suddaby & Weber, 2014, p. 51). What this does is highlight the 
intellectual tradition in which Dinham’s ÆSOP work fits. As research, it draws 
upon some (quasi-)scientific methods to abstract and measure leadership and 
outcomes to make an instrumental argument about how effective systems and 
cultures can be designed to enable improved site-based performance. 
The attributed causation, giving the hint of scientificity, assigned to leadership 
in the ÆSOP work is also troublesome. For example, Dinham (2005) notes that 
while the vast majority of the 50 sites originally identified in the project were 
confirmed to be achieving ‘outstanding’ educational outcomes as defined in the 
project, some were not. In the latter, some ‘aspects of leadership identified in the 
outstanding sites were lacking to some degree or absent’ (p. 339). This raises some 
questions as to whether it is the ‘outstanding’ outcomes or the perceived leadership 
that is driving the research. If sites were identified because they exhibited 
‘outstanding’ outcomes, why is the absence of leadership (whatever that is) 
resulting in the exclusion of sites? Does this not require asking questions of the 
original construction of ‘leadership’? Instead, what we see is a position where 
leadership is evident where ‘outstanding’ outcomes are, and the absence of either is 
perceived as a demonstration of an absence of the other – a rather cyclic, or 
tautological, situation. As Dinham (2005) argues: 
Principals of the schools where ‘outstanding’ outcomes were being achieved were 
found to be relentless in their quest for enhanced student achievement. (p. 354) 
To think this through, schools which exhibited ‘outstanding’ student achievement 
had a leader, or organisational head, that pursued student achievement. This is not 
overtly surprising. Much like how Robinson, Lloyd and Rowe (2008) argued that 
leadership focused on instruction was more effective at raising school performance 
(measured in student outcomes) than leadership focused on change 
(transformational). Constructing ‘leadership’ from this basis is somewhat 
compromised by the original sampling. What is actually being discussed is under 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
89
what conditions are ‘outstanding’ student outcomes achieved. The attribution of 
‘leadership’ into the discussion is part of an ontological complicity with seeing the 
world through (administrative) structures and the hegemonic belief that 
‘leadership’ matters. Dinham (2005) goes on to argue: 
Leadership, both positional (Principals, other school Executive, Head Teachers) and 
distributed (key classroom teachers and others), was found in this study to be a major 
factor in the outstanding outcomes achieved by students, teachers and schools. (p. 
339) 
There is a tension at play here, one that is implicitly present in mainstream 
literatures of educational administration, between classic bureaucratic based 
organisational studies, and the more contemporarily popular distributed (relational) 
ways of being. That said, much of the contemporary distributed work remains 
trapped in a bureaucratic (entity) ontology. For example, the notion of ‘teacher 
leadership’, while arguing that leadership is everywhere in an organisation – 
something that is equally problematic for the intellectual value of ‘leadership’ as a 
concept – remains embedded in the organisational hierarchy of roles. But that is an 
argument for another time and place. What stands out in the ÆSOP work is the 
focus on processes operating within schools, in general, but particularly in subject 
departments or other groupings of teachers, that appear influential in the 
achievement of ‘outstanding’ educational outcomes. The reported findings argue 
that ‘leadership’ matters, and by virtue, and consistent with Brian Caldwell (2007), 
if performance was not ‘outstanding’ enough, then ‘leadership’ was lacking or 
absent. These are all underlying generative assumptions within the work. As I have 
consistently argued in this book, the ontological and epistemological preliminaries 
are central to the construction of the research object, design, and discourses. 
What Dinham does is construct ‘leadership’ as an entity. It becomes a thing that 
interacts with other entities. As he argues: 
… the attributes, actions or qualities outlined in this paper need to be considered as 
both product (output) and process (input) variables, in that they contribute to future 
change and improvement. (Dinham, 2005, p. 354) 
Due its construction as a thing, consistent with an ontology of an knowable 
external reality, an epistemology of an objective truth and the Cartesian dogma of a 
clear separation between body and nature, the type of research Dinham and 
colleagues generate remains focused on individuals and their perceptions, 
intentions, behaviours, personalities, expectations and evaluations relative to their 
relationships with others. This is why they can list characteristics of leaders in 
schools producing ‘outstanding’ outcomes such as ‘honesty, fairness, compassion, 
commitment, reliability, hard work, trustworthiness, and professionalism’ 
(Dinham, 2005, p. 347). The focus on entities is not limited to the 
conceptualisation of individuals but also the boundaries of the school. When 
discussing the principals, Dinham (2005) notes: 
CHAPTER 6 
90
Principals of schools where outstanding sites were identified exhibited a keen 
awareness and understanding of the wider environment and a positive attitude towards 
engaging with it. (p. 343) 
Rather than being inward looking, they are aware of the wider environment, including 
other schools and systems, the community, society, business and government. (p. 344) 
There is a clear entity perspective at play here with the arbitrary partitioning of the 
social world in a way that serves the partitioners purposes more so than reflects an 
empirical reality. It was this partitioning that was central to the argument 
developed in Chapter Three. A major limitation on the entity perspective being 
mobilised by Dinham for advancing scholarship is the focus on easily 
observable/identifiable actions linked directly to outcomes and ignoring the 
underlying generative principles of action, or to think with theological philosopher 
Martin Buber (1981[1923]), ‘the space between’. This is a challenge that I have 
previously raised in relation to thinking through strategies in educational 
leadership scholarship (Eacott, 2010). The lack of attention to the discursive nature 
of the social world is embodied in: 
They have earned a certain amount of credibility with the system officials who tend to 
give special dispensation, support or approval to new approaches, even ‘turning a 
blind eye’ on occasions. … some leaders even appear to operate on the principle that 
‘it is easier to gain forgiveness than permission’. (pp. 345-346) 
What remains un-explored here is the discursive nature of the social world. Why is 
it that these principals/leaders could act this way? Would the same dispensation 
been given to other principals/leaders? If all principals were given this treatment, 
then this behaviour actually tells us little. If to the contrary, this is reserved for but 
a special few, why was this so? How do leaders accumulate the necessary capital – 
in whatever form – to secure this type of treatment? These are significant 
questions. Heroic leadership discourses, which any ‘outstanding’/turnaround 
leadership research adheres to, are frequently built upon obscure description of the 
conditions that enable such action to take place. This is why Malcom Gladwell’s 
(2008) Outliers is so persuasive – he explicitly articulates how particular 
individuals came to be in the situation they are in now – even if not particularly 
scholarly. This also speaks to Eugenie Samier’s (2006) argument that many 
administrative phenomena are actually historical (and I would add social – to 
mobilise both space and time) topics. In privileging ‘outstanding’ outcomes as an 
entity and mapping the relationship of that entity to others (e.g. socio-economic 
status of the students/school suburb) rather than empirically grounding the 
‘outstanding’ outcomes in time and space, the constructed narrative is decontextualised. Much like the critique of change as a vacuous concept, the 
aspirational tone of the instrumental does not necessarily engage in the messiness 
of the social world, limiting its contribution to both the advancement of scholarship 
and practice. Somewhat surprisingly, Dinham (2007) acknowledges the messiness: 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
91
What has become clear is that leadership, including educational leadership, is a far 
more contentious, complex and dynamic phenomenon than previously thought. (p. 
263) 
There is a limited engagement with the body of literature that problematizes 
‘leadership’ and stresses it complexity. In addition, there is a lack of reflexivity in 
the work to see how the ÆSOP work contributes to the simplification of 
‘leadership’. 
In the two Journal of Educational Administration papers (2005, 2007a), there 
are claims of using ‘grounded theory’ techniques (Strauss & Corbin, 1990, 1998).iii
This is somewhat deceptive for the untrained reader – this is especially so for the 
doctoral researcher. While the claim is only to have used the techniques of rather 
than grounded theory itself, the use of the label is problematic. A defining feature 
of grounded theory is the absence of pre-conceived theories. The foregrounding of 
‘outstanding’ outcomes based on a definition already in existence, combined with 
the inherent belief that ‘leadership’ matters is at odds with the principles of 
grounded theory. The claim that ‘the grounded theory techniques of axial and 
selective coding resulted in these concepts being grouped into seven categories – a 
core category and six contributing categories’ (p. 343) is fine and a robust process 
for analysis in qualitative work, however for the purpose of constructing leadership 
as a theoretical object draws too heavily on a priori assumptions. 
The approach adopted by Dinham and colleagues adheres to the orthodox 
position of educational leadership, management and administration researchers by 
building from the notion that ‘leadership’ is a real thing and that it is related in 
some way to organisational outcomes. In doing so, they are ontologically complicit 
with the everyday language of the social world. Irrespective of how sophisticated a 
research design or analytical frame employed, the limited, if any, attention to the 
construction of the research object limits what can be said about it. The approach 
aligns with an entity perspective where it is possible to identify, measure and link 
‘leadership’ and ‘outcomes’. The citing of examples where sites were identified for 
their outcomes and some aspects of ‘leadership’ were missing is further evidence 
of this. It also does very specific things in relation to how ‘leadership’ interacts 
with other entities. Through the construction of the social world as a series of 
entities which inter-relate, there is a separation or space between that remains 
under-explored. The separation means that while it is possible to map interactions, 
the ongoing reciprocal shaping of the social – that which is outlined in Chapter 
Four – is beyond the analysis. What does remain is an approach which advances 
the binaries of individual/collective and structure/agency. Conceiving of schools as 
made up of individuals, departments and then the school is symptomatic of the 
entity ontology. It is this positioning with enables the comparison of departments 
as it decontextualizes, in time and space, performance. Furthermore, the entity 
perspective extends the enduring structure and agency binary of leadership, 
management and administration research. 
To be productive, a key question that remains is ‘What would the relational 
approach do differently?’ This is not to say that the approach of Dinham and 
colleagues in their ÆSOP work are opposed. We can think about the same thing, it 
CHAPTER 6 
92
is however a different approach. Whereas Dinham wants to understand how to be 
more effective – or to produce ‘outstanding’ outcomes – the relational approach I 
am building is more interested in why under these conditions do we conceive of 
‘leadership’ and ‘performance’ in these ways? What is it about this particular time 
and space that makes these conceptualisations possible and hegemonic? This is not 
beyond the data generated in the ÆSOP work. It does however require a broader 
analysis and asking different questions of the data. The initial identification 
process, assuming there is some prose around why sites were selected, could be 
used to build an argument about how ‘outstanding’ outcomes and ‘leadership’ are 
constructed. This would raise some questions for what is meant by these popular 
labels and also give a point of analysis/comparison with other studies. That is, 
serious work around the construction of the research object would enables bridges 
to be built with others studies and reduce the parallel monologues which dominate 
educational leadership, management and administration journals. This would not 
reduce alternate points of view, and that would be undesirable, but it would 
facilitate dialogue (and debate) about the research objects rather than different 
models, frameworks and the like constructed upon the apparently universal 
‘leadership’. 
GURR, DRYSDALE AND COLLEAGUES’ ISSPP 
The work of David Gurr, Lawrie Drysdale and colleagues represents the Australian 
contribution to the International Successful School Principalship Project, arguably 
the longest running international scale project in the history of educational 
leadership, management and administration as a scholarly space (Leithwood, 
2005). The project includes over 20 countries and 38 universities. The outputs from 
the project, so far, include four edited books (Leithwood & Day, 2007; Moos, 
Johansson, & Day, 2011; Ylimaki & Jacobson, 2011; Day & Gurr, 2014), seven 
special issues of journals (e.g. Journal of Educational Administration; 
International Journal of Educational Management; and International Studies in 
Educational Administration), and more than 100 book chapters and individual 
papers. Gurr and Drysdale have contributed 14 book chapters and 13 journal 
articles so far. 
Beginning in 2001, the project was conceived to address the need to better 
understand how principals contribute to school success. The origin and 
methodology of the ISSPP is found in an earlier study by one of the co-founders 
and current co-ordinator Christopher Day (see Day et al., 2000). This work is 
based on: data from multiple perspectives; comparisons of effective leadership in 
diverse contexts; and the identification of personal qualities and professional 
competencies generic to effective school leaders. More than 100 case studies have 
been generated throughout the project. The focus of these case studies is on the 
leadership of principals, with selection criteria on the reputation of the schools, the 
acknowledged success of the principals by peers and evidence of improved student 
outcomes over time (Garza et al., 2014). Unlike Dinham’s ÆSOP work, the 
connection between the selection criteria and principals (a.k.a. leaders) is more 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
93
explicit. However, the connection between leadership and school performance 
remains assumed. The ISSPP has, according to its investigators, provided evidence 
of the now common view that successful school leadership comprises at least four 
core dimensions of: setting direction; developing people; developing the school; 
and managing the instructional programme (Leithwood & Day, 2007; Garza et al., 
2014). For the most part, the project has been conducted in two phases. Initially 
case studies, many of these case studies were then followed up five years later – 
sustainable. During 2013, it was decided that: 
… the ISSPP had assembled a powerful knowledge base about leadership success and 
that for the third phase the ISSPP would explore the leadership of schools were 
performance is lower than expected. Exploring underperforming/cruising schools was 
seen as a critical issue within each country and a missing part in understanding the 
puzzle of school leadership. (Drysdale & Gurr, 2014, p. 3) 
This recognition, even if over 12 years into the project, is significant as it serves as 
the basis for creating distinctions.iv Without the presence of schools performing at 
different levels, it is impossible to construct rigorous and robust descriptions about 
what it is that distinguishes organisations that perform differently. To think with 
Bourdieu, you cannot establish ‘distinctions’. This is something that the ÆSOP 
work never did. It also calls into question the strength of earlier claims about what 
successful school principals do. It is quite possible, and given its orthodoxy highly 
likely, that most principals most of the time do the things that instrumental 
accounts call for. 
Two things stand out for me in the conceptualisation of the ISSPP work. First is 
the explicit attempt to create a distance, or at least a separation, from the School 
Effectiveness and School Improvement (SESI) movement. Second is the pursuit of 
rigor through scientific inquiry. In relation to the former, I argue that the difference 
is more semantic than substantive. There is an attempt to move beyond the pure 
quantitative identification of ‘effectiveness’ frequently used in the SESI 
movement,v
 but the underlying generative principle remains the same. Both the 
SESI and the ISSPP work are about constructing models of effective systems and 
cultures to improve organisational performance. As Gurr and Drysdale (2008) note, 
models have been a central feature of mainstream management and leadership 
theory and research for over 50 years. They go on to argue, one danger in 
developing models is that they can be too simple and fail to address reality by 
ignoring important aspects of the context and key variables that impact on 
leadership effectiveness. If we return to Kenneth Leithwood and Christopher Day’s 
(2007) introduction to the first ISSPP book, entitled Starting with what we know, 
there is a more comprehensive position taken – or at least acknowledged. There is 
recognition of reciprocity in social actions, an awareness of the role of perception 
in the attribution of leadership upon others, and acceptance that links between 
variables are not intended to suggest linear or one-way relations in the real world.vi
There is however an unquestioned acceptance of ‘leadership’ and its value in 
organisational performance. This is not surprising. After all, if your argument is 
built upon leadership literatures – those written by leadership researchers and 
leaders for leaders and leadership researchers – then it is expected that leadership 
CHAPTER 6 
94
not only exists but is important. Some of the subtle critiques of ‘leadership’ or 
problematizing the notion of the ‘leader’ or the construction of ‘leadership’ are 
either not recognised or remain under-developed. Rather we see Leithwood and 
Day (2007) argue: 
While the essence of leadership, as we have portrayed it here, is both subtle and 
complex, at least many of the things we set out to learn about leadership of successful 
principals in our study are quite straightforward to describe. (p. 4) 
The simplification of ‘leadership’ takes us back to Gaston Bachelard’s 
(1984[1934]) argument that the simple is never more than the simplified. The 
tension between the simple and complex is evidence in numerous places in the 
ISSPP publications. In addition to the previously mentioned danger highlighted by 
Gurr and Drysdale, Mulford (2007) argues that leadership is more complex than 
Leithwood and Riehl claim. He goes on to suggest that successful school 
principalship is an ‘interactive, reciprocal and evolving process involving many 
players, which is influenced by and, in turn, influences, the context in which it 
occurs’ (p. 36). However, this is balanced against a claim that successful principals 
also displayed a core set of basic leadership skills regardless of school context, or 
as Gurr, Drysdale and Mulford (2005) put it, ‘a common and consistent set of 
personal traits and behaviours’ (p. 548). It is the position of a core set of leadership 
skills, irrespective of context, in Leithwood and Day, Mulford, and the ISSPP more 
broadly, in combination with a desire to ‘remain useful’ (Gurr & Drysdale, 2008) 
in an applied sense, that legitimises the simplification in the ISSPP. 
This explicit desire to be useful or accessible is balanced against an attempt to 
employ rigorous and robust methods. That is, the ISSPP seeks to remain in the 
ordinary language of the everyday – evidenced through simplicity and arguably 
common sense – yet establish itself as legitimate through scientific method. Much 
like the SESI movement, which is committed to exhibitionism of methods and 
increasingly sophisticated mathematical techniques, the ISSPP employs processes 
designed to give the legitimacy of traditional science. As Leithwood (2005) argues: 
… we wanted, for example, to approximate both the standards of internal validity 
commonly associated with intensive qualitative research and the standards of external 
validity typically reserved for large-scale quantitative research. (p. 619) 
… the number of cases being developed in some countries is beginning to 
approximate sample sizes not uncommon in quantitative research. So we are nibbling 
at the lower edges of external validity within countries. (p. 626) 
There is no doubt that the scale of the ISSPP, and its longitudinal nature, make it 
unique in educational leadership, management and administration studies. The 
adoption of a similar set of procedures for data generation across multiple sites is 
impressive. The project coordinators have also systematically engaged with 
critiques of qualitative research (e.g. Bryman, 2004), and sought to go beyond the 
quantitative SESI literatures and ‘reveal’vii how leadership may be hindered or 
helped by circumstances confronting the leader, as well as outlining in detail the or 
influences on the nature of leaders’ work (Leithwood, 2005). There are a number 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
95
of ontological and epistemological markers in the discussion about the ISSPP. An 
entity perspective is mobilised in the work. A clear distinction is made between 
numerous variables, and the idea of demonstrating links between variables 
legitimises the entity approach. Attempts to establish validity – yet an absence of 
any engagement with the extensive body of work on cross-cultural validity – and 
‘reveal’ how leadership is moderated by external and internal factors are signs of a 
belief in an external knowable reality that can be abstracted and measured. When 
combined with a belief in the universal ‘leadership’, despite the grounding in case 
studies, the constructed models of successful school principalship are decontextualised. Without any concrete empirical grounding, no level of 
sophisticated or systematic data generation methods can construct anything but 
abstracts measures of epistemic constructs loosely connected to some generative 
normative orientation. This brings me to the Australian contributions to the ISSPP, 
notably that of David Gurr, Lawrie Drysdale and colleagues at the University of 
Melbourne,viii and earlier, Bill Mulford from the University of Tasmania. 
The Australian contribution to the ISSPP began with case studies of five schools 
in Tasmania (Mulford and Johns, 2004) and nine schools in Victoria (Gurr et al., 
2003). Unlike Dinham’s ÆSOP which was focused on schools producing 
‘outstanding’ educational outcomes, the ISSPP is explicitly focused on school 
principals. In particular, principals who are acknowledged by their peers as being 
successful and who have led schools that demonstrate success through improved 
student learning outcomes and positive school review reports. Both the ÆSOP and 
ISSPP could be broadly labelled ‘positive organisational scholarship’,ix the ISSPP 
aligns most closely with ‘turnaround’ narratives due to its privileging of 
‘improvement’. The use of peers in the identification is important, but as with 
Dinham does some work around keeping within the ordinary language of the prescientific world. The explicit linking of ‘leadership’ to change in student outcomes 
is also consistent with my earlier critique of ‘leadership’ as an epistemic based on 
an a priori assumption and post event identification. 
For the most part, the cases constructed for the project by the Australian teams 
are examples of ‘turnaround’ leaders. This is why there is little, if any, problem 
with using the real names of the principals in the published work – usually frowned 
upon by human research ethics committees. Scattered through the extensive 
number of papers are hints of turnaround rhetoric. In the most recent paper, it 
explicitly argues that Jan Shrimpton had a reputation for improving schools in 
challenging contexts and was appointed in 1999 to address the very poor 
performance of the school (Garza et al., 2014). Further adding: 
Uniformly, Jan was credited as the main person behind this transformation. Jan was 
described as a person of integrity, high energy, sensitivity, enthusiasm and 
persistence. Her leadership style was consultative and conciliatory, and she was able 
to build positive relationships among staff, and with the parents. (Garza et al., 2014, 
p. 4) 
The ISSPP has, despite contemporary orthodoxy in the space being about 
distributed and collaborative models, explicitly privileged the role of the principal. 
Of course the project claims to do exactly that, so this is not a direct critique, 
CHAPTER 6 
96
however, in an era of rhetoric supporting more participatory forms of leadership, 
the ISSPP is evidence of inertia in research dating back to earlier trait and/or 
behavioural approaches to leadership studies. Like the ÆSOP work, and not 
surprising given the hegemonic ways of recognising successful schools, Gurr, 
Drysdale and Mulford (2005) note: 
… all principals were concerned to improve student learning outcomes in traditional 
areas such as literacy and numeracy. They did this by setting specific goals and 
continuously raising standards and expectations. For example, whilst school A is 
located in a low socio-economic area, the principal set an expectation that every child 
would achieve above the state average in literacy. (p. 547) 
The common-sense recognition of ‘success’ in schooling is premised on the 
measures of the time and space. As it stands currently, at both national and 
international levels, student test results are the benchmark data used to make 
judgements on the success of schools and school systems. It is a contested space, 
yet the ordinary language of the everyday is strongly connected to public 
discourses of international testing regimes and national systems of measurement. 
Unlike the ÆSOP work which explicitly focused on ‘outstanding’ outcomes, the 
ISSPP had an opportunity to ask questions about what markers were used in the 
construction of ‘successful’ by participants. Irrespective of the focus on an 
organisational role and its effect on school performance, the initial phases of the 
project provided a unique window into the very ways in which stakeholders (for 
lack of a better word) construct ‘success’. This would provide insights into what is 
seen as of worth among groups. It is this additional work that a relational approach 
would have brought to the ISSPP work. To do so however requires more 
substantive attention to, and grounding in, context. In a telling statement, Gurr, 
Drysdale and Goode (2010) note: 
… it does not explain why these interventions work in some circumstances and not in 
others. (p. 124) 
A common critique against ‘turnaround’ narratives is the absence of empirical 
grounding and the importance of context in understanding ‘leadership’. In other 
more methodological terms, the tension between the universal and the particular. It 
is the engagement with context, combined with the under-problematised 
acceptance of ‘leadership’, that is the greatest division between the relational 
approach and the ISSPP. 
Earlier work stressed that successful school princpalship was embedded in 
context (Gurr, Drysdale, & Mulford, 2005), Drysdale and Gurr (2011) argue,x
while context did impact on what successful leaders did, across different country 
contexts successful principals were found to be adaptive, reflective, and able to 
learn from their practice and experience to ensure school success. This is reflective 
of a set of traits and behaviours conducive to the perpetual improvement logic of 
the contemporary managerialist project. Similar to Dinham’s work, the ISSPP 
legitimises the underlying return on investment principle of the aspirational agency 
discourses where individual hard work and commitment can overcome structures. 
It does not overcome the tension between structure and agency rather just does not 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
97
engage. This is part of the separation of the research from the time and space in 
which practice takes place. As Day (2005) notes, successful principals 
demonstrated the ability to not be confined by the contexts in which they work.xi
They ‘do not comply, subvert, or overtly oppose. Rather they actively mediate and 
moderate within a set of core values and practices which transcend narrowly 
conceived improvement agendas’ (p. 581). The latter part is interesting. It almost 
calls for what is the difference between the mobilisation of ‘successful’ and 
‘narrow improvement agendas’. What is the break between the two? Without 
attention to this, something that potentially goes part of the way to engaging with 
the epistemological break discussed in Chapter Two, it is not entirely clear how the 
ISSPP differs. 
The importance of grounding the description is not lost in the ISSPP work. Rose 
Ylimaki and Stephen Jacobson (2011) argue that successful school leadership is 
context dependent in that global, national and local contexts need to be considered 
to fully understand the behaviour of principals. This is consistent with the 
argument I am building in this book and arguably the orthodoxy of the disciplinary 
space. However, it is the actual research design and its underlying generative 
principles that limit the work of time and space. As Gurr et al. (2006) argue, cross 
country analysis shows that principals are the key figure in a school’s success. It 
was however the sampling strategy of the study that centred identification on 
principals that were leading successful schools. Therefore, this line of argument is 
not surprising. Like Dinham’s ÆSOP work, the argument is tautological. Day 
(2005) argues that there are more similarities than differences in how the principals 
identified in the study lead. But then again, the ISSPP work sought to investigate 
commonalities. The methodological question this raises is the difference between 
confirming your original orientation (or simply seeking empirical validation for 
what you already believe) and actually developing a deeper understanding of the 
social world. This is an important observation. As noted by Leithwood and Day 
(2007), the findings of the ISSPP confirm the common set of leadership practices 
put forward by Kenneth Leithwood (one of the original co-ordinators of the ISSPP) 
and Carolyn Riehl (2005). To think this through for a moment, the ISSPP has, at a 
large scale, provided empirical validation for the work of one of the original 
coordinators. That original work was a synthesis of existing literatures. Therefore, 
the ISSPP has validated existing rhetoric in the discipline. It has provided a 
substantive knowledge base, but claims to have ‘contributed significantly to our 
understanding of successful school leadership’ (Drysdale & Gurr, 2011, p. 355) 
may be a stretch. 
The minimal grounding in time and space is why Gurr, Drysdale and colleagues 
can articulate an ‘Australian’ model of successful school principalship even though 
their work comes from, at best, two states of a nation.xii This generalisation is not a 
problem because as they cite, context matters, but there are some universal 
practices which transcend contexts. As Drysdale and Gurr (2014) argue: 
 [w]e support the proposition that school leadership broadly, and principal leadership 
in particular, can be identified, articulated and explained in terms of how it contributes 
to school success. We argue that whilst context does matter, successful school 
CHAPTER 6 
98
principals demonstrates a set of person qualities, skills and competences, and common 
practices that help them to adapt and succeed in any context. (p. 8) 
AND SO 
What would the relational approach bring to the ÆSOP and ISSPP work? To give 
this discussion some structure, I am going to use the key features of the relational 
programme to frame it. At the same time, I will also outline how the relational 
approach I am arguing for opens the prospect for potential dialogue across research 
traditions, leads to new questions being asked of ‘leadership’, while also providing 
further details of how to mobilise a relational approach. 
Most substantively, both the ÆSOP and ISSPP are ontologically complicity 
with orthodoxy of the social world. There is an implicit acceptance of the 
structures – namely bureaucratic, but I will return to this point later – of the social 
world and the importance of designated roles within them. The intellectual gaze of 
the researcher is never mentioned yet alone problematized. In the case of the 
ÆSOP work, even the partial funding from the Department of Education and 
Training is not engaged with. I am not suggesting anything inappropriate here. 
Rather, I am highlighting the unquestioned acceptance of the social world as it is. 
The idea of embedded and embodied actors is not entertained. As I argued in 
Chapter Two, the researcher does not stand outside of the social world they 
analyse, nor do they look down on it from above. Instead, the researcher is an actor 
in the social world and the pre-constructed objects of education administration 
become self-evident and legitimate through the actions of subjects (including the 
researcher). The social world deals with things that they construct, modify and 
transform through their actions, including scholarship, and the actions of others. 
This is why I have stressed the importance of relations, not just the entity 
perspective of relationships. It is as much about the relations between the 
researcher and the researched as it is research objects. Neither ÆSOP nor ISSPP 
explicitly engages with the epistemological and/or ontological preliminaries of 
their work. Had they done so, it would have required some work around the role of 
structure in the social world. ÆSOP and the ISSPP are complicit with an entity 
based ontology that privileges structures. These structures functions because of the 
perceived value of their product – education – and the prospect of mapping 
relationships with other entities. Unlike the systems thinking, an entity perspective, 
evident in the ÆSOP and ISSPP a relational approach allows focus not just on the 
‘observed systems, but also the observing system, the context from which 
knowledge emerges’ (Montuori & Purser, 1996, p. 185). 
Engaging with the ontological complicity of the research would also require the 
ÆSOP and ISSPP researchers to do some work around their core substantive 
concepts of ‘leadership’, ‘outstanding’, and ‘successful’ among others. It is this 
lack of attention that breaks down potential dialogue across traditions. By failing to 
attend to the construction and legitimation of the research object, readers – 
potential critics – can quickly dismiss the work on the basis of a lack of alignment 
with their own normative orientation. Therefore, irrespective of the sophistication 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
99
of the research methods from that point, the potential value of the work is lost in 
the minimal explicit attention paid to the preliminaries of the work. I argue that the 
potential for inter-tradition dialogue, or at least scholarly respect, lies in the 
meaningful articulation of the preliminaries of the work. This is not to suggest that 
critical analysis of one another’s work would not continue, it would – potentially 
even increase. The critique however would shift to the construction of the research 
object and ways of knowing. The logic of justification, how we defend our 
knowledge claims, becomes a focal point. It is this argument for research, 
refutation in the face of critique and ongoing defence of approaches that enables 
inter-tradition dialogue. Lack of attention to these matters has, for the most part, 
led to the benign neglect knowledge workers in educational administration 
demonstrate for one another. 
In contrast, the relational approach explicitly articulates the underlying 
generative principles of the work and engages with the construction of the preconstructed research object. In doing so, the relational approach brings a degree of 
rigour and robustness to the discussion of key concepts and their relations with 
time and space. Such an approach offers a potential avenue for inter-tradition 
dialogue as the focus is on the construction, or generative principles, more so than 
the actual findings and arguments. This gets beyond the benign neglect for 
different traditions on the basis that they do not conform to your underlying 
normative orientation. The ÆSOP and ISSPP would have generated substantial 
data around the original construction of ‘successful’ and ‘outstanding’ in their 
sampling approaches. Therefore, in revisiting that data, the research teams could do 
this work. However, this does require engaging with the orientation of the 
researcher in the process. 
This brings me to the very design of the work. As social scientists, we need to 
submit to scientific scrutiny everything that makes the orthodox experience of the 
social world possible. By remaining in the pre-scientific space, that of ordinary 
language, it is possible to constructs lists of the traits and behaviours of successful 
principals and/or outstanding departments. But is this any more than a quasiscientific rationalisation, and legitimation, of the social world as it is? Following 
on from the ontological complicity argument, a relational approach integrates the 
observer into the process of knowing. Furthermore, it is based on the premise that 
whatever is being studied must be thought of as a configuration of relations, not as 
independent entities. This is why notions of ‘leadership’, ‘success’, and 
‘outstanding’ are problematized. More attention is to be paid to the front end of 
scholarly work in the approach I am advocating. This work may not always appear 
in texts, is particularly difficult in the 20 minute conference presentation, and a 
challenge in the 6000 journal article. It may also be subjected to arguments of 
being ‘ivory tower’ work or of little relevance for practice.xiii However, in failing to 
attend to the construction of the research object, or to problematize the legitimation 
of particular discourses, research is very limited in what it can actually say about 
anything. This goes well beyond the simplistic argument that complimentary 
methods can be used to overcome weakness in one another. 
CHAPTER 6 
100
The relational approach I am advancing is also less concerned with simplistic 
methodological divisions – quantitative, qualitative, mixed methods, or objective 
and subjective – and more concerned with coherent designs for the questions being 
asked. In the ÆSOP, and specifically the ISSPP, there are attempts to overcome the 
limitations of a particular approach by adopting complimentary approaches. The 
Australian ISSPP work sought to generate data through multiple perspectives to 
overcome limitations of standard approaches (Gurr, Drysdale, & Mulford, 2006) 
and to contextualise data and increase trustworthiness (Drysdale & Gurr, 2011). 
While this is admirable, it is the epistemological and ontological preliminaries of 
scholarship which limits what can and cannot be said about the research object. 
The ÆSOP work suffers from a bias sample – as the absence of poor performing 
schools means there is little that can be said about distinctions – an underproblematised perspective on ‘outstanding’ performance and the role of 
‘leadership’ in bringing that into being, not to mention the post event identification, 
meaning that at best it can offer an instrumental list of behaviours present in 
specific contexts. It does not even go far enough to offer insights into why certain 
leaders were given flexibility from systemic authorities. The ISSPP explicitly 
attempts to mobilise scientific rhetoric to add weight to its arguments. Two things 
matter here. First, no level of sophisticated design can overcome lack of attention 
to the construction of the research object. In other words, techniques cannot 
overcome weak methodology. So having highly developed, or not, sampling built 
upon different types of schools in different locations to compare on some universal 
construct is not enough. Poorly done design can actually remove any chance of 
describing that which was intended to be studied in the first place (Eacott, 2010). 
This attention is not about operationally defining the object, rather serious attention 
to the construction of the object in time and space. It is arguably through this path 
that any scientific legitimacy can be achieved in the broader academy – an 
enduring issue for educational administration scholarship. The second issue is that 
given the particularity of education, context matters. In an early paper, Gurr, 
Drysdale and Mulford (2006) argue: 
… the disregard for country context is worrying, as despite observations of the 
apparent homogenisation of world education, there remain important differences in 
how countries approach school education. (p. 372) 
What makes this statement interesting is that as the ISSPP progressed, the concern 
with context decreased. It is further complicated by Gurr, Drysdale and Goode 
(2011) critiquing earlier research, noting: 
While this research explored school leadership broadly, it relied on overseas research 
and a somewhat unsophisticated view of school leadership. (p. 114) 
Despite this, the ISSPP suffers from much the same matters that Gurr, Drysdale 
and colleagues critique. In seeking to construct a universal account of successful 
school principalship, they produce an unsophisticated view of school leadership. 
While the increasing complexity of the model as depicted in diagrams may give an 
impression of sophistication, the models remains a mapping exercise of entities 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
101
connected to school performance. There is also the matter of context, or arguably 
better termed, empirical grounding. This is not to say that the ISSPP work is not 
grounded in empirical data rather that the empirical work is abstracted from the 
time and space in which it takes place. Elsewhere, Gladys Asuga and I, drawing 
from the indigenous management scholarship movement, argue that comparative 
studies which take as their foci two (or more) completely different contexts and 
make arguments about similarities and differences are no longer sufficient – if they 
ever were (Eacott & Asuga, 2014). Our argument is that it is inappropriate to 
conceive of any individual educator, school, school system, and so on, operating in 
an apolitical or isolated social space. The challenge we laid out is the question: why 
is this taking place in this space at this particular time? As noted in numerous 
places throughout this book, context matters. This is a well-established and 
accepted position in the scholarship of educational leadership, management and 
administration. ÆSOP simply ignores context, instead focusing on the epistemic of 
‘outstanding’ and an unproblematised notion of comparative school performance. 
ISSPP on the other hand, makes the claim that less successful principals are more 
likely to be impacted by context specific factors than successful principals. This 
claim ignores the entire, and rather large, body of work on the role of outside 
school factors in the outcomes of schooling. In both cases, ‘success’ or 
‘outstanding performance’ are viewed as a victory over context. This aspirational 
tone, very common in educational administration literatures, is coherent with a 
technicist view where the social world is malleable through a series of logical 
incremental steps and that anything is possible if you work hard enough. In doing 
so, agency overcomes structure and this agency is mobilised at the individual level. 
Such a notion removes history. From the relational approach, practice – that which 
we seek to study – is historicising. It has a history and makes history. It is a 
temporal event. This is not to mobilise a static history, but one that is always in 
motion, a dynamic conceptualisation that influences but does not define practice in 
the here and now. 
ÆSOP and the ISSPP do mobilise temporality. Dinham focuses on schools/ 
departments with sustained outstanding outcomes. Gurr, Drysdale and colleagues 
pay attention to principals who have led sustained improvement in outcomes. They 
further embed a temporal dimension through the revisiting of case studies five 
years after initial contact to engage with the level of sustainability of changes. 
However, as pointed out earlier in this book, this mobilisation of temporality is 
limited to clock time. When combined with the reification of practice in their 
construction of the research narrative and the abstraction of outcomes as proxies 
for performance (test outcomes), the ISSPP work does not necessarily go beyond 
an uncritical adoption of reproduction discourses through its failure to identify 
under what conditions individual schools and principals work. Similarly, the 
example in ÆSOP of systemic authorities turning a blind eye to acting outside the 
norm, fails to articulate what forms of professional esteem is required to achieve 
this level of flexibility. By failing to acknowledge this, the explanatory power of 
the ÆSOP work is reduced, if not removed. Even the prospect of description is 
reduced as the portrayal ignores the complexity of the social world. 
CHAPTER 6 
102
The role of description is rarely touched on in the literatures of educational 
administration. It is often demonised as the lowest form of scholarly activity and 
critiques frequently claim that as a disciplinary space, educational administration is 
made up of too many small scale descriptions of individual turnaround narratives. I 
argue that this critique and dismissal of description is premature. In seeking to go 
beyond description, even if implicitly, ÆSOP crafted case studies of outstanding 
departments, leaders, and schools. ISSPP sought scale, seeking to overcome the 
limited value of small case studies by having lots of them, and from different 
contexts. It is however, description that enables us to move beyond the discursive 
nature of the social world without claiming to be outside it. It means bringing to 
the level of discourse the problems and complexities of the social world. Where 
description falls down is the privileging of the empirical problem over the 
theoretical. Critical arguments against description are really critical of the 
privileging of the empirical problem. The inability to generalise from case studies 
is because the argument is limited to a specific empirical problem locating in a 
particular time and space. It is possible to make a larger (theoretical) argument 
from a single case and the case provides empirical evidence. This evidence is not 
conclusive, but if based on rigorous and robust scholarship can be convincing. A 
useful resource for this is Colin Evers and Echo H. Wu’s (2006) Generalising from 
single case studies: Epistemological reflections. Consistent with the argument 
throughout the book so far, rigorous and robust scholarship is the single defining 
feature of what I am arguing for. 
To make this a productive space, rigorous and robust case studies can be 
replicated elsewhere, to build a substantive basis for larger scale claims. This is to 
be admired in the ISSPP. Their model is very similar to that which I am arguing for 
here. It is also consistent with how legitimacy of knowledge claims is achieved in 
the natural sciences. The difference is that I contend that such a model is based on 
substantive attention to the preliminaries of the work and not some uncritical 
adoption of popular rhetoric. That said, as Evers and Wu (2006) argue, researchers 
bring an impressive amount of empirical knowledge that is contained within the 
theories that are used to make observations, to classify phenomena, and to 
understand and interpret cases. This challenges the notion of blind empiricism, but 
does not mean that researchers make these preliminaries explicit. 
The point I am making here is that I seek not to critique ÆSOP and ISSPP for 
the sake of it. Rather, I seek an ongoing opening, a space where we can 
communicate and engage around the research object, how we know it, and what we 
can say about it. To do this requires a point of entry. For me, this point of entry is 
the construction of the research object, hence my attention and constant arguing for 
the epistemological break with ordinary language. A similar, yet different, 
argument runs in philosophy and the notion of a ‘touchstone’ (see Walker, 1985; 
Evers & Lakomski, 1991). Without this point of entry the spaces that exist between 
the parallel monologues of the domain persist and will arguably never close. 
Importantly, my argument is not for a single approach or position for the 
scholarship of educational administration. The loss of diversity would be 
detrimental to advancing knowledge. Instead, what I am arguing for, without 
RETHINKING SCHOOL LEADERSHIP 
103
surrendering my own position, is a means for inter-tradition dialogue. Not speaking 
past one another, or ignoring each other. This is consistent with the relational 
approach I am advancing as for me it is not only inappropriate but impossible to 
see different research traditions as entities – separate from one another. 
Approaches to research can only be understood in relation to one another. All 
approaches are related in the dynamics of the social world and there are productive 
spaces yet to be engaged with at scale. 
NOTES 
i
 Due to the scale of the Australian academy – when compared with the US or even the UK – there is 
somewhat of an unwritten rule that scholars do not do work in the same space as colleagues. The 
closest exception is the overlap of the International Successful School Principalship Project and the 
International Principal Preparation Project. But for the most part, while there are examples of 
complimentary work, scholars tend to stay out of each other’s way. ii For a useful analysis of non-academic outcomes of schooling I suggest James Ladwig’s (2010) 
paper ‘Beyond academic outcomes’, published in Review of Research in Education. iii It should be noted that while Dinham cites the Strauss and Corbin texts, GT as an intellectual space 
has numerous streams, including, but not exclusively, the Barney Glaser followers, the Anselm 
Strauss and Juliet Corbin stream, and more recently, the Constructivist GT stream (particularly 
based around the work of Anthony Bryant; Kathy Charmaz; Jane Mills, Ann Bonner and Karen 
Francis; and Robert Thornberg. iv As an aside, the notion of a ‘knowledge base’, mentioned in the quote, and its implication for 
knowledge production is problematized by Fenwick English (2006). v
 As a case in point, see the flagship journal of the movement – School Effectiveness and School 
Improvement published by Springer. vi It does always intrigue me the use of the term ‘real world’. While I understand the usage is arguably 
to reflect a division between the laboratory of natural sciences, or the unhelpful binary of theory and 
practice, the notion of a ‘real world’ arguably suggests the presence of an ‘unreal world’. Although 
this may seem like semantics, for those interested in ontology and epistemology, the raising of this 
question would potentially generate some interesting dialogue between peers. vii This is the term of choice by Leithwood – not mine. 
viii It is to be noted that Stephen Dinham is currently located at the University of Melbourne also. As a 
result, I do not imagine getting any invites or job offers there in the immediate future. ix Positive organisation scholarship is an umbrella concept used to emphasise what leads to positive 
organisational deviance – performance against others. While it does not completely ignore 
dysfunction and (below) average performing organisations, POS is mostly interested in the 
motivations and effects associated with positive phenomena. This includes how positive deviance is 
facilitated, how they can be identified and how organisations can capitalise on them (see Spreitzer & 
Cameron, 2011). x
 He actually uses ‘found’ which again is evident of an external knowable reality. xi The idea of multiple ‘contexts’ is further evidence of an entity perspective, one where practice is 
seen differently by different groups (entities). In a post-structural sense, this would be arguably 
articulated through multiple subjectivities. Day is however not taking a post-structuralist approach, 
and instead is confirming the entity approach and the partitioning of the social world into entities 
which can be mapped against one another. xii The model has had a few titles. Original labels include: Victoria model of successful school 
principalship (Gurr, Drysdale, & Mulford, 2006); successful school leadership – an intervention 
based model (Gurr & Drysdale, 2007); Mulford-Johns model of successful school principalship 
(Mulford & Johns, 2004); Tasmanian model of successful school leadership (Gurr, Drysdale, & 
CHAPTER 6 
104
Mulford, 2006). These were then combined to form an integrated Tasmanian and Victorian model 
(Gurr, Drysdale & Mulford, 2006) before ‘an Australian model of educational leadership’ (Gurr & 
Drysdale, 2008; Drysdale & Gurr, 2011). xiii The term ‘ivory tower’ is most frequently mobilised against scholarship taking place in universities 
which appears to have little relevance or application in the ‘real’ world – that which is beyond the 
university. It is part of the rhetoric concerned with the theory and practice divide. 
REFERENCES 
Bachelard, G. (1984[1934]). The new scientific spirit (P.A. Heelan, Trans.). Boston, MA: Beacon Press. 
[Originally published as Le nouvel esprit scientifique (Paris: Presses Universitaries de France).] 
Birkinshaw, J., Healey, M. P., Suddaby, R., & Weber, K. (2014). Debating the future of management 
research. Journal of Management Studies, 51(1), 38-55. 
Bryman, A. (2004). Social research methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Buber, M. (1981[1923]). I and thou: The dialogic principle. New York, NY: Dutton. [Originally 
published as Ich und du: das dialogische prinzip (Germany: Darmstadt).] 
Caldwell, B. J. (2007). Educational leadership and school renewal: Introduction by the guest editor. 
Australian Journal of Education, 51(3), 225-227. 
Day, C. (2005) Introduction to ISSPP. Journal of Educational Leadership, 43(6), 533-538. 
Day, C., & Gurr, D. (Eds.). (2014) Leading schools successfully: Stories from the field. London: 
Routledge. 
Day, C., Harris, A., Hadfield, M., Tolley, H., & Beresfield, J. (2000). Leading schools in time of 
change. Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press. 
Dinham, S. (2005). Principal leadership for outstanding educational outcomes. Journal of Educational 
Administration, 43(4), 338-356 
Dinham, S. (2007a). The secondary head of department and the achievement of exceptional student 
outcomes. Journal of Educational Administration, 45(1), 62-79. 
Dinham, S. (2007b). How schools get moving and keep improving: Leadership for teacher learning, 
student success and school renewal. Australian Journal of Education, 51(3), 263-275. 
Dinham, S. (2008). How to get your school moving and improving. Camberwell, Vic: Australian 
Council for Educational Research (ACER) Press. 
Dinham, S. (2010). Leadership for exceptional educational outcomes. Brisbane: Post Pressed. 
Drysdale, L., & Gurr, D. (2011). The theory and practice of successful school leadership in Australia. 
School Leadership & Management, 31(4), 355-368. 
Drysdale, L., & Gurr, D. (2014). Reflections on a decade of research of the international successful 
school principalship project. Paper presented at the 2nd Educational Leadership, Management and 
Administration (ELMA) Theory Workshop, 3-4 July, North Sydney, Australia. 
Eacott, S. (2010). Bourdieu’s strategies and the challenge for educational leadership. International 
Journal of Leadership in Education, 13(3), 265-281. 
Eacott, S. (2011a). School leadership and strategy in managerialist times. Rotterdam, the Netherlands: 
Sense Publishers. 
Eacott, S. (2011b). Preparing ‘educational’ leaders in managerialist times: An Australian story. Journal 
of Educational Administration and History, 43(1), 43-59. 
Eacott, S. (2011c). Liberating schools through devolution: the Trojan horse of the state. Leading & 
Managing, 17(1), 75-83. 
Eacott, S., & Asuga, G. (2014). School leadership preparation and development in Africa: A critical 
insight. Educational Management Administration and Leadership, 42(6), 919-934. 
English, F. W. (2006). The unintended consequences of a standardised knowledge base in advancing 
educational leadership preparation. Educational Administration Quarterly, 42(3), 461-472. 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
105
Evers, C. W., & Lakomski, G. (1991). Knowing educational administration: Contemporary 
methodological controversies in educational administration research. New York, NY: Pergamon 
Press. 
Evers, C. W., & Wu, E. H. (2006). On generalising from single case studies: Epistemological 
reflections. Journal of Philosophy of Education 40(4), 511-526.
Garza, E., Drysdale, L., Gurr, D., Jacobson, S., & Merchant, B. (2014). Leadership for school success: 
Lessons from effective principals. International Journal of Educational Management, 28(7), 798-
811. 
Gladwell, M. (2008). Outliers: The story of success. New York, NY: Penguin. 
Graham, L., Paterson, D., & Stevens, R. (2010). Exceptional educational equity programs. Brisbane: 
Post Pressed. 
Gurr, D., & Drysdale, L. (2007). Models of successful school leadership: Victorian case studies. In K. 
Leithwood & C. Day (Eds.), Successful school leadership in times of change (pp. 39-58). Dordrecht, 
the Netherlands: Springer-Kluwer. 
Gurr, D., & Drysdale, L. (2008). Reflections on twelve years of studying the leadership of Victorian 
schools. International Studies in Educational Administration, 36(2), 22-37. 
Gurr, D., Drysdale, L., & Goode, H. (2010). Successful school leadership in Australia: A research 
agenda. International Journal of Learning, 17(4), 113-129. 
Gurr, D., Drysdale, L., & Mulford, B. (2005). Successful principal leadership: Australian case studies. 
Journal of Educational Administration, 43(6), 539-551. 
Gurr, D., Drysdale, L., & Mulford, B. (2006). Models of successful school principal leadership. School 
Leadership & Management, 26(4), 371-395. 
Gurr, D., Natalie, D. E., Ford, P., Drysdale, L., & Swann, R. (2003). Successful school leadership in 
Victoria: Three case studies. Leading & Managing, 9(1), 18-37. 
Ladwig, J.G. (2010). Beyond academic outcomes. Review of Research in Education, 34(1), 113-141. 
Leithwood, K. (2005). Understanding successful principal leadership: Progress on a broken front. 
Journal of Educational Administration, 43(6), 619-629. 
Leithwood, K., & Day, C. (Eds.). (2007). Successful school leadership in time of change. Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands: Springer-Kluwer. 
Leithwood, K., & Riehl, C. (2005). What we know about successful school leadership. In W. Firestone 
& C. Riehl (Eds.), A new agenda: Directions for research on educational leadership (pp. 22-47). 
New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
Montuori, A., & Purser, R. (1996). Ecological futures: Systems theory, postmodernism, and 
participative learning in an age of uncertainty. In D. Boje, R. Gephart, & T. Thatchenkery (Eds.), 
Postmodern management and organizational theory. Thousands Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Moos, L., Johansson, O., & Day, C. (Eds.) (2011), How school principals sustain success over time: 
International perspectives. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer-Kluwer. 
Mulford, B. (2007) Overview of research on Australian educational leadership 2001-2005. Winmalee, 
NSW: Australian Council for Educational Leaders. 
Mulford, B. (2007). Successful school principalship in Tasmania. In K. Leithwood & C. Day (Eds.), 
Successful school leadership in times of change (pp. 17-38). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: SpringerKluwer. 
Mulford, B., & Johns, S. (2004). Successful school leadership. Leading & Managing, 10(1), 45-76. 
Panizzon, D., Barnes, G., & Pegg, J. (2010). Exceptional outcomes in science education. Brisbane: Post 
Pressed. 
Paterson, D., Graham, L., & Stevens, R. (2010). Exceptional student welfare programs. Brisbane: Post 
Pressed. 
Pegg, J., Lynch, T., & Panizzon, D. (2010). Exceptional outcomes in mathematics education. Brisbane: 
Post Pressed. 
Robinson, V. M. J., Lloyd, C. A., & Rowe, K. J. (2008). The impact of leadership on student outcomes: 
An analysis of the differential effects of leadership types. Educational Administration Quarterly, 
44(5), 635-674. 
CHAPTER 6 
106
Samier, E. (2006). Educational administration as a historical discipline: An apologia pro vita historia. 
Journal of Educational Administration and History, 38(2), 125-139. 
Sawyer, W., Baxter, D., & Brock, P. (2010). Exceptional outcomes in ESL/literacy education. Brisbane: 
Post Pressed. 
Sawyer, W., Brock, P., & Baxter, D. (2010). Exceptional outcomes in English education. Brisbane: Post 
Pressed. 
Spreitzer, G. M., & Cameron, K. S. (Eds.). (2011). The Oxford handbook of positive organizational 
scholarship. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and 
techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Walker, J. C. (1985). The philosopher’s touchstone: Towards a pragmatic unity in educational studies. 
Journal of Philosophy of Education, 19(2), 181-198. 
Ylimaki, R., & Jacobson, S. (Eds.). (2011). US and cross-national policies, practices and preparation: 
Implications for successful instructional leadership, organizational learning, and culturally 
responsive practices. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer-Kluwer. 
 
107
CHAPTER SEVEN 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
INTRODUCTION 
On an international scale, irrespective of systemic variance, the office of the 
principal – the principalship – is a key component in our conceptualisation of the 
social order of schooling. Large-scale projects such as the ISSPP reinforce the 
centrality of the principalship. My claim here is not that the principalship is a 
universal and stable role, rather that the idea of an administrative position such as 
the principalship – or headteacher to think with the UK vernacular – is shared 
across many, at least English speaking, Western nations. To simply accept the 
principalship as a given would be to display the ontological complicity of which I 
am critical of in Chapter Two. After all, the notion of the principal is contested. 
Somewhat ironically, contemporary policy moves around school governance have 
raised the profile of the principalship despite the demonising of bureaucracy and 
the rhetoric of flatter organisations, networks, distributed leadership and 
participatory decision making within decentralised or devolved systems. This was 
pivotal to the discussion in Chapter Four on the recasting of administrative labour. 
Reinforced through our own lived experience of schooling and an ontological 
complicity with seeing organisations – if not the entire social world – through 
hierarchical structures, the theoretical and empirical schemata through which we 
come to know, do and be labour in education holds the principalship as the key 
administrative role (although it is now more common practice to go by ‘leader’ or 
even ‘manager’) in an educational institution. This recasting of administrative 
labour places not only the school but the somewhat timeless image of the 
principalship under revision. 
Since at least the 1960s almost all education systems in Western democratic 
societies have implemented some degree of reform concerned with devolution, 
decentralisation and/or autonomy. This is part of what Bob Lingard (2010) 
describes, with origins found in comparative education, as ‘policy borrowing’ 
within a context of global education governance (Sellar & Lingard, 2013). The 
global spread of school-based management or its various facsimiles, and its 
manifestation as ‘principal autonomy’ (as is the current policy agenda in 
Australia), is consistent with what Sotira Grek (2009) labels the ‘comparative turn’ 
in education policy. This is where a proposed reform (e.g. principal autonomy) is a 
feature of a ‘successful’ education system elsewhere, yet absent in the country in 
question and its introduction is thought of – or argued for – as a means to bring 
about improved performance. For some, this is evidence of the global spread of the 
contemporary managerialist project (see Klikauer, 2013) and the adoption of a 
theory of the firm, including the pursuit of competitive advantage. Australia has 
CHAPTER 7 
108
been one of the leading embracers of the managerialist – although frequently 
coming under the broader brushstroke of ‘neoliberalism’ – agenda. The adoption of 
practices from private enterprise into the public services, and in particular 
education, and the social Darwinism of the market have become key policy levers 
in the recasting of educational administrative labour. 
In this chapter, I use the relational research programme that I am advancing in 
this book to ask: What does the principalship look like after autonomy? Despite the 
range of objections that could be raised regarding the thinking of contemporary 
educational administration with and through the principalship, it is the contention 
of this chapter that it is in the recasting of administrative labour that we find 
important resources for the task of theorising educational administration, even if at 
first sight, these resources appear to bear little connection to, or resonance with, 
contemporary discourses of ‘leadership’ in education. The usefulness and 
relevance of these resources may only be made explicit if we understand recent 
policy moves as concerning a recasting of administrative labour, an understanding 
that positions bureaucratic roles within institutions not only in regard to 
contemporary events, but also in regard to questions of the futures of schooling. 
This is more than an intellectual puzzlement. It is a serious question for educational 
administration as domain of knowledge production and of practice. Contemporary 
discourses in the discipline have exponentially grown the number of adjectival 
leaderships, challenged traditional/classic organisational structures and then 
offered autonomy as the solution. In contemporary Australia this autonomy is not 
constructed and argued for as ‘school’ autonomy, as is often the case with schoolbased management rhetoric, rather, the current Tony Abbott led Federal LiberalNational Party government is arguing for ‘principal’ autonomy. As a result, I argue 
that the current autonomy agenda is a significant point for the office of the 
principalship both theoretically and empirically. 
RECASTING ADMINISTRATIVE LABOUR 
Luc Boltanski and Eve Chiapello (2005[1999]) argue that since the mid-1970s, 
capitalism abandoned the hierarchical Fordist work structure primarily on the basis 
of the attack on the alienation of everyday life by capitalism and bureaucracy. 
Temporally, this aligns with the proliferation of the ‘leadership’ industry in broader 
management and administrative discourses. As Barbara Kellerman (2013) argues, 
initially spawned and sustained in the United States in the 1970s, when corporate 
America was, for the first time since the Second World War, fearful of competition 
from abroad, notably Japan, ‘leadership’ became the dominant rhetoric in the 
pursuit of improved organisational performance. The genesis of leadership as a 
label, the existence of which implies a distinction from previous labels 
management and administration is rarely questioned in educational administration 
(see Chapter Three). However, there are significant limitations in constructing an 
understanding of administration in a linear or chronological manner.i
 History plays 
a small role in the Anglophone educational administration discourses (Samier, 
2006). With philosophy, sociology and the humanities, it has been forced out of 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
109
preparation and development programmes during the standards era (English, 2006), 
and as with public administration, there is a general ahistorical approach to 
scholarship (Adams, 1992). A considerable limitation in our conceptualisation of 
administration, and administrative labour, is the constructed point of origin within 
the modern bureaucracy – that articulated by Max Weber (1978[1922]) – rather 
than recognising a lineage dating back to at least ancient times. Therefore, as 
Eugenie Samier (2006) argues: 
Many administrative phenomena are really historical topics rather than strictly 
managerial problems. First, those involving forces external to organisations that 
influence decisions and actions, which are regarded simplistically as ‘environmental 
factors’ in systems theory, would be more fruitfully pursued as the study of 
administration under different historical conditions, such as colonisation and 
decolonisation, social unrest, revolt, revolution and the introduction of new political 
and social values like equality and equity, all of which have had a significant 
influence on educational systems. (pp. 131-132) 
Although for some, the administration of education is changing to reflect corporate 
ideals, or a model of the firm, there is a long history of broader managerial 
discourses in educational administration. It is significant to remember that the 
establishment of departments of educational administration in US universities, a 
key event in the creation of the discipline, aligns with the publication of Frederick 
Winslow Taylor’s (1911) The principles of scientific management. Furthermore, it 
is well documented that many of the early high profile professors of educational 
administration, such as Ellwood Cubberly at Stanford, did not have a strong 
scholarly backgrounds in education (Bates, 2010; Tynack & Hansot, 1982). More 
so, Raymond Callahan’s (1962) classic Education and the cult of efficiency 
explicitly outlines how managerial approaches were a generative feature of 
education policy and reforms during the first half of the 20th century in the US. 
This remains important because as Robert Kanigel (1997) argues, Taylorism is so 
embedded in our understanding of organisations and their management that we 
frequently fail to recognise it. 
This is not to suggest that there is not an intensification of managerialism in 
contemporary times, rather it is to make the point that this is not a ‘new’ 
phenomenon. To ignore the history is to de-contextualise – in both time and space 
– the argument. In other words, conventional ways of thinking make it unlikely, if 
not impossible, to conceive of educational administration in any other way than the 
existing orthodoxy. This is not necessarily the radical paradigm shifts articulated 
by Thomas Kuhn (1962), or even the epistemological break argued for by Gaston 
Bachelard (1984[1934]) – later used by Louis Althusser (1969[1965]) and Pierre 
Bourdieu with Jean-Claude Chamboredon and Jean-Claude Passeron (1991[1968]) 
– rather, I am building an argument for a form of scholarship that pays attention to 
locating the scholarly narrative in time and space. 
Structurally, education is one of the greatest achievements of administration. 
Systemic comprehensive education offered to a nation’s citizens – and in 
particular, youth – is at a scale that very few national, and international, reforms 
can claim. What is at stake in the current drive for autonomy is the underlying 
CHAPTER 7 
110
generative principle of education – universality. Autonomy discourses, those which 
are about creating localised distinctions, are part of a broader reform of public 
administration. Post-bureaucratic models of educational administration, 
particularly public education, shift the principalship from the local face of a state 
agenda to a role under revision. This ‘revised’ principalship is not the same unit of 
analysis that is the focus of critical literatures. Rather, it is a construction which 
enables the dismissal of critical analysis through the appearance of emancipatory 
potential and the prospect of moving beyond the structural constraints of the 
bureaucracy. This is an important move of the managerialist project, one that has 
the potential to shut down the alternative. But this alternative is one constructed 
within existing ways of thinking. Built upon entities, including the construction of 
the state, school, principal, community and so on, the dominant position has these 
as related, yet separate, entities. A relational approach explores the ‘spaces 
between’ people and phenomena in organising education. Martin Buber, a 
theological philosopher, contends that the self and the other are not separable (see 
Buber, 1981) but are rather co-evolving in ways that need to be accounted for in 
our ways of knowing and being in the world. The notion of space in between is 
also evident in physics. In the pursuit of identifying the basic building blocks of the 
natural world, quantum physicists found that atomic particles appear more as 
relations than as discrete objects (Capra, 1975; Wolf, 1980), and that space itself is 
not empty but filled with potential (Bohm, 1988). This is why I argue that whatever 
is being studied needs to be thought of as a configuration of relations and not 
individual entities. 
In response to critiques of school performance and constraints on innovation, 
contemporary discourses in educational administration have sought to break down 
bureaucratic structures to argue that ‘relief from stultifying mediocrity lies in 
deregulation and local control of schools (Timar & Kirp, 1988, p. 75). This is not 
part of a conceptual shift that goes beyond entity thinking. Rather, it is about a redistribution of the entities within the system. The relationships between entities 
might change but the underlying entity based ontology remains. Long-time 
advocates of self-managing schools, Brian Caldwell and Jim Spinks (1988, 1992, 
1998, 2013) argue that self-management provides the basis for a new 
professionalism and new forms of innovation that will provide a quality future 
focussed education for all. However, this stream of work is heavily criticised for 
over-playing the impact of reforms (Wolf, 2002) and overlooking many of the 
structural inequities of society that come to the fore through schooling (Thrupp, 
2003) and exponentially grown through school choice and self-managing schools 
(Smyth, 1993, 2008, 2011). This critique can be summarised as highlighting the 
importance of the spaces between. Within the entity perspective it is common for 
the research object to be dislocated from its empirical grounding. This was 
demonstrated in the previous chapter in the analysis of the ÆSOP and ISSPP work. 
The research object is constructed and sustained as though it is beyond the context 
in which it takes place. Boundaries between the object and context remain. They 
can be mapped, and even claimed to have reciprocity, but they remain separate. 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
111
On the StudentsFirst website, the Australian Federal government articulates its 
position stating: 
Both internationally and in Australia, evidence emphasises the advantages of school 
autonomy as part of a comprehensive strategy for school improvement. 
In Australia, schools in all states and territories have been working towards more 
autonomous and independent models to improve education outcomes. 
The Australian Government also recognises that giving schools and school leaders 
greater autonomy can help improve student results. 
Great schools have leaders and teachers who have the independence to make decisions 
and develop the courses that best meets he needs of their students. 
The recasting of administrative labour is very much a socio-historical event, one 
that requires substantive grounding in a particular time and space. In the example 
above, the notion of autonomy is given a history – and scale – through reference to 
‘evidence’ from both Australia and internationally. This suggests that schooling is 
a universal and there is a utility to autonomy. As an independent variable, it can be 
inserted into a different location and because it is unaffected by context, produce 
comparable, even reliable, results. Autonomy is mobilised as though it has a stable 
meaning and serves to explain variance in performance. The trajectory of the 
context, based on its history and socio-political context is not of importance as the 
entity is independent. The context is mentioned in the example by virtue of all 
states and territories having undertaken some reform in the space previously, and 
the Principal Autonomy agenda is therefore a natural extension of that work. It 
overlooks long standing, and ongoing, debates about the ‘success’ of loosely 
coupled autonomy reforms in the country (see Smyth, 1993, 2011) and 
significantly, links to improving schooling. Drawing on confirmatory evidence, 
much like Helen Gunter’s (2001) claim about policy makers cherry picking 
instrumental, humanist and scientific research, and ignoring alternate literatures, 
autonomy is predicted – on the basis of pre-existing knowledge – as an inherently 
good solution for performance issues. There is also the commodification of 
autonomy as government is ‘giving’ schools, and school leaders, greater autonomy. 
The commodification is consistent with critiques of autonomy discourses (Eacott, 
2011). In the ordinary language of the everyday, and the instrumental, autonomy is 
constructed as the administrative key to unleashing the potential of the 
principalship to achieve the highest levels of school outcomes. However, I argue 
that the pursuit of autonomy is a fallacy. As Bourdieu (2005[2000]) argues, in 
heavily administered societies, much like a gravitational field, even the person 
perceived to have absolute power – or decision making authority – is him/herself 
held within the constraints of administration. That is, nobody knows anymore who 
is the subject of the final decision, and the place of the decision is both everywhere 
and nowhere. This is counter to the illusion of the decision maker and the notion of 
absolute autonomy. It also opens the prospect of a more relational way of 
understanding education administration – one that goes beyond the construction of 
separate entities. 
CHAPTER 7 
112
Common-sense usage of ‘autonomy’ suggests a separation, even severance, of 
the principalship from a system or institutional context. This is an explicit 
demonstration of an entity perspective as the system and individual institution are 
constructed as separable entities. Despite this entity perspective, an inherent 
tension in autonomy arguments is the embedding of a requisite tie to the local. I 
argue that the principalship can only be understood through its relations with other 
actors and institutions, going as far to say that the principalship owes as much of its 
constitution to these relations as it does to anything else. These relations are only 
brought into existence in a particular time and space. This means that social 
activity is not viewed or mapped using measurable units of the clock but rather as 
actions taking place in relation to other actions. These relations are reflective of the 
various dynamics underway in the social space. 
THE CENTRALITY OF TEMPORALITY 
Kathryn Fahy, Mark Easterby-Smith and Jon Erland Lervik (2014) argue that the 
spatial and temporal dynamics of organisational life are much neglected. This is a 
key observation in the ongoing recasting of administrative labour. Schooling, as a 
canonical modern institution, has an underlying generative temporality. As I have 
argued previously (Eacott, 2013): 
What we have come to know as the school and the administration of schooling is 
constituted through the operationalization and privileging of clock time. The temporal 
rules of schooling construct the school day, terms, semesters, the school year, class 
schedules and the notion of progression based on time. (p. 96) 
The hegemonic position on time and temporality in modern institutions is its 
measurement in terms of an abstraction, separate from events and reversible 
through units of the clock. As Bourdieu (2000[1997]) notes, reinforced through 
ordinary language, time is constituted as a thing, an entity, something that an 
individual or institution has, gains, or wastes. This relationship keeps temporality 
and practice separate where either one can be overlaid upon the other to measure or 
construct a narrative. There is a temporal turn in the contemporary social sciences, 
witnessed in sociology (Adkins, 2009, 2011), human services (Colley, Henriksson, 
Niemeyer, & Seddon, 2012), education (Duncheon & Tierney, 2013), and 
educational administration (Eacott, 2013a). Mobilising temporality, as opposed to 
just time, historicises action without the need to prescribe a past-present-future 
model of reality. This challenges mainstream developmental thinking by breaking 
down the underlying generative linear progress that explicitly links practice with 
time. Importantly, as Lisa Adkins (2011) argues, in breaking with a view that sees 
time as an object that operates externally to actors, it is possible to consider 
temporal points of view from the acting agents. This mobilisation of temporality 
enables an alternate construction of the principalship – one that addresses, or at 
least engages with, the concern with comparison based on proxies for institutional 
and leadership performance (e.g. student test results). 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
113
Contemporary orthodoxy in educational administration is built around central 
concepts of ‘leadership’ and ‘change’. As I argued earlier in this book, what we 
have come to know as ‘leadership’ is very much shaped by our understanding of 
change and its measurement over time. This is however only one way to 
conceptualise temporality and although consistent with managerialist accounts of 
institution and performance, it has arguably reached its limits. A conceptualisation 
of time that exists separate to action is an organising framework arguably built for 
comparison. Clock time was central to Taylor’s (1911) shop floor, primarily 
through his time and moment studies. He was particularly interested in measuring 
performance and comparing against both past performance and the performance of 
others, with an implicit belief in perpetual improvement. This mobilisation of time 
is central to international, and national, comparative testing regimes. That is, time 
and points of time, are an organising structure for educational labour, be that 
teaching, learning and/or administration. 
The alternate, and one that I argue autonomy discourses call for, sees the 
principalship pay out in time rather than separate to it – a move from an entity 
perspective to a relational. As the contemporary capitalist condition shifts 
educational administration from an industrial to post-Fordist models of 
management, the boundaries between time and performance are increasingly 
blurred. The autonomous principalship is temporalized, or temporalizing. The 
autonomy agenda does not eliminate an external narrative of temporality, but casts 
radical doubt on it as the sole – or even most appropriate – means of understanding 
practice. This is however a major challenge for educational administration 
discourses which for the most part focus on manipulation, which is not necessarily 
a negative use of the word, of people, structures and symbols for the purpose of a 
desired future state. Contemporary ‘leadership’ discourses are heavily committed 
to this goal. However, a temporalizing principalship is not about building an 
alternate (better?) future rather building an alternate in the here and now. The 
conceptual category of the ‘future’ is somewhat redundant, or to think with Helga 
Nowotny (1994[1987]), at least loses some of its attractiveness with the emergence 
of an ‘extended present’ (p. 11). 
If the future is present in the here and now, this casts into radical doubt the 
distance between the present and future. More so, it casts doubt over the credibility 
of comparison between schools and school systems. What becomes most important 
in this conceptualisation of temporality is trajectory – a historicising of action and 
locating that history within a narrative of performance. This trajectory is not 
isolated as it cannot be removed from the social space in which it takes place. 
However, I argue that a greater level of understanding can be derived from a 
rigorous and robust description of this temporal trajectory than can be from a 
broader brush stroke of sites using an external (and arguably normative) criterion. 
This is not to say that scholarship in educational administration ought to progress 
through a series of small scale case studies, as such parallel monologues do little to 
add to the body of knowledge. The over reliance on small scale case studies is an 
enduring critique of educational administration discourses. My concern is less with 
CHAPTER 7 
114
case studies per se, and more with the failure to locate these case studies within the 
social space and temporality. 
THE (IM)POSSIBILITY OF ‘THE LOCAL’ 
As social institutions, schools are both embedded and embody the unique spatialtemporal conditions in which they exist. The contemporary capitalist condition is 
one that has given rise to what Luigi Pellizzoni (2011) labels ‘consumer 
sovereignty’. This is not surprising given the ubiquitous commercial settings that 
surround us daily, encouraging consumption – resulting from choice – as the 
primary source of well-being. Furthermore, the contemporary capitalist condition is 
one of constant revision, instant change and dynamic institutional identities, or as 
Zygmunt Bauman (2000, 2005) calls it, a ‘liquid society’. Such conditions 
explicitly challenge conservative conceptualisations of schooling based on notions 
of state provision, strong community ties, and stability. The solidity and continuity 
that is a trademark of modern identities has been replaced with the floating and 
drifting selves of contemporary societies. Unlike its hierarchal past with the state 
adopting a ‘panoptic surveillance’ (see Foucault, 1977[1975]), the contemporary 
capitalist condition has the individual school, and arguably the individual educator 
vying for attention in the fluidity and diversity of the marketplace. In doing so, the 
‘school community’ – the mythical entity that combines both geographic 
affiliation, but also an emotional attachment to ‘the local’ – becomes little more 
than a nostalgic imagery of a bygone era where schools, particularly the local 
public school, was a central feature of communal identity. 
This poses a significant issue for mainstream discourses of the principalship and 
the autonomy agenda. Common-sense arguments for autonomy are built upon the 
assumption that schools will better serve students if they are autonomous, 
especially if held to account publicly – even if only through market forces. The 
central thrust of this assumption is that those closest to schools, including parents 
and teachers, know how to serve students best. Who exactly are these people is 
contested. In the case of parents, is it the parents of the students currently enrolled 
at the school, or is it the parents of yet-to-come students (and does it matter how 
soon that yet-to-come is)? If the latter, how does one even begin to identify this 
group? Similarly, the same questions could be raised about the teachers and those 
‘stakeholders’ in the immediate geographic space. The assumption of physical 
proximity to the school as constituting those with the most knowledge about ‘the 
local’ is arguably cast into radical doubt when considered within the discourses of 
consumer choice, and the globalising nature of education policy. 
Despite attention to the need for autonomy as a means of sustaining (or 
establishing) an attachment to ‘the local’, corresponding school choice discourses 
encourage consumerism in education and selection based on perceived fit rather 
than geographic attachment.ii This fit may be about ideology (e.g. faith-based), 
aspiration (e.g. social mobility through a ‘high-achieving’ school), or many other 
orientations, but rarely is the choice agenda ever about a sense of loyalty to ‘the 
local’. Even market based rhetoric that focus on niche providers are often 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
115
dismissed on the basis that the niche approach is only enacted by those who cannot 
compete with comprehensive institutions on a larger scale. Autonomy discourses 
are therefore embedded within a broader set of discourses that place ‘the local’, 
that central feature of autonomy, under revision. Many of the assumptions 
regarding autonomy and ‘the local’ are counter to more sociological accounts of 
educational administration which argue for the impossibility of separating ‘the 
local’ from the global – even if they do not use that language (see Blackmore, 
2004; Bates, 2006, 2008). Most striking about autonomy discourses is the 
perceived separation from a (nation-) state anchor while at the same time the 
facilitation of connections on a global scale all to be achieved through localisation. 
However, rather than assuming where the boundaries of the local, global and 
anything in between are, or should be, these accounts of autonomy and the 
principalship alert us to how the boundaries and experiences of them are socially 
constructed. Normative assumptions – those which dominate much of the 
mainstream discourses of educational administration – assume static, in both time 
and space, boundaries. In addition, as Bourdieu warns, the artificial partitioning of 
the social world into such spaces serves the classifiers purposes more so than 
reflecting an empirical reality (see Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992[1992]). I am not 
suggesting that there is not an empirical local or any form of affiliation to the 
material and/or symbolic objects in the geographic space, rather arguing that 
establishing boundaries around what is, and more importantly, what is not, ‘the 
local’ are engaging in a complex and contested space. The notion of a static, in 
both time and space, local is counter to understandings of the social world that 
recognise fluidity and dynamic social relations. For the principalship, discourses of 
‘the local’ both narrow – through the provision of some sense of geographic 
marker – yet also create a new sale – through the complexity of defining 
boundaries. Further complicating the matter is the nature of judgement on the 
principalship and its focal point, not necessarily its genesis. 
THE IMPOSITION OF ‘QUALITY’ 
An underlying tension in the autonomy debate is that of liberation. This liberating 
of individual schools, or units within a larger system, is proposed as a means of 
improving the ‘quality’ of performance and/or product. The great difficulty or 
tension that exists is that this measure or criteria for ‘quality’ of performance or 
product of schooling is already decided. In contemporary discourses, especially 
those outside the academy, it is, for the most part, performance in standardised 
testing regimes. This means that the ‘quality’ argument is more often than not 
backward mapped into policy and subsequent documents. In what is a Tayloristic 
turn, the imposition of ‘quality’ markers of school, and by virtue principal, 
autonomy discourses are more likely to lead to the pursuit of efficiency – 
especially if funding is reduced, even if only in relative terms. As such, ‘quality’ 
discourses are as much a constraint on autonomy as they are a facilitator. The 
presence of a priori criteria of success, those which align with a pre-existing 
normative orientation, does little to provide the conditions conducive to alternate 
CHAPTER 7 
116
ways of doing, being and knowing. The backward mapping approach is consistent 
with a rational rhetoric of management (Abrahamson, 1997) for bringing about 
‘effective’ performance through a series of logical and sequential steps or 
modifications of practice. However, as Pat Thomson (2010) points out, within such 
an approach, organisational actors become increasingly better at playing the game 
rather than challenging the rules of the game or its formula for success. These 
social conditions cannot be ignored. The managerial rhetoric around autonomy and 
freeing the principalship to innovate and localise education is negated if the 
markers of quality are set beyond ‘the local’. 
An alternate way of thinking this through is Michel Foucault’s ‘practice of 
freedom’. Following Foucault,iii I contend that freedom is not synonymous with 
liberation and/or autonomy. The problem is not ‘Let’s liberate our school leaders’ 
but rather engaging with the practice of freedom by which one could define what is 
education and educating, and the pedagogical relationship. Previously I argued that 
it is possible to think anew what it means to be a ‘quality’ school and in particular 
how one school, but particularly the principal, rejected (although not completely) 
the use of external measures of quality as the sole criteria (Eacott, 2013b). The key 
point that I am making here is that what is most limiting about orthodox ways of 
thinking is that they are based in the orthodoxy of their time and space. 
The construction of absolute binaries such as autonomous and bureaucratic 
(although these two are not directly opposite) educational administration are not 
necessarily helpful, yet alone empirically defensible – even if these are common in 
the ordinary language of the everyday. As argued earlier, it is difficult, if not 
impossible, to isolate an individual school. That is, the binary of individual or 
collective is not straight forward, as no school is completely constrained by social 
structures or entirely free to do as they wish. The social world is less clear. 
Boundaries or partitioning are less empirical than epistemic and relations are more 
reciprocal than linear. My argument is that policy, such as those around autonomy, 
is the product and producer of administration, and by virtue, the principalship. You 
cannot come to understand the principalship without attention to contemporary 
administrative practice. There is a reciprocal interplay as the principalship is 
shaped by, and shaping of, the contemporary conditions, in the time and space, in 
which it takes place. From a relational perspective, policy and administration can 
only be understood in relation to one another, not as separate entities. 
Bourdieu (2004[2001]) stresses the need to not focus solely on the restraints on 
practice at the expense of the freedoms available to leaders. This is not to suggest 
we should engage in some naïve dialogue assuming absolute freedom to do what 
you want. Instead, the scholarly narrative needs to weave the two together. To 
privilege either one limits the scholarly narrative to replacing one master narrative 
with another. In de-centring both the constraints and freedoms it is possible to 
engage with the relational nature of the principalship in the contexts of autonomy. 
Most importantly, this opens avenues for thinking anew the principalship. 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
117
CONCLUSION 
Contemporary thought and analysis in the scholarly discourses of educational 
administration stress the importance of the principalship, autonomy and ‘the local’, 
particularly in the pursuit of improving educational quality. This is not surprising 
given that in broader public discourses, leaders matter and market based reforms 
are useful levers for producing effective institutions. The challenge of scholarship 
is to get beyond the naïve understanding of the spontaneous sociologist and 
construct knowledge through rigorous and robust methodologies which facilitate 
new ways of knowing, being and doing educational administration. The office of 
the principalship is an almost universally recognisable post. However this is as 
much a weakness as it is a strength. It poses one of the greatest challenges of 
scholarship on the principalship. The spontaneous sociologist within us assumes 
validity of labels and objects and works from there. My approach, and what I have 
argued in this chapter, is that mainstream discourses of autonomy and the 
principalship actually fly in the face of contemporary thought and analysis in the 
discipline. Bringing together a diverse array of theoretical resources under the 
relational approach to construct an argument for a new image of the principalship, 
one that illuminates blind spots in contemporary scholarship and calls for 
theoretically and empirically moving beyond accepting at face value notions such 
as ‘the local’, ‘quality’, and ‘autonomy’. What I have provided is a (not the) way of 
breaking with existing paradigms in educational administration and recasting our 
understanding of educational administrative labour. 
In privileging the organising of education rather than the administrative 
structures of bureaucratic systems, the relational approach goes beyond the 
acceptance of the social world as it is. Hierarchies based on bureaucratic structures 
are replaced with an understanding built upon relations. Rather than the 
construction of epistemic entities for the purpose of analysis and explanation, the 
relational approach encourages, if not forces, the scholar to epistemologically 
break with the spontaneous understanding of the social world. This is not to say 
that this is an easy task, it requires substantive front loading, and more than can be 
done in a single chapter, but when combined with work from earlier chapters it 
begins to construct a picture about the degree of nuancing that can be achieved for 
the purpose of describing what is taking place. 
Most importantly, the research object – in this case the principalship – can only 
be understood in relation to other objects. This is a challenge for the traditional 
entity based ontology of educational administration. Again, it forces an 
epistemological break with the spontaneous understanding of the social world. 
Furthermore, it empirically grounds the scholarly narrative. If the research object 
can only be understood in relation to other objects, then the description needs to be 
based in a particular time and space. The trajectory, both temporally and sociospatially, of the particular is of heightened importance. This is not to say that the 
particular is a separate entity to the universal, as such a claim would be counter to 
what I am arguing for. Rather, context matters. But it matters in a very specific 
way. The general rhetoric that context matters fails to adequately outline what is 
CHAPTER 7 
118
context, not to mention how and why it matters. From the relational approach I am 
arguing for it matters in two explicit ways: temporally and socio-spatially. Two 
questions raised are ‘why now?’ and ‘why here?’. Of course, to prevent lapsing 
into an entity perspective, it would be better articulated as ‘why here and why 
now?’. In the case of autonomy, why is it that policy rhetoric around autonomy is 
gaining traction now. What is it about the temporal conditions, the trajectory of 
autonomous discourses, in the particular socio-spatial conditions that have enabled 
autonomy to be seen as a potential solution to the problems of the time. Context 
becomes an inter-disciplinary and fluid notion. It is not simply describing schools 
using statistical data generated through audits and classification. Likewise it is not 
the classification of actors based on demographic markers. Instead, context brings 
into play many diverse disciplines (e.g. sociology, philosophy, history, economics, 
public administration) for the purpose of understanding. Does this mean that all of 
this needs to be covered in a single paper, chapter or conference presentation, 
absolutely not. Not only would that be cumbersome, but also not necessarily 
helpful. This is why the locating of scholarly work in a particular tradition is of 
importance. We cannot ask too much of individual scholarly outputs. However, 
ignoring this diversity is problematic. I believe that the relational approach 
provides a means of overcoming these matters. 
Through the empirical grounding of the scholarly narrative in time and space, 
binaries such as individual and collective, and structure and agency, become 
blurred. They no longer serve any descriptive or analytical purpose as they are the 
result of privileging one narrative over another. The productive worth of binaries is 
increased if aligning with a pre-existing normative orientation, however, if one is 
seeking to describe what is taking place without casting judgement – in the 
evaluative sense – then binaries are of little use. What I am offering is an approach 
that goes beyond the critical and opens up productive description of what is taking 
place. I contend that such an approach is of significant intellectual worth in 
advancing understanding and thinking anew educational administration. 
NOTES 
i
 For an educational administration specific example here, see Fenwick English’s (2002) work on the 
‘point of scientificity’. ii An enduring critique of the school choice agenda is that choice is not a universal and that only those 
families who were already advantaged can exercise the choice. In a number of US based studies of 
schooling this is labelled as the ghetto-isation of schooling (see Anderson, 2009). iii See Fornet-Betacourt, Becker, Gomez-Muller and Gauthier (1987). 
REFERENCES 
Abrahamson, E. (1997). The emergence and prevalence of employee management rhetorics: The effects 
of long waves, labor unions and turnover, 1875-1992. Academy of Management Journal, 40(3), 491-
533. 
Adams, G. (1992). Enthralled with modernity: The historical context of knowledge and theory 
development in public administration. Public Administration Review, 52(4), 363-373. 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
119
Adkins, L. (2009). Sociological futures: from clock time to event time. Sociological Research Online, 
14(4), http://www.socresonline.org.uk/14/14/18.html. 
Adkins, L. (2011). Practice as temporalisation: Bourdieu and economic crisis. In S. Susen & B. S. 
Turner (Eds.), The legacy of Pierre Bourdieu: Critical essays (pp. 347-365). London: Anthem Press. 
Althusser, L. P. (1969[1965]). For Marx (B. Brewster, Trans.). London: Allen Lane – The Penguin 
Press. [Originally published Pour Marx, Paris: François Maspero.] 
Anderson, G. L. (2009). Advocacy leadership: Toward a post-reform agenda in education. New York, 
NY: Routledge. 
Bachelard, G. (1984[1934]). The new scientific spirit (P.A. Heelan, Trans). Boston: Beacon Press. 
[Originally published as Le nouvel esprit scientifique (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France).] 
Bates, R. J. (2006). Culture and leadership in educational administration: A historical study of what was 
and what might have been. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 38(2), 155-168. 
Bates, R. J. (2008). States, markets and communities: is there room for educational leadership. Journal 
of Educational Administration and History, 40(3), 195-208. 
Bates, R. J. (2010). History of educational leadership and management. In P. Peterson, E. Baker, & B. 
McGraw (Eds.), International encyclopedia of education (3rd ed., pp. 724-730). Oxford: Elsevier. 
Bauman, Z. (2000). Liquid modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Bauman, Z. (2005). Liquid life. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Blackmore, J. (2004). Restrucuring educational leadership in changing contexts: A local/global account 
of restructuring in Australia. Journal of Educational Change, 5(3), 267-288. 
Bohm, D. (1988). Wholeness and the implicate order. New York, NY: ARK Paperbacks. 
Boltanski, L., & Chiapello, E. (2005[1999]). The new spirit of capitalism (G. Elliott, Trans.). London: 
Verso. 
Bourdieu, P. (2000[1997]). Pascalian meditations (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[Originally published as Méditations pascaliennes (Paris: Éditions du Seuil).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2004[2001]). Science of science and reflexivity (R. Nice, Trans.). Cambridge: Polity 
Press. [Originally published as Science de la science et réflexivité (Paris: Éditions Raisons d’Agir).] 
Bourdieu, P. (2005[2000]). The social structures of the economy (C. Turner, Trans.). Cambridge, UK: 
Polity Press. [Originally published as Les structures socials de l’économie (Paris: Éditions du 
Seuil).] 
Bourdieu, P., Chamboredon, J-C., & Passeron, J-C. (1991[1968]). The craft of sociology: 
Epistemological preliminaries (R. Nice, Trans.). Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter. [Originally 
published as Le métier de sociologue : préalables épistémologiques (Paris: Mouton).] 
Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. (1992[1992]). An invitation to reflexive sociology. Cambridge: Blackwell 
Publishers. [Originally published as Résponses: pour une anthropologie réflexive (Paris: Seuil).] 
Buber, M. (1981[1923]). I and thou: The dialogic principle. New York, NY: Dutton. [Originally 
published as Ich und du: das dialogische prinzip (Germany: Darmstadt).] 
Caldwell, B. J., & Spinks, J. (1988). The self managing school. Lewes, UK: Falmer Press. 
Caldwell, B. J., & Spinks, J. (1992). Leading the self managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Caldwell, B. J., & Spinks, J. (1998). Beyond the self managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Caldwell, B. J., & Spinks, J. (2013). The self-transforming school. London: Routledge. 
Callahan, R. E. (1962). Education and the cult of efficiency. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago 
Press. 
Capra, F. (1975). The Tao of physics. Boston, MA: Shambhala Publications. 
Colley, H., Henriksson, L., Niemeyer, B., & Seddon, T. (2012). Competing time orders in human 
service work: Towards a politics of time. Time & Society, 21(3), 371-394. 
Duncheon, J. C., & Tierney, W. G. (2013). Changing conceptions of time: Implications for educational 
research and practice. Review of Educational Research, 83(2), 236-272. 
Eacott, S. (2011). Liberating schools through devolution: The Trojan horse of the state. Leading & 
Managing, 17(1), 75-83. 
Eacott, S. (2013a). ‘Leadership’ and the social: Time, space and the epistemic. International Journal of 
Educational Management, 27(1), 91-101. 
CHAPTER 7 
120
Eacott, S. (2013b). Asking questions of leadership: Using social theory for more than critique. Leading 
& Managing, 19(1), 18-31. 
English, F. W. (2002). The point of scientificity, the fall of the epistemological dominos, and the end of 
the field of educational administration. Studies in Philosophy and Education, 21(2), 109-136. 
English, F. W. (2006). The unintended consequences of a standardised knowledge base in advancing 
educational leadership preparation. Educational Administration Quarterly, 42(3), 461-472. 
Fahy, K. M., Easterby-Smith, M., & Lervik, J. E. (2014). The power of spatial and temporal orderings 
in organizational learning. Management Learning, 45(2), 123-144. 
Forbet-Betancourt, R., Becker, H., Gomez-Muller, A., & Gauthier, J. D. (1987). The ethic of care for 
the self as a practice of freedom: an interview with Michel Foucault on January 20, 1984 (J.D. 
Gauthier, Trans.). Philosophy & Social Criticism, 12(2-3), 112-131. 
Foucault, M. (1977[1975]). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison (A. M. Sheridan, Trans.). 
London: Penguin. [Originally pubished as Surveiller et punir (Paris: Éditions Gallimard).] 
Grek, S. (2009). Governing by numbers: The PISA ‘effect’ in Europe. Journal of Education Policy, 
24(1), 23-37. 
Gunter, H. (2001). Critical approaches to leadership in education. Journal of Educational Enquiry, 2(2), 
94-108. 
Kanigel, R. (1997). The one best way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the enigma of efficiency. New 
York, NY: Viking. 
Kellerman, B. (2013). Leading questions: The end of leadership – Redux. Leadership, 9(1), 135-139. 
Klikauer, T. (2013). Managerialism: A critique of an ideology. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Lingard, B. (2010). Policy borrowing, policy learning: Testing times in Australian schooling. Critical 
Studies in Education, 51(2), 129-147. 
Nowotny, H. (1994[1987]). Time: The modern and postmodern experience (N. Plaice, Trans.). 
Cambridge: Polity Press. [Originally published as Eigenzeit. Entstehung und Strukurierung eines 
Zeitgefühls (Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp).] 
Pellizzoni, L. (2011). In search of community: Political consumerism, governmentality and 
immunization. European Journal of Social Theory, 15(2), 221-241. 
Samier, E. (2006). Educational administration as a historical discipline: An apologia pro vita historia. 
Journal of Educational Administration and History, 38(2), 125-139. 
Sellar, S., & Lingard, B. (2013). The OECD and global governance in education. Journal of Education 
Policy, 28(5), 710-725. 
Smyth, J. (2008). Australia’s great disengagement with public education and social justice in 
educational leadership. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 40(3), 221-233. 
Smyth, J. (2011). The disaster of the ‘self-managing school’ – Genesis, trajectory, undisclosed agenda, 
and effects. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 43(2), 95-111. 
Smyth, J. (Ed.). (1993). A socially critical view of the self-managing school. London: Falmer Press. 
Taylor, F. W. (1911). The principles of scientific management. New York, NY: W. W. Norton. 
Thomson, P. (2010). Headteacher autonomy: A sketch of a Bourdieuian field analysis of position and 
practice. Critical Studies in Education, 51(1), 5-20. 
Thrupp, M. (2003). The school leadership literature in managerialist times: Exploring the problem of 
textual apologism. School Leadership & Management, 23(2), 149-172. 
Timar, T. B., & Kirp, D. L. (1988). State efforts to reform schools: Treading between a regulatory 
swamp and an English garden. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 10(2), 75-88. 
Tynack, D., & Hansot, E. (1982). Managers of virtue: Public school leadership in America, 1820-1980. 
New York, NY: Basic Books. 
Weber, M. (1978[1922]). Economy and society: An outline of interprise sociology. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press. [Originally published as Wirtschaft und gesellschaft: Grundriss der 
verstehenden soziolgoie (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr).] 
THE PRINCIPALSHIP, AUTONOMY AND AFTER 
121
Wolf, A. (2002). Does education matter? Myths about education and economic growth. London: 
Penguin. 
Wolf, F. A. (1980). Taking the quantum leap. New York, NY: Harper & Row. 
123
CHAPTER EIGHT 
 FOR A RELATIONAL PROGRAMME 
INTRODUCTION 
Mainstream rhetoric in educational administration promotes rationality, 
consciousness, structural arrangements, linear concepts of temporality and the 
unique context of each location while also seeking to construct universal lists, 
frameworks, capabilities or standards for leadership. There is, and not surprisingly, 
substantial alignment between the managerialist orthodoxy of the contemporary 
condition and scholarship in educational administration. Although a crude 
synthesis, managerialism is advanced through the School Effectiveness School 
Improvement movement – or its contemporary manifestation as ‘Successful 
Schools’ (see Gurr, Drysdale, & Goode, 2010; Leithwood & Day, 2007) – and 
other forms of ‘textual apologists’ (Thrupp & Willmott, 2003) or explicitly 
challenged by the critical school (see Eacott, 2011; Gunter & Thomson, 2011; 
Smyth, 2011; Wilkinson & Eacott, 2013). Despite this diversity, it is possible to 
argue that the value and significance of educational administration as a discipline 
has been exhausted. This claim is not new, as William Taylor (1969) noted over 40 
years ago: 
Millions of words are to found on the role of the school superintendent, the role of the 
principal, the role of the school board member; on supervision, evaluation, delegation, 
communication, professionalization, certification and a dozen other processes. There 
are paradigms and models, theoretical constructs and conceptual taxonomies, 
analytical schema, dichotomous, bi-polar, ideal typical continuums and factorially 
structured four celled frameworks. The effort required to read even a representative 
selection of the books and articles available is considerable, and apt to seem not 
particularly rewarding. (p. 97) 
An enduring problem for educational administration as an area of knowledge 
production has been a relatively weak quality profile within the already weak 
quality profile of educational research (Eacott, 2010; Gorard, 2005; Griffiths, 1959, 
1965, 1985; Immegart, 1975). A significant portion of early, and it is possible to 
argue contemporary, inquiry into educational administration does not move beyond 
the ordinary language of the ‘applied’ field. As Bobby Calder (1977) argues, 
‘leadership’ (as the contemporary label of choice) is a label that originated in 
everyday discourses – that of the ‘spontaneous sociologist’ (Bourdieu & Wacquant, 
1992[1992]), p. 66) – and its common-sense meaning has been appropriated into 
scholarly discourses. As a result, in a scholarly sense, the bulk of early work in the 
area lacked substantive theoretical development as it did not engage in any form of 
epistemological break with the practical working of the day-to-day work of school 
CHAPTER 8 
124
administrators. This position was evident in the early preparation and development 
programmes where former school administrators taught classes primarily through 
‘war stories’ of lived experience being in the field of practice (Walker, 1964). The 
experience in the field, or practical knowledge was privileged over any form of 
scholarly disciplinary knowledge. While such a position is often – and this 
continues – argued for on the basis that educational administration is an applied 
field, the minimal engagement with the underlying generative principles of 
research in the area frequently, if not always, results in research being embedded 
and embodying functional/technicist versions of the world. To think with Clifford 
Geertz (1973), following Gilbert Ryle (1971), these accounts are ‘thin descriptions’ 
of the social world, concerned primarily with description of the surface level of 
social activity. While this may seem like an attack – and to some extent it is – the 
outcomes and outputs of these studies remain valuable for the construction of 
knowledge. As Duane Ireland and colleagues (2005) contend, consistent with the 
growth of sophisticated research methods in other disciplines, the results of 
primarily case-oriented, anecdotal, and topic-driven work reflects interest in 
examining a particular phenomenon. This is an important observation as it stresses 
that early investigations provide the foundations from which further activities can 
occur. The task of the scholar therefore is not to simply fill gaps in the literature or 
pick-up where someone else has left off, rather it is to delve deeper into the 
phenomenon in question through more sophisticated understandings that build 
from previous work. My argument here is not the use of, or foundation provided, 
but rather the minimal (as it is not an absolute) of many in the discipline to move 
beyond these elementary studies. Please do not be mistaken here, my intention is 
not to disregard all that has gone before, or to suggest that all work is consistent 
with the claim, rather to provide a productive means of delving deeper into the 
ways of knowing, being and doing educational leadership, management and 
administration. As Duncan Waite (1998) argues: 
Like it or not, the area of educational leadership (a.k.a. educational administration) 
has a reputation for being deeply conservative. But conservatism is not the path to 
renewal. New and different voices are required to offer us alternative ways of being in 
the world. (p. 92) 
It is however worth noting, as Robert Donmoyer (2001) argues, and Martin Thrupp 
and Richard Willmott’s (2003) book Educational management in managerialist 
times demonstrates, as a domain of inquiry, educational administration exists in a 
state of tacit agreement where those with whom we disagree, we treat with benign 
neglect. Within the Australian academy, work by both Bill Mulford (2007) and 
Richard Bates and myself (2008) argues that scholars fail to acknowledge the 
contributions of each other, both past and present, working on the same topic. For 
example, Stephen Dinham and colleagues’ (2011) work on ‘breakthroughs in 
school leadership development in Australia’ overlooks work by Bates and myself 
(2008, 2009; Eacott, 2011) and pays superficial attention to work by Simon Clarke 
and Helen Wildy (Clarke & Wildy, 2010, 2009, 2008; Clarke, Wildy, & Pepper, 
2007; Clarke, Wildy, & Styles, 2011; Wildy, Clarke, & Slater, 2007; Wildy, 
FOR A RELATIONAL PROGRAMME 
125
Clarke, Styles, & Beycioglu, 2010). I cite this as not a mere example of a dented 
academic ego, rather as a pedagogical observation about the often hidden role of 
discourse communities and the potential bounded manner in which they go about 
their work. This goes beyond peer-reviewed papers (and is arguably evident to a 
greater extent beyond the academy of peer-review). Brian Caldwell’s (2012) 
‘Review of related literature for the evaluation of empowering local schools’ for 
the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations reduces the 
critical literatures (of which there are many) on school-based management and its 
many facsimiles to a single citation – John Smyth (1993) – and a very short single 
sentence tacked on to the end of a paragraph, ‘[r]obust criticisms were mounted’ 
(p. 8). Although these may seem like innocuous examples more reflective of 
academic ego or bias than anything else, I believe them to be symbolic of a more 
substantive issue for educational administration as a discipline. That is, it is quite 
possible that a great deal of disruptive and innovative work is taking place but it 
exists at the margins or periphery of the field (Wilkinson & Eacott, 2013) and very 
little change occurs in the mainstream discourses and various traditions within the 
discipline. As a result, while for many the diversity of traditions within the 
discipline is a strength, or at least evidence of a degree of scope, it does little in 
facilitating a coherent and robust response to questions of its scholarly significance 
and intellectual value. 
The discipline, and arguably consistent with Waite’s (1998) appraisal, has 
responded to questions of its legitimacy through an expansion of leadership, 
management and administration to the extent that the labels are now mobilised to 
refer to: individuals; groups; networks; institutions; roles; structures; and practices, 
just to name a few. The various social constructions used to bring the epistemic 
‘leadership’ – as the contemporary label of choice – into being are themselves 
constructing ontologies and epistemologies for the discipline. That is, discourses of 
administration, management and leadership serve as an organising rhetoric for the 
social world. This is why the argument for the epistemological break and 
problematizing the intellectual gaze in Chapter Two is significant. However, while 
they are socially produced ways of understanding the world in which we live, they 
cannot be solely reduced to the social, as objects such as Programme of 
International Student Assessment (PISA), Trends In Mathematics and Science 
Study (TIMSS), and National Assessment Programme, Literacy And Numeracy 
(NAPLAN), those performative regimes privileged in contemporary discourses, 
not to mention school budgets and governing boards are expanding the materiality 
of educational administration and its product and producer, policy. In combination 
with this expanded materiality is the mobilisation of a particular theory of 
temporality, one that plays a significant role in the constitution of what is 
frequently thought of as ‘leadership’. 
Through an engagement with what I see as some of the contemporary issues of 
educational administration as a field of knowledge production I have built an 
argument for a relational approach as a viable alternate research programme to 
mainstream discourses in the discipline. This is based on the central belief that the 
only way to change the world is to construct new ways of seeing, doing and being 
CHAPTER 8 
126
in the world. The generative relational research programme being argued for in 
this book is concerned with the theoretical question of the legitimation of the social 
world. Playing out in multiple ways in the empirical, the central programmatic 
question, working with the original stimulus outlined in Chapter One, building 
from the analysis presented so far in the book, and using the mainstream labels of 
the field, of the relational programme is: 
How are leadership, management and administration structured by and 
structuring of the contemporary condition? 
In asking questions of the constitution and legitimation of educational 
administration in contemporary times impacts on methodology, I therefore ask: 
In what ways can we come to understand the leadership, management and 
administration of educational institutions so that we build a distinctive and 
innovative programme of research? 
Through an engagement with these questions the relational approach offers a 
viable alternative for the scholarship of educational administration that provides a 
supportive scaffold without a prescriptive ‘how to’ approach. In particular, the 
relational approach offers the following: 
– An explicit means of overcoming the current proliferation of ‘adjectival’ 
leadership; 
– A methodology for empirically grounding the scholarly narrative; 
– Destroys the myth of universal leadership; 
– Provides a degree of rigour to scholarship; 
– Moves beyond the unhelpful binary of theory and practice; 
– Non-prescriptive in its approach; and 
– Sees theory as methodology and vice versa. 
To articulate the potential significance of the relational research programme, I 
devote the remainder of this chapter to spelling out how the above listed points are 
enacted in ways that offer a means of advancing scholarship productively. 
THE PROLIFERATION OF ADJECTIVAL LEADERSHIP 
In discussing the mobilisation of Bourdieu’s conceptualisation of habitus, Karl 
Maton (2008) argues against what he sees as a proliferation of adjectives – for an 
example specific to my argument, consider the ‘leadership habitus’ of Bob Lingard 
and Pam Christie (2003). For Maton, the need for the adjective is based on an 
under-developed analysis of context – or what I would label more specifically, time 
and space. In the context of scholarship on educational administration, there are a 
few things at play here. First I would like to be clear regarding my comment above 
relating to Lingard and Christie. They make no claims to be doing anything but 
developing a normative stance on school leadership. I may even go so far to 
suggest that their focus is actually the role of school leaders (the official roles 
FOR A RELATIONAL PROGRAMME 
127
recognised in organisational charts) in policy and school reform. As a Bourdieusian 
scholar, I raise this observation as graduate students beginning to work with 
Bourdieu in educational leadership frequently seize upon the notion of ‘leadership 
habitus’ and then seek to mobilise that in the analysis of their empirical object 
without paying due attention to Lingard and Christie’s contextualising and locating 
their claims. In doing so, much of the arguments from the front end of this book 
around the need for an epistemological break are overlooked in the haste to engage 
with the empirical. 
The expansion, both conceptual and material, of ‘leadership’ has somewhat 
created a situation where an adjective is applied to demarcate where ‘leadership’ 
takes place. This is problematic for two major reasons (although arguably many 
more): one, it partitions the social world in ways that are only epistemic and 
therefore serving as a matter of scope or scoping for the research; and two, it offers 
very little in relation to knowledge advancement in ‘leadership’ studies, rather 
more so for the actual context in question. While doing so might be useful for 
setting the parameters of a project, it is difficult for such conceptualisations to get 
beyond bureaucratic roles, and if you do, there is little to distinguish ‘leadership’ 
studies from sociology of organisations. The privileging of context reduces the 
advancement of our understanding of ‘leadership’ as a phenomenon to the mere 
mapping or application of existing knowledge to a (possibly) new context. In doing 
so, the existing theorisation of ‘leadership’ remains intact, and the intellectual 
contribution to the context is questionable as what has taken place is little more 
than the addition of a new label to name a certain aspect of the empirical. 
While not explicit, yet definitely implicit in the case of using an adjective to add 
a context, this add-on, where the focus is really on the context (or at its most 
simple, a role – e.g. teacher) rather than ‘leadership’ per se, could be described as a 
pitch to increase the appeal of the topic in the contemporary context which 
privileges managerialist discourses, and therefore places greater value on leaders, 
leading and leadership. My concern with the use – or proliferation – of adjectives is 
that there is a diluted, if there ever was a concentrated, focus on what ‘leadership’ 
actually means. While I note that critiques have led to the expanded gaze of 
leadership scholarship to be more than the designated school leader (the principal), 
the issue of the original construction of the research object and its mobilisation in 
the analysis of the empirical remains under-developed. The overarching issue with 
the use of adjectives is the adjective is used to compensate for the lack of 
contextualising of ‘leadership’ in the socio-temporal conditions. 
The relational approach I have argued for in this book pays explicit attention to 
the construction of the research object. Working with the notion of the 
epistemological break to break with the language of the everyday, bringing to the 
fore the ontological complicity with organising, the relational approach negates the 
need for adjectives. In doing so, the relational approach refocuses scholarship on 
the construction and ongoing maintenance of the research object more so than an 
adjective serving as a marker of scope. To support the work around the research 
object the relational approach also calls for empirically grounding the scholarly 
narrative as opposed to universal appeals. 
CHAPTER 8 
128
EMPIRICALLY GROUNDING THE SCHOLARLY NARRATIVE 
With the rise of China and other economic powers not located in the traditional 
Anglophone north, the role of indigenous research has attracted increasing 
attention in mainstream (Anglophone) publications. Most importantly, notions of 
indigenous research seek to move discourses beyond content and contextualisation 
to an explicit engagement with epistemology and the political nature of research. 
Peter Li (2012) defines indigenous research as: 
… any study on a unique local phenomenon, or a unique element of any local 
phenomenon from a local (native as emic) perspective to explore its local 
implications, and, if possible, its global implications as well. (p. 851) 
In the case of educational administration, despite the universalism of education, I 
contend that the organising of education is a local phenomenon. At the very least, 
we cannot assume a utility of ways of organising even if educating is ubiquitous 
with developed and developing nations. 
The idea of what qualifies as indigenous research is however a contested space. 
Anne Tsui (2004) contends that indigenous research requires location-specific 
contextual factors that must be indigenous, but the theoretical lens can be 
borrowed. Similarly, David Whetten (2009) argues that any research qualifies as 
indigenous if it covers an indigenous phenomenon or topic, even if theories or 
concepts are adopted. Why is this important? Educational administration 
scholarship frequently argues that each and every school is unique and that context 
matters. Therefore, any abstraction of the scholarly narrative from the time and 
space in which practice takes place destroys that which it claims to study. Some 
examples being those I used in Chapter Six where Stephen Dinham (2005) claims 
‘there is danger with such attributes or factors in that context is not sufficiently 
recognised’ (p. 354) and David Gurr and colleagues’ (2010) note their work ‘does 
not explain why these interventions work in some circumstances and not in others’ 
(p. 124). Both mobilise a form of entity thinking, where ‘leadership’ is separate to 
context. Without empirical grounding – attention to the time and space of practice 
– educational administration scholarship struggles to provide any more than 
vacuous lists of factors, behaviours, interventions, all of which lack a solid 
grounding in a specific context. From the relational approach that I am arguing for, 
it is the context in both temporality and socio-spatial terms that gives behaviours or 
interventions meaning and significance. Similarly, the values, philosophies or other 
aspects of the individual articulated in lists conforming to a neo-trait perspective 
only exist through practice. They cannot be separated from the self just as much as 
the individual cannot be separated from their location in time and space. The lack 
of attention to the locating and specificity of contexts leads to a privileging of the 
directly observable features of practice rather than the underlying generative 
principles. 
The study of universal constructs (e.g. school leadership), without adequate 
attention to locating practice in time and space – the underlying generative 
principle of indigenous management research – significantly reduces what can say 
about the research object. Empirically grounding scholarship does two specific 
FOR A RELATIONAL PROGRAMME 
129
things: first, it is based on the generative principle that context gives meaning to 
action; and second, it raises the need for scholarly work and not just description of 
the world. 
As has been noted in multiple places throughout this book, actions are given 
their significance through locating them in temporality and socio-spatial terms. 
While it is frequently argued that every context and every individual is unique, 
these differences exist at the micro-level. A great many things of schooling and its 
organisation are highly predictable – patterns of actors, teachers, students, and so 
on meeting in a location (usually a building) over and over again. For this 
regularity to exist, it need not even be the same people who repeatedly interact 
(Fay, 1994). It is this macro-level of predictability that gives the impression of a 
universal of educational administration. However, it doing so the attention is 
primarily directed at the easily observable and most memorable actions of actors. 
This leads to faddism and work that is swept aside as the next fashion comes along. 
A central feature of the relational approach, is that organising action cannot be 
separated from the contemporary conditions in which it is enacted. As a result, 
scholarship needs to integrate the macro with the micro to generate nuanced 
account of what is taking place. It is the achievement of this blending of the macro 
and the micro that creates the enduring, and demanding of, scholarly attention to 
the work of thinkers such as Pierre Bourdieu and Michel Foucault. The work is 
both sophisticated yet grounded empirically. 
The front half of this book is very much dedicated to spelling out the importance 
of scholarly work in understanding educational administration. Empirically 
grounding the work requires careful attention to the construction and legitimation 
of the research object and the relations between the researcher and the researched. 
Attention to these matters opens potential avenues for exploration across research 
traditions and enables the author to make empirically defensible – even if not 
universal – claims. The relational approach is very much anchored in a scholarly 
perspective that pays substantive attention to the research object and locating that 
in temporal trajectory and socio-spatial terms. Importantly, the relational approach 
goes beyond the construction of entities to generate understandings based on 
relations. 
THE MYTH OF UNIVERSAL LEADERSHIP 
As noted above, there is a degree of predictability in schooling and this serves to 
generate a belief in, or lack of questioning of, a universal ‘leadership’. The holy 
grail of educational administration scholarship, dating back to its earliest 
beginnings, is to find a core set of behaviours, traits, conditions that are most 
important or impactful on performance (whatever that is deemed to be) that can 
then be packaged or measured for the greater good. The relational approach 
engages, and debunks, the myth of a universal. To do this, it explicitly goes beyond 
the ordinary language of the everyday and stresses the particular through 
empirically grounding the narrative. This is all based on a relational ontology that 
negates the possibility of a universal entity that exist separate to time and space. 
CHAPTER 8 
130
Failing to simply accept the act of recognition that is commonplace in 
educational administration scholarship, the relational approach explicitly seeks to 
challenge the ontological complicity of the everyday. Arguments for a universal set 
of traits or behaviours takes scholarship back to the work of Chester Barnard, 
Herbert Simon, and for the most part, the Theory Movement in educational 
administration. It leads to an essentialised argument of either have and have nots, 
or that through appropriate teachings all actors can become ‘leaders’. There is 
however a well-recognised body of work that no one size fits all raising questions 
about the possibility of the universal. 
The notion of a universal ‘leadership’ is based very much in an entity 
perspective. A knowable entity that is separate to other entities. It is this ontology 
that the relational challenges. From the relational perspective, we can only 
understand the world in relations. Objects only become known in relation to other 
objects. This may appear a subtle difference, if different at all, but the distinction 
does matter. The universal ‘leadership’ is based on an entity perspective that 
focuses on individual entities and is consistent with an epistemology of an 
objective truth, and also a clear separation of individual entities, and the 
researcher-researched. For the entity perspective, ‘leadership’ is centred on 
individual perceptions and cognitions as they engage in exchanges and influences 
with other entities. The space in between the entities is not considered, making 
time and space separate and of less importance. In contrast, for the relational, 
individual actors and institutions are part of an ongoing, and inexhaustible, 
legitimation that makes time and space as opposed to exists in or separate to it. In 
doing so, the universal ‘leadership’ position leaves relational dimensions of the 
social untheorised. If, as I have argued, practice is only given meaning by context, 
then the need for, and legitimacy of, a universal ‘leadership’ is questionable. 
A DEGREE OF RIGOUR TO SCHOLARSHIP 
Educational administration research has long been called to account for its lack of 
rigour. It has been challenged from within, and beyond. The former is important. 
Early attempts to bring rigour sought legitimacy through logical empiricism and 
‘scientific’ method. The orthodox approach to rigour in educational administration 
studies remains deeply rooted in logical empiricism, or at least in the application of 
sophisticated methods. The desire by Kenneth Leithwood and colleagues in the 
International Successful School Principals Project to replicate the virtues of largescale quantitative research – as though this is the desirable form of inquiry – is 
evidence of the legitimacy of logical empiricism in research (see Leithwood, 
2005). Interpretive approaches are tolerated in educational administration studies, 
but their value to the scholastic endeavour is frequently questioned. This highlights 
a deep paradigmatic division in educational administration. One where a particular 
form of research is constructed as more rigorous and the lesser paradigm/s are 
measured against the desired. This binary thinking is not necessarily productive in 
thinking through rigour. Nor is the contemporarily popular practice, often 
FOR A RELATIONAL PROGRAMME 
131
promoted in the technicist research training units of universities, of adopting a 
mixed methods approach to overcome the weaknesses of the two major paradigms. 
The relational approach offers a resolution to this situation. Rather than 
engaging in paradigmatic thinking, the relational works with research traditions – a 
far more productive space to think through scholarship in my opinion. However, 
instead of remaining within any one particular tradition, the relational facilitates 
inter-tradition dialogue through its attention to generation opposed to blind 
adherence to tradition specific methods. Such a move is theoretically desirable as it 
is concerned with alignment of theoretical question, empirical problem and modes 
of inquiry. This ensures an empirical grounding and explicit attention to rigorous 
inquiry. As a result, the significance of the relational approach lays not in 
concepts, methods or empirical observations, rather in the manner in which they 
are generated. It is the modus operandi that matters. Unlike a prescriptive method 
of data generation, the relational substitutes rigidity for rigour. This rigour is 
achieved through attention to the scholastic enterprise. Beginning with the 
construction of the research object – something that is not absolute but instead an 
enduring exercise accomplished throughout the work – rigour is demanded through 
the epistemological break with the language of the everyday. The grounding of 
observations in time and space make them empirically defensible. The locating of 
this type of inquiry with a more European notion of science as opposed to the more 
US-centric usage tied to logical empiricism, means that the focus is on rigorous 
and robust inquiry not prescriptive procedures. 
The attention to description is a key shift in thinking here. Unlike the pursuit of 
explanation (causality) or the overlaying of empirical data with a pre-existing 
normative (and evaluative) orientation, the relational approach is centrally 
concerned with description. Developing an understanding of what is taking place 
and how that fits within a trajectory. It is the integration of a theoretical question 
(in this case around the legitimation of the social world) in an empirical problem 
(the organising of education) and an emphasis on robust description that brings 
rigour to the relational approach. 
MOVES BEYOND THEORY AND PRACTICE 
As an applied field, educational administration is prone to the enduring debate of 
theory verse practice. Such a debate is based on an entity perspective of the world 
which divides these two apparently separate practices based on a division of 
labour. The practical is concerned with what works and constructed as highly 
relevant. The theoretical may be significant, but it is not necessarily translatable. In 
many ways this division – to which I am not claiming holds up – has led to the 
contemporary rise of translational research. Built upon the science-into-service 
perspective, this is where blue sky or basic research is given an applied use. Instead 
of engaging with how the relational approach might overcome the theory verse 
practice division, I am simply going to argue that the division itself is false. This 
perceived problem has more to do with knowledge production than an empirically 
defensible division. 
CHAPTER 8 
132
There are two parts to my argument: first, the matter of audience; and second, 
the need better theoretical resources. In relation to audience, a central concern in 
the construction of the division is a mis-understanding of scholarly communication. 
There are various possible outlets for scholarship. The traditional ones remain 
peer-reviewed journal articles and monographs. For the most part, these are written 
by academics for academics. Their purpose is the explicit articulation of 
scholarship to peers. Are these always accessible to the everyday reader, not 
always? Do they need to be, no. It is important to not ask such outputs to be 
accessible to all. The simplistic basis of the theory and practice divide on the 
inaccessibility of scholarly outputs is considerably flawed. Scholars have, and 
continue to, also make their work available through professional publications (not 
to mention teaching as a form of knowledge translation). In this case I am thinking 
of the magazine style publications of major professional associations and school 
systems. These are written in less dense language and usually offer something for 
the reader. With the advent of technologies, mobile devices, and alternate 
publication platforms, there is currently a proliferation of different forms of 
scholarly communication, including blogs, websites, forums, twitter, facebook. My 
argument here is that any division based on accessibility of scholarship needs to 
take into account the intended audience of the work. This is however a minor 
concern in relation to the larger matter of the need for better theory. 
Theory does not need to be accessible, but it does need to adequately describe or 
explain something. Herein lays a problem in educational administration studies. 
This speaks to the inter-play of the macro and micro mentioned earlier. Research 
that is so intimately grounded in a single site to the exclusion of historical or sociopolitical conditions is of little value to anyone beyond the immediate site. 
Similarly, accounts which lack empirical grounding yet also do not have universal 
appeal, are again of limited value. For me, this is at the heart of the theory and 
practice divide – a disconnection between the theoretical explanation or description 
offered by work and the empirical manifestation. 
The relational approach offers a means of overcoming this divide. The attention 
to the construction of the research object opens dialogue around what exactly is 
being studied and the empirical grounding of the work ensures that any theoretical 
description is defensible. The perceived distinction of theory and practice has done 
little to advance knowledge production in educational administration. Universities 
have contributed to this with doctoral programmes. The contemporary division of 
the traditional Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) and the more ‘practical’ or applied 
Doctor of Education (EdD) is a case in point. The idea that the former is a 
theoretical based exercise designed to generate a contribution to the discipline 
whereas the latter is a professional project that is of use in the field to the candidate 
is problematic. The theory and practice divide has been an enduring question for 
educational administration and one that will arguably be ongoing. The relational 
approach as articulated in this book offers a means of mobilising scholarly 
resources capable of overcoming such a division. 
FOR A RELATIONAL PROGRAMME 
133
NON PRESCRIPTIVE IN ITS APPROACH 
Something that is particularly attractive in the competitive marketplace that is the 
contemporary academy is a prescriptive ‘how to do it’ approach to scholarship. The 
outlining of a how to do it guide makes it more secure for the uncertain researcher 
and gives criteria from which an approach can be assessed as coherent with its 
claims. The difficulty with such a position is that it is based on a static notion of a 
particular approach. A technicist version of how to do things that is independent 
from time and space. I have seen how researchers have taken Pierre Bourdieu’s 
articulation of how to study a ‘field’ in Invitation to a reflexive sociology 
(Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992[1992]) and used that as the way to mobilise 
Bourdieu in scholarship. This misses some of the larger aspects of Bourdieusian 
based scholarship and most importantly, Bourdieu’s own position of not defining 
how research should be done forever more. But what are the implications of such 
approaches? If one is to build a research project around a ‘how to do’ approach, the 
outcome is a mapping of a terrain using imported intellectual resources. This is 
arguably not a problem, but it does leave the terrain and theorisation intact. It may 
be described in different language, and with some novelty, but not necessarily 
rethought. As a result, the prospect of theoretical intervention and seeing the 
research object in new ways is constrained, if not removed. 
Prescriptive adherence to method is equally, if not more so, problematic. The 
unquestioning acceptance of a set of procedures for data generation and analysis 
may be popular with those seeking certainty in process, but can often lead to 
premature empirical work. With greater attention to process, the scholarly work 
around the research object and the relations of the researcher to the researched are 
overlooked or seen as peripheral. This prescriptive approach is built upon an entity 
perspective that enables the partitioning of scholarly work. This is where you hear 
the doctoral candidate talk about being up to ‘writing up’ as though the writing is 
separate to the research. Although much of the contemporary research training 
programmes in universities compartmentalise research, I want to argue that this 
partitioning and prescription is flawed. 
In dividing research up into discrete parts to enable prescription – although this 
is often mobilised under the guise of being pedagogical, I do question why adopt a 
pedagogy that is responsible for learning something counter to the approach you 
are trying to teach – fails to engage with the interplay of theory and method. In 
other words, how theoretical dispositions, ontological and epistemological 
positions, are both product and producer of data and vice versa. It is inappropriate 
to make claims to the open nature of theory yet also provide a step-by-step guide of 
how to do research. Therefore, prescription only works, and is valid, if you believe 
in a static external world and the privileging of a set of procedures above all others. 
In contrast, the relational approach is non-prescriptive in its approach. It is more 
concerned with rigorous scholarship around a theoretical problem and the 
mobilisation of appropriate intellectual resources to engage with the empirical. As 
a result, it is not inclusive or exclusive of any particular approach. The key being 
does the work align with the key features of the relational programme concerning 
CHAPTER 8 
134
the epistemological break with the everyday, the locating in time and space, and 
the absence of binaries for the purpose of productively thinking in new ways. 
The lack of a prescriptive how to makes methodological books such as this one 
a challenge. If the work is too abstract to be meaningfully thought with, then the 
book is far too esoteric to be of value to all but a few like-minded scholars. On the 
other hand, if the book lacks sophisticated argument for the sake of ease of 
translation, then it lacks the degree of rigour that the book calls for. Getting the 
balance right is a challenge. But this is a challenge that I cannot answer. Rather, it 
is for the reader to make this call. What the relational programme I am arguing for 
does is provide an intellectual scaffold from which scholarship in educational 
leadership, management and administration can proceed with. Throughout this 
book I have articulated what is the relational approach and also what is not the 
relational approach. For some, this may be taken as an implicit, or even explicit, 
articulation of how to do a relational approach. However, for me, this is a very 
different approach. The relational research programme is a generative way of 
thinking about educational administration. The interpretation of what it is, and 
what it is not, is an ongoing – and enduring – question. This is why I cannot 
prescribe a how to, only to stress that theory is methodology and not separate 
entities. 
SEES THEORY AS METHODOLOGY 
The technicist research methodology courses of the contemporary university 
partition research into stages for pedagogical purposes. This often leads to an entity 
perspective of the scholastic enterprise, where literature, methods, data generation 
and analysis are all conceived of as individual, even if interdependent, elements. 
Throughout this book, I have demonstrated – hopefully with some success – that 
methodology is the enactment of theoretical resources through method. They are 
not, and cannot be, separated. It is not blind empiricism that brings us to the focus 
of our inquiries. Nor do we externally construct the research object. Theory is both 
product and producer of the scholastic enterprise, whether it is acknowledged or 
not. It is not a case of theory ‘and’ method, rather theory as methodology. The 
individual methods mobilised by a researcher are consistent with their ontological 
and epistemological position. The methods are consistent with the knowledge 
claims the researcher holds to be true. That being said, this is not to suggest that 
there are not contradictions in writing. Simplistic paradigmatic thinking, those built 
upon the division of quantitative and qualitative, can display such contradictions. 
The misguided belief that there are paradigm specific methods (e.g. quantitative – 
questionnaires; qualitative – interviews), makes a whole bunch of assumptions 
about the generation and analysis of data that do not necessarily hold up. It is quite 
possible that the use of interviews for data generation, that believed to align with 
the qualitative paradigm, can be analysed through a frequency analysis of words 
used as though the words reflect a static empirical reality. The counting of data is 
considered consistent with the quantitative paradigm. The result is a contested 
FOR A RELATIONAL PROGRAMME 
135
space for paradigmatic thinking. The notion of mixed methods only goes part of 
the way to addressing this matter. 
The relational approach to scholarship is just that, an approach to scholarship. 
As I have argued throughout this book, the scholastic enterprise is one of relations 
– relations between the researcher and the researched, and relations between the 
objects which constitute the generated scholarly narrative. The questions we ask, 
the theoretical resources we mobilise are all related. They cannot be partitioned and 
thought of as individual entities independent of one another. As a result, theoretical 
and methodological resources are not simply mapped on to a project but are 
generative of the project. This argument is not new, nor is it profound. However, it 
is problematic in a space where researchers (and potentially funders) have 
substantive vested interest in the research object. The argument here is simple, the 
methods mobilised are an extension of the researcher’s theory of knowledge and 
vice versa. 
FOR A RELATIONAL APPROACH 
As an intellectual space, educational administration has a tendency – as to many 
disciplines – to provide only minority status or even othering of approaches which 
do not conform to the hegemonic position (Wilkinson & Eacott, 2013). With its 
status as an applied field, educational administration has for the most part, ignored 
scholarship that asks questions. The relational research programme I have built 
and defended in this book is a viable alternative for educational administration. It 
balances the rigour and robustness sought for legitimacy within the academy with a 
systematic focus on the organising of education. It stresses the process over the 
product giving it a dynamic relationship with temporality and socio-spatiality. In 
doing so, the relational approach models the perspective for which it argues. This 
attention enables a specific focus on the structured and structuring nature of 
administration in the social world. The relational is however but one approach of 
engaging with the dynamics of the social world in a rigorous and robust way for 
the advancement of scholarship. But it is one for which I believe holds substantive 
potential for contributing to our understanding of educational administration. 
REFERENCES 
Bates, R. J., & Eacott, S. (2008). Teaching educational leadership and administration in Australia. 
Journal of Educational Administration and History, 40(2), 149-160. 
Bates, R. J., & Eacott, S. (2009). Teaching educational leadership and administration in Australia. In H. 
M. Gunter & T. Fitzgerald (Eds.), Educational administration and history: The state of the field (pp. 
69-80). London: Routledge. 
Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. (1992[1992]). An invitation to reflexive sociology. Cambridge: Blackwell 
Publishers. [Originally published as Résponses: pour une anthropologie réflexive (Paris: Seuil).] 
Calder, B. (1977). An attribution theory of leadership. In B. M. Staw & G. R. Salancik (Eds.), New 
directions in organizational behaviour (pp. 179-204). Chicago, IL: St. Clair. 
Caldwell, B. J. (2012). Review of related literature for the evaluation of empowering local schools. 
Report to Empowering local schools section of the National school reform support branch 
CHAPTER 8 
136
curriculum assessment and teaching group – Department of Education, Employment and Work 
Relations (June). 
Clarke, S., & Wildy, H. (2010). Preparing for principalship from the crucible of experience: Reflecting 
on theory, practice and research. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 42(1), 1-16. 
Clarke, S., Wildy, H., & Pepper, C. (2007). Connecting preparation with reality: Primary principals’ 
experiences of their first year out in Western Australia. Leading & Managing, 13(1), 81-90. 
Clarke, S., Wildy, H., & Styles, I. (2011). Fit for purpose? Western Australian insights into the efficacy 
of principal preparation. Journal of Educational Administration, 49(2), 166-178. 
Dinham, S. (2005). Principal leadership for outstanding educational outcomes. Journal of Educational 
Administration, 43(4), 338-356. 
Dinham, S., Anderson, M., Caldwell, B., & Weldon, P. (2011). Breakthroughs in school leadership 
development in Australia. School Leadership and Management, 31(2), 139-154. 
Donmoyer, R. (2001). Evers and Lakomski’s search for leadership’s holy grail (and the intriguing ideas 
they encountered along the way). Journal of Educational Administration, 39(6), 554-572. 
Eacott, S. (2010). Bourdieu’s strategies and the challenge for educational leadership. International 
Journal of Leadership in Education, 13(3), 265-281. 
Eacott, S. (2011). Preparing ‘educational’ leaders in managerialist times: An Australian story. Journal 
of Educational Administration and History, 43(1), 43-59. 
Fay, B. (1994). General laws and explaining human behaviour. In M. Martin & L. C. McIntyre (Eds.), 
Readings in the philosophy of social sciences (pp. 54-110). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. London: Hutchinson. 
Gorard, S. (2005). Current contexts for research in educational leadership and management. 
Educational Management, Administration & Leadership, 33(2), 155-164. 
Griffiths, D. (1959). Research in educational administration: An appraisal and a plan. New York, NY: 
Teachers College. 
Griffiths, D. (1965). Research and theory in educational administration In W. W. Charters (Ed.), 
Perspectives on educational administration and the behavioural sciences (pp. 25-48). Engene, OR: 
Center for the Advanced Study of Educational Administration. 
Griffiths, D. (1985). Administrative theory in transition. Melbourne: Deakin University. 
Gunter, H., & Thomson, P. (2009). The makeover: A new logic in leadership development in England? 
Education Review, 61(4), 469-483. 
Gurr, D., Drysdale, L., & Goode, H. (2010). Successful school leadership in Australia: A research 
agenda. International Journal of Learning, 17(4), 113-129. 
Immegart, G. L. (1975). The study of educational administration 1954-1974: Myths, paradoxes, facts 
and prospects. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University. 
Ireland, R. D., Webb, J. W., & Coombs, J. E. (2005). Theory and methodology in entrepreneurship 
research. In D. J. Ketchen & D. D. Bergh (Eds.), Research and methodology in strategy and 
management (pp. 111-141). Sydney: Elsevier. 
Leithwood, K. (2005). Understanding successful principal leadership: Progress on a broken foot. 
Journal of Educational Administration, 43(6), 619-629. 
Leithwood, K., & Day, C. (Eds.). (2007). Successful school leadership in time of change. Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands: Springer-Kluwer. 
Li, P.P. (2012). Toward an integrative framework of indigenous research: The geocentric implications 
of Yin-Yang balance. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 29(4), 849-872. 
Lingard, B., & Christie, P. (2003). Leading theory: Bourdieu and the field of educational leadership: An 
introduction and overview of this special issue. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 
6(4), 317-333. 
Maton, K. (2008). Habitus. In M. Grenfell (Ed.), Pierre Bourdieu: Key concepts (pp. 49-65). London: 
Acumen. 
Mulford, B. (2007). Overview of research on Australian educational leadership 2001-2005. Winmalee, 
NSW: Australian Council for Educational Leaders. 
FOR A RELATIONAL PROGRAMME 
137
Ribbins, P. (2007). Leadership and management in education: What’s in the field? South African 
Journal of Education, 27(3), 351-376. 
Ryle, G. (1971). Collected essays. London: Hutchinson. 
Smyth, J. (Ed.). (1993). A socially critical view of the self-managing school. London: Falmer. 
Smyth, J. (2011). The disaster of the ‘self-managing school’ – Genesis, trajectory, undisclosed agenda, 
and effects. Journal of Educational Administration and History, 43(2), 95-111. 
Taylor, W. (1969). Issues and problems in training the school administrator. In G. Baron & W. Taylor 
(Eds.), Educational administration and the social sciences (pp. 97-123). London: The Athlone Press. 
Thrupp, M., & Willmott, R. (2003). Educational management in managerialist times: Beyond the 
textual apologists. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press. 
Tsui, A. (2004). Contributing to global management knowledge: A case for high quality indigenous 
research. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 21(4), 491-513. 
Waite, D. (1998). Editorial: on the occasion of the inaugural issue of the International Journal of 
Leadership in Education, 1(1), 91-93. 
Walker, W.G. (1964). Teaching and research in educational administration. Journal of Educational 
Administration, 2(1), 9-22. 
Whetton, D. (2009). An examination of the interface between context and theory applied to the study of 
Chinese organizations. Management and Organization Review, 5(1), 29-55. 
Wildy, H., & Clarke, S. (2008). Principals on l-plates: Rear view mirror reflections. Journal of 
Educational Administration, 46(6), 727-738. 
Wildy, H., & Clarke, S. (2009). Using cognitive interviews to pilot an international survey of principal 
preparation: A Western Australian perspective. Educational Assessment, Evaluation and 
Accountability, 21(2), 105-117. 
Wildy, H., Clarke, S., & Slater, C. (2007). International perspectives of principal preparation: How does 
Australia fare? Leading & Managing, 13(2), 1-14. 
Wildy, H., Clarke, S., Styles, I., & Beycioglu, K. (2010). Preparing novice principles in Australia and 
Turkey: How similar are their needs? Educational Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 
22(4), 249-252. 
Wilkinson, J., & Eacott, S. (2013). Outsiders within? Deconstructing the educational administration 
scholar. International Journal of Leadership in Education, 16(2), 191-204. 
139
CHAPTER NINE 
SOME CONCLUSIONS 
TOO SOON 
In a book articulating and defending a research programme, any sense of a 
conclusion seems premature. Therefore, in this final chapter I am going to return to 
my original challenge and engage with what I was able to do. In particular, I have 
asked questions of educational administration as a scholarly space. In doing so, I 
have brought questions of epistemology and ontology to the fore. This has enabled 
the asking of questions about the philosophy, logic and empirical of educational 
administration. I have also raised questions about the pursuit of science in 
educational administration. In short, I have elaborated a coherent discussion from 
possibly fragmented discourses of contemporary educational leadership, 
management and administration thought and analysis to sketch an alternate 
research programme. In the introductory chapter I articulated my aim to: 
– To break new ground methodologically for the ‘scientific’ study of educational 
leadership, management and administration. 
I interpreted this aim widely and based my discussion on the following guiding 
questions: 
– What are the large scale theoretical, and empirical, problems on which 
educational administration is based?; and 
– How can we study them? 
The recognition, but not separation, of the theoretical and empirical problem is a 
key move. Rather than privileging the empirical problem and overlaying that with 
theoretical resources, the relational research programme explicitly integrates the 
two, seeing them not as separate entities but as two sides of the one enterprise. In 
doing so, particular attention is paid to the construction of the research object and 
the relations between the researcher and the researched. This is why early chapters 
were devoted to problematizing the intellectual gaze of the educational 
administration scholar and asking questions of the contemporarily popular label 
‘leadership’. The epistemic split between subject and object that has pervaded 
science is rejected in the approach I am advancing. This is not to say I have 
dismissed the notion of science, instead, I call for a widening of what we have 
come to know as science. When the idea of a detached observer first emerged in 
the West during the 15th century it was a breakthrough in thought that paved the 
way for modern science and industrialised society (Berman, 1981). This separation 
CHAPTER 9 
140
gave credibility to empirical research and allowed advances beyond the dominant 
theocratic ideology of the middle ages (Bradbury & Lichtenstein, 2000). In 
educational administration this has played out through the primary concern of 
third-person research. Publications report the so-called unbiased analysis of data, a 
phenomenon that is strictly separated from the researcher. Few, if any, still hold on 
to the belief in an independent external knowable reality. However, as Colin Evers 
and Gabriele Lakomski (1991) note: 
Ironically, however, the natural sciences go from strength to strength and, certainly 
over the last four hundred years, have been delivering knowledge hand over fist. 
Hardly any part of modern life remains untouched by the application or use of some 
aspect of natural science: for example, medicine, transport, and communications. So 
at a time when natural science has never been more successful in explaining and 
predicting phenomena and in enhancing our understanding of the world, paradoxically 
its methods and content are increasingly questioned or even denied in the social 
sciences. (p. vii) 
As with Evers and Lakomski, who accept the various criticisms of empiricist 
epistemologies raised by the scope of alternate perspectives but argue that they do 
not seriously affect the value of science as a scholarly endeavour, I see the issue 
not as the need to reject science, but the need for a broader engagement with what 
it means to scientifically inquire. For the most part, the limitations placed on 
science in educational administration have been limited to an equating of 
positivism – or really logical empiricism – with science. There is little doubt that 
there has been, and continues to be, a recognition in the weaknesses of positivist 
versions of science. The relational research programme offers a resolution to this 
situation through the provision of a theoretical frame from which to base 
scholarship. It recognises the blurred boundaries between the researcher and the 
researched and provides the theoretical resources to engage with this. After all, I 
seek to pursue, and even increase, anchorage in a rigorous empirical science, which 
seems to me to represent a fundamental contribution of the work developed in the 
frame of this relational programme. 
This is however not a straight forward case of replacing one master narrative 
with another. Such a move would be counter to my argument. I am not attempting 
to raise one perspective over others, nor am I suggesting that there is ‘one true’ 
variant of a relational approach to scholarship. That said, I would not have written 
this book if I did not believe there was substantial intellectually gain to be made 
from adopting the relational research programme as I have articulated it. What I 
am arguing is that the ontological emphasis of the relational approach is that 
educational leadership, management and administration cannot be known 
independently and outside of the scientific observer. Furthermore, from a 
relational perspective, educational leadership, management and administration is 
not a trait, behaviour, role, rather a phenomenon generated in relations between 
actors in time and space. In other words, the relational perspective focuses on 
situated – temporally and socio-spatially – actions. This represents a significant 
shift from content specific issues (e.g. strategic planning, improving outcomes – 
entities), as such content are not ‘facts’ of an objective reality but epistemic 
AUTHOR INDEX 
141
constructs, to social practices. The move to a focus on situated practice is not 
consistent with traditional theory-building approaches and requires new standards 
for validity, reliability and trustworthiness that are often uncomfortable within 
entity based perspectives. Stability and certainty are not the goal nor conceivable. 
Conservative notions of validity are challenged when the idea of an independent 
scientific observer is rejected and the lines between subject and object blurred. 
Generalisability, a quintessential of scientific value, is de-emphasised in a 
temporally and socio-spatially grounded description. Not to mention that the 
scholarly practice that I have outlined in this text may be difficult to operationalise 
for some researchers given the paucity of methodological preparation in 
conventional university programmes. As I have noted in multiple places throughout 
this book, educational leadership, management and administration is an 
inexhaustible social activity. It is messy, dynamic and situated in time and space. 
Rather than attempt to overlay order and structure, this messiness is to be engaged 
with and the relational research programme is one way to do that. 
Although it may appear that I am constructing – or outlining – a problem for 
which the relational programme solves, this is not a problem solving agenda. 
Instead, it is a problem posing project. What I see happening in the disciplinary 
space to which I pledge allegiance is a theoretical problem around legitimation. As 
a means of legitimising the social world, educational administration has sought to 
focus on relationships. These relationships however are thought of through an 
ontological complicity with administration and an entity based ontology. There is 
minimal attention to epistemology and ontology and a preference for practical 
and/or applied research. I see this as a missed opportunity. An opportunity for 
scholars to gain a more sophisticated understanding of world through building on, 
but in new directions, scholarship from the past but more importantly different 
research traditions and disciplines to bring them face-to-face with key problems in 
the here and now. To do so, I have sought to break new ground methodologically 
for the scientific study of educational leadership, management and administration. 
What this requires is attention to the large scale theoretical problems, such as the 
legitimation of the social world, and thinking through how they play out in 
empirical problems (e.g. principal autonomy). All of this is set within an agenda of 
how can we study them. This is what has been a driving force in the development 
of the relational approach articulated in this book. Sitting at the intersection of 
sociology, organisational studies, management sciences and educational 
administration, the relational research programme aspires to be a rigorous and 
robust empirical science grounded in time and space. With as much attention given 
to knowledge production as it is the understanding of practice. 
While the world of educational administration has experienced massive change 
over the past five or six decades, the theories – despite their proliferation – that we 
mobilise to examine organisations have not experienced the same degree of 
epistemological and ontological development. That is, while educational 
leadership, management and administration as a disciplinary space has grown in 
size and significance over the past couple of decades, not to mention the rapid 
expansion of leadership preparation and development on a global scale, the 
CHAPTER 9 
142
discipline finds itself in an increasingly challenged position. Not since the 
establishment of departments of educational administration have the boundaries of 
the discipline become so blurred. The rise of policy studies and the breadth of the 
sociology of education field, among others, have encroached on what was 
traditionally – and conservatively – educational administration’s territory. There is 
growing criticism of educational administration researchers in their failure to 
develop coherent and progressive approaches to knowledge production that can 
influence and shape policy and practice. This comes alongside critique for the lack 
of scholarly robustness in educational administration studies. If not practically 
useful and not rigorous and robust, then educational administration is in trouble. 
Disciplines with greater internal heterodoxy (e.g. sociology) are more open than 
those with stronger identity defining research traditions. The desire to be scientific 
– in the traditional sense – and of value to practice is a limitation of educational 
administration. If, as the current trend for inter-disciplinary scholarship would 
suggest, traditional disciplinary boundaries collapse (still a big if), then perhaps 
trying to be more like a conventional discipline is less important than it once was, 
and being at the crossroads is a productive identity to embrace and encourage. Karl 
Popper (1963) once said that disciplines are not distinguished by their respective 
subject matter but by the problems they define. For educational administration 
there are two key concerns: i) improving organisational performance; and ii) the 
preparation and development of administrators. These are teased out in many 
different ways, but essentially, these are the two central concerns of the discipline. 
Progress however has been slow. Despite countless models, frameworks and 
perspectives, educational administration has been able to overcome matters of 
inequities, gender, race, or at scale problematize the notion of performance. The 
complexity of the task at hand lends itself to broadening our approaches but also in 
not asking too much of scholarship. A question remains, how do we bring 
educational administration theory into direct contact with the key problems of 
contemporary times? 
If educational administration is to flourish as a disciplinary space, then it needs 
means of providing unique voices on a diverse set of problems. This is why I argue 
for the need to focus on the theoretical problem and its empirical manifestation. 
Attention to the theoretical problem enables the avoidance of theory fetishism, 
technical paranoia or becoming too insulated and inward looking. As educational 
administration scholars we are located in a wider system of knowledge production. 
Our theories are influenced by our many links. Therefore, while I strongly defend 
the need to embrace, protect and teach our scholastic history (something that I 
believe is poorly done at scale – and the value of which is only seen as relevant to 
those aspiring to the academy rather than the pressing concerns of the practitioner, 
but that is an argument for another time and space), we must also expand our 
definition of foundational works if we are to capture the complexity of the 
contemporary conditions. As students of the social world, our target is constantly 
moving and changing. This dynamism is temporally and socio-spatially located. 
What are the challenges that lay ahead? How does the relational research 
programme grow its own life and flourish in an academic environment prone to 
AUTHOR INDEX 
143
faddism and quick doctorates? When research seminars and robust, rigorous debate 
is replaced by part-time candidates who are part of credential creep and faculty 
who are increasingly pressured to publish at both volume and in apparently 
‘quality’ outlets? The test of a research programme is in its take up and dynamism 
while maintaining its core foci. The increasing growth of the Educational 
Leadership, Management and Administration Theory Workshop that I host 
annually is evidence that there remains a core group of internationally connected 
scholars centrally concerned with theoretical and methodological matters. This is 
despite the apparent apathy of many journals in the field to seriously engage with 
theory due to a preference for parallel monologues from logical empiricist projects. 
The path to full professor – in the British rather than US sense of the title – is no 
longer based on building and sustaining a research programme but whether one can 
attract large competitive funding and publishing in a small – and somewhat 
narrowly focused – set of journals identified as high impact or high quality. Giving 
the impression of being meritorious, such systems overlook the legitimation 
process and the discursive nature of scholarly work. This is where the relational 
approach is of worth. 
The relational research programme is about rigorous and robust scholarship. It 
is concerned with the theoretical problem of the legitimation of the social world. 
This is a theoretical problem that plays out in many, if not all, empirical situations. 
It provides a set of theoretical resources for thinking through the construction and 
maintenance of the research object, asks questions of contemporarily popular 
labels, grounds those in time and space and rejects binaries such as individualism / 
collectivism and structure/agency. Most of all, the relational research programme 
is a productive space to theorise educational administration. It is less concerned 
with evaluation than it is describing the conditions in which contemporary action 
plays out. It does not require large scale funding nor does it have an implicit desire 
to ‘scale up’. Most significantly, this is not the final word on the relational 
research programme. It is an ongoing intellectual exercise, one that if you will not 
join me on, I trust that you will at least support or follow from the sidelines. 