Quest for quality education
Faisal BariPublished November 26 , 2021 4
The writer is a senior research fellow at the Institute of Development and Economic Alternatives , and an associate professor of economics at Lums . 
UNIVERSITY students from across Pakistan will be protesting today . One of their demands is for the recent fee hike to be taken back and for tuition fees and other educational expenses to be kept low . For the school sector the problem , not the solution , is simpler . Article 25A of the Constitution clearly states that all five- to 16-year-olds should have access to ‘ free ’ education . They should not be charged for education , up to matriculation at least , under this article . 

But providing quality education is expensive . Buildings , infrastructure , teachers , materials and management cost a lot . The cost of each item is higher if minimum quality standards are to be observed . If public-sector schools cannot charge students for costs , the government / society must find a way to pay the cost of education . For now , the government pays all expenses . But schools are severely underfunded so the provision is at a significant cost on both fronts : access to education and quality of education . 

Read more : Murad unhappy over quality of teaching in govt schools

For better access , as Article 25A stipulates , we ’ ll have to increase funding for the education sector significantly . The same applies if we want to improve the quality . Not every rupee of the current allocation for education is being spent in the most efficient way , but even if all the wastage and poor allocations were to be remedied , we would still need more resources to provide for all children who are out of school and for ensuring better-quality provision for all who are and will be in school . Society must acknowledge this if 25A and ‘ Education for All ’ are to be a goal . 


At the university level , the argument gets more complex . There is no ‘ right ’ to university education in Pakistani law . We need many university-educated people for sustainable growth of the economy . University education also provides significant private returns so it is understandable that several young people want university degrees . But these arguments are not rights-based arguments . They are arguments about the instrumentality of higher education . 

How do we see the students ’ demand to keep higher education costs low ? 

The private returns argument ( if I get a degree I can have higher returns in the future which will be good for my family and me ) doesn ’ t give much support for public funding of university education . Why should the state fund a person for his or her private gains ? The state will have an interest if private returns to a person create some public returns for society too . The argument will have to be on the basis that having more university educated people allows Pakistan to have better human resources across all work sectors , makes higher and sustainable growth possible , improves the quality of life , and possibly , has benefits on the side of governance too . These arguments will justify subsidising education to ensure society gets the benefits mentioned . 

In particular , if we feel that people should have opportunities based on potential and merit , and not their ability to pay , thus making higher education accessible to people who can ’ t afford to pay for it , it becomes an important policy goal for the government . But this still does not mean that every person who can , should have access to higher education . The instrumental arguments do not establish rights and do not cover all people who fall in a particular age or education level category . 

How do we then see the students ’ demand to keep higher education costs low ? It is a complex issue . Higher education is even more expensive to provide than school education . For sciences , laboratories are a major expense . For all subjects , faculty salary is the biggest ticket item . At higher education levels , research becomes an integral part of education provision and funding for it demands a significant proportion of funds too . If universities cannot charge students , where will they get the money from ? Higher education funding for the last three years or so hasn ’ t increased . In some years , in fact , funding has decreased . So , how do we square the circle ? 

Read more : Cash-strapped DI Khan agriculture varsity using tuition fees to pay staff

Inflationary pressures have also been eroding the power of budgets set in nominal terms . Faculty and staff have been arguing for higher salaries . If faculty / staff salaries do not keep pace with inflationary pressures and the opportunity costs of being at a particular university or in academia in general , people start leaving and this has an impact on the quality of provision : we do want the very best teachers and researchers we can get . 

It is unlikely that philanthropy will fill the gap for subsidising quality education for all ( school level ) and for those who have potential / merit ( university level )  . Philanthropy , though not insubstantial in Pakistan , is mainly not through formalised channels . The share of education is also not too large and very little of it , even out of the amount that goes towards education , is for higher learning . Currently , we do not have a significant local funding base for research . Most research funding for now comes from the university ’ s own funds , HEC or overseas donors . 

Quality education for every child up to matriculation or intermediate and for those who have the merit / potential to attend university and contribute to national development is important . But quality education costs money . Given the levels of poverty in Pakistan and overall income distribution , most parents cannot pay for it . The state has taken on the responsibility of giving quality education to all children for the first 10 years . But it is not giving priority to this goal even now . Higher education too remains severely underfunded even when only a small number of those who should be getting higher education are doing so . And it seems the state has no intention of increasing funding for education in the near future . We seem to be in a poor equilibrium and there seems to be no way out of it for now . So , all children will not get education , and compromises on quality , for those who are in schools and universities , will continue . 

The writer is a senior research fellow at the Institute of Development and Economic Alternatives , and an associate professor of economics at Lums . 