Co-education in India ( and its Advantages ) 
5 Min Read
5 Min Read
Share This ! 
Co-education in India

Co- is a prefix that means together . Educate is a word that comes from educare . Educare means literally to draw out , but it tends to be used in the sense of to teach . Hence , co-education means teaching together . 

Co-education ( also mixed gender education , mixed-sex education , co-ed ) refers to the integrated education system , where the education of both boys and girls are arranged in the same environment , mainly at schools , colleges and universities . 

Co–education is one of the most common spectacles in the educational system of West . It is now been widely seen in India as well . 

As a matter of historical fact , there was co-education in ancient India particularly in the Vedic Age , when woman had a very high status in the society . 

In modern times , it means teaching students of all genders together , at various levels , such as : 

At nursery school . 
At school . 
At university . 
However , with the passage of time , the system of co- education began to be discouraged in India . During the British rule , however , co-education once again cropped up , but only one out of one thousand Indian girls could get the privilege of studying with boys . Today , of course , co-education is encouraged in our country and number of co-educational institutions is increasing . 

Critics : There are certain critics who are still holding the conservative view that by studying in co-educational institutions our girls become immodest and graceless and that their moral character also gets blotted . These critics are think that the decline of morality in the present age is the direct outcome of co-educational system . There is absolutely no truth in these false and baseless charges against co-education . Co-education neither corrupts a girl nor a boy . Educational institutions are the places of learning . Co-education doesn ’ t make students impure , unholy or immoral . When boys and girls can enjoy mixed social gatherings and parties , then where lies the harm if they study together ? 

Types of co-education . 

In the home : boys and girls can be taught to read and write together by their parents . 
At nursery school : all students play and learn together . 
At primary school : boys and girls take the same classes . 
At university : university students of all genders learn together . 
On training courses or practical courses : no preference is given to one gender over another . 
Advantages of Co-education

1 . Broadens Outlook and Personality : Co-education , apart from providing a better and higher standard of education , also serves as vital force in the development of a girl ’ s personality . It widens her narrow out-look and broadness her horizon . Modesty and grace are , indeed , two most important qualities in an ideal Indian girl . 

2 . Bold and smart : Co-education removes shyness from a girl and makes her bold and smart . It creates in the hearts of both the boys as well as girls , an inspiring urge to work together for the advancement and enrichment of the nation and the country . Boys and girls are the two ‘ wheels ’ of the Chariot of a nation . Both must play their parts equally and ideally to make the ‘ Chariot ’ run faster and still faster . 

3 . Respect : when educated together , all students learn respect for each other from an early age . 

4 . Best learning experience : co-education provides a great learning experience . 

5 . Psychological benefits : From the psychological point of view , co-education is a blessing for girls , especially of a less developed and growing country , like India , which is on her path of progress . When girls study with boys and take part in every activity side by side , they are psychologically cured of this disease of self-defeatism and self-created pessimism . 

6 . Lowers cost of education : When both girls and boys get education in a safe environment , the need for separate education institutions for girls would get minimized . Co-education is the proper solution to cut the high cost of maintaining separate staff and educational infrastructure for girls . 

7 . Gender Equality : Education should never be discriminated based on gender . Co-education enables the boys and girls to come in contact with each other . During this course , they are able to understand and develop respect for each other . This mutual understanding results in development of a social environment where both men and women are treated equally . Men will no longer oppose the equal status of women , once they are truly aware of the infinite potential of women . 

8 . Uniformity : Everyone gets to experience the same curriculum if they are all educated together . Every child gets the knowledge and wisdom to gain the best knowledge . 

9 . Social groups : Students ’ social groups expand in co-educational environments . Co-education provides opportunity for co-operation ( working together ) and co-existence ( existing together )  . 

Conclusion : Boys and girls , both , will have to put effort and energy , toil and knowledge to re-build the shattered social and economic order of our country and the nation . Co-education is immensely beneficial to the girls of India , rather it is blessing to them . We should not discriminate against any student on any basis