Introduction
One of us recently had the following experience. She had written a short case 
study on the suffering of women in some parts of the Islamic world. The case 
study was intended as a discussion basis for the topic of gender equality in 
a forthcoming ethics text. During the review process, one reviewer recommended—with an obvious air of sarcasm—that the author turn the case into 
a marketing campaign for the book. The reviewer suggested that the author 
condemn the Prophet Mohammed so that radical Muslims could condemn 
us to death in turn. The ethics text would make headline news, the reviewer 
went on to say. The author, he thought, had a good chance of getting herself 
killed, but the publisher would make a nice profi t.
While this may have been intended to be amusing, the aim of these comments was to show clearly that the issues this case study was bringing up 
could be considered too politically sensitive for the classroom. What is 
more, the reviewer’s comments prompted the editor to consider removing 
the case from the book. After some discussion about academic freedom and 
the value of a liberal education, the case stayed in the text. But a lesson was 
learned: Something has changed. The classroom is no longer as insulated 
from politics as it once was. It is no longer a place where sensitive issues 
can be discussed without concerns about repercussions. The makeup of the 
students is also different from what it has been in previous decades, and 
educators fi nd themselves facing an unprecedented variety of educational, 
ethnic, and religious backgrounds in their students. Last, today’s students 
are facing an entirely new set of problems compared to the world of as little 
as ten years ago. 
These changes cannot be ignored. Indeed, as educators we would not 
be doing well by our students if we did ignore them. Terrorism, ethnocentrism, religious tension, competition over limited resources, and war are 
just a few of the issues that educators must fi nd ways to engage in with 
their students. But we must also consider how the issues are best addressed. 
After all, higher education is supposed to help students prepare for citizenship in this new and much more globalized world.
As educators, we must ask ourselves some fundamental questions: What 
is an ideal global citizen, and how should global citizenry be fostered? What 
2 Philosophy of Education in the Era of Globalization
kind of skills and abilities are needed in democratic decision making? How 
do we deal with cultures in which democratic decision making and argumentation are not considered to be important values? How should education 
address the problems of cultural clashes that globalization brings with it? By 
and large, Western societies endorse rational discourse, as well as religious 
and value pluralism. Against that background, how can educators even begin 
to explain terrorism and religious fundamentalism to their students? And how 
do we instill religious tolerance in a time when fundamentalism has become 
inextricably tied with terrorism? To what degree should religious tolerance 
be promoted in the fi rst place? Furthermore, how do we promote economic 
growth in the face of overpopulation and its depletion of resources? How 
should we address the gender inequalities that still exist in the world? And last 
but not least: Do institutions of higher learning have an obligation to improve 
their students’ character, so that they might feel obligated to promote change? 
Should education, in other words, be value neutral or value laden?
This volume of new essays in the philosophy of education tries to grapple with the questions just raised. The book has been divided into three 
parts. Part I: Education in a Globalized Society contains several introductory essays that address fundamental questions. Harvey Siegel, in his essay 
“How Should We Educate Students Whose Cultures Frown upon Rational 
Disputation? Cultural Difference and the Role of Reason in Multicultural 
Democratic Education,” suggests that the skill of rational argumentation 
is crucial to full participation in democratic decision making. While some 
cultures may reject the democratic ideal of reasoned discourse, Siegel argues 
that this ideal takes precedence—at least in societies that aspire to having a 
democratic system in the fi rst place.
Robert Talisse’s essay “Can Liberals Take their own Side in an Argument?” addresses a tension within liberal democracy itself: that because of 
the value pluralism that liberalism is built on, it cannot fi nd a rational basis 
for one of the very principles that is fundamental to it, the principle of toleration. In this era of globalization, and the culture clashes it has brought 
with it, this problem has become even more pressing. As Talisse puts it, 
“there are no argumentative resources available to the liberal when making 
a principled case for core liberal values.” Talisse then tries to fi nd a way to 
allay these tensions, both in education and in society in general.
Hanan Alexander’s essay “Literacy and Citizenship: Tradition, Reason, 
and Critique in Democratic Education” concerns itself with a dilemma 
involved in the idea of democratic literacy: Because democratic literacy 
entails ‘initiation’ into particular modes of expression, it can end up excluding particular groups—groups that express themselves differently—from 
what the author calls ‘the language of political power.’ Alexander’s essay 
promotes one particular account of democratic literacy that he views as 
resolving this dilemma.
Doret de Ruyter, in “After All, How Small is the World? Global Citizenship as an Educational Ideal,” sets out to develop and defend a particular 
Introduction 3
conception of global citizenship. In her view, a world citizen has the moral 
and political duty to respect the rights of others to live their lives as they 
see fi t. Second, a world citizen should be committed to promoting human 
fl ourishing. Randall Curren is also concerned with what kind of global citizenship education should foster. His essay “Education for Global Citizenship and Survival” starts with the important assumption that our current 
ways of life—especially in Western society—are actually materially unsustainable. Therefore, for Curren, any conception of global citizenship, and 
consequently the education that prepares for it, must take into account the 
challenges of sustainability and survivability in light of resource depletion, 
overpopulation, and climate change.
Part II: New Pedagogical Approaches offers a variety of pedagogical 
suggestions that attempt to respond to the changed circumstances of the 
last decade. Irfan Khawaja, in his essay “Why They Hate Us: A Pedagogical 
Proposal,” advocates that the explanation of terrorism needs to be explicitly taught on the undergraduate level. While Khawaja thinks that adequately doing so would require students to develop an understanding of the 
complexities of philosophical action theory, he nevertheless considers the 
explanation of terrorism to be something any undergraduate student must 
confront during his or her studies. The essay by Elaine Unterhalter and Amy 
North, “Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education: What Kind 
of Pedagogy?” evaluates the effi cacy of three different approaches to pedagogy that the Millenium Goals for global gender equality and education 
entail. Last, Meira Levinson’s essay, “‘Let Us Now Praise . . .’: Rethinking 
Role Models and Heroes in an Egalitarian Age,” examines the educational 
value of role models in contemporary democracies. In her view, a more 
thoughtful approach to the use of heroes and role models in education is as 
a desirable tool for both self-improvement and civic engagement.
Finally, Part III: Moral and Religious Education deals with the controversy 
over whether, and to what degree, education for global citizenry should have a 
moral and religious dimension. The opening essay, “Privilege, Well-being, and 
Participation in Higher Education,” by Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy, 
takes the stance that higher education ought not merely improve students’ 
job opportunities and earning potential. It should also contribute to turning 
them into well-rounded individuals, individuals capable of being responsible 
citizens. The advantages they receive as a result of their education, Brighouse 
and McAvoy argue, bring with them the obligation to use this education not 
only for personal benefi t, but also for the benefi t of others. 
Mark Halstead, in “In Defense of Multiculturalism,” distinguishes three 
different degrees of multiculturalism, ranging from a full acceptance of 
cultural difference to a very minimal multiculturalism, which makes only 
minimal allowances for cultural difference. Halstead advocates a stronger 
form of multiculturalism and then explores its implications for education: 
To what degree, he asks, should education promote the values that a stronger multiculturalism brings with it?
4 Philosophy of Education in the Era of Globalization
In “Children’s Autonomy and Symbolic Clothing in Schools: Help or 
Hindrance?” by Dianne Gereluk, the degree to which multiculturalism 
should be respected in schools is concretized. In particular, Gereluk focuses 
on the question of whether or not symbolic clothing should be banned in 
schools. Using Rawls’ theory of justice, she argues that banning symbolic 
clothing is contrary to the liberal aims of education. In the fi nal essay of 
this volume, “Global Religious Education,” Peter Simpson argues that the 
moral teachings he thinks all religions have to offer ought to be part of 
education everywhere. As Simpson sees it, this would increase virtue and 
promote happiness.
The collected essays show that educators have to continuously refl ect on 
the way globalization affects the classroom situation and make changes on 
a continuous basis.1
This book was planned together with the journal and research project 
Protosociology. We wish to express our thanks to our authors for their 
contributions. We also thank our Routledge editor Benjamin Holtzman for 
his continuous encouragement.
Yvonne Raley, Felician College, Lodi, USA
Gerhard Preyer, Goethe-University Frankfurt 
am Main, Frankfurt a. M., Germany
NOTES
 1. On contemporary researches about globalization see G. Preyer, M. Bös, 
eds., Borderlines in a Globalized Word: New Perspectives in a Sociology 
of the Word-System, Social Indicators Research Series Vol. 9 (Kluwer Academic Publishers: Dordrecht, 2002). On consensus and controversies about 
globalization see J. Nederveen Pieterse, Globalization and Culture: Global 
Mélange (Rowman and Littlefi eld: Lanham, 2004), 7–21. On the dimensions of globalization see G. Preyer, Soziologische Theorie der Gegenwartsgesellschaft: Mitgliedschaftstheoretische Untersuchungen (VS Verlag 
Sozialwissenschaften: Wiesbaden, 2006), 181–215; Soziologische Theorie 
der Gegenwartsgesellschaft III: Mitgliedschaft und Evolution( VS Verlag 
Sozialwissenschaften: Wiesbaden, 2008), V 1–3. Further publications of the 
globalization-project of Protosociology, see www.protosociology.de.
Part I
Education in a 
Globalized Society

1 How Should We Educate 
Students Whose Cultures Frown 
upon Rational Disputation? 
Cultural Difference and the Role 
of Reason in Multicultural 
Democratic Education
Harvey Siegel
DEMOCRATIC PUBLIC EDUCATION AND 
CULTURAL DIFFERENCE: THE PROBLEM
How should public education in democratic states deal with cultural differences among citizens?
This question gains point and practical relevance from the increasingly 
diverse cultural constituencies that collectively constitute the citizenry of 
contemporary democratic states. However, to shed light on it, it is helpful 
to step back and consider the question fi rst without reference to culture. So: 
What should public education in democratic states be like (irrespective of 
the cultural make-up of its citizens)? At what should it aim?
One common answer, which I endorse, is that it should aim at fostering 
in students the skills and abilities, attitudes and dispositions needed to fully 
and successfully participate in democratic decision-making and, more generally, in democratic life. This may not be the only aim of public education 
in democratic states, but it is clearly a central one. Fostering these skills, 
abilities, attitudes and dispositions amounts to helping students become 
critical thinkers; that is, helping them to become rational or reasonable 
persons. Public education in democratic states should aim, that is, at the 
cultivation of reason in its students (Siegel 1988, 1997, 2003; Bailin and 
Siegel 2003).1
Why should this be thought of as a central aim of public education in 
democratic states? There are two sets of reasons, the fi rst having to do with 
education per se, and the second with the nature of democracy. First: Education must, for moral reasons, treat students in ways that treat them with 
respect as persons and that further their own interests (as opposed to those 
of the school or the state, where the latter might confl ict with the former). 
The Kantian principle of respect for persons is one that has relevance far 
beyond the bounds of education, but is as applicable there, governing the 
treatment of students, as it is everywhere else. Moreover, education has to 
8 Harvey Siegel
prepare students for adulthood, where this is conceived not as preparation for a predetermined slot in the preexisting social/economic matrix—
that slot being determined by the state—but rather as enabling students to 
determine for themselves, to the greatest extent possible, the character of 
their lives and their place in the social order in which they fi nd themselves. 
Further, education must endeavor to provide students with a suitable introduction to, and understanding of, the many intellectual traditions developed during the long course of human history. In all these, the ‘cultivation 
of reason’—or, less prosaically, the fostering of rationality, reasonableness, 
and the abilities and dispositions of critical thinking—is central (Siegel 
1988, chap. 3; Siegel 2003).
The second set of reasons for thinking that public education in democratic states should aim at fostering rationality, or critical thinking abilities 
and dispositions, in its students relates directly to the nature of democracy 
itself. It is a commonplace that democracy requires an educated citizenry. 
But what sort of ‘educated citizenry’ is required? What is needed, I submit, is a critical citizenry: that is, citizens who are able to and disposed to 
settle matters of public policy and concern by appeal to relevant reasons. 
For democratic states to fl ourish, their citizens must be able to conceive, 
consider, and properly evaluate reasons for and against alternative policies and practices concerning the many varied matters that require public 
deliberation and decision. Citizens must be able to imaginatively construct 
arguments, and to assess their own arguments and those of others in accordance with the epistemic principles governing the assessment of reasons 
and arguments, in order to wisely determine the course of social policies 
and institutions. Without a critical citizenry, the state itself is threatened.
Worse, in my view, than the situation of a democratic state peopled by 
an uncritical citizenry is the situation of the uncritical citizen herself in a 
democratic state. Such a citizen has no adequate way to contribute to public 
discussion, to voice her concerns, to protect her own and her community’s 
interests, or to work for constructive political change. She is marginalized, 
left on the outside, unable to participate meaningfully in democratic life. 
Her lack of critical abilities and dispositions renders her unable to enjoy the 
fruits of that life. Insofar as we value democracy and think it a good thing 
that states are democratic, we must deplore both an uncritical citizenry in 
such states in general, and the fate of the marginalized uncritical citizen 
in them in particular. In valuing democracy, we recognize the crucially 
important place of the critical citizen in democratic states, and the centrality of democratic public education’s task of cultivating the reason of its 
students.2
With this view of democracy and the place of reason in it established, 
we are in position to pursue our initial question. How, then, should public 
education in democratic states be conceived, in light of signifi cant cultural 
differences among citizens? It is worth noting that the question is not of 
merely theoretical interest. Virtually all so-called ‘First World’ democratic 
How Should We Educate Students 9
states have large and growing numbers of immigrants, from a range of 
cultural groups. Around the globe, and perhaps especially in contemporary North America and Western Europe, the question is of pressing political moment. While the practical relevance of the matter is clear, in what 
follows I abstract away from such practical considerations and offer an 
answer to the question that depends rather on particular aspects of cultural 
difference and the demands of democratic education themselves.
THE SOLUTION?
A quick answer is: Cultural difference doesn’t matter. The conception of 
democratic public education rehearsed above, as involving the fostering of 
the abilities and dispositions of reason/critical thinking, is the correct one 
for democratic states, whether or not citizens in those states are members 
of different cultures. In fact, it might be plausibly argued that the more 
culturally diverse citizens are, the more important it is that they be able 
to engage in rational, democratic decision-making. If cultural differences 
cannot be managed rationally and democratically, those differences might 
well render impossible peaceful and just social existence. (The recent and 
current state of various cultural confl icts around the globe seems to provide 
some evidence for this claim: where democratic institutions are in place 
and functioning, there appears to be at least a chance of peaceful and just 
resolution of confl ict; where not, not.)
While this ‘quick’ answer is plausible, it obviously does not resolve the most 
fundamental form of the problem because it does not acknowledge two different sorts of cultural confl ict. First, there can be confl ict between cultures, 
both (or all) of which—despite their confl ict—embrace democratic ideals, 
principles, and a commitment to endeavor to resolve their confl ict through 
participation in reasoned discourse and in democratic institutions and procedures. The quick answer might well suffi ce for this sort of cultural confl ict.
But a second, more diffi cult sort of cultural confl ict involves cultures, 
some (or all) of which reject democratic ideals, principles, and practices, 
including those involving reasoned argumentation. In such a circumstance, 
it is diffi cult to see how the quick answer can succeed. For how can such 
confl icts be resolved when (at least some of) the parties to the confl ict 
explicitly reject the value or worth of the sort of argumentation and reasoned deliberation required for democratic decision-making?3
This problem can seem particularly pressing in situations in which large 
numbers of recent immigrants originate in nondemocratic states and so 
have no experience of, and/or lack cultural respect for, the reasoned deliberation characteristic of democratic decision-making at its best. There are, 
of course, many different sorts of nondemocratic states and/or cultures. 
A short list would include those characterized by forms of patriarchy in 
which women are denied access to the existing education system and are 
10 Harvey Siegel
systematically excluded from participation in public life; overtly racist 
ones in which certain groups are systematically excluded from meaningful participation in political life on the basis of race; those in which policy 
is determined not by citizens or their elected representatives, but by nondemocratically selected monarchs or oligarchs; and those governed by religious leaders according to religious precept. There are also those that are 
democratic but are nevertheless characterized by an antipathy toward the 
rough-and-tumble of open democratic deliberation and debate. As Alvin 
Goldman rather circumspectly puts the point:
In almost every culture, and especially in certain cultures, there are 
norms that deter critical argumentation. It is widely said that in Japanese and other Asian cultures people are encouraged to conduct their 
discourse so as to preserve harmony. The expression of confl ict, including verbally explicit disagreement, is said to be discouraged . . . 
[S]tudies defi nitely reveal contrasts between different cultures in their 
toleration of critical discourse. (Goldman 1999, 147)
In such cases, the quick answer won’t do. Or will it? There are actually two 
distinct possibilities here.
In the fi rst possible scenario, members of cultures that reject the value 
or worth of reasoned deliberation in the context of democratic decisionmaking simply reject democratic values as incompatible with their culture 
or way of life. Here, democracy itself is rejected. In this case, the political/
educational task is to persuade them—rationally, of course—of the value 
of democratic institutions and practices in the actual multicultural social 
context in which they fi nd themselves. We may well fail in this task. If we 
cannot succeed, our question appears to be irresolvable: Public education 
for democratic citizenship is itself, in such circumstances, impossible. Such 
citizens do not actually want to live in a democratic state.4
Alternatively, they might recognize the confl ict between democratic values and institutions and their own undemocratic cultural values, but nevertheless value living in a democratic state. In such a case there seems to 
be no alternative to the compromising of their cultural values—i.e., their 
rejection of reasoned deliberation, etc.—insofar as such compromise is necessary for democracy to fl ourish or, less ambitiously, for them to participate 
in their state’s democratic life.
So: When democratic and non- or antidemocratic cultural values confl ict, it is essential (a) to respect and allow cultural difference to fl ourish 
as much as possible, because this sort of respect is morally required (Siegel 1997, 1999). But it is also necessary that (b) in such cases of confl ict, 
democracy trumps cultural difference. That is, when members of anti- or 
nondemocratic cultures become citizens of democratic states, the requirements of democratic participation must take precedence over their nondemocratic cultural values. When cultural values and attitudes and the 
How Should We Educate Students 11
requirements of democratic education confl ict, the latter must prevail. Why 
must the requirements of democratic participation, and education for it, 
take precedence over confl icting nondemocratic cultural values? Because if 
it does not, educating for democratic citizenship—and so, the commitment 
to democracy itself—is abandoned.
BEGGING THE QUESTION?
But doesn’t the argument just given beg the question against those who 
value their culture more highly than they do democratic citizenship? This is 
an important objection; I conclude by responding to it.
First, no question has been begged. The argument merely points out 
that its conclusion—‘democracy trumps non- or antidemocratic cultural 
values’—is required in cases of such confl ict for education of a democratic 
citizenship to be possible. Rejecting the conclusion in such cases amounts 
to rejecting that sort of education, and so democracy itself. But since the 
question being addressed is that of the character of precisely that sort of 
education—i.e., education for democratic citizenship in democratic states 
in multicultural contexts—such rejection seems clearly enough to amount 
to throwing the baby out with the bath water.
Second, the problem at hand is that of understanding how to maximize 
respect for and toleration of cultural difference, while at the same time educating new citizens for full participation in democratic life. A citizen who 
is unwilling to so participate not only in effect rejects democracy. She also 
marginalizes herself, by rendering herself unable to fully participate in the 
life of the democratic state in which she fi nds herself. This inability must be 
discouraged by education for democratic citizenship, since any such education aims at preparation for precisely such participation. But the benefi t of 
such education comes at a price, for it inevitably encourages the ‘relaxing’ 
of her relationship to her original culture. This price might be judged by 
many to be too high a price to pay, although so judging amounts, as we 
have seen, to valuing that relationship more highly than democracy itself.
Moreover, such ‘relaxing’ is not necessarily a bad thing, because cultures—in the contemporary world, at any rate—are not monolithic, but 
rather are fl uid and changing. As Seyla Benhabib (2002, ix, 4, 24–6, and 
passim) has characterized them—compellingly, in my view—cultures are 
best conceived not as monolithic and static, but rather as hybrid, multifaceted, fl uid, porous, polyvocal, interdependent, and mutually infl uential. 
Relatedly, Pradeep Dhillon and J. Mark Halstead have effectively criticized 
“the assumption that cultures are hermetically sealed” (2003, 157). If this 
is correct—that is, if cultures are indeed fl uid and changing rather than 
monolithic—then even members of cultures who are most concerned to 
cling to those cultures have no alternative to negotiating such changes and 
the ‘outside’ infl uences that bring about those changes. Closing off oneself 
12 Harvey Siegel
and one’s culture from the rest of the world is simply not a realistic option. 
If so, the kind of education called for above seems suitable even for such 
members. Preserving a citizen’s relationship to her culture, whatever state 
that culture happens to be in at the time in question, and conceiving of that 
state as fi xed, is thus both to erroneously conceive of that culture as fi xed 
and static, and is moreover obviously not a good thing from the point of 
view of education. Enabling her to be open to positive cultural change, or 
even to judge stasis to be preferable to such change on the basis of relevant 
reasons and evidence, requires just the sort of education being called for.
In any case—and this is perhaps the most important point of all—democracy is a substantive matter with substantive values. There is no reason 
to think that all cultures—especially those with antidemocratic values—
can thrive in a democratic state. Opting for democracy amounts to opting 
for its substantive values—including those animating its education—thus 
opting against incompatible cultural values. If, for example, a person values decision by religious leader or military dictator rather than decision by 
democratic institution, or if she disvalues reasoning, deliberation, argumentation, public discussion, defense and critique of proposed policies and 
practices—for example, as disrespectful or disharmonious—she has yet to 
fully embrace democracy and its substantive values.5
If the foregoing considerations are correct, our problem is solved. 
Democracy requires democratic public education; such education must take 
precedence over respect for cultural traditions that reject it. It is, of course, 
crucially important to respect cultural differences. But when non- or antidemocratic cultural traditions confl ict with democratic public education, 
the latter must prevail. If it does not, democracy itself is given up. If it is not 
to be given up, then in actual cases of such confl ict, culture must yield to its 
demands—including, especially, those of its public education.6
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
An ancestor of this chapter was presented in November 2001 at the conference on “Citizenship Education, Political Theory, and Their Refl ection in 
Language” in Bled, Slovenia, and also appeared in The School Field 13, no. 
6 (2002): 33–39. I am indebted to the conference participants for their helpful comments and criticisms, and to Michael Slote and Jennifer Uleman for 
excellent suggestions on an earlier draft. The current version also borrows 
a bit from Siegel (2007).
NOTES
 1. By ‘reason’ I do not mean to refer to the cultivation of some metaphysically 
mysterious entity. Rather, as articulated in the works just cited, I mean to refer 
simply to the abilities and dispositions involved in constructing, evaluating, 
How Should We Educate Students 13
and being appropriately guided by reasons (on this point see Scheffl er 1989, 3). 
It is obvious that this is an individualist, ‘Enlightenment’ value/commitment; I 
defend this orientation in the works just cited.
 2. It might be further suggested that in some circumstances the appropriate 
course is to relax our commitment to democracy in the name of tolerance 
and respect. However, such a course fails to respect, for it leaves such citizens 
marginalized in the ways just characterized. Thanks here to conversation 
with Michael Slote.
 3. I here make the idealizing assumption that cultures can be monolithically antireason in order to sharply focus the problem being discussed. In fact, I doubt 
that there are any such cultures. As with individuals, being pro- or anti-reason 
(like being reasonable or unreasonable) is best seen as a matter of degree, and 
particular cultures are best seen as occupying some particular interval along 
that continuum. Thanks here to conversation with Jennifer Uleman.
 4. Public education for democratic citizenship could of course be imposed on 
such citizens. But this would clearly enough be contrary to the obligation to 
respect such cultures and their members, and contrary to the spirit of democratic citizenship as well. Thanks here to Michael Slote.
 5. It is important to note that multicultural concerns may well, and rightly, 
impact the ways in which we put democratic ideals into practice. For example, in cases where disenfranchised and/or marginalized citizens are relatively 
unable or unwilling to advocate for themselves in public forums, such forums 
may well have to be redesigned in order to allow such citizens to participate 
fully, fairly, and effectively. Thanks here to Jennifer Uleman.
 6. My discussion is obviously a ‘bare bones’ one, without either real-world 
examples, exploration of related issues (e.g., how democratic principles are 
best put into practice in culturally diverse democracies), or references to relevant philosophical discussion. My intention has been to avoid these, in order 
to more clearly focus the basic issue. A more thorough, adequate discussion 
would need to include them all, and in particular, references to and consideration of the important work on these matters of Amy Gutmann, Will Kymlicka, Iris Marion Young, and many other contemporary authors, as well as 
the agenda-setting work of John Dewey and other major historical fi gures.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bailin, S. and H. Siegel. “Critical Thinking.” In The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Education, eds. N. Blake, P. Smeyers, R. Smith, and P. Standish, 
181–193. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2003.
Benhabib, S. The Claims of Culture: Equality and Diversity in the Global Era. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002.
Dhillon, P. A., and J. M. Halstead. “Multicultural Education.” In The Blackwell 
Guide to the Philosophy of Education, eds. N. Blake, P. Smeyers, R. Smith, and 
P. Standish, 146–161. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2003.
Goldman, A. I. Knowledge in a Social World. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1999.
Scheffl er, I. Reason and Teaching. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1989. First 
published 1973 by Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Siegel, H. Educating Reason: Rationality, Critical Thinking, and Education. London: Routledge, 1988.
 . Rationality Redeemed? Further Dialogues on an Educational Ideal. New 
York: Routledge, 1997.
14 Harvey Siegel
 . “Multiculturalism and the Possibility of Transcultural Educational and 
Philosophical Ideals.” Philosophy, no. 74 (1999): 387–409.
 . “Cultivating Reason.” In A Companion to the Philosophy of Education, 
ed. R. Curren, 305–317. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2003.
 . “Multiculturalism and Rationality.” Theory and Research in Education 5, 
no. 2 (2007): 203–223.
2 Can Liberals Take Their Own 
Side in an Argument?
Robert Talisse
Liberal democracy is the dominant framework for politics in the modern 
world, both in theory and in practice. Yet charges that liberal democracy is 
in crisis, or even decline, are increasingly common. Typically, such charges 
derive from concerns regarding globalization and the immanent ‘clash of 
civilizations’ that globalization brings. At the same time, liberal democracies are rife with political confl ict in the form of an ongoing ‘culture war’ 
that has divided the US at least into opposed ‘red’ and ‘blue’ regions. There 
is a long story to tell about how the clash of civilizations story and the 
phenomenon of culture war are intertwined manifestations of the same 
political tensions arising out of the theoretical features of liberal democracy itself, but I will not attempt this here. Instead, I want to call attention 
to those tensions and suggest, even if briefl y, a way we might allay them. 
Although the discussion will tend to hover at a high and abstract altitude, 
a crucial feature of the analysis will turn on an examination of the case of 
Mozert v. Hawkins, which raises the question of the extent to which a liberal society can offi cially embrace core liberal values and seek to cultivate 
the same among students in its public schools.
I THE PROBLEM OF LIBERALISM AND TOLERATION
Robert Frost is often credited with the quip that a liberal is someone who 
cannot take his own side in an argument. As with many a bon mot, the 
kernel of insight in his observation is diffi cult to explain. Here’s an attempt: 
Liberalism is a family of views concerning the nature and limits of political authority. Despite important differences among varieties of liberalism, 
all are united in the conviction that there is a considerably broad sphere of 
activity within which individuals are not accountable to anyone other than 
themselves. In fact, most liberal theories identify this sphere with liberty 
itself, maintaining that liberty consists in the ability to pursue “our own 
good in our own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of 
theirs, or impede their efforts to obtain it” (Mill 1991, 17).
16 Robert Talisse
Liberals divide over precisely what should count as an attempt to deprive 
others of their good and what social conditions, if any, must be in place 
in order to enable individuals to pursue their own good in their own way. 
Some liberals (otherwise known as libertarians) contend that taxation is an 
unbearable obstruction of liberty. Welfarist liberals argue that muscular 
systems of economic redistribution are required in order to establish and 
maintain the social institutions necessary for individuals to exercise their 
liberty. To be sure, debates between various forms of libertarianism and 
welfarism have dominated the philosophical literature for the past several 
decades. But ultimately these skirmishes are possible only because of the 
common ground shared among the contenders, which, stated more broadly 
now, comes to this: The state—indeed, political association generally—
exists solely for the purpose of securing and protecting individual liberty 
from intrusion by other individuals and other states. Any state that fails at 
this task, either by adopting more robust ambitions or by proving unable 
to provide the necessary protections is illegitimate ipso facto and, morally 
speaking, should be dissolved. This is to say that power stands in need of 
justifi cation, not liberty. Liberty is the default.
Consequently, liberalism tends to go hand-in-hand with democracy. 
Because according to liberalism political power must be justifi able to those 
over whom it is exercised, the political institutions that wield such power 
must be accountable to the individuals within its jurisdiction. Democracy, 
understood as self-government constrained by the demands of individual 
liberty, ensures this accountability by subjecting government offi cials and 
policy to periodical review and revision under conditions of transparency, 
freedom of information, protected dissent, and so on.
Such is the theoretical core of liberalism. A quick examination of a practical implication of liberalism will help us to unpack Frost’s witticism. The 
liberty to pursue our own good in our own way entails the liberty to adopt, 
devise, and revise our own conceptions of our good. Just as individuals are 
free to pursue what they judge to be good (within the usual constraints), 
they are also free to decide for themselves what is most worthy of pursuit, 
what makes a life good. According to liberalism, it is not the state’s job to 
prescribe or offi cially endorse any particular vision of the good life, secular 
or religious. This is not to say that the liberal state must adopt a morally 
relativist or skeptical view concerning the good life; rather, the liberal state 
simply does not pronounce on deep moral questions at all, it adopts an 
offi cial stance of neutrality.
Accordingly, in a liberal society a wide variety of distinct moral doctrines, religious faiths, ethnic traditions, and, in general, ‘ways of life’ will 
arise and fl ourish.1
 As they are distinct ways of life, they will often confl ict. 
Such confl icts can manifest in at least two ways: divergence and opposition. When two ways of life diverge, they prescribe different actions, pursuits, ideals, and dispositions. When two ways of life stand in opposition, 
each requires a negative estimation, or explicit rejection, of the other. For 
Can Liberals Take Their Own Side in an Argument? 17
example, the Catholic must evaluate the Protestant as practicing a religion 
that is not merely different from her own, but is, to some degree at least, 
incorrect, incomplete, or misguided. In extreme cases, the one must see the 
other as not practicing a religion at all, but only a deformed and wicked 
surrogate of religion.2
 The same goes for many of the more familiar nontheological conceptions of the good. Kantians and utilitarians, for example, see one another not only as offering a different and opposed conception 
of morality, but also often accuse each other of having missed the point of 
morality altogether.
It is important to note that this state of affairs is endemic to liberalism and not an accident; as John Rawls keenly insisted, the very liberties 
secured by a liberal political order give rise to a pluralism of ways of life 
(2005, 36). Hence we see the importance of toleration to a liberal society. If 
liberal democracy is to endure and be stable, citizens must adopt an attitude 
of toleration toward ways of life that they must regard as unwholesome, 
seriously in error, and even morally and spiritually dangerous. Of course, 
citizens of a liberal democracy need not tolerate every way of life. Nazis 
and similar extremists are not tolerated, even though those who wish to 
“play at” being Nazis are (Macedo 1990, 257).3
 Antiliberal extremists are 
tolerated only insofar as they operate within liberal constraints; in other 
words, Nazis are tolerated in the liberal state only if they are willing to be 
tolerant Nazis. Intolerant Nazis are not accommodated but opposed and, 
when necessary, fought.
So the liberal state requires this much of their citizens: They must be tolerant. To be sure, the requisite toleration is morally thin. Toleration implies 
no degree of endorsement or appreciation or approval of that which is tolerated, but only nonobstruction, what Chandran Kukathas calls ‘indifference’ 
(1998, 2003). Yet toleration even in this thin construal is a requirement for 
membership in good standing in a liberal society. Moreover, it does impose 
constraints on individuals, and, as Macedo notes, in some cases respecting 
these constraints will not be easy (1990, 257). Hence toleration stands in 
need of justifi cation.
And here is the rub. The liberal must make a case for toleration that can 
be accepted by citizens who are otherwise deeply divided, perhaps opposed, 
at the level of their fundamental moral commitments. In other words, the 
liberal state must justify toleration in a way that is consistent with its offi -
cial neutrality on controversial matters of the good. Consequently, the 
strategy of proposing a moral argument for the value of toleration must 
fail. Any such argument will inevitably employ premises that presuppose or 
favor a particular moral conception, which some citizens must feel morally 
obligated to reject. The case for toleration must be acceptable to all citizens, 
thus a moral argument for toleration is self-undermining.
But what other kind of argument could there be? To propose an argumentum ad baculum (‘be tolerant or else!’) is to forfeit the very idea that 
political power stands in need of justifi cation. To appeal to the need for a 
18 Robert Talisse
modus vivendi truce at best provides a thinly prudential and unstable case 
for toleration, for it proposes toleration as only a strategic device, useful 
only for as long as one is not powerful enough to dominate one’s opponents 
(Rawls 2005, 147). Hence Frost’s claim comes to this: There are no argumentative resources available to the liberal when making a principled case 
for core liberal values. Is he correct?
II POLITICIZING LIBERALISM
Thus far the discussion has been mostly academic, perhaps some would 
say anemic. Maybe this is to be expected. Seldom do we confront ‘gung ho’ 
Nazis these days. Domestically, groups and individuals who are extremely
illiberal—that is, intolerant in even the minimal sense we identifi ed above—
are relatively rare and, for the most part, effectively contained. Such are the 
benefi ts of liberalism. To be sure, matters are different on the global scene. 
Yet international organizations, such as the United Nations, have accomplished a great deal toward securing lasting peace on liberal terms.
However, if we turn away from the cases involving the extremities of 
genocide and the hatred of others and toward more modest versions of 
nonliberal ways of life, we will fi nd more familiar versions of these serious tensions. The combination of pluralism and neutrality provides fertile 
ground for confl icts between individual liberty (especially liberty of conscience) and political authority. As we have said, liberalism recognizes that 
the core of individual liberty is the liberty to choose and pursue one’s own 
way of life. But some ways of life include very specifi c prescriptions not only 
about how one is to live and how one is to regard those who live differently, 
but also about how one is to understand the relation between one’s deepest 
moral convictions and one’s political and legal obligations. Such cases are 
common coin in the vast literature on multiculturalism. Sikhs are morally 
obligated to carry a ceremonial dagger at all times, yet in the United States 
and elsewhere it is illegal to carry a knife on a plane. Muslim women are 
morally obligated to cover their heads in public, yet French law prohibits 
the display of religious symbols, such as headscarves, in certain public contexts, including public schools and courts. Some are religiously obligated 
to wear a turban, and thus cannot wear the kind of protective helmet that 
is legally required in some jurisdictions on construction sites and while 
riding a motorcycle. In these cases, the neutralist stance of the liberal state 
appears to impose especially heavy burdens on some citizens, who must 
violate their conscience if they are to engage in normal activities (such as 
riding a motorcycle) or even participate in crucial activities of citizenship 
(serving as a juror, attending public school).
A similar kind of diffi culty arises at the intersection of liberalism and 
democracy. The liberal state aspires to neutrality and so must avoid legislating on the basis of principles that presuppose or favor any particular way of 
Can Liberals Take Their Own Side in an Argument? 19
life. But the laws and policies of the liberal state are at least in some sense 
the products of the collective will of its citizens, and this collective will is at 
least in some sense the product of the wills of the individuals who comprise 
the citizenry. Hence the constraints associated with moral neutrality trickle 
down to individuals in their roles as citizens. This means, for example, 
that jurors must not decide cases on the basis of their sectarian moral convictions, even though many are forced by conscience to regard those very 
convictions as the foundation of justice itself.4
In the more ambitious participatory and deliberative conceptions of 
democracy that are presently in currency among liberals, this trickledown effect is even more pronounced, as it affects citizens’ behavior as 
voters. For example, Rawls argues that citizens have a “duty of civility” 
to appeal to nonsectarian “public” reasons when deciding how to vote 
and when advocating in public for their preferred option (2005, 217). To 
be sure, Rawls stipulates that these constraints apply only when “constitutional essentials” and “questions of basic justice” are at stake (ibid., 
214). In later work, he clarifi ed the position (some would say that he 
revised it) by adding that citizens may vote and advocate on the basis 
of sectarian reasons, provided they are willing “in due course” to provide public reasons for their position (ibid., 462).5
 Nonetheless, critics 
have argued, rather forcefully in some cases, that any norm that seeks 
to contain citizens’ internal and collective deliberations concerning their 
political behavior within the limitations of public reasons is unfair, antidemocratic, and illiberal.6
All of these cases are frighteningly diffi cult, and I will not attempt an 
analysis of them here. The point is that Frost seems correct at least to this 
extent: The central commitments of liberalism give rise to very hard cases, 
even in contexts far removed from Nazis and other forms of extreme antiliberalism. In fact, we might say that the multiculturalism and religion cases 
are much more diffi cult than cases involving those with ambitions that are 
genocidal and aggressive. There is broad support for regarding even play 
Nazis as a kind of necessary evil in a liberal society: it is for the sake of 
keeping open the channels of toleration for less extreme, but perhaps still 
objectionable, ways of life that we must tolerate the play Nazis. However, 
in the multiculturalism and religion cases, unlike the Nazi case, allowing 
the ways of life in question to have their way will not result immediately in 
mass murder and violence. To be sure, in all such cases there are distinctive 
public goods at stake, such as public safety in the case of helmet laws in the 
US, and civic unity in the case of the headscarves in France. But there are 
signifi cant costs to individual liberty, too. Some liberals have argued for 
“maximum feasible accommodation” (Galston 2002, 119) in such cases. 
Others adamantly reject this, insisting that equal treatment trumps all 
(Barry 2001, 17).
What can be done? As I mentioned earlier, a substantively moral argument for prioritizing public safety or civic unity over duties of conscience 
20 Robert Talisse
cannot succeed. Must we then resort to either ad baculum or modus vivendi
appeals, both of which confi rm Frost’s claim?
The dominant answer among contemporary liberals is no. Following 
Rawls (2005), many liberals countenance a middle ground between substantive moral argument and purely prudential argument. This middle 
ground is called ‘political’ argument, and the liberalism based on such 
argument is called, naturally enough, ‘political liberalism.’ A political case 
for toleration does not invoke a substantive moral theory yet still appeals 
to the moral, rather than simply prudential, value of toleration. It does this 
by construing toleration as a civic value, a moral good whose goodness 
derives from no substantive moral conception of the good life in particular, 
but rather from the most fundamental values implicit in the very idea of a 
liberal society. The requirement of toleration follows from the core liberal 
commitments to free and equal citizenship and to viewing political society 
as a cooperative system (Rawls 2005, 15ff.). The argument runs that if we 
are to collectively enjoy as free and equal citizens the important goods that 
a liberal political order manifests and secures, we must adopt a norm of 
toleration toward those who live in ways we fi nd morally disagreeable or 
worse, provided that they respect the usual liberal constraints and adopt the 
same norm of toleration. Notice that the claim is not that being tolerant is a 
necessary constituent of a good life, or that being tolerant makes one happy 
or a better person; rather, toleration is posed as a virtue for liberal citizens, 
or for persons in their role as liberal citizens. Thus to reject this ideal of 
civic toleration is to reject the very idea of liberal politics. Those who reject 
liberal politics in this way are regarded not as wrong or wicked, but as 
unreasonable, simply unfi t for citizenship in a liberal political order.
This politicizing strategy promises to forge a unique path between the 
merely prudential and the substantively moral. If it succeeds, citizens will 
have a moral reason to uphold the norm of toleration—now understood as 
a civic value—deriving from their own moral reasons for pursuing a liberal 
political order, yet the liberal state will not have violated neutrality. Consider: With those already committed to pursuing a society of free and equal 
persons, liberals can appeal to civic versions of core liberal values; with 
those not so committed, neutrality is not a requirement, and so liberals 
may employ their substantive moral reasons. Politicization enables liberals 
to take their own side in an argument. Frost is mistaken.
III PROBLEMS WITH POLITICIZED LIBERALISM
Yet the scent of the illicit lingers. Can the tensions we have been discussing 
really be dispelled by simply placing the word ‘civic’ before the concepts 
that seemed to be causing the trouble? In order to assess this, we will need 
to examine an actual application of politicization. Let us consider the oftdiscussed case of Mozert v. Hawkins.
Can Liberals Take Their Own Side in an Argument? 21
First it should be noted that Eamonn Callan (1997, 157) is correct to 
observe that the Mozert case is complicated in part because the plaintiff’s 
complaint “confounded reasons of extremely uneven merit.” I do not intend, 
therefore, to engage in an extended discussion of the details of the case. 
Rather, I want to examine Macedo’s (1995, 2000) view about the decision in 
Mozert, which represents the ‘political’ strategy we identifi ed above. To this 
end, I will follow Macedo’s own account of the relevant details of the case.7
In Mozert, several born-again Christian families brought the complaint 
against the public school board of Hawkins County in Tennessee that the 
primary grade reading curriculum violated the families’ free exercise of religion. The textbooks used in that curriculum exposed their children to stories told from a wide variety of religious points of view, including Buddhist, 
Native American, Islamic, New Age, and Christian. One of the plaintiffs, 
Vicki Frost (no relation to Robert Frost, I presume), objected to the evenhandedness with which the non-Christian views were presented; she claimed 
that a proper Christian must refuse to see other religions as “equal” to Christianity (Macedo 2000, 168); as Macedo indicates, according to Vicki Frost, 
the “exposure to diversity” of religious worldviews itself constitutes a violation of the free exercise of her religion, which commands her to raise her 
children to be Christian, and which in turn requires her to teach her children 
that there are no other religions in the proper sense (1995, 471).
What makes the Mozert case compelling from the point of view of 
liberalism is that the parents were not attempting to have the reading 
curriculum abolished or the textbooks in question replaced. Rather, the 
parents sought an exemption for their children from the classes that 
employed the textbooks. The parents agreed that their children needed 
reading instruction, and proposed that their children would be taught to 
read at home and would sit for the same standard reading examinations 
as the other students in the class. That is, the Mozert parents did not 
attempt to impose their own religious convictions on other students, they 
simply claimed their right to control the kinds of worldviews to which 
their children were exposed.
The Hawkins County school board initially allowed the proposed 
exemption, but quickly reversed its decision and declared participation in 
the reading curriculum mandatory for all students, vowing to suspend any 
student who refused. Although many of the concerned parents withdrew 
their children from the public school system, others brought a case against 
the school board. A federal court dismissed the case, but a higher court, 
which decided to uphold the parents’ complaint, reversed this dismissal. 
However, this decision was eventually reversed by a federal appeals court, 
which found in favor of the Hawkins County School Board.
Macedo frames the philosophical issues well:
Can respectful exposure to diversity interfere with the free exercise of 
religious beliefs? And if so, do state offi cials—operating on the basis 
22 Robert Talisse
of their democratic mandate—have the authority to condition a benefi t 
such as public schooling on the willingness of parents to have their 
children exposed to diversity, or does doing so violate fundamental 
rights or run afoul of some other principled limit on public authority? 
(Macedo 2000, 161)
Furthermore, Macedo gives what seems to me to be the right response. 
Macedo concedes that the reading program interferes with the Mozert parents’ ability to “teach their children their particular religious views,” but 
he denies that this constitutes a violation of the parents’ moral or constitutional rights (2000, 162). Macedo writes,
While it is true enough that out liberal Constitution protects freedom 
to proclaim that the religious doctrines of others are heretical, a more 
complex dynamic is at work here. A liberal democratic polity cannot 
endure without citizens willing to support its fundamental institutions 
and principles and to take part in defi ning those principles. . . . Liberal 
citizenship carries with it not only privileges but also obligations, including the obligation to respect the equal rights of fellow citizens, whatever 
their faiths. . . . Our constitutional order must shape citizens, and not 
only establish political institutions. Citizens, not courts or legislatures, 
are the ultimate custodians of our public morality. We have every reason 
to take seriously the political project of educating future citizens with an 
eye to their responsibilities as critical interpreters of our shared political 
traditions—that is, as participants in a democratic project of reason giving and reason demanding. (Macedo 2000, 164–165)
Macedo sees the democratic project he describes as part of his broader “civic 
liberalism” (2000, 169), a species of political liberalism that “includes an 
account of the political institutions and social structures that help promote 
a publicly reasonable liberal community” (ibid.). Macedo claims that his 
civic liberalism “focuses our attention on shared political values without 
requiring or expecting agreement on ultimate ends or a comprehensive set 
of philosophical values” (ibid., 170). Accordingly, Macedo contends that 
his civil liberalism can “avoid directly confronting or denying the Mozert 
families’ contention that the Bible’s authority should be accepted uncritically” (ibid., 174). Instead, civic liberalism recommends that we proceed 
by “simply leaving aside the religious question as such”; this “leaves the 
school door open to reasonable fundamentalists—that is, to those willing 
to acknowledge for civic purposes the authority of public reasonableness” 
(ibid., 175).
According to Macedo, then, the fact that the Hawkins County public 
school reading curriculum promotes attitudes of toleration toward other 
religions and worldviews does not constitute a violation of the Mozert parents’ free exercise; this is because the toleration that is promoted is strictly 
civil rather than substantive (2000, 175). In other words, Macedo holds 
Can Liberals Take Their Own Side in an Argument? 23
that public schools are warranted to—in fact, are obligated to—engage in 
a “reasonable attempt to inculcate core liberal values” such as “toleration 
and other basic civil virtues” (ibid., 201) because such values are necessary 
for citizenship in a modern democratic society. Macedo contends that these 
values can be inculcated without taking a stand on larger questions of the 
good life or salvation; they are, again, the civic virtues appropriate to our 
role as citizens, not as persons as such. Thus Macedo’s civic liberalism is 
based in the claim that “the lives of liberal citizens are in a sense properly 
divided: we have a public and a private side, and the public (or political) 
side is guided by imperatives designed to make our shared life together civilized and respectful” (ibid., 164).
Macedo recognizes that the civic virtues will inevitably “spill over into 
other spheres of life,” and that these virtues are “far from neutral with 
respect to the forms of life that are likely to prosper and gain adherents” 
in a society governed by them (2000, 179). But this failure of neutrality 
of effect is of no concern, for Macedo contends that the relevant sense 
of neutrality is that of justifi cation (ibid.). As we’ve seen, Macedo holds 
that the values and virtues associated with his civic liberalism can be justifi ed “independently of religious and other comprehensive claims” (ibid.). 
Macedo holds that the justifi cation for his civil liberalism derives from the 
“widespread (though not perfect) consensus on the sorts of basic guarantees that constitute the core of a political morality” that Americans enjoy; 
he holds that, despite deep disagreement, “there is nevertheless a reasonable consensus on certain shared matters of urgent political concern, a consensus that is freestanding in the sense that we do not need to agree on any 
one comprehensive religious or philosophical grounding” (2000, 173).
But here is where the limits of the politicization strategy come to the 
fore. The Mozert case demonstrates that the reasonable consensus Macedo 
describes is not as widespread as he seems to think. More importantly, it 
could be the case that the Mozert parents indeed recognize the high value 
of the “basic guarantees” which constitute the “core of a political morality” that Macedo describes. This is suggested by the fact that the Mozert 
parents did not press an objection to the idea of secular education as such.8
On a plausible reading of the case, part of what they objected to is the idea 
that this core political morality should take priority over the aims and values of their religious or substantive morality. What reason could Macedo 
give that is consistent with his justifi catory neutralism for prioritizing 
political morality over substantive morality in cases of direct confl ict? His 
response to this kind of challenge is telling; in considering that certain religious believers may object to the very idea of partitioning their ‘private’ and 
‘political’ morality in the way civic liberalism requires, Macedo writes,
At this point, there may be nothing more to say to such people, except 
to point out that their religious beliefs are, unfortunately, inconsistent with the demands of good citizenship in a religiously pluralistic 
society. (Macedo 2000, 186)
24 Robert Talisse
This is an awkward reply because the aptness of Macedo’s conception of 
the demands of good citizenship in a religiously pluralistic society is precisely what is in question. Elsewhere, he concedes that “civic education is 
bound to have the effect of favoring some ways of life or religious conviction over others”; but instead of offering a justifi cation for his conception of 
civic education in light of this effect, he simply declares, “So be it” (2005, 
202). But this is not a justifi cation of any sort, and, in any case, it is an odd 
stance given Macedo’s commitment to the idea that “public institutions 
should operate based on mutually accessible reasons” (2000, 184).
The problem is that in order to avoid appealing to controversial moral 
claims in his justifi cation of his civic liberalism, Macedo must appeal to 
“shared political values” (2000, 185). But Mozert shows that even if there 
were a suitably robust collection of such values, there would still be a question of how they are to be prioritized in cases of confl ict. To declare simply 
that the political values override religious ones is to betray the very justifi catory ideal that Macedo claims is central to his liberalism; however, to 
give a moral argument for the priority of the political to the religious is 
necessarily to invoke the kind of controversy Macedo most wants to avoid. 
Perhaps Robert Frost was right after all.
IV SOCIAL EPISTEMIC LIBERALISM
In this concluding section, I want to sketch a different kind of approach to 
these issues, an approach I call ‘social epistemic liberalism.’9
 The main idea 
of social epistemic liberalism is that despite deep differences over fundamental moral, religious, and metaphysical commitments, there is a cluster 
of epistemic norms and values that we hold in common; these norms are 
substantive enough to provide the basis for powerful argument for core liberal commitments, yet epistemic and so able to sustain moral neutrality.
To explain: Each of us is epistemically dependent upon others for many 
of our factual and normative beliefs (Buchanan 2004, 102). This dependency consists not only in the fact that many of our beliefs ultimately have 
their source in the testimony, experience, research, and expertise of others, 
but also in that our epistemic habits are socially derived. Our epistemic 
habits include not only the ways in which we form, revise, and maintain 
our beliefs, but also how we select those to whom we show epistemic deference and the extent of that deference. Insofar as such habits are truthconducive, they are epistemically virtuous; insofar as they are not, they are 
epistemically vicious.
Epistemic dependence is unavoidable because every individual has limited cognitive resources. However, this dependence in itself is not a bad 
thing; great stores of knowledge and information that could not be produced by a single person are available to us precisely because of the division 
of epistemic labor that epistemic dependence necessitates. Nonetheless, 
Can Liberals Take Their Own Side in an Argument? 25
epistemic dependence is risky, because one may defer to the wrong persons 
to the wrong extent and so become vulnerable to developing beliefs and 
epistemic habits that engender and sustain falsehood. The risks associated 
with having false beliefs are both prudential and moral: They are prudential insofar as false beliefs frustrate one’s deliberations about means; they 
are moral insofar as they can lead one to adopt immoral ends.
In light of the risks associated with unavoidable epistemic dependence 
and our strong interest in getting moral matters right and avoiding moral 
error, we should agree that those social institutions are best which tend 
to minimize the risks of dependence while maximizing the benefi ts of the 
epistemic division of labor. The social epistemic case for core liberal commitments follows naturally: The extent to which a society manifests core 
liberal values is roughly the extent to which that society satisfi es these 
desiderata. Liberal societies satisfy these desiderata because they (1) recognize individual liberties of thought, conscience, and association that enable 
information to be freely shared and disagreements to be rationally engaged; 
(2) feature a meritocratic system of identifying experts that encourages 
proper epistemic deference and discourages improper deference; and (3) 
encourage a broad culture of moral egalitarianism that enables citizens to 
confi dently address, question, and criticize each other and socially identifi ed experts. As Buchanan concludes, anyone “who takes seriously the 
moral and prudential risks of social epistemic dependence ought to support 
liberal institutions” (2004, 100), no matter what her substantive theory of 
the good life may be.
To state the argument succinctly, despite the ways in which reasonable 
comprehensive moral doctrines are otherwise deeply divided, all should 
countenance the fact of epistemic dependence, and all should recognize 
that a well-functioning system of social epistemic risk reduction is necessary for proper moral judgment, whatever one takes that to consist in. Liberal institutions are the most effective of the available options at managing 
epistemic risk. Thus, despite deep disagreement at the level of moral fundamentals, all reasonable persons have a reason to support liberal society. 
The most important feature of the social epistemic argument for liberalism is that it proposes epistemic reasons for core liberal values and institutions rather than moral reasons, substantive or politicized. Accordingly, 
social epistemic liberals can with great vehemence take their own side in a 
debate, for their claim is that liberal norms must be in place in order for an 
informed and responsible debate to occur.
We can think of the social epistemic approach, then, as following the 
political liberal in resisting appeals to substantive moral norms in making a 
case for liberal values. However, whereas the political liberal offers politicized versions of core liberal values, the social epistemic liberal offers an 
epistemologized view of toleration, equality, liberty, and the like. According 
to social epistemic liberals, these values must be manifest in our politics if 
we are to effectively manage the epistemic risks to which we are all subject. 
26 Robert Talisse
In other words, we must uphold norms of toleration, egalitarianism, and 
liberty if we are to benefi t from the free and open exchange of information 
and reasons. And we should seek these benefi ts because, on any plausible 
theory of the good life, responsible moral agency requires moral deliberation, which in turn requires access to reliable sources of moral and factual 
information. Of course, social epistemic liberals need not claim that these 
values are exhaustively epistemic, and social epistemic liberals need not 
deny the decidedly moral components of these values. The point is rather 
that one may appeal to the epistemological dimension of these values in 
confl icts concerning their moral dimensions.
But where does this leave the parents in Mozert? What does the social 
epistemic liberal say to Vicki Frost, who claims that “the word of God as 
found in the Christian Bible is the totality of my beliefs” (Macedo 2000, 
158)? Presumably Vicki Frost sees no need for moral deliberation, and thus 
no need for toleration.
The social epistemic liberal could begin by pointing out that it cannot 
possibly be true that the word of God is the totality of Vicki Frost’s beliefs 
because the Bible does not contain the sentence, ‘The word of God as found 
in the Christian Bible is the totality of Vicki Frost’s beliefs.’ Thus, by her 
own admission, Vicki Frost has beliefs that are not contained in the Bible, 
and therefore she is committed to the idea that there are some truths that 
are not found there. The next move would be to present her with the vast 
Christian literature devoted to biblical interpretation, laying bare all of the 
internal controversies among Christian scholars concerning the Bible’s core 
moral teachings. The aim would be to follow Michael Perry in urging that
[w]idespread transdenominational disagreement among Christians 
over whether the Bible teaches about morality what some claim that it 
teaches is not a new phenomenon. In the past, there was such disagreement over, for example, whether the Bible teaches that slavery can be 
morally permissible. Precisely because such disagreement is not a new 
thing, and because the historical experience of Christians discloses 
that Christians can be radically mistaken about whether in fact the 
Bible teaches about morality what some claim that it teaches, such disagreement—increasingly widespread disagreement among Christians, 
disagreement that is not interdenominational but transdenominational—should be an occasion for Christians to subject the traditional belief to careful, critical scrutiny. (Perry 2003, 63)
According to Perry, such “careful, critical scrutiny” will often require “dialogue with the other” (2003, 76) because such dialogue is frequently what is 
needed if we are to uncover the tacit assumptions and intuitions driving our 
own thinking. Now, it may seem that the injunction to engage in critical dialogue for the sake of testing one’s religious commitments itself constitutes 
a violation of one’s religious commitments, since it seems to call for some 
Can Liberals Take Their Own Side in an Argument? 27
kind of skepticism or a willingness to doubt one’s religious beliefs. However, 
Perry correctly emphasizes that the kind of scrutiny he calls for does not 
require religious believers to deny or doubt core commitments of their faith. 
The recognition that the Bible has in the past been wrongly interpreted, and 
thus that any proposed interpretation must be examined carefully, does not 
confl ict with a commitment to the Bible’s infallibility; it requires only an 
admission of one’s own fallibility in interpreting the Bible, an admission that 
is perfectly fi tting for Christians in light of their view of “the fallenness, the 
brokenness” of human beings as such (Perry 2003, 79).
Perry’s point is crucial and obviously quite in line with social epistemic 
liberalism. No matter what their moral comprehensive doctrines happen to 
be, citizens have, from their own epistemic perspective, compelling reasons 
to engage each other in critical, reasoned dialogue. But in order for that 
dialogue to be epistemically responsible in light of the risks of epistemic 
dependency, it must be conducted against the background of a well-functioning social epistemic system that provides access to reliable sources of 
moral and factual information.
Consequently, the social epistemic liberal supports Macedo’s position 
that the Mozert parents should not be accommodated on the grounds that 
“We have every reason to take seriously the political project of educating 
future citizens with an eye to their responsibilities . . . as participants in a 
democratic project of reason giving and reason demanding” (2000, 165). 
But whereas Macedo’s justifi cation of this position necessarily invokes the 
kind of moral controversy he correctly aspires to avoid, social epistemic 
liberalism justifi es this position on the grounds that Vicki Frost’s positive 
epistemic commitments must support critical engagement with opposing 
doctrines for the sake of upholding the epistemic norms that enable her 
and her children to better satisfy the demands of their own moral doctrine. 
Again, the argument does not appeal to a supposedly “widespread consensus” on a shared “political morality” (Macedo 2000, 173), but rather 
draws from the epistemic commitments we already endorse in light of the 
facts that we are all subject to social epistemic risk, and we are interested 
in getting morality right.
I have here provided only a sketch of social epistemic liberalism. There 
is much more to be said, of course. But from what has been said, this 
much can be said by way of conclusion: We are living in the midst of a 
rapid and surprising transformation of the global order. Economic, technological, political, and social changes (some would call them advances) 
force liberal societies to confront, both domestically and abroad, persons, 
groups, and populations who endorse ways of life that, while not radically antiliberal, are nonliberal to a degree suffi cient to call into question 
central liberal norms. Liberals are bound by their own doctrine to providing justifi cations for their commitments. If the academic literature is any 
indication, there is a palpable sense that liberalism is at present working through a legitimation crisis brought on by challenges deriving from 
28 Robert Talisse
sources as diverse as multiculturalism, feminism, communitarianism, and 
religious traditionalism. In many cases, these challenges come in domestic 
and global varieties, and often there is great variation in the character of 
the challenge posed.10 It will not do for liberals to simply trot out their 
favorite accounts of the substantive good of autonomy, liberty, equality, 
or individuality; such accounts beg the question. Nor will it do for them 
to import a simple distinction between ‘civic’ and substantively ‘moral’
virtues and obligations; for these too beg the question, only less directly. 
The social epistemic approach, however, holds the promise of being able to 
provide philosophical reasons to uphold liberal principles without thereby 
begging the very moral questions over which people are divided. For those 
who take themselves to be offering criticisms of liberal norms, or who 
allege that liberalism cannot take seriously the ways in which we disagree, 
or who insist that political power must justify itself, the social epistemic 
approach should be suffi cient to provide a liberal basis from which further 
argument could proceed.
NOTES
 1. Throughout, I shall use the term ‘way of life’ to refer to what Rawls calls a 
“comprehensive doctrine” (2005, 12n). Others refer to ‘conceptions of the 
good’ to the same effect.
 2. See, for example, Joseph Ratzinger’s Dominus Iesus, which declares that 
some Protestant churches are “not churches in the proper sense” and all suffer 
from “defects” (2000, 17). Offi cial condemnations of Catholicism from Protestant sects are easy to fi nd. Those who see the Protestant/Catholic confl ict as 
more a case of divergence rather than opposition may change the example to 
Catholicism (or Protestantism) and, say, Wiccanism or Scientology.
 3. The passage should be quoted in full: “The liberal polity requires that the 
Nazis be law-abiding Nazis and that is not easy. They cannot be ‘gung ho’ 
Nazis, in fact they cannot be Nazis at all but only play at it” (Macedo 1990, 
257). This is not to suggest, however, that play Nazis do not pose serious 
problems for liberal politics.
 4. In 2003, a judge in Colorado overturned the death sentence of a convicted 
rapist and murderer after discovering that the jurors collectively consulted 
the Bible during their deliberations. The Judge’s ruling was upheld in 2005 
by the Colorado Supreme Court. See People v. Harlan, Colorado Supreme 
Court Case no. 03SA173.
 5. It should be noted that Rawls fi rst proposed his public reason doctrine in 
the 1993 edition of Political Liberalism. He later revised and further clarifi ed that view along the lines suggested above in his 1997 paper on “The 
Idea of Public Reason Revisited.” This 1997 paper now appears in the 2005 
expanded edition of Political Liberalism.
 6. Nicholas Wolterstorff makes the point nicely: “It belongs to the religious convictions of a good many religious people in our society that they ought to base 
their decisions concerning fundamental issues of justice on their religious convictions. They do not view it as an option whether or not to do so. . . . Their 
religion is not, for them, about something other than their social and political 
existence; it is also about their social and political existence. Accordingly to 
Can Liberals Take Their Own Side in an Argument? 29
require of them that they not base their decisions and discussions concerning 
political issues on their religion is to infringe, inequitably, on the free exercise 
of their religion” (1997, 105). See also Eberle 2002.
 7. See Bates 1993 for a comprehensive account of Mozert.
 8. As John Tomasi (2001, 92) notes, some of the parents objected not to the 
mere exposure of their children to the non-Christian stories, but to the fact 
that Christianity was not given equal representation in the readers.
 9. Much of what follows draws heavily from Buchanan 2002 and 2004. For further elaboration, see Talisse 2008 and forthcoming. Goldman 1999 provides 
a comprehensive and original survey of the fi eld of social epistemology.
 10. See, for example, the critical responses to Susan Okin’s essay “Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women?” collected along with Okin’s reply in Okin 1999.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barry, B. Culture and Equality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001.
Bates, S. Battleground. New York: Poseidon Books, 1993.
Buchanan, A. “Social Moral Epistemology.” Social Philosophy and Policy, 19, 
2002: 126–52.
 . “Political Liberalism and Social Epistemology.” Philosophy & Public 
Affairs 32, no. 2 (2004): 95–130.
Callan, Eamonn. 1997. Creating Citizens. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eberle, C. Religious Conviction in Liberal Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Galston, W. Liberal Pluralism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Goldman, A. Knowledge in a Social World. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1999.
Kukathas, C. “Liberalism and Multiculturalism: The Politics of Indifference.” 
Political Theory, 26, no. 5 (1998): 686–699.
 . The Liberal Archipelago. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Macedo, S. Liberal Virtues. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
 . “Liberal Civic Education and Religious Fundamentalism: The Case of God 
vs. John Rawls?” Ethics 105, 1995: 468–496.
 . “In Defense of Liberal Public Reason: Are Slavery and Abortion Hard 
Cases?” In Natural Law and Public Reason, eds. R. George and C. Wolfe. 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2000.
Mill, J. S. On Liberty and Other Essays. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Okin, S. Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women? Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1999.
Perry, M. Under God? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Ratzinger, J. Dominus Iesus. Vatican: Vatican City, 2000. http://www.vatican.va/roman_
curiacongregations/cfaith/documents/rc_con_cfaith_doc_20000806_dominusiesus_en.html (accessed 16 June 2008).
Rawls, J. Political Liberalism. Exp. ed. New York: Columbia University Press, 2005.
Talisse, R. B. “Toward a Social Epistemic Comprehensive Liberalism.” Episteme
5, no. 1 (2008): 106–128.
 . Democracy and Moral Confl ict. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
forthcoming.
Tomasi, 2001. Liberalism Beyond Justice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wolsterstorff, Nicholas. 1997. “The Role of Religion in Decision and Discussion 
of Political Issues,” in Religion in the Public Square, Robert Audi and Nicholas 
Wolterstorff. (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefi eld)
3 Literacy and Citizenship
Tradition, Reason, and Critique in 
Democratic Education1
Hanan Alexander
In this chapter I assess the role of literacy in three standard accounts 
of democratic education: republican, liberal, and (for lack of a better 
term) radical, with special attention to the education of Jewish and 
Arab (or Palestinian) citizens of Israel as illustrative of liberal republics 
more generally. I argue that each account is problematic—the republican 
because it tends to emphasize one particular community to the exclusion 
of others, and the liberal and radical because each promotes distinct but 
equally universal ideals at the expense of the particular idioms literacy 
and democracy require. To conclude, I suggest an alternative grounded 
in what John Gray, in keeping with Isaiah Berlin and Michael Oakeshott, has called ‘value-pluralism.’ Yael Tamir refers to the political 
theory associated with this view as ‘liberal nationalism,’ the educational 
consequences of which I dub the ‘pedagogy of difference.’
It is commonly accepted that citizens of democratic societies should 
be literate. To vote, deliberate matters of public concern, or protect 
one’s interests or those of one’s family, community, culture, class, race, 
ethnicity, gender, or sexual orientation, requires some ability to decipher language, interpret social cues, understand cultural practices, or 
grasp—even apply—ethical, political, aesthetic, or other sorts of values. 
But what does it mean to be literate under circumstances such as these? 
On John Searle’s account, language constitutes the so-called ‘ontological substance of civilization,’ the very stuff of which human societies are 
made (Searle 1997, 59–78). To acquire the ability to use language, on 
this view, is to learn to express one’s purposes or intentions in the context of particular societies, cultures, or traditions. To become literate, 
then, is to be initiated into a particular community that expresses itself 
in certain ways and not others; and to inquire about the sort of literacy 
required of democratic citizens is to ask about the varieties of purposes 
and intentions with which citizens in democratic societies should be 
concerned.
Literacy and Citizenship 31
Democratic literacy then appears to involve a dilemma. On the one hand 
it entails initiation into cannons of expression that in the nature of the case 
will be used by particular communities for the purposes of articulating 
their customs, beliefs, and practices—in short, their ways of life or concepts of the good. On the other hand, to limit these cannons to a particular 
group excludes from the language of political power others who are not 
members of that group. Enfranchising all members of society requires that 
citizens be provided with skills to articulate their own purposes, intentions, 
interests, and desires; yet requiring people to adopt a particular way of 
talking in order to be invited into the corridors of power can deny legitimacy to other modes of expression that may not be favored by purveyors of 
the current dominant discourse. This is so even if that discourse promotes 
common cannons of communication, since what counts as ‘common’ will 
itself vary from one community of discourse to another.
This is no abstract problem. Consider Israel, which was conceived as a 
Jewish and democratic state to provide for the cultural and political aspirations of an ancient people presumably without denying the parallel desires 
of others. Approximately 80 percent of Israel’s citizens are secular and 
religious Jews, while around 20 percent are Arabs of Muslim, Christian, 
and Druze dissent, many of whom identify culturally and politically as 
Palestinians. The language of political discourse into which Jewish Israeli 
youngsters are initiated in school is grounded in the modern Hebrew culture created by the founders of Zionism in the fi rst half of the twentieth 
century. Yet, even though the language of primary education for Palestinian youngsters who are citizens of Israel is Arabic, which is also an offi cial 
language of the country, Jewish and Zionist history and culture play an 
important role in the curriculum of Arab Israeli schools, and the language 
in which Palestinian youngsters must matriculate and pursue higher education is Hebrew. It is entirely unclear what ought to count as the sort of literacy necessary for participation in Israeli democracy for these two groups 
of citizens. On the view that Israel should be a Jewish state, Palestinian 
Arab language and culture would seem to be excluded from the corridors 
of power, which could raise questions about Israel’s democratic character. 
However, the claim that democracy requires granting cultural rights to all, 
which challenges the privilege afforded Hebrew culture, may preclude a 
nation-state from grounding its political culture in the traditions of a particular people, which as we have seen could in turn undermine the possibility of literacy and hence democracy altogether. Nor is Israel alone in facing 
this problem; most democratic societies around the world were founded 
as expressions of particular national cultures, yet they face the diffi culties 
of educating signifi cant minority populations whose history, heritage, and 
language may be different than that of the majority the state was founded 
to promote, but who aspire nonetheless to equal rights as citizens (Tamir 
1995, 124–130).
32 Hanan Alexander
Philosophers have long been concerned with dilemmas of this sort. How, 
they ask, is one thing possible, supposing certain other confl icting or contradictory things? How is it possible for us to have free will, supposing 
that all actions are causally determined, or for evil to be possible, given 
the existence of an omnipotent, omniscient good God? (Nozick 1981, 8) 
Addressing these sorts of questions requires what Robert Nozick has called 
a ‘philosophical explanation,’ which articulates deeper principles that can 
remove the apparent confl ict and put one’s beliefs in alignment. The search 
for such an explanation, Nozick points out, is often conducted as much to 
assuage the internal affairs department of one’s own belief system as it is 
to convince others. What follows then is an attempt to put my own beliefs 
in alignment by asking how an account of literacy suitable to political education in democratic societies is possible that is suffi ciently grounded in 
particular traditions or cultures for the term ‘literacy’ to be meaningful, yet 
which also takes into account relevant concerns for the enfranchisement of 
all citizens.
In this chapter I will address this question by assessing the role of literacy in three standard accounts of democratic education: republican, liberal, 
and (for lack of a better term) radical, in light of what John Gray (2002) 
has called the ‘pluralistic face of liberal toleration.’ Drawing on the political theories of Isaiah Berlin (1953, 1990) and Michael Oakeshott (1991), I 
will argue that each of these standard accounts of democratic literacy are 
problematic: the republican because it tends to emphasize one particular 
community to the exclusion of others, and the liberal and radical because 
each promotes distinct but equally universal ideals at the expense of the 
particular idioms literacy and hence democracy requires. To conclude, I 
will suggest an alternative grounded in a liberal communitarian view that 
Yael Tamir (1995) calls ‘liberal nationalism.’ I have referred to the educational consequences of this political theory as the ‘pedagogy of difference’ 
(Alexander 2004, 2007).
RIVAL CONCEPTIONS OF LITERACY 
IN DEMOCRATIC EDUCATION
Three traditions of thought dominate the literature of political education in 
democratic societies, each of which approaches the literacy of citizens differently: republican, liberal, and radical. By political education I mean very 
broadly the intentional initiation of members in a society into the concepts, 
ideals, and practices that are used to govern; and by democracy I mean 
again very loosely a society that, as Lincoln put it so well, conceives itself 
as being “of the people, by the people, and for the people,” although there 
is considerable disagreement among the three traditions in question as to 
who is to be counted as one of the people and what it means for government 
to be by and for them.
Literacy and Citizenship 33
According to the republican tradition—from Aristotle (1981), Marcus 
Tullius Cicero (2009), and Niccolo Machiavelli (1984) to J. G. Herder (Berlin 2001, 168–242) and G. W. F. Hegel (1967) and perhaps contemporary 
communitarians such as Alistair MacIntyre (1981, 1989) and Michael Sandel (1998)—being a citizen entails membership in a particular group. This 
might be determined by virtue of lineage or heritage, which is sometimes 
called ethnic or national republicanism. It may also be a result of having 
been taught or chosen a particular way of life or concept of the Good, 
which can be referred to as ethical or ideological republicanism. For government to be by and for the people on this account means that it uses the 
powers of the state to support and sustain this group or way of life; and to 
be a literate citizen is to be initiated into the customs, beliefs, and practices 
of that ethnicity, nationality, culture, or tradition.
When Israeli high school matriculation requires exams in modern 
Hebrew language and literature or Zionist history for both Jewish and Arab 
students; or when A- and O-level exams in the UK demand profi ciency in 
English language and literature or British history from all students regardless of background, and the state allocates funds for teacher preparation, 
curriculum construction, and classroom instruction in those subjects; or 
when universities do not hold classes on Jewish holidays in Israel or Christian holidays in France, Germany, or Denmark or Muslim holidays in Pakistan or Indonesia, these subjects and customs are granted special privilege 
on republican grounds. To function effectively as a citizen in a national or 
ideological republic one must speak its language, know something of its 
history or collective story, and respect its religious and cultural heritage. In 
McLaughlin’s (1992) terms, this is likely to yield a more ‘maximal,’ or as 
Walzer (1994) would call it a ‘thicker’ conception of literacy for democratic 
citizenship, grounded in local culture, language, history, and custom.
According to the liberal account, on the other hand—from Immanuel 
Kant (1989, 1997) and John Locke (1988) to John Stuart Mill (1998) and 
John Rawls (2005a)—democratic citizenship is a legal status that requires, 
among other qualifi cations, a signifi cant degree of personal autonomy; and 
for a government to be by and for its citizens entails protecting their fundamental rights to follow a life-path of their own choosing, provided of course 
that one’s choices do not infringe on the preferences of others (Alexander 
2007). According to Eamonn Callan (1988, 25–55) this entails the capacity 
to assess one’s genuine interests realistically according to relevant criteria of 
rational truthfulness. By ‘interests’ in this context Callan has in mind one’s 
most deeply held convictions and desires, something akin to what Charles 
Taylor (1985) called ‘strong values,’ not units of utility, benefi t, or gain. 
Additionally, to be an autonomous person in Callan’s view, one must possess the independence of mind to pursue these interests even in the face of 
signifi cant obstacles. Whatever else it may mean, then, to be a literate citizen in this view entails a common conception of critical rationality among 
groups with alternative visions of the good life, upon which individuals can 
34 Hanan Alexander
base realistic and independent choices. This view is likely to result in what 
McLaughlin would call a more minimal, or Walzer a thinner, account of 
literacy for democracy because it will seek a common and neutral discourse 
in which to assess personal preferences and deliberate public policies.
In small liberal republics this would constitute a strong basis for common schools in which children of different religions, nationalities, and 
races, both majorities and minorities, would be educated together. In the 
Israeli case, for instance, this would suggest that Palestinian and Jewish 
citizens of Israel be educated together in common schools (they are currently schooled separately) that would teach various aspects of Arab and 
Hebrew culture to both communities—perhaps with different emphasis 
for each, but with a common intellectual ethos that emphasizes enabling 
students to cultivate their own interests and arrive at independent choices 
about fundamental life choices. In large, diverse democracies such as the 
US, it would mitigate against state-supported separate schools for groups 
with differing religious or cultural orientations, and for limiting parental 
rights to religious education. Harry Brighouse (2005), for example, argues 
against the rights of Amish parents to limit the secondary schooling of 
their children in order to support their particular faith, on the grounds 
that it would infringe on the autonomy of their children, and Callan (1985) 
has challenged the rights of parents to bring their children up in a religious 
tradition altogether.
Finally, according to the radical tradition—from Plato (2008) to Karl 
Marx (1970) and the Frankfort school (Horkheimer and Adorno 2002) 
to the critical pedagogues (Freire 2000), postcolonialists (Said 1979), and 
poststructuralists (Foucault 2001)—all human societies are grounded in 
fundamental, and possibly insurmountable, confl icts over power. The people, on this account, refers to all members of society—whether or not they 
are recognized legally as duly constituted citizens or have more and less 
power—and for government to be by and for them, it must seek to equalize 
the distribution of resources among them by taking power from those who 
have it and allocating it equitably to everyone. At the heart of literacy for 
democracy, according to this position, is the recognition of false consciousness or wrongheaded ideology that allows those in power to deny equal 
distribution of resources to all.
Ilan Gur-Ze’ev (2008) argues, for instance, that Israeli education 
should abandon the colonial idea that in establishing a state of their 
own Jews are coming home or that they have achieved a utopian or messianic ideal. The Zionists were mistaken. There is no utopia, no home, 
no ultimate teleological end or messianic time. With George Steiner 
(1998), Gur-Ze’ev holds instead that we all exist in a spiritual Diaspora 
in which there is no Archimedean point and no view from which to base 
life’s meaning and purpose. This holds no less true for Jews and Palestinians in the land that one calls Israel and the other Palestine than it 
does for those who reside abroad. Instead of educating Jewish children 
Literacy and Citizenship 35
in Israel toward a false utopia, or Palestinian children in the nostalgic belief 
that the clock can be turned back to a better time (for them) when there 
was no Jewish state, both should be engaged in a counter-education that 
acknowledges the suffering each people has endured in order create a 
new dialogue of coexistence for the future. Following critical pedagogue 
Paulo Freire (2000), this can be accomplished by posing common problems on which teachers and students can collaborate, instead of treating 
children like banks into which instructors deposit accepted ideologies 
that refl ect current unequal power relations.
Limitations of space do not allow a fully nuanced account that does 
justice to the rich diversity of opinion within each of these traditions or 
the deliberations and debates that transpire amongst them. However, 
I have tried to capture in broad strokes what the various alternatives 
within each orientation share in common that I take to be problematic. 
The diffi culties I have in mind can be made plain, I think, by reference 
to what political philosopher John Gray (2002) has called the ‘pluralistic face of liberal toleration,’ though it can be applied to republican and 
radical political theory as well. “Liberalism has always had two faces,” 
writes Gray:
From one side, toleration is the pursuit of an ideal form of life. From 
the other, it is the search for terms of peace among different ways of 
life. In the former view, liberal institutions are seen as applications of 
universal principles. In the latter, they are means to peaceful coexistence. In the fi rst, liberalism is the prescription for a universal regime. 
In the second, it is a project of coexistence that can be pursued in many 
regimes. The philosophies of John Locke and Immanuel Kant exemplify the liberal project of a universal regime, while those of Thomas 
Hobbes and David Hume express the liberalism of peaceful coexistence. In more recent times, John Rawls and F.A. Hayek have defended 
the fi rst liberal philosophy, while Isaiah Berlin and Michael Oakeshott 
are exemplars of the second. (Gray 2002, 2)
Gray calls the politics exemplifi ed by Kant and Locke universal (some say 
comprehensive) liberalism, and that exemplifi ed by Berlin and Oakeshott 
a theory of modus vivendi, which he writes, “is liberal toleration adapted 
to the historical fact of pluralism” (Gray 2002, 6). The ethical theory that 
underpins the search for coexistence among alternative ways of life is called 
‘value pluralism.’ It entails the idea that “there are many confl icting kinds 
of human fl ourishing, some of which cannot be compared in value” (ibid.). 
Simply put, my problem with each of these theories of literacy in democratic education is that they do not take suffi cient account of the historical 
fact of pluralism, because they tend to embrace overly rigid approaches to 
what Berlin dubbed ‘positive liberty’ and what Oakeshott called ‘rational 
technique’. Berlin (1953, 1990) makes the case for pluralism, I think, while 
36 Hanan Alexander
Oakeshott (1991) shows how respect for difference can be combined with 
commitment to particular traditions
HEDGEHOGS, FOXES, AND CONCEPTS OF FREEDOM
Following an obscure fragment from the ancient Greek poet Archilochus, 
Berlin (1953) marked what has become a famous distinction between two 
sorts of intellectual types: ‘hedgehogs,’ who know one big thing; and ‘foxes,’ 
who know many things.
A great chasm exists between those, on one side, who relate everything to a single central vision, one system less or more coherent or 
articulate, in terms of which they understand, think and feel—a single, 
universal, organizing principle in terms of which alone all that they 
are and say has signifi cance—and, on the other side, those who pursue 
many ends, often unrelated and even contradictory, connected, if at 
all, only in some de facto way, for some psychological or physiological 
cause, related by no moral or aesthetic principle. These last lead lives, 
perform acts, and entertain ideas that are centrifugal rather than centripetal, their thought is scattered or diffused, moving on many levels, 
seizing upon the essence of a vast variety of experiences and objects 
for what they are in themselves, without consciously or unconsciously, 
seeking to fi t them into, or exclude them from, any one unchanging, 
all-embracing, sometimes self-contradictory and incomplete, at times 
fanatical, unitary inner vision. The fi rst kind of intellectual and artistic personality belongs to the hedgehogs, the second to the foxes; and 
without insisting on a rigid classifi cation, we may, without too much 
fear of contradiction, say that, in this sense, Dante belongs to the fi rst 
category, Shakespeare to the second; Plato, Lucretius, Pascal, Hegel, 
Dostoevsky, Nietzsche, Ibsen, Proust are, in varying degrees, hedgehogs; Herodotus, Aristotle, Montaigne, Erasmus, Molière, Goethe, 
Puschkin, Balzac, Joyce are foxes. (Berlin 1953, 3)
Societies conceived by foxes encourage citizens to choose among competing paths to human fulfi llment provided they respect the choices of others, whereas hedgehogs assign privilege to those who follow one particular 
path. Foxes are drawn to Berlin’s (1990) negative concept of freedom, the 
absence of constraints on, or interference with, a person’s actions; hedgehogs are attracted to positive liberty, the idea of self-mastery, or self-defi nition, or control of one’s destiny.
Berlin had deep reservations about the latter because of the tendency 
among those who advance positive accounts of freedom to distinguish 
between one’s actual self that acts in the day-to-day world and some occult 
entity referred to alternatively as a ‘true’ or ‘real’ or ‘higher’ self of which 
Literacy and Citizenship 37
a person might not be fully aware. Thus, it is argued that although one’s 
empirical self may indeed feel free, one’s true self may actually be enslaved. 
As Berlin put it so aptly, “Once I take this view, I am in a position to ignore 
the actual wishes of men or societies, to bully, oppress; torture them in the 
name, and on behalf, of their ‘real’ selves, in the secure knowledge that 
whatever is the true goal of man (happiness, performance of duty, wisdom, 
a just society, self-fulfi llment) must be identical with his freedom—the free 
choice of his ‘true’, albeit often submerged and inarticulate, self” (1990, 
133). It is not surprising, then, that Berlin (1997, 1–24) leveled this critique 
against the potential authoritarianism inherent in the strong ‘counter-Enlightenment’ romanticism associated with the likes of Hegel (1967) and his 
right- and left-leaning intellectual descendents, who were in many important respects heirs to the ethical republicanism of Aristotle and Cicero and 
the dialectical idealism of Plato, and the progenitors of the more contemporary republican and radical traditions mentioned above.
Berlin was well aware of the complexities of the many different critical 
traditions grounded in various forms of dialectical reasoning and confl ict 
analysis, at least as they emerged during his lifetime. He even held that Tolstoy “was by nature a fox, but believed in being a hedgehog” (1953, 5), and 
he might well have said the same of the likes of Antonio Gramsci (2008), 
Max Horkheimer, and Theodor Adorno (Horkheimer and Adorno 2002). 
This said, he had harsher things to say about the intellectual descendents of 
Plato, Hegel, and Marx than about those of Aristotle, Cicero, and Machiavelli—in part, I think, because he believed that the latter set the stage for the 
sort of pluralism he embraced in ways that the former did not. We will see 
below how Oakeshott critiques the lack of pluralism in critical social theory 
on the basis of a universal application of dialectical logic. Berlin, however, 
had a slightly different concern in mind, that all too often the ultimate end 
of confl ict analysis is the obliteration of difference altogether. There are, to 
be sure, social distinctions that ought to be dissolved because they entail 
an unjust abuse of power—such as those aspects of class, race, gender, 
ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, and the like—on the basis of which 
benefi ts, resources, and opportunities are withheld or verbal, emotional, or 
physical abuse infl icted. But the exercise of power is not always evil, and 
its equal distribution not necessarily just. There are many instances where 
we want and need to rely on the state to use power wisely (in battling corruption, for example, or protecting the weak or innocent); and some tasks 
deserve higher reward than others, although well-intended people may differ as to what those tasks might be and how large a differential in reward is 
warranted. Yet, without any ‘objective’ standard of what is to count as justice, wisdom, corruption, or innocence, we have nothing on which to rely 
but political tradition in order to distinguish between the just and unjust 
application of power or distribution of wealth. Berlin was therefore more 
sympathetic to republicans such as Machiavelli (1984) and Herder (Berlin 
2001, 168–242) than to radicals like Marx and Engels (1998) because he 
38 Hanan Alexander
believed that, tempered with a strong dose of negative freedom, republicanism might yield a respect for difference that could facilitate ways for deeply 
distinctive peoples to coexist that are absent from the sort of critical social 
theories that strive to deconstruct difference altogether.
It may be more surprising, however, to learn that Berlin’s reservations 
concerning the excesses of positive liberty were addressed no less to the 
monist moral and political theories of Kant and Locke than to the republicans and the radicals. If he viewed Machiavelli and Herder as nascent 
foxes, he saw these Enlightenment liberals as hedgehogs, headstrong about 
the capacity of reason to negotiate competing ways of life. Liberalism is 
normally associated with pluralism, grounded in the right of citizens to 
choose a concept of the Good over any particular goods they may prefer. This assumes that they can pick freely based on relevant reasons (Raz 
1988; Brighouse 2005) and engage in reasonable deliberation to adjudicate 
disagreements (Gutmann and Thompson 1998; Rawls 2005b). However, 
Berlin followed Hegel in holding that our choices are not always as free 
nor our deliberations as reasonable as they might appear, since the very 
idea of rational evaluation is historically situated; and though preferring 
negative freedom, he recognized it too as an historical achievement that 
tends toward its positive counterpart when transformed into a doctrine 
that strives for comprehensive infl uence over the lives of citizens. Thus, he 
counted as a fairly extreme version of positive liberty the concept of rational autonomy and the pursuit of liberal toleration as a universal ideal found 
in Kant and Locke.
Berlin parted company with Hegel, however, and especially his leftleaning followers when they argued that selections can only be genuinely free when power is distributed equally by liberating the weak and 
oppressed from the ideas and material conditions that render them feeble (Freire 2000; McLaren 2006; Young 2002). The ultimate source of 
human power, he argued, lies not in its uniform distribution, but in the 
presumption that people can step outside of their current circumstances 
to choose a new path, despite all of the infl uences upon them or the forces 
stacked against them. This is so precisely because our circumstances are 
not given and even though our choices cannot be based on one view or 
another of universal reason (Gray 1996). Berlin’s views were thus closer 
to communitarians, such as Alastair MacIntyre (1989) and Charles Taylor (1985), who held that there is no way to assess rational evaluation 
other than by appeal to the very rational standards in question, and that 
without a satisfactory justifi cation of rationality, preferences may be 
reduced to expressions of mere personal feeling. This confuses freedom 
with caprice and isolates citizens from one another as they increasingly 
center on themselves. Meaningful assessment must, therefore, be based 
on values that emanate from beyond the self, linked to historically contingent communities or traditions in which citizens are embedded (Sandel 1998; Taylor 1991).
Literacy and Citizenship 39
Some liberals, such as Rawls, respond to these objections by pointing 
out that the weak and oppressed would themselves choose the principle of 
distributive justice from behind a veil of ignorance (Rawls 2001) and that 
procedural justice is a neutral mechanism for defending personal choices 
grounded in affi liation—not a comprehensive doctrine in its own right 
(Rawls 2005b); and although others take issue with this sort of political 
minimalism by suggesting that liberal values should infl uence the private 
as well as the public domain (Callan 2004; Gutmann 1987; Tomasi 2001), 
most agree that liberal states should protect, not preclude, strong affi liations and situated identities (Feinberg 2000). But these rejoinders fail to 
address the full weight of Berlin’s embrace of the Hegelian assault on Kant 
and Locke, which questions not only the capacity of reason to adjudicate 
difference without prejudice, but also the very rational grounds of liberalism altogether. Of course, many of the alternatives offered by radical 
and republican critics of liberalism are not free of diffi culties associated 
with extreme concepts of positive liberty; liberation from false consciousness can lead to new forms of oppression, and traditionalism, if too rigid, 
may leave little room for those who seek fulfi llment outside of prescribed 
frameworks. This may be why many of them return to some form of liberal justice even after they have criticized it (Macedo 1991). With all of 
its limitations, it appears that only some sort of liberal democracy seems 
to secure the basic rights and liberties, such as free expression, that make 
criticism possible. But if reason can serve neither as a basis for liberal values 
nor as a neutral arena for public deliberation, on what grounds can this 
reengagement with liberalism, however modifi ed, be sustained? This brings 
us back to John Gray’s (2002) pluralistic liberalism that assumes numerous 
incompatible forms of human life and pursues a modus vivendi for peaceful 
coexistence among them.
Eamonn Callan (1988) challenges Berlin’s critique of universal (he might 
call it comprehensive) liberalism by questioning whether the distinction 
between positive and negative liberty can withstand close scrutiny, at least 
as Berlin has traced it in the history of Western political thought. The diffi culty with Berlin’s position, writes Callan,
is that if one looks hard enough at any particular instance of positive or 
negative liberty, it normally turns out to be describable in terms of the 
other sort of liberty. One might say that Berlin’s putative adherents of 
positive freedom want the activity of collective self-determination to be 
free from interference of forces outside the society and disruptive elements within it, while adherents of negative liberty want the individual 
to be free to determine her life as she pleases within the area of selfregarding conduct. Thus, the dominant interest of Berlin’s so-called 
proponents of positive freedom, given a different but perfectly accurate 
description of their position, appears to be negative; and the overriding concern of their political adversaries turns out to be with positive 
40 Hanan Alexander
freedom, given a similar descriptive change. That is not say that no signifi cant difference exists between the two schools of political thought 
which Berlin differentiates—there obviously is—but it is a difference to 
which the ordinary distinction between positive and negative liberty is 
wholly irrelevant. (Callan 1988, 10)
But, on Callan’s view, what is the difference between the two schools of 
thought that Berlin delineates? One prioritizes collective goods over individual rights, while the other prefers the right of individuals to choose a 
concept of the collective Good over any goods they may choose. The former is a common way of conceiving republicanism and the latter a central 
tenet of universal liberalism. However, this interpretation of Berlin misses 
the essential point that even the society that promotes individual self-rule, 
when left untempered by something like Mill’s familiar caveat having to do 
with impinging on the liberties of others, is no less oppressive in its own 
way than the sorts of extreme right- and left-leaning collectivism to which 
Callan, along with Berlin, objects. But the desires and aspirations of others 
only acquire independent moral standing when we recognize the historical 
contingency, and hence fundamental diversity, of the very sort of rationality 
(Callan calls it ‘truthfulness’ or ‘realism’) upon which personal autonomy 
rests. For if standards to assess ways of life were the same for all—independent of the vicissitudes of history, language, culture, and tradition—then 
the very idea of self-rule would be meaningless, since universal reason, not 
personal choice, would in fact govern one’s will, the results of which would 
turn out the same for everyone. Under these conditions, in principle, there 
would be no need for a separate consideration of the Other, since everyone’s 
choices would turn out to be the same. In short, it would appear that in this 
interpretation of Berlin’s distinction between positive and negative liberty, 
Callan—like many universal liberals before him—reveals himself to be a 
bit of a hedgehog rather than a fox, falling prey to what Oakeshott calls the 
‘fallacy of rationalism’ in politics.
RATIONALISM IN POLITICS AND TRADITIONS OF PRACTICE
Oakeshott’s (1991) critique of rationalism shows that he too was a pluralist, 
although Gray thought that he was overly committed to a single tradition. 
Oakeshott’s mistake, Gray contends, was to replace principle with tradition as a basis for liberalism, as if any late modern society contained only 
one tradition. “If contemporary societies contain several traditions, with 
many people belonging to more than one, politics cannot be conducted by 
following any one tradition. It must try to reconcile the intimations of rival 
traditions” (Gray 2002, 32–33). In this assessment, Gray (like other liberal 
philosophers) confuses Oakeshott’s concern for the political tradition of a 
single society with the idea that traditions are necessarily closed and rigid, 
Literacy and Citizenship 41
while it is Oakeshott’s critique of closed and rigid traditions that in fact 
points the way to understanding how people who adhere to opposing traditions can coexist and even learn from one another (Alexander 2008).
Oakeshott’s position is grounded in a distinction between two sorts of 
knowledge, one technical the other practical. Technical knowledge entails 
a mastery of the techniques required to properly engage in such human 
activities as natural science, the fi ne arts, or the governance of a good society. These can be formulated in propositions—rules, principles, directions, 
and maxims—that are found in manuals for cooking, driving, or scientifi c 
research. Practical knowledge, on the other hand, exists only in use, and 
is shared or becomes common not by means of formulated doctrines, but 
through traditions of practice. Technical knowledge can be learned from a 
book, wrote Oakeshott. Much of it can be learned by heart, repeated by 
rote, and applied mechanically. It can, in short, be both taught and learned 
in the simplest meanings of these words. Practical knowledge, on the other 
hand, “can be neither taught or learned, but only imparted and acquired. It 
exists only in practice, and the only way to acquire it is by apprenticeship 
to a master—not because a master can teach it (he cannot), but because it 
can be acquired only by continuous contact with one who is perpetually 
practicing it” (Oakeshott 1991, 10–11).
The problem with rationalism, claims Oakeshott, is that it denies that 
practical knowledge should be counted as knowledge altogether, since there 
is no knowledge that is not technical knowledge. For the rationalist, he 
writes, “the sovereignty of ‘reason’ . . . means the sovereignty of technique” 
(ibid., 11). The heart of the matter, he continues, “is the pre-occupation 
of the Rationalist with certainty” (ibid., 12). The superiority of technical 
knowledge lay in the appearance that it springs from pure ignorance and 
ends in complete knowledge. But this is an illusion. Technical knowledge 
is never self-complete; it relies on presuppositions grounded in experience, 
without which the techniques of a particular fi eld of inquiry make no sense. 
Oakeshott traces this preoccupation with certainty born of technique to 
Bacon’s Novum Organum (Bacon 2000) and Descartes’ Discourse on 
Method (Descartes 2000). These texts infl uenced John Locke’s Second Treatise of Civil Government, which Oakeshott described as among the most 
popular and long-lived of political cribs (Locke 1988). On this account, 
Jefferson’s Declaration, and similar documents of the French Revolution, 
merely summarized an ideology that Locke had distilled from the English 
political tradition, on the mistaken assumption that these principles were 
not the product of civilization, but “discovered in the nature of human 
reason” (Locke 1988, 28). However, this passion for logical technique misconceived the relation between reason and tradition by confusing genuine 
knowledge of political affairs with partial truths torn not only from general 
experience of the world, which is certainly a more reliable guide than the 
maxims that might be recorded in a book, but also from the traditions of a 
society, which can take two or three generations to acquire.
42 Hanan Alexander
The diffi culty with universal liberalism, on this view, is that it succumbs 
to this rationalist infatuation with uniformity and regularity. The consequence for literacy in democratic education is a strong tendency toward 
what historian David Tyack (2007) has called a “one best system,” according to which all accounts of how and why children are taught to communicate must conform to a universal, rational standard. Rawls (2005a), 
for example, calls for citizens in liberal democracies to accept ‘burdens of 
judgment’ as a common basis for deliberating public goods. Among their 
other demands, these burdens require that public policies be defended only 
on grounds accepted by all, without appeal to particular value traditions. 
A Catholic, in this view, should not make a public case against the legality 
of abortion on the grounds that human life begins at conception, since this 
view is limited to particular traditions not held in common by all citizens. 
However, as Meira Levinson (1999, 17) points out, accepting this approach 
requires embracing an account of how pluralism is to be negotiated in the 
public domain that itself violates pluralism, because among other reasons 
it requires that our most substantive differences be left at the deliberation 
room door. Suggestions that Israel abandon its distinctive Jewish cultural 
character in order to address injustices done to Palestinians fall prey to this 
same fallacy of uniform technique. It presupposes a common culture to be 
transmitted to the young citizens of this state that is based on one form or 
another of universal reason divorced from a particular language or tradition; no such culture is possible, since even Enlightenment rationality is 
embedded in the history of a particular people who have lived at a specifi c 
time and place.
Radical social theorists also succumb to this rationalist fallacy, although 
they differ with liberals over the technique to which we ought to subscribe. 
Kant and Locke embraced an empirical–deductive logic with roots going 
back to Aristotle, whereas Hegel and Marx employed rival versions of 
dialectical reasoning that began with Plato. “No other technique has so 
imposed itself upon the world as if it were concrete knowledge,” wrote 
Oakeshott (referring to the Marx and Engels 1998), “none has created 
so vast an intellectual proletariat, with nothing but its technique to lose” 
(Oakeshott 1991, 26). And nowhere is this tendency to reduce complex 
social relations to abstract and uniform techniques more apparent than 
in concepts relating to confl ict and power associated with critical social 
theory. Consider the postcolonial claim that Zionism constitutes a form 
of colonialism, which draws what may be apt parallels between the exercise of Israeli and European power in the Middle East while denying the 
deep historic ties of Jews to the land of Israel. To be sure, power relations 
between Jews and Arabs in Israel and the Middle East have been troubled 
for centuries, and Zionism most certainly has more than its fair share of 
abuses to account for, as do all of the other actors in the region; but to 
reduce these relations to so one-sided a model as colonialism, in which 
Jews are the intruders and Palestinians the natives, is to misconceive in 
Literacy and Citizenship 43
the extreme the complexity of the interactions between these peoples.2
 It 
is highly unlikely that a concept of literacy for democratic education based 
on such an analysis could contribute to a reduction of the many tensions 
between them for, among many reasons, it would necessitate a call for the 
nostalgic return to Muslim-dominated Ottoman rule, which predated the 
arrival of the British in 1917 and the establishment of Israel in 1948—
hardly a democratic or pluralistic outcome. This is not to diminish the 
attention to power relations brought out by radical social criticism or to 
suggest that it always or necessarily lacks nuance. Rather, the point is that 
in a legitimate effort to deconstruct irrelevant differences among people 
that lead to abuses of authority and inequitable distribution of resources, 
critical theories too often delegitimize distinctions in culture and tradition 
that are essential to the moral bite of their opposition to oppression in the 
fi rst place since, as Oakeshott would insist, the ethical evaluation of social 
confl ict is itself historically contingent; or as Foucault has taught since, 
even dialectical reasoning is a product of power relations and so unavailable as a basis for resisting injustice.
Oakeshott’s analysis extends, then, not only to how we understand rational technique, but also to the nature of political traditions. Rationalists, he 
claims, attribute to those traditions “the rigidity and fi xity of character” 
that in fact belongs to the ideological principles born of “arid technique” 
(Oakeshott 1991, 31). However, traditions of practice are not limited by 
one or another conception of rational rules. They are manners of preserving, recalling, and transmitting across the generations knowledge particular 
peoples have accumulated from the concrete experience of living together 
as a community (ibid., 123). Knowledge of this sort is practical, not technical; it cannot be fully captured by any set of rules, principles, or procedures; or abridged into an abstract political or religious ideology, which 
although useful can easily distort or mislead; rather, it is preserved in the 
intricacies and details of shared lives that are communicated in the sundry 
institutions, rituals, manners, customs, stories, and oddities of which a collective existence is comprised. A tradition of practice, then, is not an infl exible manner of doing things. (ibid.,126) “It is neither fi xed, nor fi nished; it 
has no changeless centre to which understanding can anchor itself . . . no 
model to be copied or idea to be realized . . . Some parts of it may change 
more slowly than others, but none is immune from change. Everything is 
temporary” (ibid.,128). Nevertheless, though dynamic and emergent, traditions are not totally fl uid or without identity, since all of their parts do not 
change at the same time. What accounts for the identity of a tradition is the 
diffusion of authority between past, present, and future, in which nothing 
that ever belonged is completely lost. Change within a tradition of practice, 
then, is normal, though it emerges gradually and not abruptly by means of 
undirected evolution and not preplanned revolution (ibid., 126).
Unfortunately, all too often the tendency among critics of republicanism 
is to adopt a dogmatic as opposed to dynamic account of political traditions, 
44 Hanan Alexander
closed off from valuable dialogue and debate with alternative views. One 
example of this is what Sigal Ben-Porath (2006) calls the ‘belligerent concept of citizenship,’ which emerges when national and personal security 
are threatened, such as in times of war. It entails a narrowing of three key 
components of citizenship: (1) civic participation, which is normally voluntary but becomes mandated toward the war effort; (2) patriotism, which 
normally refl ects pride in democratic ideals but is transformed into unity 
and solidarity in the face of a common enemy; and (3) public deliberation, 
which is normally open and wide ranging but becomes attenuated, focused 
on security issues with limited acceptable opinions (Ben-Porath 2006, 
11–14). These unfortunate tendencies arise under the pressures of war, BenPorath argues, because citizenship education is too often viewed as a form 
of initiation into national identity, which seeks to contain rather than preserve diversity because it supposes that identifi cation with the nation-state 
trumps all other identities we may have. Instead, Ben-Porath proposes what 
she calls “expansive education,” which conceives citizenship as shared fate 
that may entail shared cultural or ethnic identity, but can also be based on 
other features, such as institutional and material linkages (ibid., 23–27).
This alternative seems unobjectionable as far as it goes, but Ben-Porath’s 
complaints about education in national identity appear to be grounded in 
the very dogmatic conception of tradition that Oakeshott attributes to the 
rationalists, which too often does not need the threat of war in order to 
become belligerent. Oakeshott was wrong if he supposed that no traditions 
of practice function in this way. Some religious and political orientations 
undoubtedly have a dogmatic tendency to fear the other, and one of the 
important contributions of critical social theory is to call them to account 
when they become overly narrow or oppressive. He was correct, however, 
to point out that many if not most traditions of practice are dynamic, not 
stagnant; and that given the right conditions and left to their own devices, 
they will evolve and adapt to threats of all kinds quite effectively, precisely 
because they are open to learning from alternative perspectives and from the 
world in which they are situated. We require, then, not merely an account 
of citizenship that enables people from diverse backgrounds, such as Jewish 
and Palestinian Israelis, to view themselves as part of a common enterprise, 
but also an understanding of the traditions that inform those backgrounds 
that allows such a dialogue across difference to take place.
LIBERAL NATIONALISM AND THE PEDAGOGY OF DIFFERENCE
Yael Tamir (1995), a student of Berlin’s, outlines a potential basis for such 
an understanding in her defense of liberal nationalism, in which she uses 
the term ‘culture’ to refer to something very close to what Oakeshott means 
by a ‘tradition of practice.’ With many communitarian critics of comprehensive liberalism, she conceives the citizen and her choices as embedded 
Literacy and Citizenship 45
in shared languages, histories, and customs, not governed solely by disengaged or hypothetical rationality. However, unlike the perfectionism of 
some communitarianism, she adopts an open and refl ective rather than a 
perfectionist account of culture, which assumes that individuals can shape 
the cultures in which they choose to live and not only base life choices 
on the cultures they have chosen. Hence, she distinguishes between selfdetermination and self-rule; the former referring to the right of individuals 
to public cultural expression, and the latter to the right of cultural groups 
or nations to secure self-determination for their members by means of the 
state, although state power is not the only way to achieve cultural expression. National privileges are thus intrinsic not instrumental values—basic 
rights owed to every individual, not means to redress collective suffering or 
promote cultural survival. Concern for the others outside of the immediate 
circle of national membership is grounded in something akin to what Nel 
Noddings (1984) calls ‘concentric circles of care:’ “Individuals care most 
about those in the circle closest to the centre, but are not indifferent to the 
welfare of those who occupy farther positions” (109).
Finally, in her Preface to the 1995 paperback edition of Liberal Nationalism, Tamir distinguishes between national and civic education.
In a nationally diversifi ed political system, be it a town, a state, a federation, a regional organization, or a global society, it is especially 
important that all children learn to respect others who have different 
lifestyles, values, and traditions and view them—qua members of the 
political system—as equals. Beyond this thin layer each national group 
should foster among its young knowledge that is relevant to its own 
particular community, its history, language, and traditions. Separating 
civic from national education is thus the key for continued peaceful 
existence of multinational societies . . . National groups—minorities 
and majorities alike—should thus be given the freedom to have their 
own educational system (whether in the form of separate schools or, 
preferably, . . . special hours or days) alongside the civic one. Civic education should attempt to create civic friendship among all, but it should 
attempt to do so not by assimilating all into one culture, but by respecting cultural diversity. (Tamir 1995, xxix)
In addition to initiation into their own cultural heritage, “all children 
should thus acquire some knowledge of the culture, history, and tradition 
of all national groups that share their political system, and be taught to 
respect them” (ibid.).
Like Meira Levinson’s ‘weak perfectionism’ (1999, 21–24), Tamir’s liberal 
nationalism goes some distance toward managing the tension between the 
individual rights that democratic citizenship demands and the literacy in particular cultures needed to understand and exercise those rights—or in Berlin’s 
terms, toward fi nding a proper balance between positive and negative liberty. 
46 Hanan Alexander
But one wonders whether Tamir, like Levinson, has not leaned too far in the 
direction of the individual to the detriment of cultural integrity and continuity, perhaps because she follows the rationalists in misconceiving traditions as 
rigid and dogmatic. She rejects the idea of culture ‘authenticity’ being dependent on roles ascribed by some “Council of Elders,” since deviating from those 
roles might be interpreted as ‘false consciousness’ or hiding from one’s ‘true 
self,’ both indicators of positive freedom gone awry, and argues instead that 
“the only authentic and genuine way of life is that freely chosen by each individual for himself” (Tamir 1995, 51). There is, then, “no Archimedean point 
from which we can evaluate the authenticity of cultures” (52).
The debate about the nature of authenticity is closely related to the 
debate about the ‘thinness’ or ‘thickness’ of modern nations. The idea 
that a nation has undergone a slow and organic process of development 
is more authentic than one that has developed in a less stable and less 
continuous way—or that a society that exhibits a more contiguous set 
of values and beliefs is therefore more authentic than one that is new, 
pluralistic, and therefore heterogeneous—should then be viewed with 
suspicion. The assumption that individuals can exercise choice regarding both their communal affi liations and their moral identity entails 
respect for dynamic and pluralistic views of culture. It views with favor 
the fact that, at any given point in time, different cultural interpretations compete for recognition within each nation. Membership in the 
cultural community would then be expressed by participating in the 
debate, rather than by following one specifi c interpretation (51).
Thus Tamir appears to suppose that, with no Archimedean point to evaluate the authenticity of cultures, personal feeling is the only basis on which 
to make constitutive choices about the person we aspire to be. But it does 
it not follow from the fact that our preferences are historically contingent, 
determined by neither dogmatic tradition nor universal reason, that the only 
available option is what Taylor (1985) would call ‘weak evaluation,’ based 
on mere feeling alone. For constitutive choices to be embedded in culture as 
Tamir asserts requires what Taylor calls ‘strong evaluation,’ based on norms 
that emanate from beyond the self. This in turn necessitates a thicker concept 
of culture or tradition than Tamir appears to allow, which grows in response 
to dialogue with opposing views and current events, but which is not within 
the total control of the individual to shape at the whim of his momentary or 
personal desires. Traditions that develop organically in response to their environments need not be homogeneous or monolithic. Indeed, the very priority 
Tamir places on pluralism and heterogeneity is itself the product of such a 
tradition of practice.
Moreover, without a neutral standpoint, what ought to be the substance of 
‘civic’ as distinguished from ‘national’ education, in what language should it 
be taught, or on what cultural values can it be based? In passage cited above 
Tamir appears to endorse state support for education in minority cultures 
Literacy and Citizenship 47
and faiths, which might suggest a multinational approach to civic education. 
Yet, later on she equivocates: “Even if social resources are fairly distributed, 
minority groups will be more limited in their ability to practice their national 
culture,” she writes. “Therefore, due to no fault of society, national minorities may feel culturally deprived and continue to wish that they lived in a 
community in which they constitute the majority” (Tamir 1995, 56). From 
this it might appear that the common civic education should be based, as in 
the US, on a version of the majority culture that is suffi ciently thin so as not 
to offend minorities. In either case, if this culture is not suffi ciently robust to 
override individual preferences when they run counter to such essential values 
as respect for difference, it is unlikely that it can promote the sort of peaceful 
coexistence to which Tamir aspires. This necessitates neither a total separation of national from civic education nor a thin culture of mere personal 
choice. Instead, multinational coexistence requires an education in tradition 
that is open to dialogue with opposing views within the political system, but 
that also seeks common ground upon which to build a joint civic education. 
This may include Ben-Porath’s common fate, institutions, and material relations, but it should also involve common historical, religious, and ideological connections. Jewish, Muslim, and Christian religions, for example, all 
share connections to the narrative of Abraham and Sarah, though the stories 
they tell about these seminal fi gures may differ, but all of these stories share 
connections with modern European Enlightenment culture that gave birth to 
liberal democracy. Exploring these connections in Jewish and Arab schools in 
Israel, along with elements of a shared fate including institution and material 
ties, could be the beginning of a common civic curriculum.
For this to be possible, however, each group requires a robust education 
in their own tradition, viewed as open and dynamic rather than closed and 
dogmatic, along with exposure to the traditions of the other. In addition to 
awareness of the historical contingency of a student’s own traditions, cultural initiation also requires a critical aspect that addresses power relations 
both within that tradition, and between it and other traditions. In short, we 
need a hermeneutic of dialogue not of suspicion à la Freire (2000), but à la 
Buber (1970) and Noddings (1994) that acknowledges and confi rms rather 
than accuses the other. Education in Jewish and Zionist traditions requires 
a self-examination concerning how Jews have related to one another, for 
example, across divides of politics, religion, ethnicity, gender, and sexual 
orientation. But such an education also demands examination of how Jews 
have exercised power over, in addition to suffering at the hands of, others. 
Similarly, Arab students of Muslim and Christian origin should be educated 
in their own customs and beliefs, but taught also to critically examine the 
cultures and societies from which they have emerged. They should explore 
historic power relations between Christians and Muslims and, of course, 
between both communities and the Jews. The civic education that should 
emerge from this approach cannot be entirely separated from national education; it needs to seek roots within each national culture separately, conceived dialogically and developmentally.
48 Hanan Alexander
The antidote to rampant rationalism and universal liberalism or egalitarianism, as I have argued elsewhere (Alexander 2007), is neither a weak and 
personalized culture nor a dogmatic and oppressive tradition, but an emergent and dynamic heritage grounded in what Jonathan Sacks (2003) calls the 
‘dignity of difference’ that admits multiple compelling approximations of the 
truth and many acceptable visions of how to live. Given that one can never 
stand outside of the life one leads, one can acquire the capacity to make independent choices by learning to be different and to respect the difference of 
others. This requires a critical understand of the tradition into which I was 
born or with which I choose to affi liate, along with an acknowledgement and 
confi rmation of others who are different from me, recognizing that it is they, 
not I, who should assume responsibility for their future. Following Sacks, and 
in contrast to pedagogies of the oppressed that tend to place responsibility 
for one’s plight on social structures or power relations rather than on oneself 
(Freire 2000), I have called this the ‘pedagogy of difference.’
NOTES
 1. I am grateful to the Richard and Rhoda Goldman Foundation for funding a visiting professorship at the University of California, Berkeley during 
the 2008/2009 academic year. Also to Dr. Mitchell Bard of the American 
Israel Cooperative Enterprise and Dean P. David Pearson of the Graduate 
School Education (GSE) for exceptional conditions that made writing this 
chapter possible. I am also indebted to the students in my graduate seminar 
on citizenship education, participants in the Social and Cultural Studies 
Speakers Series, and Professor Jabari Mahiri, Chair of the Language, Literacy, Society, and Culture Division of the GSE for helpful comments and 
suggestions.
 2. The very name Palestine for what Jews have historically called Israel was chosen by the Romans after their conquest in the fi rst century ostensibly to indicate that the land belonged not to the Jews but the Philistines, a people who 
resided in the southwest costal region of that land around eight hundred years 
earlier. Muslim Arabs arrived in the seventh century and until very recently did 
not use the designation Palestine for the land. It was reintroduced by the British when they acquired a mandate to rule from the League of Nations in 1917, 
probably to identify their own empire with that of the Romans. Although 
people certainly have the right to choose the names by which they prefer to be 
called, one can only wonder whether the choice of such a name as the national 
designation for Arab residents of that land after the establishment of the State 
of Israel in 1948 did not entail an allusion to its anti-Jewish origins. Relations 
between Jews and Arabs in the region, as I said, are not easily summarized in 
a single technique of confl ict analysis or dialectical reasoning.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alexander, H.A. “Moral Education and Liberal Democracy: Spirituality, Community, and Character in an Open Society.” Educational Theory 53, no. 4 (2004): 
367–387.
Literacy and Citizenship 49
 . “What is Common About Common Schooling? Rational Autonomy and 
Moral Agency in Liberal Democratic Education.” Journal of Philosophy of 
Education 41, no. 4 (2007): 609–624.
 . “Engaging Tradition: Michael Oakeshott on Liberal Learning.” In, Learning to Live with the Future, edited by A. Stables and S. Gough, 113–127. New 
York: Routledge, 2008.
Aristotle. The Politics. New York: Penguin Classics, 1981.
Bacon, F. The New Organon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Ben-Porath, S.R. Citizenship Under Fire: Democratic Education in Times of Confl ict. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006.
Berlin, I. The Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy’s View of History. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1953.
 . Four Essays on Liberty. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.
 . Against the Current: Essays in the History of Ideas. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997.
 . Three Critics of Enlightenment: Vico, Hamann, and Herder. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Brighouse, H. On Education. New York: Routledge, 2005.
Buber, M. I and Thou. New York: Scribner, 1970.
Callan, E. “McLaughlin on Parental Rights.” Journal of Philosophy of Education 
19, no. 2 (1985): 111–118.
 . Autonomy and Schooling. Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1988.
 . Creating Citizens: Political Education and Liberal Democracy. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2004.
Cicero, M.T. The Republic and the Laws. Trans. N. Rudd. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Descartes, R. Discourse on Method and Related Writings. New York: Penguin, 
2000.
Feinberg, W. Common Schools/Uncommon Identities: National Unity and Cultural Difference. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000.
Freire, P. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum, 2000.
Foucault, M. The Order of Things: An Archeology of the Human Sciences. New 
York: Routledge, 2001.
Gramsci, A. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. New York: International Publishers, 2008.
Gray, J. Isaiah Berlin. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996.
 . The Two Faces of Liberalism. London: New Press, 2002.
Gur-Ze’ev, I. Beyond the Modern-postmodern Struggle in Education. Rotterdam: 
Sense Publishers, 2008.
Gutmann, A. Democratic Education. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1987.
Gutmann, A. and D. Thompson. Democracy and Disagreement. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1998.
Hegel, G.W.F. Philosophy of Right. Oxford: Oxford University Press,1967.
Horkheimer, M. and T. Adorno. The Dialectic of Enlightenment. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford Univ. Press, 2002.
Levinson, M. The Demands of Liberal Education. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1999.
Locke, J. Two Treaties of Government. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1988.
Kant, I. Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1989.
 . Critique of Practical Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
50 Hanan Alexander
Macedo, S. Liberal Virtues: Citizenship, Virtue, and Community in Liberal Constitutionalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.
 . Diversity and Distrust: Civic Education in a Multicultural Democracy. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000.
Machiavelli, N. The Prince. New York: Bantam, 1984.
MacIntyre, A. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. Notre Dame, IN: University 
of Notre Dame Press, 1981.
MacIntyre, A. Whose Justice, Which Rationality? Notre Dame, IN: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 1989.
Marx, K. Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970.
Marx, K. and F. Engels. Collected Works. New York: International Publishers, 
1998.
McLaren, P. Life in Schools: An Introduction to Critical Pedagogy in the Foundations of Education. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2006.
McLaughlin, T.H. “Citizenship, Diversity and Education: A Philosophical Perspective.” Journal of Moral Education 21, no. 3 (1992): 235–250.
 . “Liberalism, Education, and the Common School.” Journal of Philosophy 
of Education 29, no. 2 (1995): 239–255.
Mill, J.S. On Liberty and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Noddings, N. Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984.
Nozick, R. Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1981.
Oakeshott, M. Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays. Wichita, KS: Liberty 
Press, 1991.
Rawls, J. Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2001.
 . A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005a.
 . Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press, 2005b.
Raz, J. The Morality of Freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.
 . Engaging Reason: On the Theory of Value and Action. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2002.
Plato. The Republic. Trans. R. Waterfi eld. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2008.
Sacks, J. The Dignity of Difference. London: Continuum, 2003.
Said, E. Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books, 1979.
Sandel, M. Liberalism and the Limits of Justice. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1998.
Searle, J. The Construction of Social Reality. New York: The Free Press, 1997.
Steiner, G. After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation. Oxford: Offord 
University Press, 1998.
Tamir, Y. Liberal Nationalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.
Taylor, C. The Ethics of Authenticity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1991.
 . “What is Human Agency?” Chap. 1 in Human Agency and Language. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
Tomasi, J. Liberalism Beyond Justice: Citizens, Society, and the Boundaries of 
Political Theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Tyack, D. The One Best System: A History of American Urban Education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007.
Walzer, M. Thick and Thin: Moral Argument at Home and Abroad. Notre Dame, 
IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1994.
Young, I.M. Inclusion and Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
4 After All, How Small is the 
World? Global Citizenship 
as an Educational Ideal
Doret de Ruyter
INTRODUCTION
It is not surprising that the globalization of the market and consumer economy, as well as the globalizing effect of the Internet and other media, have 
led to a revival of the idea of a certain kind of cosmopolitanism—namely 
that we are no longer only citizens of a nation state, but that we are citizens 
of the world. Moreover, this new civic identity is not simply a fact; it is 
perceived as a desirable state to which persons should aspire. The increased 
opportunities for First-World citizens to travel the world and interact with 
people from around the world can be seen as having positive infl uences on 
their lives: they are able to explore and learn in unprecedented ways. However, this is not the only side to global citizenship, and it needs to be clearly 
separated from the moral obligations that follow from such opportunities. 
The idea that a global citizen is a person who can live everywhere because 
she is able and willing to understand others is, in my view, but one side of 
globalization. It is clearly benefi cial for the individual, but not necessarily 
so for others. Under the guise of the moral obligation to be respectful to 
people in foreign countries, the global citizen may well act primarily in her 
own interest. She may, for instance, be eager to learn about her new home 
country in order to become a successful businesswoman. In this case, her 
respect for others and their cultures is primarily instrumental in character, 
and ‘global citizenship’ would merely be a new term for ‘(capitalist) imperialism.’ In order to exclude the possibility of violating the original moral 
conception of ‘cosmopolitanism’ as it was found among the Greeks, the 
moral dimension should be spelled out clearly. Thus, the concept of global 
citizenship that I offer will be explicitly moral in character. However, this 
does not mean that being cosmopolitan should not be benefi cial to individuals as well, but that the conception of global citizenship will therefore 
have to balance aspects that are other-regarding as well as self-regarding.
Having to balance moral demands and self-serving qualities is an enormous challenge, particularly at a global scale. Moreover, doing it well is 
an excellent achievement. These two qualifi cations seem to indicate that a 
global citizen is an ‘ideal’ person. This idea suggests that global citizenship 
52 Doret de Ruyter
is also an ideal aim of education. In this chapter I will defend the view 
that cosmopolitanism is indeed an educational ideal aim. I will begin by 
explaining the concept of ‘educational ideals.’ Then I will describe what I 
believe to be the two ideal aims of education, i.e., human fl ourishing and 
being morally good. These two aims shape the conception of global citizenship that I will defend as an educational ideal.
IDEALS AND EDUCATION
‘Ideals’ can be defi ned as those values a person believes to be excellent or 
even perfect. To these ideals, she attaches high importance, but they are 
not realized as of yet. Thus, ideals are a subclass of values and have three 
characteristics.
Firstly, ideals are values that have a particular quality. Contra Rescher 
(1987), who claims that ideals refer to perfect values only,1
 I believe that 
the concept of ideals can also stand for excellent values. This refl ects our 
ordinary language, in which the word ‘ideals’ is used for excellent values 
that can be realized as well as perfect values that are unrealizable. For 
instance, it does not sound awkward to say that one day a Dutch woman 
may be able to realize her ideal to become the fi rst female prime minister of 
the Netherlands, but that her ideal of being the perfect ruler of our nation 
is unachievable because it is impossible for her to be fl awless.
Secondly, a person believes her ideals to be of great importance. Ideals 
therefore have a personal character. An individual may agree with others 
that a value is excellent or perfect, but it is only an ideal for them if they 
also believe it is highly important. Of course, the personal character of 
ideals does not preclude the possibility of a large group of people sharing 
an ideal. For example, members of a faith community can have similar religious ideals, and professionals pursue ideals characteristic of their profession. Nor does the personal character of ideals imply that a person cannot 
adopt ideals from others; ideals need to be affi rmed by persons, but they do 
not have to be invented by them. Finally, the personal attachment to ideals 
does not mean that they are subjective, or that they cannot be evaluated by 
others through the use of objective standards.
Thirdly, ideals are not yet realized. Their not-as-yet-realized character 
makes it possible to look at imagined excellent or perfect situations or characteristics of a person from different perspectives and to discover whether 
or not they would be truly excellent if realized. In refl ecting on this, one 
does not have to take into account whether or not it is actually possible 
to realize the ideal. On the contrary, not having to do so is precisely what 
allows people to develop their views on excellent or perfect values. If ideals 
have to be confi ned to those values that one can realize, the possibility of 
developing ideas about perfect values becomes impossible, because perfect 
values cannot be actualized.
After All, How Small is the World? 53
The combination of these three characteristics motivates a person to 
pursue the realization of the ideal. The fact that ideals refer to perfect 
or excellent values implies that they are impossible or at least very diffi cult to achieve. Therefore, it is important that persons be able to combine this implication of ideals with their own wish or drive to realize what 
they highly value. In other words, their pursuit of the ideal, as well as the 
expectations of what they can achieve, should be realistic. Without tempering their expectations, persons may either become utterly frustrated and 
defeated about their own capacities, or they might become fanatical in a 
relentless mission to accomplish their ideal. These possibilities necessitate 
that education addresses not only the content of ideals, but also ways in 
which people pursue them. I will return to this later.
Educational Ideals
‘Educational ideals’ can be described as the excellent or perfect values that 
prevail in education, values that are seen as highly important but that are 
not yet realized. It is possible to differentiate between three clusters of educational ideals: ideal aims, content-ideals, and ideal educational methods or 
educational approaches.
Firstly, ideals can be aims educators aspire toward or should arguably 
strive for; for example, that children, once they become adults, will be 
devout believers, autonomous, happy, successful, or incredibly rich. These 
examples illustrate two of the characteristics I just described: there are different views about which values are excellent, and secondly, some of these 
excellences are realizable, albeit with great effort. Ideal aims of education 
can be diverse, too, in part because children encounter different educators. 
Therefore, we are faced with the question: Excellent or perfect according to 
whom? Parents have views on what is excellent for their children, but so do 
members of society, and the state, as well as those who work as functionaries of the state, such as teachers. Furthermore, not only may the views of 
these parties clash, it is also possible that they are mistaken or that their 
intentions lead to undesirable or counterintuitive results.
Here are two examples involving the Dutch government. First, several 
years ago, the Dutch government warned pregnant women about the 
consequences of smoking. The reduction in the baby’s birth weight was 
named as one of the negative effects. For some women, however, this 
information was an incentive to increase the number of cigarettes they 
smoked. By doing so, they aimed at having an easy delivery. Thus, the 
good intention of the government led to opposite results. Second, The 
Netherlands Institute for Spatial Research recently accused the government of having obsolete ideals about the Dutch landscape. The institute 
argued that the government holds on to nostalgic ideals about unspoiled 
nature and idealistic rural areas. According to the institute, these ideals 
may have been valid years ago, but that is no longer the case. Therefore, 
54 Doret de Ruyter
the ideals of the government are mistaken, according to the institute at 
least.
In order to minimize the possibility of erroneous ideals, we may expect 
educators to give good reasons for believing that the educational aims they 
pursue are excellent or perfect, and that they are willing to change their 
views if they realize that the aims are either not as excellent as they thought 
or that they confl ict with other ideals. In other words, educators need to 
have a capacity for conception of the good (Rawls 1993). This is important 
for educators, because what they do affects not only their own lives, but 
also, or even primarily, affects the lives of others.
Additionally, because ideal educational aims refer to perfections or excellences, they are either impossible or diffi cult to achieve. That ideals are diffi cult to achieve is not only related to their excellent character, but also to the 
potential of children and the circumstances in which educators and children 
live. Thus, while being able to read, write, and calculate are certainly aims of 
education, these aims remain ideals for children with dyslexia or dyscalculia, 
for in their case it would be an excellent achievement if they were able to read 
or calculate at an adequate level. It may seem that this introduces a new characteristic of ideals, namely that their pursuit and possible realization require 
a particular level of effort. This is not true. Rather, it illustrates that what we 
call ‘excellence’ is also dependent on a person’s starting position. However, 
this does mean that there is a somewhat grey area: educational aims and 
educational ideal aims cannot always be neatly disentangled.
Second, in addition to ideals as aims, ideals also feature in education 
as the content of education, i.e., as content-ideals. These are the ideals 
that educators pursue themselves, as well as those that educators, most 
likely teachers, believe (or should believe!) an important alternative view 
on excellent values (see also Brighouse 2005). For instance, while religious 
parents may foster and pursue the ideal of a theocratic society, teachers 
will also highlight the excellent qualities of a liberal democracy. Or, while 
parents may believe that an academic career is the only excellent option for 
their children if they have the intellectual capacities, teachers may provide 
excellent examples of other vocations, which for some for children may be 
more conducive to their fl ourishing.
The ideals that educators pursue will always play a role in education, 
even if educators do not intentionally aim for children to adopt these. This 
is because ideals infl uence the way in which educators act, and this obviously has an effect on children. For instance, parents or teachers who aspire 
to be trustworthy or honest will try to act accordingly and will praise children if they do the same, or correct them if they do not.
The distinction between content-ideals and ideal aims might seem a 
purely analytic one, for we might ask if content-ideals are not simply an 
aspect of ideal aims. For example, we could interpret the active membership of an organization that challenges unjust situations in the world as a 
content-ideal, but also as an aspect of the ideal aim that children become 
After All, How Small is the World? 55
good global citizens. However, it is useful to distinguish between these, 
because while there is a necessary relation between ideal aims and contentideals, this relation is not suffi cient. Parents and teachers with different 
ideal aims can have the same content-ideals. For instance, both educators 
who strive for autonomy, as well as parents who hope that their child will 
become a devout and committed Christian, may wish to instill in their children the ideal of a just world. Likewise, parents and teachers who share the 
same ideal aim can have different content-ideals.
Third, there are ideal ways in which parents and teachers raise and educate children. What is considered an ideal way of educating children needs 
to cohere with the ideal aims. For instance, if educators pursue the ideal of 
autonomy, the way they raise and educate children will include the ideals of 
freedom, critical thinking, open-mindedness, courage, and honesty. However, if they were to use methods of indoctrination to ensure that children 
will adopt the ideals that they value themselves, they would undermine 
those ideal aims.
A clear example of the coherence of ideals can be found in William 
Hare’s What Makes a Good Teacher (1993). Hare has defended the ideal 
of open-mindedness in several publications.2
 In his 1993 book, he argues 
that good teachers should be humble, courageous, impartial, open-minded, 
empathic, enthusiastic, and able to think critically and use their creative 
imagination. These qualities of good teachers are characteristic for being 
open-minded, which means that Hare portrays a good teacher as a person 
who models this ideal to her pupils and pursues this ideal herself.
Although there are different views about what is excellent and therefore 
of what diverse educational ideal aims consist, some aims of education can 
be called ideals for all because they are an excellence for all. This claim, 
however, is feasible only if the ideals are relatively abstract and open to subjective interpretations. Children need to develop their own interpretation 
of the excellence because only then will they attach high value to it, and 
thereby the excellent value can become their ideal too.
In my view there are two ideal educational aims for all: Human fl ourishing and being a moral person. The ideal of human fl ourishing I defend 
is an abstract and formal educational ideal that has objective as well as 
subjective aspects. Although there are strict or pure objective and subjective well-being theories in both philosophy and psychology, the theories 
that have most credibility acknowledge the importance of both (see also 
Griffi n 1986).
The following examples illustrate that many theorists who position 
themselves primarily in one tradition also acknowledge the importance of 
some aspects of the other.
With regard to the objective theories, Kraut argues that
They [objectivists] might believe that for each of us there is a large class 
of ideal lives, and that to be happy we have to come reasonably close to 
56 Doret de Ruyter
one of those lives. And an objectivist can also say that different types 
of individuals have different capacities, so that what is ideal for one 
person may not be ideal for another. (Kraut 1979, 181).
Meanwhile, the self-determination theory of psychologists Ryan and Deci 
maintains that there are three innate psychological needs which are functionally required for the fl ourishing of a person (Ryan and Deci 2000; Reis 
et al. 2000, 420): the need for autonomy, the need for competency, and 
the need for being related. However, while these needs are universal, they 
argue that the way in which they are met is dependent on personal, societal, 
and cultural circumstances. Thus, a subjective fulfi llment of objective and 
universal goods allows people to fl ourish.
In subjective theories on well-being or happiness we also recognize ideas 
of the objective well-being theories. For instance, the subjective well-being 
theory (SWB) in psychology claims that there are three components to subjective well-being including a cognitive component about satisfaction in 
life and two affective components, the presence of positive affect and the 
absence of negative affect (Diener, Suh, and Oishi 1997; Diener, Suh, Lucas, 
and Smith 1999). Diener, the most important defender of SWB, argues, 
however, that feelings of happiness or life satisfaction are not suffi cient for 
well-being (Diener and Scollon 2003). He claims research has shown that 
while happiness is an important value, it is not the most important for all, 
nor is it the only important value. His studies also demonstrate that persons 
believe happiness to be of value if they experience positive emotions related 
to the satisfaction of desires that are important to them. In other words, 
mere feelings of pleasure are not suffi cient.
Based on these two theories, I suggest that persons are able to fl ourish if 
they can give their own interpretation to the objective goods and develop 
as optimally as possible, and if the resulting life satisfi es them. It is clear 
that the objective goods of health, having relationships, autonomy, creativity, and intellectual development are general in character. This not only 
allows but actually necessitates that persons give their own interpretation 
to those goods. Under this conception of fl ourishing, subjective elements 
are imported into an objective theory: fulfi lling the goods in an optimal 
way is necessary for the fl ourishing of people, but they will only do so if 
this fulfi llment is satisfactory to them.
The second educational ideal that is ideal for all is that children develop 
into moral persons. Similar to the ideal of human fl ourishing, this ideal 
needs to be general as well as abstract. It should not be phrased more concretely because there are different views on which excellences are characteristic for a moral person. While some believe that justice is the highest 
ideal a moral person should pursue, others defend the ideal of care. While 
some claim that a moral person ideally fulfi lls all her duties, others perceive 
a moral person in terms of her virtues. In my ideal conception of human 
fl ourishing, being morally good is part of what human fl ourishing involves. 
After All, How Small is the World? 57
Although some theories maintain that a person can fl ourish without being 
moral or even while being immoral (for instance, see Becker 1992, 26), we 
would not call this an ‘ideal’ of human fl ourishing; we would not say that 
it is excellent to fl ourish in a way that does not take into account the fl ourishing of others too. However, to leave no room for the idea that I would 
suggest that education should aim for the fulfi llment of prudent interests of 
children only, I present moral goodness as a separate educational ideal aim 
in addition to human fl ourishing.
The two ideal aims also lead to a proposal about the content ideals, 
because educating children to become fl ourishing adults who are morally 
good has implications for what is being educated. First, objective goods 
need to be part of the children’s upbringing, and of their family life. In 
other words, parents need to introduce children to objective goods. They 
also need to have found satisfying interpretations of these goods themselves. These interpretations are the ones they live by and share with their 
children. Second, ideals need to be part of education. The reason for this 
claim is based on Joseph Raz’s social dependence thesis (2003).
One of the central claims of Raz’s thesis is that different practices 
bring about diverse values. And these values may continue to exist even 
when the originating practices have changed. The practices, however, are 
not a uniform whole, but consist of practice ‘genres,’ which Raz characterizes as follows: “The concept of a genre or a kind of value combines 
two features: it defi nes which objects belong to it, and in doing so it 
determines that the value of the object is to be assessed (inter alia) by its 
relations to the defi ning standards of the genre” (2003, 39). Thus, while 
the social dependence thesis leads to value pluralism—i.e., that there are 
diverse as well as incompatible values—it does not imply relativism. The 
ground for saying that an action or object is good is relative to a particular genre, but this verdict is absolute within the genre. Thus a piece of 
art or a social arrangement can be judged by criteria that belong to the 
respective genre. For instance, Michelangelo’s paintings in the Sistine 
Chapel are exquisite examples of mannerism, while Rothko’s work is 
an excellent illustration of abstract expressionism. Both are good in the 
absolute sense, yet they are good in different ways. This allows us to say 
without contradiction that works of art or social arrangements, though 
completely different, are both good.
Parents and teachers need to teach their children the standards of the 
particular genres because this enables children to become good judges of 
values themselves. More importantly, it provides a valuable interpretation 
of the goods that are conducive to their well-being. Which genre within 
the objective goods will be good for children is something they have to discover for themselves, but what makes their actions within this genre good is 
something that educators can teach them. If someone knows what the best 
within a genre is, that person is able to evaluate current as well as future 
or alternative practices against these supreme standards. Ideas or images of 
58 Doret de Ruyter
a trustworthy friend, a reliable colleague, a harmonious family, or a just 
society can function as regulative ideals.
They can assist people in evaluating what they should do, what they 
should change or continue doing in order to achieve these ideal standards. 
These examples illustrate that the interpretation one gives to an objective 
good is not morally indifferent; on the contrary, they are often moral in 
character and therefore part of what it means to be a moral person.
Finally, the two ideal aims infl uence the ideal way of educating children. 
First, educators need to assist children in developing their ability to refl ect 
on the interpretations of the objective goods, so they may discover which 
interpretation will be satisfying to them. In other words, the way in which 
parents and teachers educate children should be characterized by openmindedness and critical refl ection. These qualities are not only of instrumental value to the fl ourishing of children, they are equally important for 
the development of children into moral persons. Second, parents have to 
give their older children the freedom to discover which interpretation of the 
objective good is right for them, for what parents think is good for their 
children may not be the right interpretation of the good for them. Alternatively put: children need to have an open future in which they can discover 
what it is that contributes to their fl ourishing (Feinberg 1980).
IDEALS AND THEIR PURSUIT
I have already said that the pursuit of ideals can be detrimental both to 
oneself and to others. While I argued that persons will pursue the realization of their ideals, this does not mean that there is necessarily a causal 
relationship between the content of ideals and the way in which they are 
being pursued. Of course, we expect consistency between a person’s ideals 
and her behavior. For instance, if I aspire to be an honest person but regularly tell white lies, then the sincerity of my claims to have this ideal should 
be questioned. However, as philosophers like Berlin and Emmet (as well 
as the psychologist Baumeister) have argued, good ideals can lead to evil. 
Precisely because persons attach such high value to their ideals, there is the 
possibility that they will strive to achieve their ideals in every possible way. 
Ideals can then become more valuable than other human beings: a person 
might not hesitate to sacrifi ce a few people for the sake of achieving her 
conception of the Good.
The threat of pursuing ideals in ways that are detrimental to others 
seems to be particularly prevalent when the two following conditions are 
combined: when people believe the ideal to be realizable and when the ideal 
concerns an ideal society. If it is believed that the best society can actually be established because people have a concrete picture—what Dorothy 
Emmett (1994) calls a ‘blueprint’ of such a society—they may well aim to 
create this ideal society at whatever cost. These costs could possibly include 
After All, How Small is the World? 59
the extermination of those who do not believe in the ideal, or the suppression of those with ways of life that do not cohere with the ideal society.
This observation may explain why the most vehement arguments against 
the pursuit of ideals are about utopias built on a single ideal or a coherent 
group of ideals. Berlin, for instance, focuses on worldviews that consist 
of one ideal. This ideal is that “all genuine questions must have one true 
answer and one only,” that “there must be a dependable path toward the 
discovery of these results,” and that “the true answers must necessarily be 
compatible with one another and form a single whole” (1990 5,6). Even 
though this ideal is conceptually incoherent, its believers continue pursuing 
the true answer because they tend to be blinded by their conviction and 
therefore do not see that they are mistaken, and by doing so, they can create 
situations with horrifi c outcomes. In his Agnelli lecture, Berlin proclaims 
that “the possibility of a fi nal solution turns out to be an illusion; and a 
very dangerous one. For if one really believes that such a solution is possible, then surely no cost would be too high to obtain it . . .” (ibid., 15).
It would be wrong to deny, therefore, that there are dangers related to 
pursuing one’s ideals. This acknowledgement has implications for a proposal for global citizenship too, because conceptions of the ideal kind of 
citizen and the ideal kind of society are interrelated. Views on what counts 
as an ideal society also indicate what is characteristic for an ideal citizen; 
and conversely, a conception of an ideal citizen also informs how we think 
of an ideal society. For instance, defi ning the ideal global citizen as a good 
Muslim or Christian implies that one believes that a global Muslim or 
Christian world is ideal and vice versa. The main implication of avoiding 
the detrimental effects mentioned in this section is to develop a conception 
of global citizenship that is neither concrete nor precise. The reasons are the 
same as above: a blueprint of a good global citizen could lead to the conviction that it is possible to actually establish the particular global society of 
which one is supposed to be a good citizen.
Global Citizenship
Citizenship is regarded as a moral concept; it concerns the way in which citizens are expected to act toward each other and the state. This means that 
being a global citizen is morally qualifi ed as well—referring here to the way 
in which inhabitants of the world have to interact or take responsibility for 
the world in which they live. Thus, global citizenship has to be regarded as 
an aspect of being a morally good person. This also means that global citizenship qualifi es as an educational ideal aim because being morally good, 
in my view, is one of the two educational ideal aims that should be pursued 
for all. The educational aim of human fl ourishing also infl uences the way 
in which we have to conceptualize global citizenship, for this is equally an 
educational ideal aim for all. This leads to the following consequence: The 
ideal of global citizenship needs to be conceptualized in a way that allows 
60 Doret de Ruyter
for different subjective interpretations of this ideal. In other words, it has to 
have a general and abstract character allowing individuals to give their own 
specifi c content to the ideal, although this content has to be restricted by 
the moral imperatives that are equally characteristic for a global citizen.
Following these two ideals, I propose that global citizens should be 
able to identify with fellow human beings around the world, and that 
they should be interested in the ways in which others aim to fl ourish, 
particularly with regard to what other peoples or individuals perceive to 
be the ideals of the genres of the objective goods. This leads to a conception of global citizenship that consists of two aspects. First, global citizens have a moral political duty to respect the rights of other people to 
live their lives as they want to. Second, they ought to have both a moral 
and self-regarding disposition to be interested in the way other people 
fl ourish. The conceptualization of global citizenship that I am outlining 
here corresponds with two strands that Appiah believes to be characteristic of cosmopolitanism:
One is the idea that we have obligations to others, obligations that 
stretch beyond those to whom we are related by the ties of kith and 
kind, or even the more formal ties of a shared citizenship. The other is 
that we take seriously the value not just of human life but of particular 
human lives, which means taking an interest in the practices and beliefs (italics DJR) that lend them signifi cance. (Appiah 2006, xv)
The fi rst characteristic of global citizens is that they adhere to public rules 
in at least a minimally moral and political sense: They have to respect the 
rights of other people to live according to their own world view or culture, 
unless their way of life inhibits the rights of others to do the same. Thus, a 
global citizen should have the moral political capacity to respect the freedom of people around the world to pursue their fl ourishing in the way 
that is satisfying to them. This ability is exclusively moral in character and 
therefore resides completely under the ideal educational aim of becoming a 
good moral person.
Sypnowich (2005) has developed an interesting conception of global 
citizenship in relation to human fl ourishing. In her view, the imperative of 
global citizenship has to be related to the fl ourishing of all people on earth, 
not to the fl ourishing of the individual (e.g., 2006, 65). In other words, 
global citizenship is not defended as an aspect of personal fl ourishing, but 
as an aspect of the moral responsibility to improve the fl ourishing of others. 
Sypnowich acknowledges that grounding it in the fl ourishing of all people 
on earth leads to a very demanding conception of global citizenship, most 
particularly with regard to the redistribution of wealth. Clearly, it would 
generate the imperative for people in the First World to donate part of their 
wealth to the Third World. The consequence of a human-fl ourishing concept of moral worldliness—as she phrases it—requires, in her terms
After All, How Small is the World? 61
the imperative to provide aid wherever it is needed, regardless of borders or territory. Moreover, insofar as we are concerned that people 
fl ourish not just in terms of bodily health, but also in the cosmopolitan’s criterion of cultural well being, with scope for human interaction, 
music, art, and enjoyment of nature, it would seem that the bar for 
global redistribution is very high indeed. (Sypnowich 2005, 69)
In my own view, this bar is too high if it does not take into account the 
fl ourishing of the individuals themselves. Because Sypnowich focuses too 
much on the moral imperatives of global citizenship, there is a danger that 
the other ideal educational aim, personal human fl ourishing, is neglected.
My conception of the duty to respect the rights of others is clearly a more 
minimal interpretation of the moral obligations that arise out of global citizenship than Sypnowich proposes. Whereas the obligation I propose here 
is a negative duty, Sypnowich’s views entail a positive duty. It could be 
objected, therefore, that my conception is too minimalist an interpretation 
of what it means to be a good moral person. This objection would be apposite if this were the only characteristic of a global citizen.
However, being interested in the way other people fl ourish, which is 
the second characteristic of global citizens, encompasses obligations that 
are not minimal in character. The fact that global citizens are obligated to 
be interested in the lives and the fl ourishing of other people beyond their 
own circle—in other words, that they have an expanded circle of sympathy 
(Rosenblum 1998)—leads to a more than minimal interpretation of their 
moral capacities: that is, global citizens should have the disposition to contribute to the factors3
 that enable other people to fl ourish. At this point, one 
may wonder if Sypnowich’s and my proposal are as distinct as I suggested. 
I think that there are actually two differences.
First, the way in which global citizens encounter other cultures not only 
requires that they approach them with respect and open-mindedness (in 
other words, that they are not prejudiced), but also that they evaluate the 
practices they encounter from an ethical perspective. World citizens should 
be able to appreciate cultural artifacts for their aesthetic, cultural, or religious value, and rites of passage for their social value. At the same time, 
however, they should be able to evaluate the accompanying cultural practices and be highly critical of the political and moral circumstances of the 
countries they visit or live in. For instance, one can be in awe of the beauty 
and grandeur of Mayan temples but also abhor the practice of offering 
people to the gods. Likewise, while there may be good reasons for valuing 
the tribal practice of hunting because those tribes live on the animals they 
have caught, it is diffi cult to value the same practice if it is done merely for 
the sake of pleasure or an archaic tradition, like in Britain.
The second difference is that, in my view, being interested in the ways 
in which other people fl ourish has self-regarding characteristics as well. 
It is not only morally good to want to learn about other ways of life, but 
62 Doret de Ruyter
becoming culturally knowledgeable is also valuable for the fl ourishing of 
the individuals themselves. Cultures generate different forms of artifacts 
and practices in music, literature, science, and technology. They also generate different kinds of social practices, such as ways in which children are 
raised, ways in which adults interact, or what they regard as appropriate 
dress, eating habits, etc. Understanding other ways of life enriches one’s 
knowledge of alternative ideals within different genres. This, in turn, allows 
one to discover other ways of fl ourishing than the ways found within one’s 
own culture.
The thesis of Joseph Raz that I introduced previously in this article (the 
view that social practices can be distinguished into genres) is relevant for 
the knowledge and understanding of the global citizen, too. In my view, 
a world citizen is able to recognize a great variety of genres and judge an 
artifact or practice in relation to the ideals of that genre. As Appiah has it:
Because you respond, with the instinct of a cosmopolitan, to the value 
of elegance of verbal expression, you take pleasure in Akan proverbs, 
Oscar Wilde’s plays, Basho’s haiku verses, Nietzsche’s philosophy. Your 
respect for wit doesn’t just lead you to these works: it shapes how you 
respond to them. (Appiah 2006, 26)
Thus, being a world citizen may contribute to a person’s fl ourishing 
because of her increased insights into a variety of cultures and the satisfaction she gets out of these encounters. Her knowledge of a wider range of 
genres may be benefi cial in discovering which genre enables her to fl ourish, 
and the ideals that correspond to the genres may assist her to do so in an 
excellent way.
Now that I have developed a conception of global citizenship that can 
be defended as an educational ideal, I need to address the question whether 
or not the pursuit of this ideal could be detrimental to others. Is it possible 
to realize the global society that mirrors my conception of a global citizen 
by suppression of alternative views on the ideal society or repression of the 
defenders of the alternatives?
The ideal society that corresponds to my conception of global citizenship is a liberal democracy. I have already defended the idea that a liberal 
democracy offers the best possibilities for people to fl ourish (De Ruyter 
2006; 2007). In such a society the state does not impose a particular conception of the good on its citizens; citizens are free to live their private lives 
as they want to. Precisely because people are able to fl ourish if they can 
lead their lives according to an interpretation of the objective goods that is 
satisfactory to them, it is crucial that they have the freedom to do so4.
In Moral Education and the Democratic Ideal (1989), Israel Scheffl er 
describes the consequences for an education committed to the ideal of 
democracy. A democratic society requires citizens who are able and willing 
to make reasoned choices. This means that “[T]o choose the democratic 
After All, How Small is the World? 63
ideal for society is wholly to reject the conception of education as an instrument of rule; it is to surrender the idea of shaping or molding the mind of 
the pupil” (1989, 139). In requiring that social policy be subject to open 
and public review, the democratic ideal rejects the rule of dogma and of 
arbitrary authority as the ultimate arbiter of social conduct. As Scheffl er 
has it, to cultivate the trait of reasonableness is to liberate the mind from 
dogmatic adherence to ideological fashions, as well as from the dictates of 
authority. This implies that such an ideal can never be imposed or forced 
upon societies by an absolute authority or upon children by indoctrination. 
Moreover, if citizens subscribe to the democratic ideal and contribute to its 
realization, fanaticism and absolutism become impossible options for them 
because the ideal excludes these practices by defi nition.
Furthermore, the actualization of an ideal liberal democracy seems 
impossible, on a societal as well as a global level. Although societies have 
developed in the direction of the ideal, the ideal itself will never be achieved. 
The ideal is too good to be true; it is likely that there will always be aspects 
of the liberal democracy that can be improved. Moreover, governments 
and citizens can be mistaken. This requires that citizens be stimulated to 
use their critical capacity to evaluate the state as well as the world they live 
in. In other words, the ideal of a liberal democracy functions as a regulative ideal, i.e., an ideal that that sets a direction for a practice and prevents 
citizens from settling for surrogates (Emmet 1994, 2, 17).
However, even if people were to believe that this ideal could be realized, the ideal would not lead to the detrimental effects for others. As I 
have claimed, liberal democracies cannot be established by suppression. 
Moreover, it does not seem feasible to provide a blueprint of an ideal liberal 
democratic society. Although it is possible to describe its general characteristics and the principles that must prevail in such a society, spelling out 
what it looks like concretely and saying precisely what the ideal balance 
would be between the principles of freedom, equality, and fraternity, seems 
an elusive goal.
Thus, a global citizen defi ned as a person who respects the rights of others to live their life as they want to5
 and who is interested in the ways other 
people fl ourish is, in my view, an ideal aim of education.
IS GLOBAL CITIZENSHIP AN EDUCATIONAL IDEAL FOR ALL?
Global citizenship has universal characteristics because it has to encompass 
citizens around the entire globe, but is it also a universal ideal? My arguments lead me to the conclusion that it is. Nevertheless, it is not rational for 
everyone to pursue it. Whether or not it is sensible for individuals to pursue 
this ideal very much depends on the circumstances they live in.
Inglehart (2000), on the basis of the outcomes of three World Values Surveys (WVS), concludes that there is a positive relation between the economic 
64 Doret de Ruyter
level of a society and the prevalence of postmaterialist6
 and postmodern values.7
 When a country’s wealth increases, its inhabitants no longer have to 
concentrate on their own survival, but can begin to look at fulfi lling other 
needs. In line with Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, the WVS provides evidence 
that in societies in which people do not have to live in hunger or economic 
insecurity, there is “a gradual shift in which needs for belonging, self-expression, and a participant role in society became more prominent” (Inglehart 
2000, 221). The WVS also show that “postmodern values give priority to 
environmental and cultural issues, even when these goals confl ict with maximizing economic growth” (Inglehart 2000, 223). It is obvious that only the 
citizens of affl uent countries can afford such a stance.
Global citizenship should be interpreted as one of the higher-level postmaterialist values, which means that it is currently untenable that the majority of the world’s inhabitants ought to pursue this ideal. It is a vacuous ideal 
for those who are not able to attend to their basic material needs. This does 
not mean, however, that we should reject the universal validity of such an 
ideal. On the contrary, it suggests that there is an additional ideal, namely 
that everyone should be in the position to become a global citizen. This 
brings us back to my brief discussion of Sypnowich. I want to reiterate that 
being a global citizen does not require that one become a moral hero who 
verges on the brink of denying her own interests. As Wolf has convincingly 
argued, “moral perfection in the sense of moral saintliness, does not constitute a model of personal well-being toward which it would be particularly 
rational or good or desirable for a human being to strive” (1982, 419). A 
global citizen should also take into account her own fl ourishing. An ideal 
global citizen is able to fi nd a balance between her moral obligation to look 
after other citizens in the world as well as her right to look after herself.
NOTES
 1. According to Rescher ideals are fl awless excellences, i.e., perfect values, 
which are unrealizable “in this imperfect, sublunary dispensation” (Rescher 
1987, 115). He acknowledges that we also have images of something that is 
“as perfect as we can realistically expect to fi nd” (ibid., 116), but he calls 
these, slightly disparagingly, mini-ideals.
 2. See for instance W. Hare, Open-mindedness and Education (Montreal: 
McGill-Queens University Press, 1979) and W. Hare, In Defence of Openmindedness (Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press, 1985).
 3. This would encompass both economic factors (such as suffi cient income 
and appropriate living conditions) as well as moral/political factors (such 
as freedom).
 4. The state is not completely neutral, because it has responsibility to protect 
the freedom of all citizens. Therefore it needs to place limits on the acceptability of positions and the way in which they are pursued (for instance, see 
for instance De Jong and Snik, 2002).
 5. The respect of the global citizen will, however, be ‘limited to’ those whose 
way of life recognizes the rights of others to do the same.
After All, How Small is the World? 65
 6. ‘Postmaterialist values’ refer to values that gain importance for a person once 
her economic situation is relatively secure. If one lives under dire economic 
circumstances, one is likely to attach importance to materialist values, such 
as food or shelter.
 7. As Inglehart has it, “Postmodern values emphasize self-expression instead of 
deference to authority and are tolerant of other groups and even regard exotic 
things and cultural diversity as stimulating and interesting, not threatening” 
(2000, 223). For example, in a postmodern society sexual norms change 
from being geared to encouraging reproduction to individual sexual gratifi -
cation and individual self-expression.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Appiah, K.A. Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers. London: W.W. 
Norton, 2006.
Baumeister, R. Evil: Inside Human Cruelty and Violence. New York: W.H. Freeman, 1997.
Becker, L.C. “Good Lives: Prolegomena.” In The Good life and the Human Good, 
eds. E. Frankel Paul, F.D. Miller, and J. Paul, 15–37. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1992.
Berlin, I. “The Pursuit of the Ideal.” In The Crooked Timber of Humanity: 
Chapters in the History of Ideas, ed. H. Hardy, 1–19. London: John Murray, 
1990.
Brighouse, H. “Channel One, the Anti-Commercial Principle, and the Discontinuous Ethos.” Educational Policy 19, no. 3 (2005): 528–550.
De Jong, J. and G. Snik. “Why Should States Fund Denominational Schools?” 
Journal of Philosophy of Education 36, no. 4 (2002): 573–587.
De Ruyter, D.J. “Whose Utopia? Which Ideals? The Importance of Societal and 
Personal Ideals in Education.” In Edutopias: New Utopian Thinking in Education, eds. M.A. Peters and J. Freeman-Moir, 163–174. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers, 2006.
 . “Ideals, Education and Happy Flourishing.” Educational Theory, 57, no. 
1 (2007): 23–35.
Diener, E., E.M. Suh, and S. Oishi. “Recent Findings on Subjective Wellbeing.” Indian Journal of Clinical Psychology, 1997. http:// www.psych.uiuc.
edu/~ediner/hottopic/ paper1.html (accessed 12 December 2006).
Diener, E., E.M. Suh, R.E. Lucas, and H.L. Smith. “Subjective Well-being: Three 
Decades of Progress.” Psychological Bulletin 125, no. 22 (1999): 276–302.
Diener, E. and C. Scollon. “Subjective Well-Being is Desirable, But Not the Summum Bonum.” Paper delivered at the University of Minnesota “Interdisciplinary 
Workshop on Well-being,” Minneapolis, MN, 23–25 October 2003. http://www.
tc.umn.edu/~tiberius/workshop_papers/Diener.pdf (accessed 13 December 2006).
Emmet, D. The Role of the Unrealisable: A Study in Regulative Ideals. New York: 
St. Martin’s Press, 1994.
Feinberg, J. “The Child’s Right to An Open Future.” In Whose Child? Children’s 
Rights, Parental Authority and State Power, eds. W. Aiken and H. LaFollette, 
124–153. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefi eld.
Griffi n, J. Well-being: Its meaning, Measurement and Moral Importance. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1986.
Hare, W. Open-mindedness and Education. Montreal: McGill-Queens University 
Press, 1979.
 . In Defence of Open-mindedness. Montreal: McGill-Queens University 
Press, 1985.
66 Doret de Ruyter
 . What Makes a Good Teacher: Refl ections on Some Characteristics Central to the Educational Enterprise. London, Ontario: Althouse Press, 1993. 
Inglehart, R. “Globalization and Postmodern Values.” The Washington Quarterly 
23, no. 1 (2000): 215–228.
Kraut, R. “Two Conceptions of Happiness.” The Philosophical Review 88, no. 2 
(1979): 167–197.
Rawls, J. Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993.
Raz, J. The Practice of Value. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Reis, H.T., K.M. Sheldon, S.L. Gable, J. Roscoe, and R.M. Ryan. “Daily WellBeing: The Role of Autonomy, Competence and Relatedness.” Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin 26, no. 4 (2000): 419–435.
Rescher, N. Ethical Idealism: An Inquiry Into the Nature and Function of Ideals. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987.
Rosenblum, N. Membership & Morals: The Personal Uses of Pluralism in America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998.
Ryan, R.M. and E.L. Deci. “Self-determination Theory and the Facilitation Of 
Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and Well-being.” American Psychologist 55, no. 1 (2000): 68–78.
Scheffl er, I. “Moral Education and the Democratic Ideal”. in Reason and Teaching, 
I. Scheffl er, 136–148. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 1989.
Sypnowich, C. “Cosmpolitans, Cosmopolitanism and Human Flourishing.” In 
The Political Philosophy of Cosmopolitanism, eds. G. Brock and H. Brighouse, 
55–74. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Wolf, S. “Moral Saints.” The Journal of Philosophy 79, no. 8 (1982): 419–439.
5 Education for Global Citizenship 
and Survival
Randall Curren
The idea of global citizenship suggests a norm of global goodwill or disposition to promote the well-being of others everywhere, present and future, 
at least to the extent of respecting the requirements of global justice or fair 
terms of global cooperation. Although the requirements of global justice 
have not been institutionalized and are still unclear in theory, the global 
reach and impact of individual actions through economic relations, pollution that damages health and food sources (Connor 2007; Shrader-Frechette 
2007, 15ff.; Dodds 2008, 3, 48–62), and climate disruption that already 
causes an estimated 150,000 deaths each year (WHO 2007), makes the 
institutionalization of these requirements a moral and practical necessity.1
Morally, we owe it to each other to discuss the ways our actions impair 
each other’s interests, and to settle what will and will not be recognized as 
wrongful violations of those interests. Practically, there are no unilateral or 
regional solutions to global problems of climate disruption and unsustainable aggregate burdens on resources and ecosystems. Globally coordinated 
action to address these problems is urgently needed, and it is inconceivable 
that such action will occur except on the basis of global agreements that are 
mutually advantageous, if not ideally just.
In this context, the contours of global citizenship might be sketched in light 
of an unrealized ideal of global justice, and education for global justice might 
be defi ned parasitically as the education that is most suitable to nurturing 
citizenship so conceived. An exercise in ideal theory of this sort might have 
some merit, but the case for instituting such education would be limited by 
the quality of argument for the ideal. A more serviceable approach would be 
to conceive of education for global citizenship as educationally preparatory 
to a just and sustainable world order whose institutional and legal framework is not yet known. It should be predicated on the desirability of universal 
goodwill and willingness to accept fair terms of cooperation, but it should 
not attempt to defi ne what those terms of cooperation will be. It should also 
refl ect what is understood of the nature of the hazards to be confronted, and 
it should aim to enable those being educated to survive and fl ourish in the 
face of those hazards, in part by contributing to the transparency of whatever 
terms of cooperation may be proposed and debated. This is the approach I will 
68 Randall Curren
adopt. I will focus on the matters of sustainability and survival that provide 
the most morally and practically compelling case for global cooperation. I will 
argue that our circumstances require an unprecedented degree of global educational provision, coordination, and reform, and I will outline a ‘curriculum 
of survival’ conceived with the US in mind, but adaptable to other settings. 
To ground this, I will outline the challenges we face and offer a principled 
defense of a universal education for survival, by which I mean both individual 
survival and the survival of culturally diverse, intergenerational communities. 
I will then outline a set of educational proposals. Finally, I will consider the 
signifi cance of these ideas for the philosophy of education and identify some 
precedent for them in its history.
HUMANITY IN EXTREMIS
Even now, at a time of openly declared ‘global food crisis,’ tightening oil 
supplies, and growing public concern about global warming, the most 
fundamental aspects of the emerging global sustainability crisis are not 
widely appreciated. This is not surprising because our everyday experience, 
especially in the prosperous enclaves of the North, provides little insight 
into the larger patterns and appalling environmental costs of steeply rising global populations and rising intensity of per capita resource use. The 
human population doubled to two billion between 1800 and 1950, tripled 
between 1950 and 2000 from two billion to over six billion, and is currently rising by more than 200,000 people per day. On a fi nite planet this 
obviously cannot continue indefi nitely, and the longer it does continue, the 
greater the risk will be of a catastrophic population collapse.2
 Yet, with 
global average fertility rates at 2.8 live births per woman, and not expected 
to reach replacement fertility (2.06) until 2050, the world’s population will 
continue to grow until 2100 unless pandemics, widespread drought, or 
something else intervenes (Dodds 2008, 12–16). Average per capita energy 
use has meanwhile increased more than tenfold since 1800, from less than 
half a metric ton of oil equivalent per year to about fi ve, and individual 
water use has nearly quadrupled in that time (ibid., 19–20).
One product of this population growth and rising average material consumption has been a tripling of the human ecological ‘footprint’ or demand 
on natural systems between 1961 and 2003. The World Wildlife Fund’s Living Planet Report 2006 estimated human demand on the biosphere at 125 
percent of carrying capacity, or 25 percent beyond what is sustainable, having crossed the threshold of unsustainability in the mid-1980s (WWF 2006). 
Carrying capacity cannot be long exceeded without causing long-term or 
permanent destruction of that capacity, and the report projects that
[a] moderate business-as-usual scenario, based on United Nations projections showing slow, steady growth of economies and populations, 
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 69
suggests that by mid-century, humanity’s demand on nature will be 
twice the biosphere’s productive capacity. At this level of ecological 
defi cit, exhaustion of ecological assets and large-scale ecosystem collapse become increasingly likely. (WWF 2006, 2–3)
Another recent analysis projects a 33 percent increase in humanity’s footprint in just a decade (Dietz et al. 2007), or a trajectory not unlike the 
WWF’s. In stark numbers, world population, currently 6.7 billion, is projected to reach 9.3 billion by mid-century, at which point human demands 
on nature might be double what is sustainable. At the higher living standards assumed by the UN, we might be faced with being able to sustain a 
population of about 4.6 billion or about 2 billion below the current number. 
At today’s standards, 5.2 billion might be feasible. Both numbers assume, 
of course, that the ecological damage that is occurring does not result in 
long-term loss of carrying capacity.
The 2005 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA), a comprehensive set 
of reports sponsored by the UN Foundation, coauthored by 1,350 scientists 
from ninety-fi ve countries and twenty-two national academies of science, 
is consistent with this in fi nding that 60 percent of the world’s ecosystems 
are being “degraded or used unsustainably” (UN Foundation 2005). Walt 
Reid, the MA’s lead author, has noted in interviews that local and regional 
ecosystem collapses are already occurring, and we are “putting such strain 
on the natural functions of Earth that the ability of the planet’s ecosystems 
to sustain future generations can no longer be taken for granted.”3
 There 
have been very few mass-extinction events in the past billion years, but 
human beings are in the process of causing one now. About one-quarter 
of land mammals, one-third of freshwater fi shes, one-third of amphibians, 
and 70 percent of all plants are at risk of extinction. As many as 300,000 
species have become extinct since 1950, and the majority of the ten million 
or so remaining will probably be destroyed in our lifetimes (Dodds 2008, 
42, 70–77). Whether or not one regards this as morally horrifi c in itself, it 
is a measure of the hazards to which humanity is subjecting itself.
Many specifi c aspects of the unsustainability of our collective existence 
could be mentioned, but energy, water, and climate disruption are pivotal. 
Global per capita grain yields have been declining steadily since the mid1980s and are critically dependent upon fertilizer, pesticides, herbicides, 
and fuel, which are mostly derived from oil and natural gas. World oil 
reserves will soon peak and begin to decline, if they have not already done 
so, and we can expect that decline to accelerate, yielding prices high enough 
to keep demand in equilibrium with declining supplies. There is no ready 
substitute for the twenty-fi ve billion barrels of oil being consumed each 
year, and the process of shifting from an oil-based economy to one based 
on other energy sources will be long and energy intensive. Looking a little 
further down the road, the fossil fuel age will be spent by the end of this 
century whether or not effective policies to combat global warming are 
70 Randall Curren
enacted: natural gas supplies are not many years beyond oil in peaking, and 
coal, though abundant by volume, is a far less concentrated energy source 
than oil (Goodstein 2004). A focus on the energy yields (energy return on 
energy invested) of different technologies would counsel the abandonment 
of biofuels, as well as a preference for wind power over nuclear.4
 The most 
prudent course will likely involve a rapid conversion to renewable energy 
sources, but “Surviving [this transition] will of necessity require radical 
social reorganization” (Tainter, Allen and Hoekstra. 2006, 56). Because 
modern farming is very energy intensive, it is likely that food prices will rise 
sharply through the period of transition.
Problems of water availability are already becoming acute in some parts 
of the world and are getting worse as global warming contributes to drought 
conditions. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC’s) 
2007 Fourth Assessment Report confi rms a global average land temperature increase of nearly 1.8°F (1°C) since 1960, and projects increases of up 
to 4.5°F (2.5°C) by 2050 and up to 10.4°F (5.8°C) by 2100.5
 This may be 
enough to cause persistent, severe drought across much of the US and other 
parts of the world by 2050 (Kolbert 2006, 110–111), and to kill many forms 
of marine life (Dodds 2008, 45). According to James Hansen, the leading 
climatologist in the US, the rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations from the preindustrial level of 275 ppm to today’s 385 ppm is already 
enough to raise ocean levels by several meters (Hansen, 2008). Writing in 
The New York Review of Books in the fall of 2006, Bill McKibben observed 
that “Very few understand with any real depth that a wave large enough to 
break civilization is forming, and that the only real question is whether we 
can do anything at all to weaken its force” (McKibben 2006, 24).
How much higher atmospheric carbon dioxide levels could rise without 
eventuating in utter catastrophe is a matter of debate, but recent fi ndings 
suggest Earth’s climate system is more sensitive to rising levels of greenhouse gasses than previously estimated. “Compared with the original 
[climate] models of a few years ago,” writes McKibben, “ice is melting 
faster; forest soils are giving up more carbon as they warm; storms are 
increasing much more quickly in number and size. . . . methane [is] leaking from Siberian permafrost at fi ve times the predicted rate” (McKibben 
2006, 23). The IPCC’s current estimate of climate sensitivity suggests a 
stabilization target of 425 ppm is safe, though fi gures as low as 350 ppm 
are now defended (Hansen 2008). Staying within the politically canonical 
target of 450 ppm would require that emissions begin to decline now, fall 
by 65 percent globally by 2050, and be more or less eliminated by 2100 
(Athanasiou and Baer 2002, 50–62; Eilperin 2008). Lower stabilization 
targets would require even bolder steps to prevent much of the planet from 
becoming uninhabitable.
All told, it is becoming clear that in one way or another and before long 
there will be major adjustments in the ways we live, though most people 
remain even with respect to energy problems, “aware neither that there is a 
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 71
problem, nor how short is the time (viewed historically), nor how large are 
the stakes, nor how great are the uncertainties” (Tainter, Allen and Hoekstra 2006, 57). Geopolitically, events seem to be moving towards intensifying competition for shrinking basic resources, through means that include 
wars over land, water, oil, timber, and minerals.6
WHY SUSTAINABILITY PROBLEMS CALL 
FOR AN EDUCATIONAL REPONSE
I will now offer some reasons why the global circumstances I have outlined require a vigorous and global educational response. Specifi cally, I will 
argue that all children are entitled to learn about these things and be prepared to deal with them constructively, and that public institutions should 
be designed to provide such education as well as continuing education of 
this kind for all ages. The obstacles to universally providing this education 
give some indication of the urgent need for globally coordinated action. 
Most notably, there are cultural barriers to educating girls in many parts of 
the world, and there are half a million people per week being added to the 
roughly 1 billion inhabitants of urban slums, which lack not only schools 
but every other basic service and prerequisite of human dignity (Davis 2006, 
22, 126, 155).
The simplest and most compelling reason I will describe for providing 
education for global citizenship and survival is that everyone is entitled to 
it. I will offer four supporting arguments for the existence of such an entitlement. The second reason is that there are moral and prudential grounds 
for cooperating to solve the problems of sustainability and survival, and 
the desirability of cooperation makes desirable the education I am calling 
for. The third reason I will identify is that in our present circumstances, the 
education I am calling for is a prerequisite for sustaining any other reasonable educational goals we may have.
A fi rst argument for thinking everyone is entitled to an education for 
global citizenship and survival is that human beings, being born helpless 
and needy, are entitled to have their needs met and to be prepared so as to 
be able to meet their needs themselves as they mature. The opportunity to 
acquire the understanding and ability to survive and meet one’s needs in the 
world one will inhabit would seem to be a basic entitlement, to the extent 
one can be provided with that opportunity. Because we are social beings 
who must often act collectively to protect and advance our well-being, there 
is a civic aspect to this entitlement. Civic education that enables one to be 
an informed and capable participant in democratic processes is one aspect 
of a well-rounded preparation to responsibly secure the satisfaction of one’s 
needs. In the circumstances I have described, this civic education must have 
a global dimension, since the well-being of individuals everywhere will 
depend upon the quality of global cooperation. As it pertains to both the 
72 Randall Curren
conduct of one’s private affairs and one’s participation in public affairs, the 
education called for should promote ‘effective agency,’ or the development 
of not only one’s knowledge, abilities, and value orientation, but also the 
development of capacities to critically examine and improve the state of all 
three related aspects of one’s agency (Curren 2006, 465–68).
A second argument I will describe for thinking everyone is entitled to the 
education for global citizenship and survival is that it is arguably a condition of a just society that individuals not be denied substantial opportunities to live well “as an avoidable result of the design of social institutions” 
(Brighouse 2006, 18). This is a quite minimal requirement of justice, and 
certainly less demanding than a principle of fair equality of opportunity. 
It should thus be widely acceptable in societies, such as the US and UK, 
that acknowledge the importance of fair equality of opportunity. It follows 
from this principle that justice requires schools and other institutions be 
designed to enable children to meet the challenges they will face and live 
well, to the extent this is possible. This a requirement of justice that creates 
a fundamental social entitlement.
Third, one could appeal to a notion of universal human rights linked to a 
conception of the capabilities people must be able to exercise in order to live 
a life of human dignity. This version of the ‘capability approach’ provides 
a direct foundation for regarding the universal, global provision of education as a basic human right, since education is “the key to all the human 
capabilities” (Nussbaum 2006, 322). Because capabilities are understood 
as abilities to function in various ways within an institutional, economic, 
social, and physical context, the education required as a basic human right 
must be suitable to the world as it is and will be.
A fourth perspective on educational entitlements may be found in Allen 
Buchanan’s appeals to our inevitable and signifi cant epistemic reliance on others in defending liberal institutions, characterized as institutions that reduce 
prudential and moral risk by sorting truth from error and disseminating truth 
(Buchanan 2004). We all have fundamental interests, both prudential and 
moral, which are served by truth, he argues: we have an interest in truth, both 
to advance our own well-being and to avoid doing harm to others. From this 
perspective, we all have a prudential and moral interest in the existence of 
educational institutions, including but not limited to schools, and an interest in their thoroughness in disseminating the truths we most need to know 
in order to live well and without fault. Given the state of the world as I have 
described it, those truths would surely include the ones I have mentioned and 
a great deal more. This is a useful perspective, in noting the signifi cance of 
education beyond schools and emphasizing that we all have a common interest in knowing the truth—even those among us who perceive public education 
as a burden whose benefi ts fl ow exclusively to other people’s children.
I will now argue that the moral and prudential grounds for cooperating 
to solve the problems of sustainability and survival give us reasons to implement the education I am calling for.
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 73
At the beginning of this paper, I noted the global reach and impact of 
our actions, and I said that morally we owe it to each other to acknowledge 
the ways our actions impair each other’s interests, and to settle what will 
and will not be recognized as wrongful violations of those interests. From 
a Kantian moral perspective, there is indeterminacy in the content of our 
concrete rights and duties—e.g., who owns what, and how much risk it is 
morally acceptable to impose on others (Kant 1991, § 6). Because this is 
so, and because this indeterminacy can only be remedied by establishing a 
body of common law, we have in Kantian terms a moral duty to settle the 
details of our moral relations with each other—with all those with whom 
we cannot help associating or interacting—by binding ourselves by mutual 
consent under a body of common law and legislative and judicial capacity. 
In an age of global interaction involving incremental impacts on resources, 
health, and climate, this implies a moral duty to enter into a system of 
global governance with enough power to create and enforce fair terms of 
cooperation. If a world state is too fraught with tyrannical prospects, we 
can nevertheless imagine a “thin, decentralized, and yet forceful global 
public sphere,” an array of enforceable environmental, trade, and labor regulations, and various other accords and treaties that can be incorporated 
into the domestic laws of the world’s still independent countries (Nussbaum 
2006, 319–320). This would make concrete and specifi c the general moral 
duties we already owe each other, and it would almost certainly extend 
the forms of self-restraint entailed by duties not to injure others’ property 
and health, for instance by establishing equitable limits on greenhouse gas 
emissions and compensation mechanisms to alleviate some of the harms 
that are no longer preventable (Adger, Paavola, Huq and Mace 2006).
If global cooperation is thus morally compulsory, then education for 
global citizenship is required on two grounds. It is required fi rst of all 
because the facilitation of cooperation requires understanding of the value 
of cooperating; a well-informed critical capacity to guard against the strategies used by corporate front groups and others to misinform, discourage, 
and subvert cooperation; understanding of the possible institutional bases 
of cooperation, such as the United Nations; and the understanding, skills, 
abilities, and knowledge that may be needed to participate in cooperative 
arrangements. Little of the learning that could facilitate global cooperation 
is widely available to students in the US, and few have any comprehension of the extent to which their impressions of environmental matters are 
shaped by an array of well-fi nanced corporate strategies.7
A second related consideration is that education for global citizenship is 
required to secure the legitimacy of whatever terms of cooperation might be 
negotiated. Legitimacy rests on transparency, which requires understanding of what is at stake, hence a wealth of relevant education for all who may 
be directly or indirectly parties to the negotiation or subject to the terms 
of cooperation it yields—in short, everyone in the world. Legitimacy also 
requires that the terms of cooperation be imposed—that compliance be 
74 Randall Curren
obtained—as much as possible through voluntary cooperation based on a 
sound understanding of what is at stake and how the cooperative arrangements have been arrived at. Creating a semblance of a global rule of law is, 
like instituting any rule of law, an essentially educative enterprise (Curren 
2000; 2002). However far we may be from settling on fair terms of global 
cooperation, it is not too early to lay the groundwork for this to occur in a 
legitimate way.
As I have said, global cooperation to address problems of sustainability and survival is not only morally required, but prudent. Faced with the 
declining resilience and capacity of global commons—the atmospheric and 
oceanic systems—on which human life fundamentally depends, the longer 
the nations of the world approach these matters competitively and without self-imposed collective limits, the more diffi cult life will become. This 
makes it prudent, in addition to morally compulsory, to favor the cooperation whose educational requirements I have just outlined.
To the extent that this concerns climate disruption, a contrary view, 
expressed frequently and with some truth, is that there will be ‘winners’ 
and ‘losers.’ What is true is that below some threshold of warming, some 
are more vulnerable than others (Adger et al. 2006). It doesn’t follow from 
this that it would be prudent of those who currently may be less vulnerable 
to withhold the cooperation necessary to stay within that threshold. In the 
absence of effective coordinated action, there is little assurance there will 
be any ‘winners’ much longer, and even less reason to think the interests 
of the ‘winners’ of today wouldn’t be harmed enough to make cooperation 
worthwhile. A planet altered to the profound detriment of all life on it for 
hundreds of years, if not far longer, is not in the interest of anyone who feels 
any personal stake in a civilized future for humanity.
There are, to be sure, countless unresolved questions about the terms of 
the cooperation needed. Most vexing may be the tradeoffs between population size and quality of life. Faced with a status quo that allocates substantial reproductive rights through markets that will increasingly deny those 
who are poor the means to sustain the lives of any children they bear, 
one can speculate that before long it may seem fair and most humane to 
conceive of reproductive rights not as unlimited liberty rights, but as limited welfare rights.8
 What can be said within the parameters of the present 
inquiry is that the various reasons adduced in support of the education I 
am defending are all reasons to believe that everyone in the world should 
be enabled to make reproductive decisions informed by knowledge of the 
momentum and impact of unsustainable human demands. A step toward 
this, which would go a long way toward reducing fertility by promoting 
a greater capacity to exert reproductive choice, is simply universal basic 
education for girls.
To the foregoing arguments may be added the consideration that the 
curriculum called for by the circumstances of unsustainability is arguably 
a prerequisite for the prudent advancement of any other educational ends 
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 75
we might reasonably impute to schools. Whether our aim as educators is to 
enable children to lead fl ourishing lives, to facilitate the conscious reproduction of democratic communities, to preserve and transmit the best of what 
human beings have achieved, or to secure any other good whose fulfi llment 
requires an indefi nite civilized future, our educational mission requires the 
survival of a civilized world order and must take some responsibility to 
incorporate a curriculum of survival.
I suggested at the outset that global citizenship requires a willingness to 
act for the well-being of others everywhere by respecting the requirements 
of global justice or fair terms of global cooperation. I have argued that as 
a matter of individual right and institutional legitimacy, such willingness 
must rest on a rational, free, and informed understanding and acceptance 
of those terms. The prospects of reaching agreement on any such terms, 
and of securing cooperation with them, rest similarly on understanding and 
acceptance of this kind. Beyond this, cooperation and individual well-being 
will require understanding, resourcefulness, adaptability, and sacrifi ce.
A Curriculum of Survival
The curriculum that seems to be called for may be outlined as a set of nine 
recommendations.
Teach Environmental Studies More Systematically
The environmental studies curriculum should include the relevant science, the problems, the regional and global distribution of impacts, and 
the state of cooperation or noncooperation in solving the problems. It is 
important that students not just learn science, but be able to understand 
what is happening in the world around them through the methods and 
explanatory resources of science. This is a tall order, yet without such 
understanding and openness to scientifi c inquiry, science learning will 
be inert and offer little foundation for conviction about what must be 
done to solve our problems. To say that adequate education in environmental science should be supplemented with other forms of environmental education—concerning the problems, distributions of impacts, 
and state of cooperation or noncooperation—implies an extension of 
student learning and inquiry into matters that are vitally important, 
but also controversial. Students in wealthy countries will need to understand far more than most now do about poverty and the distribution of 
environmental benefi ts and burdens both globally and within their own 
countries. To understand these things, they will need to learn some very 
distressing truths about the vast resources devoted to suppressing the 
truth about pollution, environmental damage, and their enormous and 
inequitably distributed burdens on human health (Shrader-Frechette 
2002; 2007).
76 Randall Curren
Integrate This with Honest History and Prehistory
This should begin with what we know of the patterns and dynamic of societal collapse and survival (see Tainter 1988; Redman 1999; Wright 2004; 
Diamond 2005). Every child should know the story of deforestation fueled 
by status competition on Easter Island, of irrigation and ecological catastrophe in the Fertile Crescent, and the population overshoot and collapse 
of the Maya. They should understand the analytical models through which 
anthropologists, geographers, and others understand societal complexity 
and collapse, and they should understand how those models apply to their 
own world and lives.
In the spirit of UNESCO’s wide conception of ‘environmental literacy,’ 
history and social studies curricula should also address the role of competition for scarce resources in the genesis of war and genocide.9
 This is best 
accomplished through detailed case studies, including some that provide 
background for ongoing confl ict, most obviously in the Middle East. In the 
United States, textbook adoption practices in the largest states, Texas and 
California, yield school books that are notoriously devoid of ‘controversial’ 
content, no matter how well-established on the evidence that content may 
be.10 We are thus not likely to see many legislatively adopted texts in the 
near future that deal honestly with the role of water rights in the Israeli–
Palestinian confl ict, or US and British oil interests in the political history 
of the Middle East. It is nevertheless very much within the rights and in 
the interest of children in the US, as well as children in the Middle East, 
to know the specifi c truths and general lessons of such history. It is surely 
in their interest to understand the extent to which the case for war is often 
built on obfuscation, disguising unacknowledged private interest as a common national or international interest. Indeed, there can be little doubt 
that, in the age of scarcity looming before us, global citizenship and security of every kind will require far more vigilant resistance to the seductions 
of war than most of us are accustomed to.11
Integrate Economics with These Environmental Studies
Students can benefi t from honest instruction in production methods, both 
agricultural and industrial, and the environmental controversies surrounding them. They should come away knowing how much energy and water 
resources are consumed in the production of common products (800 gallons of water for a hamburger, for instance, and 1,700 for a gallon of corn 
ethanol), and how atmospheric carbon and other wastes are released. Here, 
and throughout the curriculum, the focus on critical and inventive thinking 
should be as effective as possible and engaged with vital questions: How 
can production, marketing, and distribution systems be redesigned to be 
more environmentally friendly? How can we best live without economic 
growth, if growth is precluded? To what extent would more egalitarian 
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 77
distributive policies help? Who, if anyone, gains from growing populations 
and growing demand for property, goods, and services, and who doesn’t?
Encourage Resourcefulness, Inventiveness, and Adaptability
Schools can promote a readiness to examine, rethink, and redesign every 
aspect of how we live, in order to promote the most rapid adjustment to a 
sustainable human ecological footprint. In connection with this, they can 
nurture skills in diverse practical arts, with an emphasis on design, economy, 
and adaptability. This may be considered not only collectively benefi cial as 
a basis for adapting how we live, but also a form of individual insurance 
against the risk inherent in being prepared only for white-collar occupations 
that may become less lucrative or cease to exist. The collapse or simplifi cation of social hierarchies has been associated historically with the depletion 
of usable energy reserves, and it requires little imagination to grasp that this 
could easily happen within the lifetimes of today’s school children.12
With regard to adaptability and the potentially calamitous price of cultural intransigence, public schools should at the very least provide lessons 
in the hardship that societies have brought upon themselves by failing to 
adapt. The failure of the Greenland Norse to abandon maladaptive aspects 
of their European heritage provides one vivid illustration of this (Diamond 
2005, 211–276). Another telling case study could be constructed around 
the culture and economics of gold. Many people continue to regard the 
exchange of gold (e.g., in weddings) as a cultural necessity, even as the 
environmental toll of producing gold far eclipses any substantial good 
achieved by it. The decision to buy gold should at least be informed by a 
vivid understanding of the fact that the world’s remaining gold ore is of 
such poor quality that the extraction of a single ounce—the gold in one 
ring—requires thirty tons of ore and commonly involves the use of a cyanide leaching process that contaminates the thirty tons (minus one ounce) 
of debris that remains, as well as everything downstream and downwind 
(Perlez and Johnson 2005; Perlez and Bergman 2005). In the interest of 
dietary adaptability, which could reduce the American carbon footprint by 
20 percent (Singer 2007), schools could provide students with experiences 
calculated to broaden their culinary horizons.
Encourage the Enjoyment of Environmentally Friendly 
Activities as a Basis for Flourishing Lives
Such activities would include intellectual, musical, athletic, and social pastimes, with modifi cations from their present forms as needed, such as to 
reduce demands on transportation and energy resources. The growing body 
of research on what actually makes people happy, why they buy things, and 
the surprising extent to which shopping and buying things makes them less
happy, can be taught as one component of this (Kasser 2002).
78 Randall Curren
De-Commercialize Schools
Commercial messages to consume, to defi ne one’s identity through consumption, and to address one’s problems though material consumption 
should be banned from schools, except as objects of critical-thinking exercises. This would be one modest step toward making it easier for children 
to distinguish between what they need and what they want, and to resist 
inducements to excessive and imprudent consumption. As modest as this 
step would be, however, it requires that we muster renewed belief in the 
importance of preserving public spaces, including schools, in which we can 
conduct the public’s work, in the public interest, through public reason, 
free of the dominating infl uence of commercial interests.13
Teach Children to Distinguish the Truth from Propaganda
Most or all of the foregoing will be denied and subverted by many whose 
short-term commercial and political interests and positional advantages are 
at stake. In light of this, it bears repeating that throughout the curriculum, 
the focus on critical and inventive thinking should be as effective as possible 
and engaged with vital questions. This requires sustained, direct instruction 
in methods of critical thinking, practice in thinking critically and creatively 
about the vital questions at issue, and a critical study of the media and propaganda. Surely we owe children the wherewithal to protect themselves against 
campaigns of misinformation and misleading argument.
Prepare Children for Global Cooperation
There is much that could contribute to an openness and ability to participate in global cooperation, beginning with serious instruction in geography, 
languages, world affairs, the history of the United Nations, and an understanding of poverty and the faltering capacity of existing governments to 
secure a livable future for their citizens. If it is ever appropriate to inculcate 
patriotism at all, which is doubtful, it should be counterbalanced by the 
cultivation of sympathetic attachment to a global community and institutional basis of international cooperation.14 Writing in 1916 during the First 
World War, John Dewey suggested that schools treat national sovereignty 
as “provisional” (Dewey 1916, 98). I would second this, at least to the 
extent of urging openness to accepting limitations on national sovereignty 
as the price of escaping the hazards of a global state of nature.
Prepare Everyone for a World with Lower Fertility 
Rates and the Prospect of Fewer Human Beings
The human population of Earth will almost certainly be lower at the end of 
this century than it is today. What is uncertain is how humane or inhumane 
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 79
the path of descent will be, and how and to what extent decisions will refl ect 
the trade-offs between population size and quality of life. It is not clear 
how best to prepare children for this, but any approach taken must seek 
to equip them with the imagination, understanding, and critical capacity 
to make rewarding lives for themselves in ways we may not now envision. 
Literature and the arts will surely play a role.
THE PRESENT, PAST AND FUTURE OF 
PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION
The idea of education for survival may seem outlandish and marginal to 
the traditional and contemporary concerns of philosophy of education. I’ll 
suggest in this concluding section that apart from it being necessary, it is a 
natural extension of other recent developments in philosophy of education, 
and not completely without precedent in the history of the fi eld. A focus on 
the limits to growth and associated need for equity would return the fi eld 
to an important aspect of its roots.
The language of survival does appear in one major strand of contemporary philosophy of education, but invariably with a narrow focus on 
cultural survival and the limits of a cultural group’s right to impose the 
education of its choice (see e.g., Appiah 1994 and Reich 2003). Many of 
the world’s language and ethnic groups are indeed threatened with extinction through assimilation and genocide and through cultural, economic, 
and geographic encroachment; national minorities often “demand various 
forms of autonomy or self-government to ensure their survival as distinct 
societies” (Kymlicka 1995, 10).15 They are “concerned with ensuring that 
the larger society does not deprive them of the conditions necessary for 
their survival,” where that “survival . . . is heavily dependent on protection 
of their land base . . . [which] is vulnerable to the greater economic and 
political power of the larger society” (Kymlicka 1995, 38, 43). Political 
philosophers and others have argued that all of these groups should have 
the wherewithal to survive as distinct groups, if that is their wish, and some 
have advanced qualifi ed defenses of minority rights (to certain forms of representation, self-governance, and cultural protection) as a counterweight to 
the political advantages that accrue to national majorities. The educational 
debates associated with these matters have focused on language rights and 
tensions between the cultural autonomy of adults, the future autonomy 
and well-being of children whose parents and communities may use their 
educational discretion to discourage deviations from cultural norms, and 
the claims of liberal-democratic societies to establish educational standards 
consistent with a liberal-democratic political culture.16
At the heart of these debates is a conception of autonomy focused on the 
‘conceptions of the good’ available within a culture. Largely overlooked is 
the culture or society’s capacity to provide the means to live well or secure
80 Randall Curren
those goods, the global context of that capacity, and the contributions of 
education to preserving or destroying that capacity. This is not a trivial 
oversight, and it’s what I’ve addressed here: the material basis of the survival of diverse cultural groups and their members, and the moral basis 
and shape of a curriculum of global citizenship and survival adequate to 
the challenges of global interdependence and emerging sustainability crises. 
Survival has thus been on the agenda of contemporary philosophy of education, but we are in need of a wider discussion of the educational dimensions 
of survival than what has been transacted in the conceptual space of cultural identity, autonomy, and citizenship. The focus on domestic, cultural 
politics must be absorbed into a larger focus on global, intergenerational, 
and environmental justice and a curriculum of survival that is in part a curriculum of global citizenship.
Will Kymlicka, a prominent liberal theorist of minority rights, notes 
repeatedly that cultural survival depends in part on a culture’s material 
basis and ability to control and ensure the adequacy of that material basis. 
He notes the fundamental importance to some cultures of fi shing and hunting rights, and that “indigenous struggles over land are the single largest cause of ethnic confl ict in the world” (Kymlicka 1995, 43). “Fishing is 
an important aspect of some Aboriginal cultures, and guaranteed fi shing 
rights ensure that they are not outbid or outvoted by the larger society on 
decisions regarding access to fi shing,” he writes (Kymlicka 1995, 44). It 
would be easy to concede this point and consider it beyond the concern of 
educational philosophy, were it not becoming clear that it is beyond the 
power of individual countries to provide meaningful long-term guarantees 
of fi shing rights, or water rights, or rights to land that can sustain life. The 
collapse of fi sheries; the disappearance of mountain ice packs and other 
transnational water sources; the impact of human-induced drought, soil 
loss, and salinization; and the global population pressures that outstrip any 
foreseeable growth in basic commodities or public services are conspiring 
with other aspects of globalization to transfer the focus of political philosophy to a world stage on which the fate of individual countries, let alone 
national minorities, is not in their own hands—a global stage on which 
a commitment to establishing fair terms of cooperation in the survival of 
diverse ethnic groups may matter to the survival of a civilized way of life in 
general. Educational philosophy must follow suit, and adopt a perspective 
that is both global and comprehensive in its understanding of the prospects 
for human well-being.
Looking back across the history of the fi eld, there are reasons why one 
would scarcely expect in the modern period to fi nd any concern with such 
matters as limits to the growth of population or aggregate consumption. 
Among noted educational thinkers, the most direct concern with survival 
we fi nd is in the work of Jean-Jacques Rousseau. In Book III of Emile, he 
invokes the specter of revolutions that upset the social ranks assumed by 
conventional education:
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 81
You trust in the present order of society without thinking that this 
order is subject to inevitable revolutions, and it is impossible for you to 
foresee or prevent the one which may affect your children. The noble 
become commoners, the rich become poor, the monarch becomes subject. Are the blows of fate so rare that you can count on being exempted 
from them? (Rousseau 1979, 194).
The lesson Rousseau draws is that education should be predicated on equality, the value of work that provides the necessities of life, and the premise 
that no one is too good or too secure to master a trade and prepare to 
secure the necessities of life with his own hands. Education should prepare 
one to survive without the conveniences of rank in a system bound to collapse (Rousseau 1979, 195–96).
Rousseau could see that only so much destitution and opulence could 
coexist side-by-side in one society, but he was a philosopher of his time 
and place in focusing on the proportionality of individual production 
and consumption, and not on the inevitable limits to aggregate production and consumption. Why would Rousseau, or John Locke, or any 
other European philosopher of the seventeenth or eighteenth century 
concern himself with such limits when vast continents lay at hand, when 
nature’s ‘harmony’ seemed suffi cient proof of a divine plan in which a 
human future was assured?
Post-Enlightenment Greek antiquity offers a contrasting view still 
shaped by cultural memory of civilizations in extremis. Philosophically, 
Plato’s Republic is most of all about the nature of justice or goodness, 
and the relationship between goodness and happiness. If we inquire about 
the nature of the background concerns that animate the dialogue, however, the answer in a word is ‘overconsumption.’ The theme of excessive 
and ruinous consumption is invoked through the language of greed and 
injustice, and more specifi cally of “unnecessary” and “lawless” desires.17
The “true” and “healthy” city of Book II (Cooper 1997, 369–372) is contrasted with the luxurious “city with a fever” (ibid., 372e, 373).18 People 
in the former live simply, and everyone’s needs are met even in old age 
(ibid., 372d); the city is sustainable across generations (ibid., 372d); it is a 
classless, unregulated partnership, with free and mutually advantageous 
exchange of goods (ibid., 369dff., 372c); people enjoy sex but limit children to “no more than their resources allow” (ibid., 372b–c); they thereby 
avoid both poverty and war (ibid., 372c). This ‘healthy’ city might be 
Plato’s image of Eden.
The unhealthy city is, expressly or by implication, none of these things. 
Its fi rst unhealthy choice is to eat meat, which requires hunters, herds, more 
land, and doctors (ibid., 372b–d). The addition of further luxuries requires 
more resources, even more land, and hence an army and a policy of military expansionism. This is a portrait of Athens itself, which mitigated class 
confl ict by exporting a large proportion of its poor over time to colonies 
82 Randall Curren
established in conquered territories, until the Peloponnesian War brought 
an end to that. The story of the ensuing books of the Republic is one of 
restoring the luxurious city of Athens to a healthy state of equilibrium, 
a state of social harmony achieved through equity in the distribution of 
limited resources. The justice and education that establish this equilibrium 
are deeply equalizing in the sense that they steer those who hold political 
and military power away from material indulgence, and toward the enjoyment of the ‘highest’ goods—those of the mind—which are goods that can 
be enjoyed simultaneously and equally by an unlimited number of people 
(provided their basic material needs are met).
We know from other texts that Plato’s concerns about sustainability and 
excessive consumption were not limited to the relationship between warmaking and limited resources. By the time Plato was born, the landscape of 
Greece had already suffered from overgrazing by sheep and hillside deforestation, which had given rise to a number of legislative acts to replant 
hillsides and limit erosion (Ponting 1991, 76–77; Williams 2006, 62ff.). 
Writing with a sound understanding of fl oods, erosion, and water scarcity 
caused by deforestation, Plato observes in the Critias that “Attica of today 
is like the skeleton revealed by a wasting disease, once all the rich topsoil has been eroded and only the thin body of the land remains” (Cooper 
1997, 111b). He goes on to describe a mythical city of Atlantis as densely 
populated, incessantly occupied with commerce, and ultimately ruined by 
intoxication with luxury and wealth (ibid., 117–121). The lesson, as in the 
Republic, is that when “possessions become pursued and honored” (ibid., 
121a), human beings exceed the limits of prudence and justice and come to 
a bad end. The antidote he prescribes is an education that combats materialism and injustice.
There are some echoes of these Platonic themes in Aristotle’s Politics, especially in his remarks about misguided accumulation of wealth 
(1256b27–1258b8), the importance of limiting population (1265a38–b16, 
1326a5–b25, 1327a15, 1335b21–27), and his insistence that injustice is the 
most important general cause of the collapse of regimes (1301a36–b4). It 
is instructive to note his observation that education that gives unfettered 
expression to a culture is not the same thing as education that is most 
conducive to a culture’s survival. He notes in Book V of his Politics that 
the education that enables a regime to survive is not what members of the 
ruling class typically prefer. “Democratic education,” or education that 
preserves a democracy, is not as singularly favorable to the poor, nor is 
“oligarchic education” as singularly favorable to the rich, as the friends 
of unfettered democracy (defi ned as lawless rule by the poor) or oligarchy 
(lawless rule by the rich) imagine (1310a20–26). What preserves a regime is 
education that is constitutionally moderating, or conducive to an equitable 
distribution of political power among constituent groups and conducive to 
cooperation in the direction of that power toward an equitable distribution 
of the means to living well.19
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 83
In our world, a world in which much of the material basis of a sustainable human existence is imperiled by overreaching, the education that will 
enable individual governments and societies to survive is not likely to be 
the education of our partisan dreams and patriotic pride. An example from 
close to home is the culture of the American suburbs, which is unsustainable and already staggering under the weight of rising costs and debt.20 In 
the meantime, the schools in these suburbs are for the most part blindly 
replicating a culture of consumption that is not only doomed, but also hard 
to reconcile with any conceivable terms of global cooperation compatible 
with the survival of many other linguistic and ethnic groups.21
NOTES
 1. For a vivid account of the global reach of economic relations, see Davis 
2006.
 2. For accounts and explanatory analyses of such collapses in the past, see 
Tainter 1988, Redman 1999, Wright 2004, and Diamond 2005.
 3. Quoted in “The State of the World? It is on the Brink of Disaster,” The Independent, 30 March, 2005, online edition. http://news.independent.co.uk/
world/science_technology/article8480.ece.
 4. The net energy loss on corn ethanol, when all energy inputs are accounted for, 
has been calculated at 43 percent, and the loss on switch grass ethanol, if that 
became feasible, would be about 70 percent, since it would require the processing of two to fi ve times more biomass. Even if there were a net energy gain, the 
vision of large-scale use of biofuels is fundamentally misguided. Photosynthesis is such an ineffi cient way of capturing the energy of sunlight (0.01 percent 
versus 2 percent for photovoltaic cells) that it would require 80 percent of all 
vegetation in the US to replace 15 percent of US gasoline consumption by 2017 
(Pimentel 2008). The energy yields on nuclear fi ssion reactors are also quite 
inferior to those of wind generation (Tainter 2008), and the limited reserves 
of fi ssile material make it at best a short-term solution requiring exceedingly 
long-term investments in securing radioactive waste against leakage (Goodstein 
2004, 106–07; Shrader-Frechette 2002, 95–116).
 5. The IPCC is a scientifi c and member government body established by the 
World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environmental 
Programme, charged with providing periodic assessments of the state of climate science and knowledge of climate change. Its comprehensive report, the 
Third Assessment Report (IPCC 2001), was attacked by skeptics but strongly 
endorsed in a report by the US National Academy of Sciences requested by 
the Bush administration (US National Academy of Sciences, 2001). The 
IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report was released in 2007 and strengthened 
the basic conclusions of earlier assessments. See IPCC 2007 for the summary of fi ndings addressed to policymakers. Although the assessments represent the work of thousands of scientists, the role of member governments 
in approving assessment reports typically injects some politically motivated 
dilution of the strongest conclusions reached on the basis of the science.
 6. On genocide in Rwanda and the critical role of land hunger, see Diamond 
2005, 311ff. and related references. On the role of climate change and displacement from land in the Darfur confl ict, see Borger 2007. On confl ict over 
water and other resources, see Ward 2002 and Klare 2002.
84 Randall Curren
 7. On the role and extent of misinformation campaigns in suppressing public 
awareness of environmental risks, see Shrader-Frechette 2007. The book’s 
specifi c focus is public awareness of the public health risks of pollution, but 
its detailed exposé of corporate-funded regulatory capture, private interest 
science, legal settlement nondisclosure provisions, public relations strategies, 
lobbying, and industry front groups reveals much about the uphill battle any 
environmental or sustainability public education campaign would face.
 8. One could fi nd philosophical support for this in David Archard’s account of 
children’s rights and limitations on the right to bear children (Archard 2004, 
141), and in the implications of Martha Nussbaum’s conception of human rights 
for reproductive rights. On her view, the securing of a right is an “affi rmative 
task” to put people “in a position of capability to function” in a specifi ed way 
(Nussbaum 2006, 287). In circumstances of declining resources, the substantial 
and affi rmative character of the right would demand that it be limited.
 9. See UNESCO 2005a and 2005b. UNESCO has announced a UN Decade 
of Education for Sustainable Development (UNDESD) with the intention of 
promoting environmental integrity, economic viability, and justice. Its environmental component is focused on the natural resources and ecosystem 
goods and services “essential for human development and indeed survival.” 
Environmental “literacy” is understood broadly to include “the capacity to 
identify root causes of threats to sustainable development and the values, 
motivations and skills to address them” (UNESCO 2005a, Quality Education). This would surely include a capacity to recognize when wars are being 
contemplated and fought out of unwillingness to accept just and peaceful 
distributions of scarce resources.
 10. On the role of major ‘adoption’ states and the extent to which US school 
books are censored, see Delfattore 1992.
 11. For related analysis of the proper stance of school curricula toward US foreign policy, see Miller 2007. On the relationships between justice, security, 
and war, see Curren 2005.
 12. On the “massive transformation in employment patterns” and “reduced economic circumstances” entailed by a transition to renewable energy sources 
(in effect, from energy mining to energy farming), see Tainter, Allen, and 
Hoekstra 2006. The paper identifi es general patterns in energy resource 
transitions on the basis of both historical and biological case studies.
 13. For background, see Manning 1999; Schor 2004; Brighouse 2005; Raley 
2006.
 14. Much has been written about the forms and presumed benefi ts and costs 
of patriotism. See Fullinwider 1996, Nussbaum 2002, Brighouse 2007, and 
Blum 2007. I agree with Brighouse that the inculcation of patriotism by a 
government or its schools undermines the legitimacy of that government.
 15. By ‘national minority’ Kymlicka means a nation, or “historical community, 
more or less institutionally complete, occupying a given territory or homeland, sharing a distinct language and culture,” which is embedded within a 
country dominated by a different national culture (Kymlicka 1995, 11).
 16. See Callan 1997, Dwyer 1998, Levinson 1999, Curren 2000, Galston 2003, 
McDonough and Feinberg 2003.
 17. Balot 2001 documents the widespread attention to these themes in Athens 
and their importance for understanding Plato’s work.
 18. All the translations from Plato’s works relied on here are from Cooper 1997.
 19. See Curren 2000, 100–109. References to Aristotle’s Politics are to the book, 
chapter, page, column, and line numbers of Immanuel Bekker’s 1831 edition 
of the Greek text. These appear in the margins of most modern editions and 
translations.
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 85
 20. I use the word ‘culture’ here in the sense of the customs of a group or ‘lifestyle 
enclave’ (Kymlicka 1995, 18).
 21. For helpful discussion of earlier drafts of this paper, I owe thanks to Jason 
Blokhuis, Yvonne Raley, Chris Schlottman, Barb Stengel, Kenneth Strike, 
Elaine Unterhalter, and my audiences at the annual meetings of the Philosophy of Education Society, the Philosophy of Education Society of Great Britain, and the Human Development and Capability Association, in March, 
April, and September of 2007. I also owe a debt to my sustainability interns, 
Gena Akers, Daniel Muller, and Rayna Oliker, who researched and talked 
me through a wealth of sources and themes pertaining to the theory and 
practice of education for sustainable development in the summer of 2008. 
The fi rst three sections of this paper incorporate material from chapters one, 
four and fi ve of my book, Education for Sustainable Development: A Philosophical Assessment. London: PESGB, 2009.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adger, W. N., J. Paavola, S. Huq and M. J. Mace, eds. Fairness in Adaptation to 
Climate Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006.
Appiah, A. “Identity, Authenticity, Survival: Multicultural Societies and Social 
Reproduction.” In Multiculturalism: Examining the Politics of Recognition, ed. Amy Gutmann, 149–163. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1994.
Archard, D. Children: Rights and Childhood. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Athanasiou, T., and P. Baer. Dead Heat: Global Justice and Global Warming. New 
York: Seven Stories Press, 2002.
Balot, R. Greed and Injustice in Classical Athens. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Blum, L. “Best Traditions Patriotism.” Theory and Research in Education 5, no.1 
(2007): 61–68.
Borger, J. “Darfur Confl ict Heralds Era of Wars Triggered by Climate Change, 
UN Report Warns.” The Guardian, 23 June 2007. http://www.guardian.uk/
environment/2007/jun/23/sudan.climatechange
Brighouse, Harry. “Channel One, the Anti-Commercial Principle, and the Discontinuous Ethos.” Educational Policy 19, no. 3 (2005): 528–49.
 . On Education. London: Routledge, 2006.
 . “Should We Teach Patriotic History?” In Philosophy of Education: An 
Anthology, ed. R. Curren, 528–38. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2007.
Buchanan, A. “Political Liberalism and Social Epistemology.” Philosophy and 
Public Affairs 32, no. 2 (2004): 95–131.
Callan, E. Creating Citizens. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997.
Connor, S. “World’s Most Important Crops Hit by Global Warming Effects.” The 
Independent, 19 March 2007. Archived at http://news.independent.co.uk/environment/climate_change/article2371569.ece.
Cooper, J. Plato: Complete Works. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1997.
Curren, R. Aristotle on the Necessity of Public Education. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefi eld, 2000.
 . “Public Education and the Demands of Fidelity to Reason: A Response to 
Dwyer, Feinberg, Hourdakis, Pendlebury, Robertson, Strike, and White.” The 
School Field 13, no.1 (2002): 79–105.
 . “Public Reason and the Foundations of Security.” Chap. 13 in Homeland Security: Controversies, Strategies, and Impact, ed. Nawal Ammar. Kent, 
86 Randall Curren
OH: Kent State University Press, 2005. Available at http://upress.kent.edu/
Ammar/13%20Curren.htm.
 . “Developmental Liberalism.” Educational Theory 56, no. 4 (2006): 451–
468.
Davis, M. Planet of Slums. London: Verso, 2006.
Delfattore, J. What Johnny Shouldn’t Read: Textbook Censorship in America.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992.
Dewey, J. Democracy and Education. New York: Macmillan, 1916.
Diamond, J. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: 
Viking, 2005.
Dietz, T., E. A. Rosa, and R. York. “Driving the Human Ecological Footprint.” 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 5 (2007): 13–18.
Dodds, Walter. Humanity’s Footprint: Momentum, Impact, and Our Global 
Environment. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008.
Dwyer, James. Religious Schools v. Children’s Rights. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998.
Eilperin, Juliet. “Carbon Output Must Near Zero to Avert Danger, New Studies 
Say.” Washington Post, 10 March 2008.
Fullinwider, R. “Patriotic History.” In Public Education in a Multicultural Society,
ed. R. Fullinwider, 203–227. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Galston, W. “Church, State, and Education.” In A Companion to the Philosophy 
of Education, ed. Randall Curren, 412–429. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 
2003.
Goodstein, D. Out of Gas: The End of the Age of Oil. New York: W. W. Norton, 
2004.
Hansen, James. Interview on The Diane Rhem Show, 23 June 2008. Archived at 
http://www.wamu.org/programs/dr/08/06/23.php#20635.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Third Assessment Report: 
Climate Change 2001. http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/assessments-reports
.htm
 . Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/
ar4-syr.htm
Kant, I. The Metaphysics of Morals. Trans. Mary Gregor. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991.
Kasser, T. The High Price of Materialism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Klare, M. T. Resource Wars. New York: Henry Holt, 2002.
Kolbert, E. Field Notes from a Catastrophe: Man, Nature, and Climate Change. 
New York: Bloomsbury USA, 2006.
Kymlicka, W. Multicultural Citizenship. Oxford: Clarendon Press,1995.
Levinson, M. The Demands of Liberal Education. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press,1999.
Manning, S. “Students for Sale: How Corporations are Buying Their Way into 
America’s Classrooms.” The Nation, 27 September 1999.
McDonough, K., and W. Feinberg. Education and Citizenship in Liberal-Democratic Societies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
McKibben, B. “How Close to Catastrophe?” The New York Review of Books 53, 
no. 18 (2006): 23–25.
Miller, R. “Unlearning American Patriotism.” Theory and Research in Education 
5, no. 1 (2007): 7–21.
Nussbaum, M. For Love of Country. Boston: Beacon Press, 2002.
 . Frontiers of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006.
Perlez, J., and K. Johnson. “Behind Gold’s Glitter: Torn Lands and Pointed 
Questions.” The New York Times, 24 October 2005. http://www.nytimes.
com/2005/10/24/international/24GOLD.html?th+&emc+th&pagewa.
Education for Global Citizenship and Survival 87
Perlez, J., and L. Bergman. “Tangled Strands in Fight over Peru Gold Mines.” The 
New York Times 25 October 2005. http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/25/international/americas/25GOLD.html?th+&emc=th.
Pimentel, D. “Global Energy Challenges and Solutions.” Paper presented at the 
Sustainable Energy Symposium, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 5 April 
2008.
Ponting, C. A. Green History of the World. London: Penguin, 1991.
Raley, Y. “Food Advertising, Education, and the Erosion of Autonomy.” International Journal of Applied Philosophy 20, no.1 (2006): 67–79.
Redman, C. Human Impact on Ancient Environments. Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press, 1999.
Reich, R. “Multicultural Accommodations in Education.” In Education and Citizenship in Liberal-Democratic Societies by K. McDonough and W. Feinberg, 
299–324. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Rousseau, J.-J. Emile. Trans. A. Bloom. New York: Basic Books, 1979.
Schor, J. Born to Buy. New York: Scribner, 2004.
Shrader-Frechette, K. Environmental Justice. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2002.
 . Taking Action, Saving Lives. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Singer, P. “Richard J. Franke Lecture.” Chicago Humanities Festival, Chicago, IL, 
1 November 2007.
Tainter, J. The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press,1988.
 . “Energy Gain, Organization, and Sustainability.” Keynote address, Sustainable Energy Symposium, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, April 5, 
2008.
Tainter, J., T. Allen, and T. Hoekstra. “Energy Transformations and Post-normal 
Science.” Energy 31(2006): 44–58.
United Nations Foundation (UNF). The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.
Washington, DC: UNF, 2005. Summary with links available at http://www.
unfoundation.org/features/millenium_ecosystem_assessment.asp
United Nations Educational, Scientifi c, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 
Education for Sustainable Development: United Nations Decade (2005–2014). 
Paris: UNESCO, 2005a. Available at http://portal.unesco.org/education/en/
ev.php-URL_ID=23279&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
 . Guidelines and Recommendations for Reorienting Teacher Education to 
Address Sustainability. Paris: UNESCO, 2005b. Available at http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0014/001433/143370E.pdf
United States National Academy of Sciences. Climate Change Science: An Analysis 
of Some Key Questions. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2001.
Ward, D. R. Water Wars. New York: Riverhead Books, 2002.
Williams, M. Deforesting the Earth: From Prehistory to Global Crisis (An Abridgment). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.
World Health Organization (WHO). Climate and Health. Geneva: WHO Media 
Centre, 2007. Available at http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs266/
en/.
World Wildlife Fund (WWF). Living Planet Report 2006. Available at http://
www.panda.org/about_our_earth/all_publications/living_planet_report/living_planet_report_timeline/lp_2006
Wright, R. A Short History of Progress. Toronto, Canada: House of Anansi Press, 
2004.

Part II
New Pedagogical Approaches

6 Why They Hate Us
A Pedagogical Proposal
Irfan Khawaja
INTRODUCTION
The explanation of human action is both an everyday task and an occasion 
for the most perplexing of methodological dilemmas. On the one hand, we 
unrefl ectively ask for, offer up, and receive action explanations as a matter 
of daily routine: we need to know why someone acts as he does in order 
to deal with him at all, and do so in everyday contexts without necessarily 
being stymied into paralysis. On the other hand, when we pause to refl ect 
on the philosophical presuppositions of action explanations, we’re quickly 
led to questions of suffi cient complexity to keep philosophers occupied for 
generations.
Issues in action theory acquire a yet greater degree of complexity when 
we focus on the explanation of a morally and politically charged category 
of actions, like ‘terrorism’ or ‘Islamic terrorism’ or ‘Islamic terrorism in the 
late twentieth and early twenty-fi rst centuries.’1
 The intensifi cation of complexity arises in part from the specifi cally political and historical dimensions of the topic: what was previously a diffi cult exercise in action theory 
becomes, in this context, a yet more diffi cult interdisciplinary exercise in 
action theory, legal theory, religious studies, history, and international 
relations. To explain the actions of an Osama bin Laden or Muhammad 
Atta, we need the apparatus of action theory, plus a conceptual framework 
for talking about terrorism, plus a working knowledge of Islamic theology, plus a working knowledge of the history of the modern Near East. 
And even the metaphor of addition is insuffi cient to capture what we need; 
we need to sum what we know and put the results into an integrated and 
coherent whole.
This topic might at fi rst seem wildly inappropriate as the basis of a 
pedagogical proposal, as opposed to a professional research program: too 
complex, too emotionally fraught, and too political. Perhaps counterintuitively—drawing on themes in the work of Gerald Graff2—I argue in what 
follows that teaching it is appropriate, and in fact urgently necessary in 
American higher education. In my experience, American undergraduates 
want to understand Islamic terrorism, but lack a context in which to study 
92 Irfan Khawaja
it. The result is that such students are uniquely vulnerable to the pseudoexplanations of terrorism offered up by ideologues and conspiracy theorists. 
To preempt that possibility, and simply to educate students to understand 
the world around them, I argue in what follows that the explanation of terrorism ought explicitly to be thematized and taught. Though challenging 
and not without risk, I argue that the venture can, under the right circumstances, be successful.
PEDAGOGY AND THE STUDY OF ACTION
Philosophers since Aristotle have typically made a distinction between 
actions on the one hand and events on the other, and have marked out 
the former as the subject of a special and systematic topic of study. An 
action is something done; an event is something that merely happens. In 
this sense, though both human and animal action are voluntary and goaldirected, human action is uniquely subject to specifi cally moral appraisal: 
not just voluntary but free, and not just goal-directed but intentional. So 
understood, action is a ubiquitous phenomenon that demands constant and 
assiduous attention. We can scarcely go a day without in some sense having 
to deal with, think about, engage in, and/or appraise actions, whether our 
own or those of others.
In a wide variety of contexts, action confronts us as an interpretive puzzle mediated by ‘why’ questions. In the simplest case, someone acts a certain way, and we wonder why she’s done as she has. Or else we ourselves act 
without conscious deliberation, and then wonder why we did. These simple 
cases vary greatly, but variation aside, what we seek in asking such ‘why’ 
questions is intelligibility. We want to make sense of the action, and the 
answer to the ‘why’ question does that by identifying its cause and putting 
the action in a broader context. Such demands for intelligibility are made 
in two very different contexts which, risking oversimplifi cation, I’ll call the 
‘everyday’ and the ‘academic.’
The everyday approach to action involves four interlocking (but typically unarticulated) assumptions that seem, at least prima facie, to cohere 
in a seamless way. The fi rst concerns the nature of the explanandum; call it 
‘methodological individualism.’ The actions we seek to explain in everyday 
life are the actions of identifi able individuals; hence ‘why’ questions are of 
the form ‘Why did S do x?’ where ‘S’ denotes such an individual and ‘x’ 
denotes an action.
The second assumption is a presupposition of explanation; call it the 
‘causal assumption.’ Every action is produced by some cause or network of 
causes, and every ‘why’ question seeks to identify the causes that produced 
the action requiring explanation. So the answer to ‘Why did S do x?’ is a 
claim of the form ‘Because . . . ’ where the causal force of that word is to be 
taken literally.
Why They Hate Us 93
A third assumption concerns the relevant causes themselves; call it the 
‘character assumption.’ The thought here is that the causes that best explain 
an action lie in the interaction between S’s character and S’s circumstances. 
We identify the deepest and most fundamental causes when we identify the 
relevant connections between S’s traits of character and the circumstances 
of her action that, in conjunction with those traits, ‘triggered’ the action.
A fi nal assumption involves the normative status of the causes; call it the 
‘agency assumption.’ While character functions as a cause, its formation 
is still in some sense up to us, and thereby a candidate for ascriptions of 
moral responsibility and moral appraisal. It’s worth noting that the agency 
assumption need not involve any commitment, implicit or explicit, to ‘compatibilism’ as that term is understood in analytic philosophy. Where ‘compatibilism’ denotes the compatibility of determinism and responsibility, 
the agency assumption merely entails the compatibility of causation and 
responsibility, a commitment compatible with compatibilism (so to speak), 
but not equivalent to it.
Put in a nutshell, then, the everyday explanatory framework consists in 
the following ostensible truisms: actions are produced by individuals who 
freely do what they do in virtue of the interaction between their character 
and their circumstances; the explanation of an act and the moral evaluation 
of the causes that produced it are inextricable parts of the same inquiry. An 
action is produced by the agent’s virtues or vices. In the fi rst case, the agent 
is to be praised and/or rewarded for the action, in the latter, to be blamed 
and/or punished. But the same cause explains the action as supplies the 
basis for judging it.
Now consider academic approaches to the study of action. In this case we 
can, broadly speaking, distinguish two distinct approaches to the subject. 
On the one hand, we have what might be called the ‘fi rst-order disciplines,’ 
i.e., the social sciences, along with those of the natural sciences that focus 
on the explanation of human action. Here the task is to explain action in 
particular contexts without worrying too much about second-order issues 
about the nature of action as such. If we want to explain, say, an action or 
a trend, we take a certain explanatory framework for granted, and apply it 
to the relevant data. The basic challenge is to fi nd the best explanatory fi t 
between data and hypothesis, not to raise questions about action as such.
On the other hand, we have what might be called the ‘second-order disciplines,’ most prominently philosophical action theory. Here the task is to 
tackle second-order conceptual issues about the nature of action without 
bothering too much with the job of explaining concrete cases of it. In this 
case, for instance, we want to know what counts as an action, whether 
actions can in principle be free, and if so, how freedom relates to determinism, responsibility, and moral judgment. The challenge here is to generate a 
coherent and plausible conceptual scheme, not to apply it.
Despite the differences between them, both of the preceding academic approaches to explanation exist in tension with what I called the 
94 Irfan Khawaja
everyday approach to action—a fact with a series of pedagogically relevant 
consequences.
Imagine that a student comes to university adhering unrefl ectively to 
the everyday explanatory framework I described above, and encounters or 
majors in one of the fi rst-order disciplines. She soon discovers at least two 
problematic things.
She discovers, fi rst, that the everyday approach is fl atly incompatible 
with the academic. For one thing, the academic approach fl atly denies 
methodological individualism. It assumes the existence of irreducible social 
facts and of structural types of causation not reducible to individual action. 
So individuals no longer take center stage.
Further, the academic approach delegitimizes the importance of character traits in explanation. Reference to such traits is essentially incompatible 
with the decision-theoretic or evolutionary frameworks now prevalent, and 
is likewise incompatible with the insistence that genuinely scientifi c explanations of action involve measurable variables that ‘maximize concreteness’ and eliminate reference to moral or evaluative predicates.3
Finally, the academic approach delegitimizes ascriptions of moral 
responsibility, at least as a feature of the explanatory enterprise. The agency 
assumption as I described it above is essentially at odds with the causal 
models that are taken for granted in the fi rst-order disciplines, where explanations are deterministic, probabilistic, or stochastic but typically ignore 
the question of how action can, consistent with its etiology, be up to the 
agent (especially in a strong libertarian sense).4
 Thus the single assumption 
held in common both by the everyday and the academic approach is the 
causal assumption, but this nominal agreement evaporates in the context 
of the other, more substantive disagreements. Both approaches agree that 
explanation is causal but disagree about what that amounts to.
Having made this fi rst discovery, our student quickly makes a second: that her everyday explanatory framework is irrelevant to academic 
study. The governing assumption of a great deal of fi rst-order teaching and 
inquiry is that the student of a fi rst-order discipline is, qua student, being 
inculcated into the explanatory framework of the discipline to which she 
is apprenticed: she is being invited to ‘think like’ an economist, a political 
scientist, or a historian. To fail to think in this way, according to standard textbook presentations, is not necessarily to think falsely but to fail 
to live up to an academically defi ned role. The choice is either to accept 
the role and its assumptions, or forswear the respectability that the role 
confers. The assumptions of the everyday framework are not therefore to 
be refuted or rejected; they’re to be set aside in deference to the imperatives 
of professionalism.
Suppose now that the student comes to university with the same everyday explanatory framework but goes into philosophical action theory, 
a second-order discipline. In this case, the student will very likely have 
to grapple with explicit challenges to every element of her everyday 
Why They Hate Us 95
framework. She may well come to vindicate elements of that framework. 
She could, for instance, become an agent-causal libertarian about free 
will and/or a nonreductionist virtue ethicist about character. But whether 
she vindicates or undermines the everyday framework, she will typically 
study the subject in abstraction from the everyday task of explanation. 
She might, for instance, come to vindicate metaphysical libertarianism by 
refl ecting on ‘Frankfurt counterexamples’ or Van Inwagen’s ‘consequence 
argument’ but have no idea how this bears on the explanation of a single 
everyday action, much less anything more complicated than that.5
 She 
might likewise become an enthusiast of virtue ethics by reading Foot or 
Hursthouse, but as this material is usually taught, it is irrelevant either to 
second-order questions about the explanation of action or to fi rst-order 
explanations.6
 And a survey of about twenty logic/critical thinking textbooks convinces me that explanation is one of the least discussed topics 
in courses on logic and critical thinking. When it is discussed (e.g., in the 
context of inductive logic), textbook examples and exercises on the topic 
are usually drawn from the natural, not the social sciences, wherein the 
explananda are events, not actions.
These tensions between the everyday and academic approaches to explanation are exacerbated by tensions within the academic approach. I noted 
above that the academic study of action divides along fi rst- and secondorder lines—and obviously, along lines of division within each of these 
categories. These various divisions in the academic approach to the subject 
tend to produce a certain compartmentalization. Each discipline has its 
own distinctive approach, occasionally overlapping with, but occasionally 
subversive of, the claims of others. Meanwhile, philosophy tends to pursue 
its own autonomous lines of inquiry, mostly without reference to the claims 
of any of the fi rst-order disciplines.
Predictably, this compartmentalization of inquiries gives rise to a dizzying variety of perspectives on the subject of action within the academy, with 
each perspective saying wildly different things about action and embodying 
incompatible methodological or substantive approaches to it, but no single 
discipline devoted to the comparative study or integration of the different claims. Thus a student can learn about free will versus determinism in 
introductory philosophy, but have no sense of the connection of that topic 
to her study of ‘the causes of World War I’ in international relations. She 
can study ‘thick description’ in a class on area studies or anthropology,7
but have no sense of the relation between thick description there and an 
economist’s explanations of the behavior of ‘the sovereign consumer’ in 
the local supermarket. Our student can study intention and foresight in the 
sociology of law without being aware that the very same subjects are discussed in a very different way in moral philosophy. And she can, in criminology, take for granted that crime is produced by ‘negative reinforcement,’ 
but never encounter explanations of crime from evolutionary psychology, 
much less explanations via the id, the ego, or moral agency.8 As a result of 
96 Irfan Khawaja
this compartmentalization, ‘action’ disappears as an object of study, to be 
replaced by ‘action as seen through the lens of discipline X.’
My point here is not to lament the delegitimization of the everyday 
approach by the academic, but to suggest that the failure to confront their 
incompatibility in an explicit way leads students to a sort of epistemic 
schizophrenia.9
 Given the incompatibilities between the everyday and academic approaches (as well as within the academic), a student has two basic 
options: either adopt one consistent approach to the explanation of action, 
or acquiesce in incoherence. The student who opts for acquiescence ends 
up committed to a sort of methodological relativism, according to which 
one’s choice of an approach to the explanation of action is unregulated by 
principle; we can adopt any approach to action without worrying about its 
incompatibilities with other approaches.10 The student who opts for consistency faces two further options: either consistently affi rm the everyday 
approach to action, or consistently affi rm (some brand of) the academic. In 
the fi rst of these cases, the student is obliged to regard academic inquiry as 
a relatively pointless exercise unrelated to everyday life. In the second case, 
bracketing the (unguided) choice of which academic perspective to adopt, 
she is obliged to apply a radically revisionary explanatory perspective to 
everyday life without ever explicitly addressing whether the revision might 
entail a serious loss of intelligibility—or indeed, whether the revisionary 
perspective is true.
Epistemologists tell us that coherence is (at least) a necessary condition of 
epistemic justifi cation and so, of knowledge. If so, there is a sense in which 
academic life, ironically enough, unfi ts students for knowledge about the 
explanation of action. What it produces, to paraphrase Bernard Williams, 
is a situation in which education destroys knowledge: the more students 
believe what they study, the more they undermine the coherence of their 
beliefs.11 The easiest strategy for achieving coherence would appear to be 
to believe as little as possible, but that, unfortunately, is also the quickest 
recipe for apathy and cynicism.
If this is right, there is an epistemic case to be made for making the study 
of action a topic (an interdisciplinary course or even a program) designed 
for advanced undergraduates and graduate students in the humanities 
and social sciences. If coherence is a necessary condition of knowledge, it 
requires both the removal of obvious inconsistencies in our belief-sets, as 
well as the concerted attempt to bring coherence to apparently divergent 
approaches to a common subject matter. In the present case, it requires 
students to bring coherence to their beliefs about the explanation of action 
at multiple levels: between everyday and academic approaches, within different aspects of the everyday approach, and within different aspects of 
various academic approaches.
Though certainly ambitious, such a project would reap important pedagogical dividends. For one thing, it would ensure that students left the university with the resources to leverage what they had learned about action 
Why They Hate Us 107
undergraduate professors in political philosophy (at a different institution) 
said and did about the same thing.
 7. C. Geertz, “Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture,” 
The Interpretation of Culture (New York: Basic Books, 1973), 3–30.
 8. Cf. Graff, BCW, chaps. 6–7.
 9. Cf. Graff, BCW, chap. 6.
 10. I don’t think that the problem can be circumvented by differentiating contexts 
of explanation and employing some methods in some contexts, and others 
in others. For one thing, we would need a principled account of how to individuate and differentiate contexts, and need an account of why each context 
required methods that were (not just different but) incompatible with those 
in other contexts. It’s not clear that that’s possible. Second, notice that the 
everyday question asks ‘Why did S do x?’ In this form, the question makes 
no reference to context; it simply demands the explanation of an action as 
such. Thus if the presuppositions of the question are correct, the question 
cannot affi rmatively be answered by an explanation relativized to a context: 
to give such an answer is to fail to answer the question as asked. But if the 
only possible explanations are relativized to contexts, the presuppositions of 
the question as asked must simply be illegitimate, since the question asks for 
the impossible. I think the alternatives are exhaustive, and their exhaustiveness sharpens the dilemma described in the text. Thanks to Yvonne Raley for 
pressing this issue.
 11. B. Williams, Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985), 147, 168–70. We could, in principle, ignore the tensions 
I’ve described in the text, proceeding as though they weren’t there or weren’t 
important, but this gambit would necessarily have to come at the expense 
of coherence, and if coherence is necessary for knowledge, at the expense of 
knowledge. Thanks to Yvonne Raley for pressing this point.
 12. C. Hitchens, “The Morning After,” reprinted in Love, Poverty, and War: 
Journeys and Essays (New York: Nation Books, 2004), 407, 408, 409.
 13. C. Hitchens, “Why Americans Are Not Taught History,” in Love, Poverty, 
and War, 265.
 14. For an illuminating discussion of 9/11 conspiracy theorizing, see S. J. Al 
Azm, “Islam, Terrorism, and the West,” Comparative Studies of South Asia, 
Africa and the Middle East 25, no. 1 (2005): 6–15.
 15. In what follows, I accept the essential veracity of The 9/11 Commission 
Report, authorized ed. (New York: W. W. Norton, 2004).
 16. Contestable because Khalid Shaikh Muhammad, “the principal architect of 
the 9/11 attacks,” was not a member of al-Qaeda but “enjoyed considerable 
autonomy” in planning his own independent terrorist campaigns. See 9/11 
Commission Report, p. 145, and generally, pp. 145–50. The word qaeda in 
Arabic means ‘base’ or ‘foundation’ and therefore implies the existence of a 
superstructure supported by the base but not identical with it.
 17. An explanation for the signifi cance of the dates in the text: 1917 represents 
the date of the Balfour Declaration; 1923, the end of the Ottoman Caliphate; 1947, the proposed partition of Palestine; 1967, the (to Arabs) most 
traumatic of the Arab–Israeli wars; 1989, the Soviet retreat from Afghanistan; 1993, the fi rst attack on the World Trade Center; 1996 and 1998, 
the dates of Osama bin Laden’s fi rst and second fatwas against the US, 
respectively; and 610 A.D., the Prophet Muhammad’s assumption of the 
prophecy.
 18. Cf. A. MacIntyre, “Rationality and the Explanation of Action,” in Against 
the Self-Images of the Age: Essays on Ideology and Philosophy (Notre Dame: 
University of Notre Dame Press, 1978), chap. 21.
108 Irfan Khawaja
 19. Reprinted as chapter 3 of Messages to the World: The Statements of Osama 
bin Laden, ed. B. Lawrence, tr. J. Howarth (London and New York: Verso, 
2005).
 20. For two contrasting accounts of this issue, see T. Nagel, The View from 
Nowhere (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986), chap. 7 (hereafter VFN), 
and T. O’Connor, “Agent Causation,” in Agents, Causes, and Events, 173–
200.
 21. My account here, though highly infl uenced by Nagel’s philosophy of mind, 
departs radically from it in ways that I cannot discuss here. See Nagel VFN, 
120–24; “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review 33, October 
1974, reprinted in T. Nagel, Mortal Questions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), 165–80.
 22. I get the phrase “vicarious introspection” from J. Stern, Terror in the Name 
of God: Why Religious Militants Kill (New York: Harper Collins, 2003), 
xvii. Cf. Nagel: when we hold someone responsible for an action, “the result 
is not merely a description of his character, but a vicarious occupation of his 
point of view and evaluation of his actions from within it” (VFN, 121).
 23. For a brilliant fi ctional depiction of this problem, see I. Murdoch, The Nice 
and the Good (New York: Penguin, 1968). Cf. E. H. Carr’s discussion of a 
similar point in What Is History? (New York: Vintage, 1961), 26–29.
 24. Stern offers a sensitive account of this problem; see the Introduction of Terror in the Name of God.
 25. Pace Nagel, VFN, 113, 117, 123, 124, 137.
 26. I include in this assessment social scientists who adopt the explanatory 
framework of R. A. Pape’s Dying to Win: The Strategic Logic of Suicide 
Terrorism (New York: Random House, 2005), widely regarded as a model 
of explanatory success in the social sciences. Yet Pape deals with none of the 
topics I discuss in this paper, and offers an explanation of suicide terrorism 
that equivocally ascribes it to “foreign occupation” and to perceptions of
foreign occupation (e.g., 20–24). Thus his account treats veridical cognition 
of real occupations and delusions about nonexistent ones as a single unitary 
causal factor in the production of suicide terrorism. But it is hardly clear 
that incompatible phenomena can, by mere conjunction, be regarded as unitary causal factors. It is also highly disputable that explanations of action 
that abstain from judgments of rationality about the explananda, as Pape’s 
does, are genuinely explanatory of those actions. An action is arguably not 
intelligible until we can judge its rationality, but we cannot judge this from 
a perspective that is professedly neutral as between veridical cognition and 
self-delusion. (On this latter point, see MacIntyre, “Rationality and the 
Explanation of Action,” cited note 18 above.) If either of these points can be 
vindicated, Pape’s explanation becomes a paradigm of explanatory failure, 
not success.
For a critique of the methodological assumptions of postcolonial theory, 
see my “Essentialism, Consistency, and Islam: A Critique of Edward Said’s 
Orientalism,” Israel Affairs 13, no. 4 (2007): 689–713.
 27. Cf. Graff, BCW, 148.
 28. Cf. Graff’s discussion of this issue in BCW, 153–155. See also my review of 
William Bennett’s Why We Fight: Moral Clarity and the War on Terrorism
in Teaching Philosophy 27, no. 1 (2004): 61–65.
 29. Bin Laden’s spokesman, Suleman Abu Gheith, has argued that four million 
Americans deserve to die in retaliation for what he takes to be indiscriminate killing of Muslims by the United States. See “Why We Fight America,” 
Middle East Research Institute, Special Dispatch Series No. 388 (12 June 
2002), http://www.memri.org/bin/articles.cgi?ID=SP38802.
Why They Hate Us 109
It’s worth remembering that if a course of this sort were taught in a Muslim-majority country, most students would have as much sympathy for alQaeda as American students have for the American military. As I say in what 
follows in the text and imply in the discussion of “narrowly informational 
defi ciencies,” I do not mean to imply that an instructor should remain neutral 
about a student’s sympathy for al-Qaeda. The view needs to be challenged. 
But it is not the purpose of the class to ensure that students have or lack such 
sympathy. Thanks to Yvonne Raley for pressing this issue.
 30. For an excellent discussion of philosophy instructor as discursive model for 
students, see C.-A. Biondi, “Socratic Teaching: Beyond The Paper Chase,” 
Teaching Philosophy 31, no. 2 (2008): 119–140.
 31. B. de Spinoza, A Political Treatise, tr. R. H. M Elwes (New York: Dover, 
1951), I.4, 288 (my emphasis).
 32. Thanks to George Abaunza, Fahmi Abboushi, Sadik al Azm, Carrie-Ann 
Biondi, Richard Burnor, Hilary Persky, and Yvonne Raley for helpful conversations on the subject of this essay, and to Carrie-Ann Biondi and Yvonne 
Raley for comments on the essay itself. Thanks also to audiences at The College of New Jersey and Felician College for the opportunity to present related 
material.
7 Global Aspirations for Gender 
Equality in Education
What Kind of Pedagogy?1
Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
Since the late 1990s there has been widespread acceptance of a shift in 
economic power from the nation-state to the global market. While analysts 
disagree on the extent of economic control that remains with governments 
and on the nature of the political and social realignments that have accompanied this change, virtually no one disputes that a signifi cant alteration 
in relationships has taken place (Lauder et al. 2006). Thus, for example, 
the global market price for oil, securities, or the skills of highly trained 
mobile teachers have marked effects on economies and education systems 
around the world, which governments have only a limited range of strategies to mitigate. These changes have profound implications for how we 
think about schooling and pedagogies. Drawing on some discussions of 
the nature of globalization and its implications for education (Baylis and 
Smith 2001; Green 1997; Rizvi 2003) this chapter develops a taxonomy 
that distinguishes three different ways to understand how these processes 
frame ideas about pedagogy associated with the global aspirations for gender equality in education.
Gender equality in education holds a special place in contemporary 
global social justice policies and practices. Two-thirds of the one billion 
people in the world with little or no schooling are women and girls (Unterhalter 2007, xii). Aspirations for gender equality are central to two Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), initially agreed by virtually all the 
governments of the world in 2000. These remain a touchstone for UN organizations, many national government departments, and a large number of 
civil society organizations. MDG 2 aims at universal primary education, 
and its target entails that by 2007, all girls and boys of primary-school age 
should have entered school to enable them to complete eight years’ study 
by 2015. MDG 3 aims to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of 
women. Its fi rst target was for gender parity (that is, equal numbers of girls 
and boys) in primary school by 2005. The dates for the gender and education targets were set earlier than those associated with the other MDGs 
(all of which are to be accomplished by 2015) because education generally, 
and gender equality in education more specifi cally, is seen to underpin the 
achievement of all the MDGs (Vandemoortele, 2003). The MDGs have 
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 111
been scrutinized both by those who are close to the implementation effort 
(Birdsall and Vaishnav 2005; Sachs 2005), and by those who are critical of 
the attempt (Antrobus 2005; Black and White, 2003). We do not intend to 
take on the debate regarding the effi cacy of the MDGs, although we have 
written elsewhere regarding some of the assumptions they make and the 
problems associated with failures to meet targets (North 2006; Unterhalter 
2005, 2007). Instead, in this chapter we attempt to explore some of the 
pedagogic approaches associated with different engagements with the question of gender equality in education as a global aspiration as expressed in, 
but not only confi ned to, the MDGs.
One view of globalization links it with the struggle between global market relations and nation-states. Global space, in this view, is understood as 
constituted by the interaction between global market forces and nationstates, which sometimes advance economic globalization and sometimes 
oppose or seek to regulate it. The space of the global and the national are 
distinct with the global set ‘above’ the national. It is argued that global 
market forces, accelerated by information communication technologies, 
enthusiasm for trade liberalisation, privatisation, and the growth of fi nance 
capital, weaken the power of nation-states. Although some moves have been 
made to regulate global markets, these are generally inadequate in addressing the speed, rapacity, and greed associated with hyperglobalization (Held 
et al. 1999; Elliott and Atkinson 2008). This view is associated with the 
idea that economic growth has been primarily linked with the development 
of knowledge economies, and that education systems and investments in 
skills will be key vehicles for leaping from the level of the national ‘up’ to 
the more intoxicating air of global market action (Powell and Snellman 
2004). A form of what we term ‘inter/national contestation’ between countries and corporations is generated by economic globalization with competition between nation-states to ‘upskill’ and ‘tune up’ education systems. 
The assumption is that states offer fertile conditions for economic growth 
through enhanced education provision and skills development. We identify 
below a pedagogic approach associated with this agenda based on skills 
and competition. While economic competitiveness is a major driver, the 
international approach is also associated with limited programs for social 
inclusion, partly so that the disadvantaged do not threaten national and 
global stability. The form of gender equality associated with this entails the 
expansion of education for girls and boys to enhance skill formation and 
social cohesion.
A second view of globalization and pedagogy we have named ‘in/ternational,’ because contestations are not framed by national political economics, but by the intermingling and fl ow between global and local cultural 
processes, each of which is inside the other. This view, sometimes identifi ed 
by the term ‘glocalisation,’ is strongly associated with the work of Arun 
Appadurai (1996). He argues that the new global cultural economy cannot be understood in terms of older center–periphery models, but requires 
112 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
an appreciation of the disjuncture between culture, economy, and politics. 
He links these disjunctures with aspects of global cultural fl ows, in which 
imagined landscapes of sameness and difference shape the ways in which 
we understand ethnicity, media, technology, fi nance, and ideas about 
consumption. This view is associated with discussions of pedagogy that 
highlight its potential as a form of critique of the discourse of skills and 
marketization. In this work there is an appreciation of the critical potential 
of pedagogies to disrupt the notion of education as a tool for economic 
growth or ‘simple’ social inclusion. The stress is on pedagogic practices 
that are deconstructive, generating questions regarding the authority of science, the offi cial curriculum, and the worldview shaped by the minority 
world (Hooks 1994; Lather 1991a, 1991b; Luke and Gore 1992; Ntuli 
1999; Spivak 1993). Forms of pedagogic practice concern the ways in 
which languages and cultures are negotiated and their meanings expanded 
or diminished in relation to global processes. The discourses that frame 
knowledge production and circulation have been an important area of discussion (Bhabha 1994; Hickling-Hudson and Ahlquist 2003; Said 1978). 
A key pedagogical activity entails the revelation of formations of in/ternational understanding, where the intermixture of global and local practices 
and identities are evident (Carrim, forthcoming; Rampal, forthcoming). 
Pedagogy is thus not a simple matter of instruction in particular forms 
of knowledge or understanding, but a deconstructive process, constantly 
examining its own discursive formation.
A third view of globalization is associated with attempts to build global 
regulatory institutional machinery across nation-states to tame global market forces, effect redistribution, enhance participation, and assert some 
equality of status between people. This position, generally associated with 
the writings of David Held (2004) on a global covenant, is also evident 
in a range of positions on cosmopolitanism (Appiah 2006; Brock and 
Brighouse 2005; Rapport and Stade 2007) and assessments of attempts 
by global social movements to deepen practices of participation and discussion and hold states and markets accountable for promises made on 
advancing equalities (Cohen and Rai 2000; Edwards and Gaventa 2001; 
Mundy and Murphy 2001; Okin 2003). This position is associated with a 
range of writings on pedagogies that take seriously some of the normative 
questions entailed by thinking about global justice (Boni 2008; Nussbaum 
1997; Walker 2006). Some writers advocate teaching global dispositions, 
not just deconstructing the discourses that frame globalization (Bourn 
2008; Davies et al. 2005). A number of accounts document teacher and 
learner views in classrooms where human rights, global citizenship, and 
inequalities are explicitly discussed (Marshall and Arnot 2007; McCowan 
2008). Nira Yuval-Davis (1997; Stoetzler and Yuval-Davis, 2002 ) has 
elaborated the notion of transversal dialogue. This offers rich resources 
for formulating pedagogies that take seriously participatory processes to 
foster critical understanding of the historical location of the self as learner 
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 113
and teacher, and engagement with discussion across difference with others. 
This dialogic process of transversalism appears a key component of actions 
for reconstructing global justice, not simply deconstructing or evading it 
(Unterhalter 2007, 32). We have termed the pedagogic approaches associated with an attempt to change existing global social and pedagogic relations ‘international’ in that they do not refuse some of the frameworks 
provided by nation-states, as is typical of writers in the second group, but 
stand very far from the uncritical endorsement of competition around skills 
and alignments of national assessment or quality assurance regimes associated with the fi rst group of writers. In this pedagogic approach there is a 
critique of nation-states for being insuffi ciently attentive to participatory 
processes, global inequalities, forms of the global market, and the exclusions associated with current forms of decision making. Nancy Fraser’s 
(2005) concern to bring together a politics of redistribution, recognition, 
and participation provides a useful framing for some of these international 
pedagogies. Jennifer Chan illuminates both the ontological and epistemological dimensions of an emancipatory pedagogy that draws on some 
notion of reconstructed global relations when she writes:
A dialogical model of recognition to global justice sees education beyond merely a good investment or basic freedom; it is a core component 
of an emancipatory project for recognizing and positively valorizing 
cultural diversity, and transforming the institutionalized patterns of 
cultural value in our collective pursuit of global democracy. (Chan 
2007, 373)
Her vision entails both a form of reconstructed international relations 
where participation and debate form part of some of the processes of regulation, and also a set of relationships where gender equality is linked with a 
larger emancipatory project concerned with global justice.
This taxonomy of different approaches to pedagogy associated with different understandings of globalization allows us to distinguish some different emphases in the ways in which gender equality in education as a global 
aspiration is put into practice.
CONTRASTING APPROACHES TO GENDER EQUALITY 
IN EDUCATION AS A GLOBAL ASPIRATION
Each view of globalization and the associated pedagogies is linked with a 
different orientation to the issue of gender equality in education as a global 
aspiration. Thus for the hyperglobalists, there is concern to get girls and 
boys into school, partly to enhance social stability and partly to develop 
skills. Suffi cient education for girls and boys to ensure ‘no child left behind’ 
or ‘meeting basic learning needs’ is the major policy goal. Inequalities in 
114 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
education, in earnings, or in national power may remain, but the remit of 
global policy is only to intervene to bring every child up to the minimum 
level of schooling or income. As we discuss below, this (inter/national) policy is associated with a minimalist reading of gender equality in the MDGs. 
It is linked with an approach to global education policy where there is a 
strong conviction that global organizations and nation-states can get equal 
numbers of girls and boys into school to advance the development of the 
global market.
The second position on globalization, associated with the formation of 
in/ternational pedagogies, tends to problematize the construction of gender, race, ethnic, or national identities within and through schools. These 
are seen as relational, culturally located, and intersecting dimensions of 
social division. For writers associated with this position, the MDG project 
is highly problematic regarding gender parity in schooling. It fails to understand or take seriously the complexity of local histories and cultures. It 
does not give attention to reversing social and cultural languages of exclusion and oppression, and it refuses the participatory and deconstructive 
politics so central to in/ternational pedagogies.
The third position (the international) entails some form of global social 
compact on gender equality and education. This is associated with the 
formulation of pedagogies concerned with building global networks and 
institutions, developing processes of participation, and revising current 
forms of understanding so that we can advance and evaluate intersecting 
demands for gender equality, women’s rights, human rights, and global 
social justice.
Inter/National Pedagogies as Interventions for Gender Equality
For supporters of globalization, education—and in particular, girls’ education—is seen as a catalyst for the development of dispositions for the 
global knowledge economy. The argument, based on a cost–benefi t analysis of education, is that educated girls and women make better mothers 
with fewer, healthier, and better-educated children and are more productive workers, thereby contributing to faster economic growth (Herz and 
Sperling 2004). Links are also sometimes made between education and 
women’s empowerment, although what is actually meant by ‘empowerment’ is not always clear. There is an emphasis on technical rather than 
political interpretations of empowerment, and empowerment is often not 
conceived multidimensionally, as characterizes the work of a number of 
feminist and critical commentators (Gaventa 2003; Kabeer 1999), but as 
a set of technical attributes such as voting or participating in the formal 
economy (World Bank 2001). Women’s empowerment and gender equality 
are themselves often linked instrumentally to economic development: the 
World Bank’s 2007 Global Monitoring Report’s “Key message” number 
two is that “investing in gender equality and empowerment of women is 
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 115
smart economics” (our emphasis) because “greater gender equality helps to 
create a fair society, raises economic productivity, and helps advance other 
development goals” (World Bank 2007, 3).
This position is associated with seeing learning as primarily a matter concerning the economic outcomes of gender-equitable education. Learning is 
thus not linked with processes that develop understanding of the gendered 
power relations within which schooling and pedagogies are embedded. 
Indeed, in much of the literature that advocates expanding girls’ enrollments or supporting progression, there is little or no discussion of what 
goes on within schools, how gendered hierarchies and inequalities play out 
within them, or the way in which these are affected by the broader social 
context within which they are situated. The assumption is that schools are 
bounded neutral spaces in which the transfer of skills from teacher to student occurs. As long as girls are in school and have teachers, textbooks, and 
adequate management, appropriate skills will be learned (Hill and King 
1995; Schultz 2002).
Gender is thus understood as a noun. It simply refers to the numbers 
of girls (and boys) in school. The principal strategy for ensuring access to 
and progression through school is intervention—for example the abolition 
of school fees, stipend programs for girls, or food for school (Unterhalter 2007). There is some concern with building supportive institutions for 
girls’ schooling (Unterhalter 2007), but little attention is given to critically 
examining conditions within schools, developing participatory processes 
for gender equality, or exploring pedagogies that make connections outside 
the formal school space.
The narrow focus in MDG 2 on gender parity suggests an understanding of gender equality restricted to gender as a noun. The setting of the 
fi rst MDG target—gender parity in primary and secondary school by 
2005, ten years before the rest of the MDGs—is indicative of the view 
that gender equality in education is instrumental for the achievement of 
the broader MDG agenda. This invites an orientation to pedagogy that 
stresses the ways in which it is primarily a form of intervention to develop 
particular skills.
This approach is dominant within many of the global institutions that 
work without an explicit critique of inter/national relations and seek to 
implement frameworks such as the MDGs. For example, the World Bank 
provides direct support to national education systems though credits and 
loans, participates in global education policy formulation as a member 
of the High-Level Advisory Group, and hosts the Education For All–Fast 
Track Initiative (FTI), a compact between donor agencies and developing 
countries that seeks to mobilize and coordinate funding to accelerate progress towards the Millennium Development Goal of universal primary education by 2015. An approach to gender equality and education that focuses 
on interventions to get girls and boys into and through school is central 
throughout this work. It is refl ected, for example, in the 2005 Education 
116 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
Sector Strategy Update, which emphasized education strategies that “maximize the impact of education on economic growth,” and outlined the 
Bank’s intention to work toward strengthening “education as a basis for a 
knowledge economy” (World Bank 2005, 3). Gender equality is given little 
attention beyond the recognition of a need to accelerate “the rate at which 
the gender gap is closing” through interventions such as stipend programs 
or tutoring programs for girls (World Bank 2005, 101).
The work of the FTI exemplifi es the lack of engagement with gender 
equality beyond the consideration of gender as a noun. The FTI made a 
commitment in 2005 to pay greater attention to gender in its processes. 
This had been prompted by recommendations in a report commissioned by 
the United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative (UNGEI) (Seel and Clarke 
2005). However, since 2005 there has been little action to give the commitment effect. In the FTI’s most recent progress report (FTI 2007) there is a 
focus on the progress made to get children into school and on the resources 
needed for this to continue. There is barely any mention of gender beyond 
the identifi cation of girls in “hard to reach” groups and an analysis of progress made toward gender parity in FTI countries. Any wider concerns with 
equality are off the page.
The United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative, which was established 
in 2000, coordinated by UNICEF as a partnership including the UN agencies, governments, donors, and civil society, seeks to narrow the gender gap 
in primary and secondary education (UNGEI 2006). While some global 
social movements initially saw UNGEI as a vehicle to advance wider concerns with gender and participation, its focus has largely been limited to 
interventions for getting girls into school, rather than a broader vision 
of gender equality within and beyond school and some of the pedagogic 
resources required for this. This narrow remit is refl ected in UNGEI promotional literature (see for example UNGEI 2006) and in a recent report 
documenting UNGEI’s experiences (Chung 2007). However, interviews 
conducted in 2008 with senior fi gures in UNGEI indicate efforts within 
the organization to engage with gender equality more holistically and 
build the organization at country level, although the effects of this are still 
to be assessed (North 2008).
The approach to learning associated with inter/national pedagogies 
is predicated on a particular understanding of the relationship between 
the global and the local—the North and the South. Learning in a school 
is understood primarily as a top-down process involving the transfer of 
knowledge and skills from an expert/teacher to the learner. At the global 
level this translates into a top-down transfer of funds, technical skills, and 
knowledge from ‘global experts’ who advise nation-states and local organizations on ‘what works’ (Herz and Sperling 2004) for girls’ education. 
International policy documents and frameworks are produced and agreed 
by experts working at the global level. There is an expectation that funding 
for national and local governments or local NGOs will be tied—explicitly 
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 117
or implicitly—to adherence to globally established priorities. This sometimes sits uncomfortably alongside affi rmations on support to nationally 
owned, autonomous education plans, a tension that is clearly illustrated by 
the stated aims of the FTI:
[the FTI aims] to provide the incentives and resources to empower poor 
nations to build and implement sound education plans. Developing nations are responsible for taking ownership of crafting national education plans, with budget accountability and a greater commitment of 
political and fi nancial resources, while donor nations commit to providing the additional technical know-how to ensure that no country 
that met its obligations would fail for a lack of resources or technical 
capacity. (FTI 2002)
But in the work of the FTI there is little concern with the context in which 
governments make plans or fashion accountability (Rose 2005).
The approach is not attentive to power relations in schools and, in a 
similar vein, tends to ignore the power relations that shape the relationship between the global and the local—the North and the South. The 
inter/national assumptions suggest these are all players in a global marketplace, and that the historical and contemporary forms of inequality are 
not salient. In this view, globalization is seen as a set of useful technical 
processes based on competition and skills development that speed up and 
facilitate the transfer of information and delivery of plans between nationstates, or from the global to the local. This means that there is little scope 
for questioning the relations of inequality associated with global capitalism 
or considering the impact these have on global learning. In inter/national 
pedagogies, the local is expected to listen to and learn from the global, 
while those who work at the global level have little obligation to learn 
from or with the local. Those who drive policy are concerned to teach, but 
not to learn. They stress instruction and forms of intervention to get girls 
into school, for example, but do not see dialogue or attention to the conditions within which dialogue can occur as particularly pressing. The understanding of gender equality emphasizes technical processes, which focus on 
transferring skills and knowledge. There is no obligation for global institutions to engage in discussions regarding gender either within their own 
organizations or in wider global social relations.
International Pedagogies and Critiques of Global Initiatives
The limited interpretation of pedagogies associated with the international 
version of gender equality in education draws a wide array of criticism. 
One group of writers who cluster around an in/ternational understanding 
of globalization highlight the complexity of the contexts for implementing policy, and they question the sharp binaries between global and local, 
118 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
school and non-school knowledge, and gender identities (Bronfen and 
Kavka 2001; Cornwall et al. 2007). These critics stress the way in which 
gender and poverty are enacted in multiple sites of education, linked with 
multifaceted and relational dimensions of difference, diversity and negotiations over resources, meanings or outcomes (Mohanty 2003; Vavrus 2005). 
They tend to highlight gendered power relations and their intersection with 
race, class, and postcolonial processes. Often their work, informed by 
poststructuralism and postcolonialism, deploys theories of discourse and 
identity to explain the complex pedagogic processes associated with an in/
ternational understanding of globalization. The relational gender dynamic 
associated with people moving across spaces and shifting identifi cations is 
a major concern. In this work there is a clear realization that gender equality in education can never be a simple matter of policy roll-out because of 
local conditions marked by gender inequalities, struggles over power, the 
complexities of historical context, and the ravages of global capitalism. A 
number of critical studies are based on practical experiences of working in 
particular local settings and experiencing inter/national fl ows as disjunctures and discontinuities (Chapman and Miske 2007; Vavrus 2003).
The problems of conservative backlash and multiple forms of negotiation are just one of a number of reasons these writers are highly critical of 
the confi dent assertions associated with the framing of inter/national pedagogies. Some draw powerfully on the work of grassroots organizations or 
social/indigenous movements, or on ethnographic studies (Aikman 1999; 
Vavrus 2003). For many writers in this group, the relationship between 
culture and gender is a complex one. Some point to the need to recognize 
and consider the way in which gender may be constructed in different contexts. They argue that it is not possible to consider a universal defi nition 
of equality, and that gender identities are embedded in local identities and 
hierarchies linked to ethnicity and caste (Robinson-Pant, 2004). There is 
often a tension between gender and culture, with culture—as a collective 
identity—sometimes being privileged over concerns with gender inequality 
(N. Rao and Robinson-Pant 2006; S. Rao, 1999; Robinson-Pant 2004). 
This is sometimes evident when global economic or security forces place 
particular cultures under threat, forcing cultural solidarities across gender divisions. In the process, educational and other social achievements for 
gender equality are undermined (Yuval-Davis 1997).
Rather than stressing the economic and socially integrating outcomes 
of education, these critics tends to be more concerned with the processes 
of learning and the ways in which diverse activities are embedded within 
locally situated contexts of power and exclusion. There is a stress on learning as a social practice through which identities are constructed, bounded by 
the power dynamics of languages, cultures, national curricula, or gendered 
conditions of knowledge production (Braidotti 1994; Mohanty 2003). They 
tend to celebrate pedagogies that construct—rather than deny—difference. 
They are concerned with processes that take place beyond the confi nes of 
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 119
the school—within the community, in adult education classes, or in local 
political and activist spaces (Higgins and Rwanyange 2005).
Many in this group are critical of actions for gender and education based 
on interventions and the establishment of institutions, which are seen to be 
imposed by northern donors or trading partners who link cultural assimilation to the views of dominant elites (Rampal, forthcoming). They advocate 
approaches based on participation as equals in decision making, critique, 
dialogue, and revisioning the rules of the game, rejecting the ‘top-down’ 
forms of relationship that characterize some of the inter/national writing. For example, writing about education policy in Uganda, Higgins and 
Rwanyange point to the need to look critically at discourse around partnership and ownership, and the way in which “the realization of nationally 
(and globally) set goals and targets is complicated by the dynamics of the 
complex interplay of cultural and social forces at local level” (2005, 8).
These critics reject the privileged position given to global actors associated with the fi rst position we mapped. They question the validity of ‘global 
experts’ and assert the value of local expertise and locals as experts (Longwe 
1998). They challenge the global—or those in global positions of power—to 
learn from and listen to the local, to respect and value diversity, and to recognize the unequal global power dynamics within which exchanges occur. 
Pedagogy for this group is therefore a bottom-up process that starts with/
from the local and contextually specifi c. Their localist vision makes thinking about global action or a global project for gender equality and education 
challenging. For this group, political action, forms of analysis, and pedagogic 
practice all must of necessity become diverse, relational, and contextually specifi c. Global obligations are to recognize and respect difference, but formulating a pedagogy that goes beyond the fragments is very diffi cult.
International Pedagogies for Gender Equality in Education
A second group of critics are not inherently opposed to the idea of global 
aspiration or the notion of a pedagogy that develops larger horizons than 
those suggested by local relationships. For this group, overarching values 
such as human rights, cosmopolitanism, and global social justice offer 
opportunities to refashion the MDGs, make connections with global social 
movements, and develop pedagogies that take seriously new forms of global 
interconnection (Kabeer 2005; Molyneux 2007; Unterhalter 2008).
This group has no single view of gender or education. Sometimes writers 
associated with it delineate gendered sites of power and intersecting relational 
identities and discourses, but sometimes they stress women’s rights, gender 
and capabilities, and shifting sites of empowerment. They often draw more on 
political economy analyses than those linked to cultural studies, but critiques 
of gendered exclusions, hybrid identities, and forms of gendered becoming 
distinguish their work from writers associated with the fi rst position who 
simply note the presence or absence of girls or boys. However, while there 
120 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
are some similarities between this group of writers and those advocating in/
ternational pedagogies in their defi nitions of gender, there are differences in 
relation to how they view global markets and poverty. Proponents of in/ternational pedagogies generally view the growth of global markets as wholly 
destructive, inevitably associated with exploitation, exclusion, and the establishment of a reserve army of labour. However, many writers contributing to 
developing analysis of international pedagogies look to forms of the development state, redistributive policies, and forms of global regulation to direct and 
regulate economic growth toward gender equality. They are more optimistic 
that there may be forms of economic growth and development that make it 
possible to overcome gender and other inequalities, and thus form fairer societies expressing strong notions of national and global obligations for social 
justice and equality. It is to this work that pedagogies to develop forms of 
global understanding and connection are directed.
Pedagogies that work with notions of empowerment (Gaventa 2003; Kabeer 
1999) have considerable potential to underpin the international approach. 
Discussions of empowerment suggest the importance of bringing together 
and evaluating resources (such as trained teachers, curricula, and learning 
materials), the development of a critical form of agency in learners and teachers, and attention to overcoming global and local inequality in the outcomes 
of education. Gaventa’s ‘power cube’ (2007) provides an important method 
for approaching pedagogy, suggesting the process assists learners and teachers to understand the nature of closed, invited, and created spaces for participation in global governance, and the visible, hidden, and invisible forms 
in which power is exercised. The struggle to articulate forms of empowerment in relation to practice is evident in some UNICEF documents. Thus, for 
example, a joint publication in 2007 from UNICEF and UNESCO (UNICEF/
UNESCO 2007) outlined a vision of a rights-based approach to education. 
Rather than being instrumentally linked to economic returns, education is 
seen as necessary for the realization of other rights; and there is concern with 
not only access to school, but also conditions within school, including those 
that affect gender equality such as freedom from violence and teaching and 
learning materials free from gender stereotypes. While the pedagogic detail is 
not elaborated, the potential for thinking beyond the top-down frame is evident. While these pedagogies of rights and empowerment await further work 
to make them concrete in curriculum design and classroom practice, they suggest an approach that accepts global interconnections, yet points to different 
values—not those simply given by the unregulated market.
INTERSECTING PEDAGOGIES: 
THE GLOBAL CAMPAIGN FOR EDUCATION
In practice, the distinctions between the three positions outlined above 
are not always clear-cut. Despite inherent tensions between the three 
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 121
approaches, many organizations display elements of each in different aspects 
of their work, and organizations may oscillate between one approach and 
another as they adapt their work and communications to particular contexts, moments, and audiences. Many global civil-society organizations 
working on education appear to move uneasily between the three positions. Some have explicit commitments to women’s and girls’ rights in and 
beyond school, a focus on gender not limited to counting numbers of girls 
in schools, and a critical perspective on globalization and the role of global 
institutions. However, in their policy documents a concern with ‘what 
works’ to get girls in school often dominates as they seek to infl uence or 
appeal to policy makers—donors, governments, or multilateral organizations. Meanwhile, they may engage with local partners who have critical 
perspectives on gender, education, and issues relating to cultural identity 
and diversity.
The Global Campaign for Education (GCE) provides an interesting 
example of how these three pedagogical approaches intertwine. The international alliance was founded in 1999 to ensure that the World Education Forum held in Dakar in 2000 resulted in “concrete commitments and 
viable policies to implement the Education For All goals” (GCE 1999). 
GCE brings together civil-society organizations, including nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), community based organisations (CBOs), and 
teacher unions campaigning on Education For All around the world. Building links globally through democratic structures that connect member 
organizations working on education in the North and South has been key 
to GCE’s practice and identity (Mundy 2007; Mundy and Murphy 2001). 
The notion of education as a right and a concern with the most deprived 
sections of society, including women, is central to the GCE’s aims. According to their mission statement,2
The Global Campaign for Education promotes education as a basic 
human right [and] mobilizes public pressure on governments and the 
international community to fulfi l their promises to provide free, compulsory public basic education for all people, in particular for children, 
women and all disadvantaged, deprived sections of society.
The campaign itself is thus explicitly framed within a rights-based approach 
as well as around the broader Education For All agenda, which expresses 
concerns with gender equality in education (Aikman and Unterhalter 
2005).3 Therefore, although gender equality in education and pedagogies 
to advance this is not the main or central focus of the GCE’s work, the campaign does have an interest in rights, participatory processes, and strategies 
which wish to advance the MDGs beyond the narrowest reading.
Some GCE activities and policy reports have focused specifi cally on 
gender equality in education, and align their work with the international 
stream. In 2005, the year in which the fi rst MDG target to get as many girls 
122 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
as boys into primary and secondary school was missed, the GCE released 
Girls Can’t Wait (GCE 2005a). This report, like a similar one published 
in 2003 (GCE 2003), went beyond a simple consideration of gender parity, taking a more nuanced approach to gender equality in education that 
included attention to wider equality issues. Instrumental understandings 
of gender were combined with language around rights and emphasis on 
the intrinsic importance of gender equality. Alongside a focus on the need 
for interventions such as abolishing schools’ fees to get girls into school, 
suggestions were also put forward for addressing issues of gender equality 
within schools that go beyond issues of access.
However, despite these efforts, the space given to concerns with gender equality in GCE’s main work and higher profi le campaigns and policy 
materials is limited. The arguments presented for investment in gender 
equality and education often refl ect an unproblematized approach to policy 
roll-out. The School Report, produced yearly by the GCE, ranks governments on their commitments to Education For All (GCE 2005b, 2006, 
2007, 2008). It makes explicit use of ‘what works’ language in its efforts 
to mobilize resources to get children—girls and boys—into school. The 
emphasis is on what can be achieved and the wider economic and social 
benefi ts that greater numbers of children—including girls—in education 
will bring about. As with the literature associated with inter/national pedagogies discussed above, gender is given little emphasis beyond a concern 
with increasing parity.
The pedagogical eclecticism associated with the mixed alignments of 
GCE is evident in the teaching it supports in schools. In April of every 
year, Global Action Week is a focal moment in the GCE’s campaigning 
when members coordinate campaigning efforts around a particular theme. 
In 2008, the focus was on breaking the record for the world’s biggest lesson. More than 7.5 million people took part in the planned lesson, which 
focused on Quality Education to End Exclusion4. The global lesson utilized 
the GCE’s networks in the North and the South to bring together education organizations, campaigners, school children, politicians, and celebrities from around the world and build and strengthen connections between 
different groups. Thus—in contrast to the inter/national top-down notion 
of learning and its formulation of sharp distinctions between global and 
local—the global lesson was concerned with building a sense of a shared 
international global vision. In this, while stressing the importance of local 
affi liations, there was also an acknowledgement of the strategic gains from 
global connection.
The lesson plan focused on what constitutes a quality education and 
the groups currently excluded from receiving this. There was scope for 
learner participation as students were invited to suggest their defi nitions 
of ‘quality education.’ A number of national coalitions adapted the plan to 
fi t with their national curricula and incorporated issues relevant to their 
national context. For example, in Kenya the lesson included a focus on 
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 123
the education needs for children and young people who had experienced 
violence and exclusion in the postelection crisis. Thus, the lesson did not 
suggest context was irrelevant, but the particularities of context came to 
be connected with a wider discussion of quality and exclusion. All of these 
were elements of a pedagogy associated with reconstructed international 
relations and pedagogies with the potential to express transversal dialogue. 
However, in order to be recognised as an offi cial world-record attempt, 
which was important for GCE publicity, and in order to facilitate a sense 
of connection between participants in different places, the lesson followed 
a similar format in every country. This included a ‘test’ at the end in which 
participants were tested on what they had learned. This prescribed formula 
meant that space was limited for the expression of diverse local forms of 
learning and experimentation with pedagogical practice. Despite the focus 
on quality and exclusion, within the lesson plan itself there was little attention to the way in which processes of exclusion take place both outside 
and within school, and the ways they are affected by power inequalities 
at global, national, and local levels. Gender issues were barely mentioned 
beyond giving girls as an example of an excluded group.
The aim of the Global Lesson was to raise awareness of the numbers of 
children still excluded from school and to put pressure on governments and 
global leaders to invest more in education. As such it probably achieved 
these limited inter/national objectives. However, wider pedagogic concerns 
to collectively engage in a critical examination of global processes concerning justice or inequality were addressed only as a side issue.
The Global Lesson in many ways illustrates both the strengths of the 
GCE and the challenges that come with building a global movement around 
gender equality and education. Much of the GCE’s success so far has been 
in their ability to mobilize very large numbers of people across borders and 
bring different constituencies together through the Global Action Week, 
building up very real pressure for change. Yet this very process involves 
negotiating between the competing priorities and perspectives of different 
groups. To some extent simple ‘top line’ campaign messages do not encourage the exploration of more complex, nuanced and controversial issues such 
as gender equality or ideas around identity, difference, local complexity and 
global inequality. The high profi le of these messages refl ects strategic decisions to prioritise infl uencing key global players, and a missed opportunity 
to consolidate meaningful outward links to the global women’s movement 
or other civil society networks working on social justice, or participatory 
and critical pedagogies.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has counterposed three different ways of understanding globalization and drawn out the implication for thinking about pedagogies 
124 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
associated with gender equality in education. The most limited, but also the 
most widely circulating meaning of gender equality, is that which aspires 
only to have parity in the numbers of girls and boys in school. This view is 
associated with pedagogies concerned with transmitting skills and fostering inter/national participation in a global marketplace. Critical views of 
pedagogy that develop a sense of the complexity of gender and different 
forms of globalization struggle for articulation. Even when the UN or large 
civil-society organizations have policy supporting these, they are diffi cult 
to put into practice. The strategic challenge for advocates of gender equality 
in education as a global aspiration is to assess how much useful collaboration is possible with the agenda of skills and free markets, and where and 
how to stage the important contestations regarding expanded notions or 
equality, empowerment, and critical pedagogies.
NOTES
 1. This chapter expands ideas initially discussed in working papers developed 
as part of the ESRC funded research project Gender, Education, and Global 
Poverty Reduction Initiatives (Award number RES 167–25–0260). We are 
grateful to fellow members of that research team (Jenni Karlsson, Herbert 
Makinda, Jane Onsongo, Veerle Dieltiens, and Chris Yates) and advisory 
committees in Kenya and South Africa for comments on earlier drafts. Special thanks to Yvonne Raley for very helpful advice on the development of the 
initial paper for this volume.
 2. See GCE’s constitution at http://www.campaignforeducation.org/about/
about_constitution_en.html
 3. http://www.unesco.org/education/efa/ed_for_all/dakfram_eng.shtml.
 4. http://www.campaignforeducation.org
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aikman, S. Intercultural Education and Literacy: An Ethnographic Study of 
Indigenous Knowledge and Learning in the Peruvian Amazon. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins, 1999.
Aikman, S. and E. Unterhalter. Beyond access: transforming policy and practice 
for gender equality in education. Oxford: Oxfam GB, 2005.
Antrobus, P. “Critiquing the MDGs from a Caribbean Perspective 1.” Gender and 
Development 13, no. 1 (2005): 94–104.
Appadurai, A. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press, 1996.
Appiah, K. Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers (Issues of Our Time). 
New York: W. W. Norton, 2006.
Baylis, J., and S. Smith, eds. The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction 
to International Relations. 2nd ed. Oxford and New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2001.
Bhabha, H. K. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge, 1994.
Birdsall, N., and M. Vaishnav. “Education and the MDGs: Realizing the Millennium Compact.” Journal of International Affairs 58, no. 2 (2005): 257–264.
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 125
Black, R., and H. White, eds. Targeting Development: Critical Perspectives on the 
Millennium Development Goals. London and New York: Routledge, 2003.
Braidotti, R. Nomadic Subjects. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.
Boni, A. “Using the Capability Approach and Power Theories to Analyse Competency Discourses in Higher Education.” Paper presented at the seminar organized 
by the education thematic group of the HDCA (Human Development and Capability Association), Nottingham, England, March 2008.
Bourn, D. “Education for Sustainable Development in The UK: Making the Connections Between the Environment and Development Agendas.” Theory and 
Research in Education 6, no. 2 (2008): 193–206.
Brock, G., and H. Brighouse. The Political Philosophy of Cosmopolitanism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Bronfen, E., and M. Kavka, eds. Feminist Consequences: Theory for the New 
Century. New York: Columbia University Press, 2001.
Carrim, N. “Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices in 
a Post-apartheid South Africa.” In International Handbook of Comparative 
Education, eds. R. Cowen and A. Kazamias. Berlin: Springer, forthcoming.
Chan, J. “Between Effi ciency, Capability and Recognition: Competing Epistemes 
in Global Governance Reforms.” Comparative Education 43, no. 3 (2007): 
359–376.
Chapman, S., and S. Miske. “Promoting Girls’ Education In Africa: Evidence from 
the Field Between 1996 and 2003.” In The Structure and Agency of Women’s 
Education, ed. M. Maslak, 87–106. Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 2007.
Chung, F. Making UNGEI Work: Lessons From Four African Countries. Nairobi: 
UNICEF Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Offi ce, 2007.
Cohen, R., and S. Rai, eds. Global Social Movements: Towards a Cosmopolitan 
Politics. London: Athlone Press, 2000.
Cornwall, A., E. Harrison, and A. Whitehead, eds. Feminisms in Development: 
Contradictions, Contestations and Challenges. London: Zed Books, 2007.
Davies, I., M. Evans, and A. Reid. “Globalising Citizenship Education? A Critique 
of ‘Global Education’ and ‘Citizenship Education.’“ British Journal of Educational Studies 53, no.1 (2005): 66–89.
Edwards, M., and J. Gaventa. Global Citizen Action. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner 
Publishers, 2001.
Fast Track Initiative (FTI). Education For All–Fast Track Initiative. 2002. Available at http://www.worldbank.org/education/efafti/overview.asp (accessed 19 
May 2008).
Fraser, N. “Mapping the Feminist Imagination: From Redistribution to Recognition to Representation.” Constellations 12, no.3 (2005): 295–307.
Elliott, L., and D. Atkinson. The Gods That Failed. London: Bodley Head, 2008.
Gaventa, J. Power After Lukes: An Overview of Theories Of Power Since Lukes 
and Their Application To Development. Brighton: Participation Group, Institute of Development Studies, 2003.
 . “Participation and Citizenship: Exploring Power for Change.” Paper presented at the ODI/IDS Development Horizons Seminar, 2007. Available at 
http://www.odi.org.uk/events/horizons_nov06/22Jan/John%20Gaventa.pdf
Global Campaign for Education (GCE). A Fair Chance: Attaining Gender Equity in 
Basic Education by 2005. Johannesburg: Global Campaign for Education, 2003.
 . Girls Can’t Wait: Why Girls’ Education Matters, and How To Make It 
Happen Now. Johannesburg: Global Campaign for Education, 2005a.
 . Missing the Mark: A ‘School Report’ on Rich Countries’ Contribution to 
Universal Primary Education by 2015. Johannesburg: Global Campaign for 
Education, 2005b.
126 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
 . ‘Underachievers’: A ‘School Report’ on Rich Countries’ Contribution to 
Universal Primary Education by 2015. Johannesburg: Global Campaign for 
Education, 2006.
 . ‘Not Up To Scratch’: A ‘School Report’ on Rich Countries’ Contribution 
to Universal Primary Education by 2015. Johannesburg: Global Campaign for 
Education, 2007.
 . Global School Report 2008: No Excuses! A Global Report Card Ranking Governments Efforts To Achieve Education for All. Johannesburg: Global 
Campaign for Education, 2008.
Green, A. Education, Globalization and the Nation State. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1997.
Held, D. Global Covenant: The Social Democratic Alternative to the Washington 
Consensus. Cambridge: Polity, 2004.
Held, D., A. McGrew, D. Goldblatt, and J. Parraton. Globalization. Global Governance 5 (1999): 483–496.
Herz, B., and G. Sperling. What Works In Girls’ Education: Evidence and Policies 
From The Developing World. New York: Council on Foreign Relations, 2004.
Hickling-Hudson, A., and R. Ahlquist. “Contesting the Curriculum in the Schooling of Indigenous Children in Australia and the United States: From Eurocentrism to Culturally Powerful Pedagogies.” Comparative Education Review 47, 
no. 1 (2003): 64–89.
Higgins, L., and R. Rwanyange. “Ownership in the Education Reform Process in 
Uganda.” Compare 35, no. 1 (2005): 7–26.
Hill, M., and E. King. “Women’s Education and Well-Being.” Feminist Economics
1, no. 2 (1995): 21–46.
Hooks, B. Teaching To Transgress: Education As the Practice Of Freedom. London: Routledge, 1994.
Kabeer, N. “Resources, Agency, Achievements: Refl ections on the Measurement of 
Women’s Empowerment.” Development and Change 30, no. 3 (1999): 435–464.
 . “Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: A Critical Analysis of the 
Third Millennium Development Goal.” In Gender and the Millennium Development Goals, ed. C. Sweetman. Oxford: Oxfam GB, 2005.
Lather, P. Feminist Research In Education: Within/Against. Geelong, Vic.: Deakin 
University Press, 1991a.
 . Getting Smart: Feminist Research and Pedagogy With/in the Postmodern. 
New York: Routledge, 1991b.
Lauder, H., P. Brown, J.-A.Dillabough, and A. H. Halsey, eds. Education, Globalization and Social Change. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Longwe, S. H. “Education for Women’s Empowerment or Schooling for Women’s 
Subordination?” Gender and Development 6, no. 2 (1998): 19–26.
Luke, C., and J. Gore. Feminisms and Critical Pedagogy. New York: Routledge, 
1992.
Marshall, H. and M. Arnot. “Competing curriculum agendas for gender justice: 
The implications of EFA and global citizenship education.” In Girls’ Schooling 
at a Critical Juncture: conceptual frameworks and global engagements, eds. S. 
Fennell and M. Arnot. London: Routledge, 2007.
McCowan, T. Enacting Citizenship: A Study of Three Educational Initiatives. PhD 
thesis, Institute of Education, University of London, 2008.
Mohanty, C. T. Feminism Without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003.
Molyneux, M. “The Chimera Of Success: Gender Ennui and the Changed International Policy Environment.” In Feminisms In Development: Contradictions, 
Contestations and Challenge, eds. A. Cornwall, E. Harrison, and A. Whitehead, 227–240. London: Zed Books, 2007.
Global Aspirations for Gender Equality in Education 127
Mundy, K. “Global Governance, Educational Change.” Comparative Education 
43, no. 3 (2007): 339–357.
Mundy, K., and L. Murphy. “Transnational Advocacy, Global Civil Society? Emerging Evidence from the Field of Education.” Comparative Education Review 45, 
no. 1 (2001): 85–126.
North, A. “Missed Target Triggers Call For Bold Steps—Will They Be Enough?” 
Equals 16, (2006): 1–3.
 . Notes from interviews conducted with senior fi gures within UNGEI/UNICEF, London/New York, July 2008.
Ntuli, P. P. “The Missing Link Between Culture and Education: Are We Still Chasing Gods That Are Not Our Own?” In African Renaissance: The New Struggle,
ed. M. W. Makgoba. Sandton/Cape Town: Mafube/Tafelberg, 1999.
Nussbaum, M. C. Cultivating Humanity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1997.
Okin, S. M. (). “Poverty, Well-Being, and Gender: What Counts, Who’s Heard?” 
Philosophy & Public Affairs 31, no. 3 (2003): 280–316.
Powell, W. W., and K. Snellman. “The Knowledge Economy.” Annual Review of 
Sociology 30, no. 1 (2004): 199–220.
Rampal, A. “An Indigenous Discourse to Cradle Our Cognitive Discourse and 
Script Our Aspirations.” In International Handbook of Comparative Education, eds. R. Cowen and A. Kazamias. Berlin: Springer, forthcoming.
Rao, N., and A. Robinson-Pant. Adult Education and Indigenous People: Addressing Gender In Policy and Practice. International Journal of Educational Development 26, no. 2 (2006): 209–223.
Rao, S. “Woman-As-Symbol: The Intersections of Identity Politics, Gender, and 
Indian Nationalism.” Women’s Studies International Forum 22, no. 3 (1999): 
317–328.
Rapport, N., and R. Stade. “A Cosmopolitan Turn—Or Return?” Social Anthropology 15, no. 2 (2007): 223–235.
Rizvi, F. “Democracy and Education after September 11.” Globalisation, Societies 
and Education 1 (2003): 25–40.
Robinson-Pant, A. “Education For Women: Whose Values Count?” Gender and 
Education 16, no. 4 (2004): 473–489.
Rose, P. “Is There A ‘Fast-Track’ to Achieving Education For All?” International 
Journal of Educational Development 25, no. 4 (2005): 381–394.
Sachs, J. The End Of Poverty : How We Can Make It Happen in Our Lifetime. 
London: Penguin Books, 2005.
Said, E. Orientalism. London: Penguin Books, 1978.
Schultz, T.P. “Why Governments Should Invest More To Educate Girls.” World 
Development 30, no. 2 (2002): 207–22.
Seel, A., and D. Clarke. Integrating Gender into Education For All–Fast Track Initiative Processes and National Education Plans. Washington: UNGEI, 2005.
Spivak, G. C. Outside in the Teaching Machine. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Stoetzler, M., and N. Yuval-Davis. “Standpoint Theory, Situated Knowledge and 
the Situated Imagination.” Feminist Theory 3, no. 3 (2002): 315–333.
Education for All–Fast Track Initiative (FTI). Quality Education For All Children: 
Meeting The Challenge (Annual Report, 2007). Washington, DC: World Bank, 
2007.
United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative (UNGEI). Factsheet. New York: 
UNGEI, 2006. http://www.ungei.org/resources/fi les/Ungeifactsheet_Nov06.
pdf (accessed 13 May 2008).
UNICEF/UNESCO. A Human Rights-Based Approach to Education For All: A 
Framework for the Realization Of Children’s Right To Education and Rights 
Within Education. New York/Paris: UNICEF/UNESCO, 2007.
128 Elaine Unterhalter and Amy North
Unterhalter, E. “Mobilization, Meanings and Measures: Refl ections on Girls’ Education.” Development 48, no. 1 (2005): 110–114.
 . Gender, Schooling and Global Social Justice. London: Routledge, 2007.
 . “Cosmopolitanism, Global Social Justice and Gender Equality In Education.” Compare 29, no. 3 (2008): 539–553.
Vandemoortele, J. The MDGs and Pro-poor Policies: Can External Partners Make 
a Difference? Policy paper, United Nations Development Programme. New 
York: UNDP, 2003.
Vavrus, F. Desire and Decline. New York: Peter Lang, 2003.
 . “Adjusting Inequality: Education and Structural Adjustment Policies in 
Tanzania.” Harvard Educational Review 75, no. 2 (2005): 174–201.
Walker, M. Higher Education Pedagogies: A Capabilities Approach. Maidenhead, 
UK: Society for Research into Higher Education/Open UP, 2006.
World Bank. Engendering Development. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2001.
 . Education Sector Strategy Update: Achieving Education For All, Broadening our Perspective, Maximizing our Effectiveness. Washington, DC: The World 
Bank, 2005. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/
ESSU/Education_Sector_Strategy_Update.pdf (accessed 12 May 2008).
 . Millennium Development Goals: Confronting the challenges of gender 
equality and fragile states. Global Monitoring Report 2007. Washington, DC: 
The World Bank, 2007.
Yuval-Davis, N. Gender and Nation. London: Sage, 1997.
Yuval-Davis, N., and M. Stoetzler. “Imagined Boundaries and Borders: A Gendered Gaze.” European Journal of Women’s Studies 9, no. 3 (2002): 329–344.
8 ‘Let Us Now Praise . . . ’
Rethinking Role Models and 
Heroes in an Egalitarian Age
Meira Levinson1
INTRODUCTION
Martin Luther King Jr. is indisputably an American hero. In a recent Gallup 
poll, he came in second only to Mother Teresa as the most admired person 
from the twentieth century (Newport 2006). He and Christopher Columbus are the only two non-presidents to have national holidays designated 
in their honor. Last year, a full two-thirds of high school students surveyed 
in a nationally representative sample named Martin Luther King Jr. as one 
of the fi ve “most famous Americans,” easily vaulting him into fi rst place 
on the list. A parallel survey of adults similarly earned King one-third of 
the vote, putting him second only to Benjamin Franklin (Wineburg and 
Monte-Sano 2008; although it is important to note that respondents were 
explicitly told to exclude presidents and their wives from the possible list 
of “most famous”). King’s popularity presumably refl ects, at least in part, 
his ubiquity in American history textbooks that cover the period, every US 
civics book, literally thousands of trade books for children and adults, and 
almost every classroom and media outlet across the country during Black 
History Month. There is little doubt that Martin Luther King is widely 
taught and recognized as an “American hero” (Bond 1993).
What are the civic implications of Americans’ recognition and elevation of King as a heroic fi gure? These are much harder to discern. The 
techniques used by King and his colleagues in the civil rights movement 
are arguably moribund, despite the fact that our country faces a multitude 
of ills (and commits a multitude of sins) that threaten justice, equality, and 
liberty as much now as fi fty years ago. Civil disobedience, collective action 
among thousands of citizens for a sustained period of time, nonviolent protest—these are evident neither in school curricula, which tend to treat King 
as a towering fi gure who single-handedly led Americans into ‘the promised 
land,’ nor in American civic or political practice in the early twenty-fi rst 
century.2
 Young people (and probably adults, too) fail to recognize even 
that they could carry forward King’s work in any but the most anodyne 
ways. Among the thousand or so middle school students that I taught over 
the course of about a decade, for example, almost all expressed fervent 
130 Meira Levinson
admiration for Martin Luther King while never thinking to try to put his 
techniques into action. They would speak generally of King’s perseverance, 
his standing up for what he believed in, his willingness to sacrifi ce himself 
to the cause, and other such platitudes. But they rarely if ever referenced 
his broader civic leadership or his empowerment of others to advance the 
causes for which he and they stood. Furthermore, even the sanitized and 
“antiseptic” (Bond 1993) personal characteristics they did identify did not 
motivate them to act in a different way on a day-to-day basis. This is admiration devoid of emulation.
Why does this matter? Why should it matter that at least one—and I 
would actually argue many more—of America’s ‘most famous’ heroes lives 
on in words but not in deeds? In part, I think it matters because our democracy would be stronger, and we as citizens would be better, if we were to 
emulate King in addition to venerating him. I think that young people as 
developing citizens should learn about the power of collective action, such 
as by learning and practicing the techniques for identifying and working 
with allies on behalf of a common cause. I also think that we would do 
well to recognize that the goals that King fought so tirelessly to achieve 
are not yet fully realized, and to feel an obligation to promote those goals 
ourselves. It is no diminution of his heroic stature to admit that the struggle 
needs to continue if his and others’ hard-fought gains are to be sustained. 
In this respect too, it is disturbing and even a bit bizarre that so many 
Americans profess deep admiration for King while failing to actually work 
to advance the causes for which he fought.
On the other hand, there are some ways in which our worship of King 
in words but not in deeds are perfectly acceptable. Heroes are frequently 
referred to as symbols of what people or a nation identify with, care about, 
or see themselves as standing for. Rev. Peter Gomes remarks, for example, 
that “a discussion about heroes and heroines is essentially an exercise in 
self-discovery and cultural introspection; and in choosing to honor certain 
persons as heroes and certain actions as heroic, we invest those persons 
and actions with ideals that we ourselves value and admire” (Gomes 2002, 
xi). In this respect, the fact that we hold up Martin Luther King—a liberal African American who crusaded for social and economic justice, civil 
rights, and racial equality, among other goals—as an American hero is 
itself worth celebrating.3
 Whether or not we actually emulate him, the fact 
that we hold him up as a symbol of what’s good about our country is itself 
a valuable good.
The purpose of this essay is to delve more deeply into the complicated 
network of relationships among heroes, role models, and democratic civic 
education in the US in the early twenty-fi rst century. In this essay, I argue 
that while heroes have historically served many purposes in educating 
young citizens and shaping and sustaining the civitas, these purposes are 
frequently being lost or even undermined because of heroes’ diminishing 
stature and changing roles in the United States today. Much ink has been 
Let Us Now Praise 131
spilled bemoaning the loss of heroes in the modern American imagination. 
Arthur Schlesinger complains, for example, that “Ours is an age without 
heroes. . . . Today no one bestrides our narrow world like a colossus; we 
have no giants” (Schlesinger 1968, 341). Charles I. Glicksberg concurs, 
“What is wrong with their age is that it has lost its faith in the greatness or 
the capacity for greatness of man” (Glicksberg 1968, 357; see also Boorstin 
1968; Porpora 1996; Gibbon 2002). Unlike these authors, I do not bemoan 
this state of affairs: in part because it’s not entirely true, as the example of 
Martin Luther King shows;4
 in part because I think our country is stronger, and certainly our understanding of history is more accurate, when we 
recognize and discuss individuals’ complexities, nuances, and even failings; 
and in part because we can achieve the same civic goals for which we used 
to use heroes in other ways. But to do so, we need to be thoughtful and 
intentional, and I would argue that these characteristics have been missing 
in much democratic civic education both taught in schools and promoted 
through the media.
The rest of the essay is structured as follows: fi rst, I examine the various reasons that people have given for needing heroes, creating heroes, 
and/or teaching about heroes. I focus in particular on the civic uses of 
heroes, and give examples of how civic educators in the past used heroes 
to advance these purposes. In the second section, I consider whether these 
uses of heroes are appropriate for democratic civic education in the United 
States in the early twenty-fi rst century. This question has two components: 
(1) Are the goals themselves that heroes were used to promote actually worthy of democratic civic education? And (2) to the extent that they are, is it 
possible in this day and age to use heroes to achieve such goals? Question 
(1) is essentially a normative and political question, while (2) is essentially a 
sociological, psychological, and pedagogical question. In the third section, 
fi nally, I consider how we might achieve worthwhile goals of democratic 
civic education in twenty-fi rst-century America without the widespread use 
of civic heroes, as well as highlighting where and how heroes can still play 
an effective role in democratic civic education. With respect to the latter, 
I suggest that in order truly to learn from heroes, students need to learn 
more about their techniques—their step-by-step mechanisms for achievement. As we teach this, we and our students will discover that many heroes 
are public symbols for the important work and efforts of many ‘behind 
the scenes’ individuals. In this vein, I will also argue that we should spend 
at least as much time in school helping students learn about these ‘behind 
the scenes’ participants and activists, particularly in students’ own communities, as we spend studying the ‘heroes’ in the front. Sustained study 
of and interaction with these ‘ordinary role models,’ I suggest, can take us 
a long way toward motivating simultaneous admiration and emulation—
and thus overcome the paradox with which I opened this essay. I conclude 
with some brief refl ections on the potential implications of Barack Obama’s 
presidency with regard to these issues.
132 Meira Levinson
TEN CIVIC FUNCTIONS OF HEROES
Society’s elevation and recognition of heroes may serve many civic functions—at least ten, by my count. In particular, social and civic recognition and 
elevation of heroes may:
A. model expectations by
 (1) providing models for emulation by citizens;
 (2) imparting and reinforcing common civic values and norms;
 (3) establishing touchstones for the qualities citizens should expect of 
elected offi cials and other civic leaders;
 (4) teaching citizens their place by contrasting their own ordinariness 
with heroes’ extraordinariness;
B. promote civic unity and identifi cation by
 (5) inspiring patriotism;
 (6) unifying the country via establishment of a civil religion;
 (7) unifying the country via establishment and reinforcement of symbolic, inclusive membership;
C. inspire greatness of character and action by
 (8) combating historical fatalism and thus inspiring potential leaders 
to grasp the reins of power and citizens in general to become civically engaged;
 (9) motivating citizens to look for and realize greatness within 
themselves;
 (10) symbolizing human possibility.
Although these functions are often confl ated in theory and overlapping in 
practice, it is important to tease out their conceptual and empirical distinctions in order to understand what we have potentially lost in losing common 
civic heroes, and hence also in order to refl ect sensibly on how we can overcome or at least minimize those aspects of this loss that are troubling. In the 
rest of this section, therefore, I explain each of these civic functions of heroes 
and provide evidence of their historic use in civic education inside and outside 
schools.
Provide Models for Emulation by Citizens
One of the most basic functions that the public elevation of heroes has served 
in the past—and I will argue in Part II below that ‘role models’ have taken over 
today—is that of providing models for emulation. We valorize and teach our 
children about heroes in order to inspire ourselves and our children to behave 
like them and thus be better people in general—and from a civic perspective, 
better citizens in particular. Thus, “[t]extbook writers typically used statesmen 
like George Washington as exemplars of republican character” (Tyack 2001, 
337). A typical nineteenth-century school recitation taught, for example:
Let Us Now Praise 133
Perhaps the reason little folks
Are sometimes great when they grow taller,
Is just because, like Washington,
They do their best when they are smaller. (Wecter 1941, 99)
By engaging “in a constant striving to live up to” such heroes (Kelly 2003, 
89), young citizens practice and imbibe specifi cally republican and/or democratic civic virtues. Nor is this confi ned to the early days of our republic, as the 1954 textbook Civics for Americans strikingly exemplifi es. It 
quotes a naturalized citizen in a chapter on naturalization and the benefi ts 
of American citizenship:
[T]his George Washington, who died long before I was born, was 
like a king in greatness, and he and I were Fellow Citizens. . . . It 
thrilled me to realize what sudden greatness had fallen on me; and 
at the same time it sobered me, as with a sense of responsibility I 
strove to conduct myself as befi tted a Fellow Citizen. (Clark et al. 
1954, 159)
There is a clear message here, reinforced throughout this textbook and 
others from the same time period, that good citizenship is a common 
responsibility resting on shared civic virtues; as our greatest citizens (such 
as Washington) did, so should we try to do in our own small ways. Dixon 
Wecter similarly remarks rather ruefully in his landmark work on American heroes that he and his schoolmates were constantly taught, “if we 
worked very hard and took infi nite pains, and always did our duty, we 
might become little Washingtons.” This is a two-sided sword, to be sure: 
“He is therefore a silent reproach to our shortcomings. Some of us, especially in boyhood, were inclined to resent the fact” (Wecter 1941, 130). I 
will discuss the risks of this approach, and consider how alternative uses 
of heroes and role models may ameliorate such resentment and potential 
attendant disengagement, in the fi nal section of this essay.
Impart and Reinforce Common Civic Values and Norms
Closely related to the fi rst goal of using heroes to provide models for civic 
emulation is that of establishing and promoting the civic values, norms, 
and virtues that are intended to tie the nation or civitas together. As I 
noted in the Introduction, each nation’s heroes are often thought to provide a window into understanding the nation’s soul: what it values and 
emulates, and how it conceives of itself—what it believes it stands for. 
Thus, Wecter lauds Washington, Franklin, Jefferson, Jackson, Lincoln, 
Robert E. Lee, Theodore Roosevelt, and others as those “from whom we 
have hewn our symbols of government, our ideas of what is most prizeworthy as ‘American,’” linking them as tangible symbols of American 
134 Meira Levinson
values with “touchstones like the Declaration of Independence and the 
Constitution” (Wecter 1941, viii). As many authors have noted, this is in 
large part a constructed, even artifi cial process. Thus, Jackson symbolizes 
democratization and populism, not Native American genocide or antiintellectualism, even though these may equally accurately capture both the 
man and some foundational American values. On the other side, the “heroifi cation” (Loewen 1995, 19) process has similarly turned Martin Luther 
King into a symbol of America’s ongoing ‘dream’ of equality and diversity, 
rather than a reminder of its persistent racism or militarism, against which 
King protested so mightily.5
 (See Kammen 1991 for an account of this process throughout US history.)
This process of national civic self-conceptualization and self-actualization through hero identifi cation and elevation is made transparent when 
one looks at the treatment of national heroes in civics textbooks. Youth 
are explicitly instructed in the meaning they should ascribe to such heroes, 
and thus in the values they should ascribe to their country. Thus, Civics 
for Citizens (1974) instructs students that Mount Rushmore honors “four 
great Americans who were dedicated to the American ideal of freedom” 
(Dimond and Pfl ieger 1974, 7). In the same vein, Magruder’s American 
Government (1953) shows a picture of students literally dwarfed by the 
statue of Thomas Jefferson at the Jefferson Memorial. The caption reads,
These students in the Jefferson Memorial, Washington, D. C., fi nd inspiration from one of our greatest patriots. Jefferson believed that all 
men were created equal, that men should make their governments, and 
that men should enjoy freedom of speech, of the press, and of religion. 
In his sixty years of public service, Jefferson stamped his personality 
and ideals indelibly upon our country. (McClenaghan 1953, 23)
In this case, the author drives home the point by not just telling the reader 
what Jefferson himself stood for, but further emphasizing that these ideals 
are “indelibly” stamped upon the country as well. Linking this use of hero 
identifi cation with the purpose of inspiring emulation, the 1956 civics textbook Youth Faces American Citizenship similarly pictures Lincoln towering over visiting high school students, explaining, “These young men are 
rededicating themselves to the democratic ideals for which Lincoln stood” 
(Alilunas and Sayre 1956, 384). Here Lincoln’s heroic fi gure provides both 
civic self-defi nition and a model for citizens’ personal emulation.
Establish Touchstones for the Qualities Citizens Should 
Expect of Elected Offi cials and Other Civic Leaders
In addition to imparting the values that defi ne the country in general, the 
identifi cation and elevation of civic heroes can also serve to teach citizens the 
values and characteristics that ideally defi ne their civic leaders in particular. 
Let Us Now Praise 135
In this respect, civic heroes may not necessarily be models of emulation for 
all citizens. Rather, the implication is that such heroes are ‘the kind of people’ 
who should be running the country. Thus, the elevation of military heroes 
may serve to teach citizens that their elected leaders should also have served 
in the military, or at least demonstrate the virtues of strength, fearlessness, 
and discipline that military heroes often possess. Conversely, if young people 
are taught about heroes who fought injustice, bucked the system, worked to 
incorporate the disenfranchised, and so forth, they may similarly learn to 
look for civic leaders who possess these virtues or embody these ideals.
A corollary of this approach is the potential demeaning or civic exclusion 
of those who are not heroized. If certain kinds of people—women or nonwhites, say—are not elevated as heroes, then the implicit (or even explicit) 
message is that such people are also not appropriate civic leaders. In response 
to a vast array of pressure groups, contemporary textbook publishers are 
now exquisitely sensitive to this concern about the exclusionary power of 
symbolism, and thus focus intensely on making sure that the heroes that students learn about are visibly diverse and multicultural. White men are now 
almost never featured consecutively in sidebars or photos in civics (or any 
other) textbooks; rather, every white man or other apparent ‘mainstream’ 
hero is followed by a visible ethnic or racial minority, woman, naturalized 
citizen, disabled person, or other ‘multicultural’ hero (see e.g., Davis et al. 
2005; Hartley and Vincent 2005; McClenaghan 2003; Wolfson 2005; Glencoe/McGraw-Hill 2005). In this case, the aim is to provide multiple touchstones for civic leaders—touchstones for each racial and ethnic group, both 
genders, etc.—in order to inspire an inclusive conception of desirable civic 
leaders. (I come back to this issue of symbolic membership below.)
Teach Citizens Their Place by Contrasting Their 
Ordinariness with Heroes’ Extraordinariness
At its extreme, this elevation of heroes as touchstones for civic leaders but 
not for ‘ordinary’ citizens can result in the antidemocratic lesson that ordinary citizens in fact should not be involved in governance or civic leadership 
at all. Thomas Carlyle expresses this conviction throughout On Heroes, 
Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History.
We come now to the last form of Heroism; that which we call Kingship. The Commander over Men; he to whose will our wills are to be 
subordinated, and loyally surrender themselves, and fi nd their welfare 
in doing so, may be reckoned the most important of Great Men. He is 
practically the summary for us of all the various fi gures of Heroism; 
Priest, Teacher, whatsoever of earthly or of spiritual dignity we can 
fancy to reside in a man, embodies itself here, to command over us, to 
furnish us with constant practical teaching, to tell us for the day and 
hour what we are to do. (Carlyle 1893, 217)
136 Meira Levinson
Here, heroes are specifi cally granted powers and rights of civic leadership 
that ordinary human beings do not possess or deserve. Furthermore, ordinary human beings are not encouraged to develop heroic traits, to aspire 
to the virtues or powers possessed by “Great Men” such as Cromwell or 
Napoleon. According to this view, most people are not capable of leadership insofar as good leadership necessitates heroism, and we wouldn’t 
want them to try—especially because society would be a shambles if we 
had more than a few heroic civic leaders in any generation. “Greatness is 
hard for common humanity to bear. . . . great men live dangerously. They 
introduce extremes into existence” (Schlesinger 1968, 342). Thus, in this 
approach heroes are taught as people to be admired and even feared, but 
defi nitely not to be emulated in aspiration or practice.
Insofar as civic leaders are considered to have qualitatively different virtues from ordinary citizens, another approach to civic education is simply 
to eliminate heroes from the curriculum at all. Joseph Moreau explains the 
perspective of a textbook author from 1885 thusly:
The problem with colorful stories of past heroes, argued Alexander 
Johnston of Princeton, was that the ‘mass of pupils’ had little chance 
to emulate a John Smith or Pilgrim Father in contemporary, industrial 
America. They needed ‘to learn from history the simple and homely 
duties of good citizenship.’ (Moreau 2003, 50)
The practical implications of this approach may be found in the many 
1950s civics textbooks that devoted full chapters to teaching the civic 
importance of having ‘a pleasing personality,’ being a ‘good date,’ and 
other such duties. This approach sidesteps the obviously antidemocratic 
implications of Carlyle’s arguments while nonetheless maintaining a stark 
separation between the heroism of the elite and the more mundane virtues 
required of the rest of us.
Inspire Patriotism
A fi fth purpose of identifying, elevating, and teaching about heroes can be 
to inspire patriotism. As Noah Webster argued, “Every child in America 
should be acquainted with his own country. . . . As soon as he opens his lips, 
he should rehearse the history of his own country; he should lisp the praise of 
liberty and of those illustrious heroes and statesmen who have wrought a revolution in her favor” (Noah Webster, “On the Education of Youth in America,” quoted in Pangle and Pangle 2000, 32). This patriotism may sometimes 
require some historical reconstruction or even deception: “Although he had 
not admired Washington’s leadership during the war, Rush thought it wise to 
tell less than the full truth about the founding fathers: ‘Let the world admire 
our patriots and heroes. Their supposed talents and virtues . . . will serve the 
cause of patriotism and of our country’” (Tyack 2001, 337). Similarly, the 
Let Us Now Praise 137
accomplishments—both real and mythic—of such iconic heroes as Lewis 
and Clark, Douglas MacArthur, Harry Truman, Theodore Roosevelt, and 
the American cowboy, both reinforce America’s ‘can do’ spirit (the function of imparting common civic values) and inspire love of the country that 
exemplifi es such a characteristic. A variation on this approach is to inspire 
patriotism by highlighting the nation’s history of nurturing and inspiring 
heroes: for example, by teaching that ‘only in America’ could heroic entrepreneurs such as Andrew Carnegie or Bill Gates achieve their dreams—and thus 
achieve the ‘American dream’ more broadly—or could heroes such as Helen 
Keller and Colin Powell rise from obscurity to greatness.
Unify the Country via Establishment of a Civil Religion
At the same time, ‘mere’ patriotism is just one stage along the continuum 
of civic purposes that heroes can be made to serve. Further along the continuum, civic heroes can be turned into “demigods” (Tyack 2001, 337), 
used to establish or burnish a civil religion that unites the country in a 
shared reverence of their deifi ed patriots. This process has been especially 
apparent with George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, and Martin Luther 
King. “[H]ero-worship of the living Washington,” for example, started as 
early as the 1770s and has continued virtually every decade since (Wecter 
1941, 111; see also Chapter 6 passim). Consider Legends of the American 
Revolution, published in 1847, which
told of a mystic who had heard the voice of God, ‘I will send a deliverer 
to this land of the New World, who shall save my people from physical bondage, even as my Son saved them from the bondage of spiritual 
death!’ This mystic came from Germany to the New World and one 
midnight consecrated Washington with holy oil, a crown of laurel, and 
a sword. (Wecter 194, 139)
Seventy-fi ve years later, the civic impact of such deifi cation can be seen in 
the report of a young immigrant girl: “‘Never had I prayed . . . in such utter 
reverence and worship as I repeated the simple sentences of my child’s story 
of the patriot. I gazed with adoration at the portraits of George and Martha 
Washington, till I could see them with my eyes shut’” (Tyack 2001, 356). 
Similarly, although it took longer for Lincoln to achieve demigod status,
[i]n the twentieth century . . . Americans began to refashion the man of 
the people [Lincoln] along epic lines. Increasingly, they saw the Christlike Man of Sorrows. They saw the Savior of the Union who takes upon 
himself the pain of his people. They saw the great moralist, the prophet of 
democracy, the Great Emancipator, the giant who changes the course of 
history. They saw the man that can never be reached: a man, for sure, but 
too good, and too big, to be treated as a man. (Schwartz 1990, 98)
138 Meira Levinson
Martin Luther King Jr. too, has attained an almost Christ-like stature in 
the United States. As Majora Carter recently commented in her introduction to a Martin Luther King Day radio special, “In my family, there was 
the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.” 
(Ostroushko 2009). Building on this, the standard narrative could be summarized, only a little facetiously, as follows: ‘King lived and died for our 
sins. He wanted all people to live as brothers and to love each other. For 
some reason there was a lot of racism when King was alive. Through his 
work and especially his “I have a dream” speech, he taught people to love 
each other and not be racist anymore. A racist person then killed him. But 
his dream lives on, and now everybody gets along.’ This myth was carried 
to a logical extreme a few years ago by the four-year-old son of a friend of 
mine. One day in late January (so a week or two after Martin Luther King 
Day), Hersh asked his teacher, “Who gave us nature?” Before his teacher 
could respond, Hersh burst out, “Martin Luther King gave us nature! Since 
he wanted us all to be kind and nice to each other, he gave us nature to 
help us remember how to be nice.” As his teacher wryly remarked in an 
e-mail to his mom, “I thought this was wonderful, but reminded Hersh 
that while MLK did want all those things, nature was here before him” 
(Kanner 2007).
In all of these cases, Washington, Lincoln, and King are constructed as 
Christ-like heroes used to center a civic religion. As Wecter puts it, without 
irony (and probably appropriately so), “these heroes are . . . men who stand 
somehow for the essence of our faith, whose birthplaces and graves we 
make into shrines, and whose faces we carve upon mountains as our American way of writing poetry” (Wecter 1941, viii; see also Kammen 1991).
Unify the Country via Establishment and Reinforcement 
of Symbolic, Inclusive Membership
Another way to unify the country is by establishing and reinforcing an 
inclusive narrative in which all the nation’s peoples (however defi ned) play 
a variety of heroic roles. I discussed above the potentially exclusionary 
characterization of civic leaders’ necessary virtues—say, being white, a 
military veteran, or male—and I noted contemporary textbook authors’ 
attempts in response to expand these often literal images of civic leadership 
in order to establish more inclusive ideals. A similarly self-conscious, symbolically inclusive approach to establishing and teaching civic heroes can 
also be deployed for the purposes of promoting a common national story in 
which all citizens are encouraged to see themselves and of which they are 
encouraged to feel a part. As Chicago mayor “Big Bill” Thompson put it in 
1928, “All nationalities are entitled to a place in the sun, and our national 
heroes are the stars in the fi rmament of our patriotism” (Zimmerman 
2002, 21). Although there have been sporadic challenges to this approach, 
historian Jonathan Zimmerman makes a persuasive case that this blandly 
Let Us Now Praise 139
unifying narrative essentially won out in textbooks throughout the 1980s 
and beyond. “Texts retained an emphasis on ‘positive images’ in history: 
every ethnic group could have its place in the textbook sun, so long as no 
textbook ever said a dark or critical word about its members. . . . Whites 
allowed new actors into the national story so long as the story stayed the 
same” (Zimmerman 2002, 128). The 2005 edition of Civics: Government 
and Economics in Action (Davis et al. 2005), a fairly typical middle- and 
high-school civics textbook from this decade, demonstrates this logic. 
Although it doesn’t feature ‘heroes’ as such, it does feature 15 “Citizen 
Profi les” ranging from Mickey Leland, James Madison, Carol Moseley 
Braun, and Louis Brandeis to Andrea Jung, Alice Rivlin, Thurgood Marshall, and Madeleine Albright. Each paragraph-long (fi ve to seven sentence) 
profi le—which invariably highlights the subject’s nonwhite, non-Christian, 
or female status—is accompanied by a photo and followed by a question 
that reinforces the civic contribution made by that person to the country.
Combat Historical Fatalism
Public identifi cation and elevation of heroes serve an entirely different 
set of civic purposes when they are used to demonstrate the importance 
of individual agency to civil society. These comprise the fi nal three functions discussed in this part of the essay. First, if citizens can be taught to 
recognize heroes’ power to “shape history” (Gibbon 2002, 23; see also 
James 1880), then they will realize that historical fatalism is foolish. History is not inevitable. Thus, citizens must assume some responsibility for 
shaping the future, too. “It takes a man of exceptional vision and strength 
and will—it takes, in short, a hero—to try to wrench history from what 
lesser men consider its preconceived path” (Schlesinger 1968, 350). When 
such ‘lesser men’ realize this, then they will themselves potentially refuse 
to “acquiesce[] in the drift of history” (Schlesinger 1968, 350) and assume 
civic responsibility themselves.
Motivate Citizens to Look for and Realize 
Greatness Within Themselves
Combating historical fatalism is an essential fi rst step for inspiring citizens’ 
assumption of even limited civic responsibility. A still-more ambitious goal 
is to inspire citizens to reach for the same level of greatness in assuming that 
responsibility as their heroes have achieved. “Great men enable us to rise 
to our own highest potentialities. They nerve lesser men to disregard the 
world and trust to their own deepest instinct” (Schlesinger 1968, 350). In a 
certain way, this takes us back to the very fi rst civic function of heroes: to 
provide models for emulation. But that fi rst goal was fairly modest. Citizens 
were expected to emulate their heroes only in specifi c ways (to be honest, 
for example, because George Washington was honest) and to a limited—to 
140 Meira Levinson
a human rather than heroic—degree. One may teach about the heroes of 
the past, however, in order to inspire and even create the heroes of tomorrow. As Ralph Waldo Emerson puts it, “Great men exist [and are taught 
about] so that there may be greater men” (Emerson 1907, 40). This function of teaching about heroes is to inspire citizens to seek out and achieve 
their own heroism, not necessarily in the same domain or with respect to 
the same virtues as the original hero made his or her mark, but in some way 
that enables “the higher self to prevail” (Gibbon 2002, xxi). Thus, someone 
who learns about Washington’s heroic bravery may be inspired to reach for 
greatness inside of herself and become a great teacher, a remarkable sportswoman, or attain some other heroic standing, even if her achievement has 
nothing to do with bravery or politics (or honesty) as such. The Giraffe 
Heroes Project, which works extensively with young people and adults to 
“fi nd new heroes, to tell their stories, and to help more people be heroic” 
(Giraffe Heroes Project 2008), clearly attempts to promote this civic function of identifying and elevating heroes. As they put it, “Everyone has what 
it takes to be a Giraffe”—their term for a hero who “sticks their neck out 
for the common good” (Giraffe Heroes Project 2008).
Symbolize Human Possibility
Finally, heroes can be used to expand our sense of what is possible for all 
of humanity. I discussed above the use of heroes in establishing touchstones for elected or other civic leaders; in this case, heroes are used to 
help citizens envision possibilities beyond those represented in their own 
lives or experiences. “Public heroes—or imperfect people of extraordinary achievement, courage, and greatness of soul whose reach is wider 
than our own—teach us to push beyond ourselves and our neighborhoods 
in our search for models of excellence. They enlarge our imagination, 
teach us to think big, and expand our sense of the possible” (Gibbon 
2002, 13). This is obviously related to functions 8 and 9, but its purpose 
is not necessarily to inspire citizens to become their own heroes; rather, it 
is to inspire citizens to develop civic aspirations that go beyond the realm 
of the apparently possible and even realistic in order to set society on a 
better, more uplifting path.
Having taken the time to distinguish these ten civic functions of hero 
identifi cation and education, I should reiterate that these rarely are so purely 
separated in practice. Consider, for example, a representative discussion of 
Rousseau’s enthusiasm for heroes:
[G]ood citizens . . . identify with great citizens from the past and with 
legislators. Citizens can be made to engage in a constant striving to live 
up to these great examples. As Rousseau says, ‘From the effervescence 
excited by this shared emulation will be born that patriotic intoxication which alone can raise men above themselves, and without which 
Let Us Now Praise 141
freedom is only a vain name and legislation only a chimera.’ (Kelly 
2003, 89–90)
In these few brief sentences, heroes are called upon to play at least three 
different civic functions: as models for emulation, sources of patriotism, 
and sources of unity that together help to construct a common civil society. 
Furthermore, Rousseau’s formulation of the civic purposes of hero-worship 
seems to intimately connect all three functions; they are simultaneously and 
mutually reinforcing, as opposed to sequential or separable. The taxonomy 
of heroism’s civic educative uses is thus admittedly more theoretical than 
empirical, and runs the risk of missing important interconnections. Nonetheless, I suggest that it is worth keeping in mind the many different—and 
at least in theory, distinguishable—civic functions that heroes can serve as 
we move into a consideration of whether each of these functions is in fact 
desirable or even possible in contemporary democratic societies.
USES OF HEROES IN CONTEMPORARY DEMOCRACIES
The Fall of Heroes and Rise of Role Models
It is no accident that most examples of civic education about heroes in Part I 
came from earlier times (eighteenth, nineteenth, and early to mid-twentieth 
centuries). There is strong evidence that the salience of heroes is severely 
limited in the contemporary United States, and thus that they no longer can 
(or do) fulfi ll many of the functions listed above. In an October 2000 Gallup Youth Survey, for example, young people were asked, “Do you have any 
heroes or heroines in the world today—men or women whom you personally greatly admire for their achievements and for their strong moral character?” Over a third of respondents (36 percent) answered no; they were 
unable to identify any hero or heroine whatsoever. The next largest group, 
comprising almost a quarter of young people (23 percent), selected a family 
member. After that, selection slowed to a relative trickle. In other words, 
barely 40 percent of young people were able to identify anyone beyond their 
own family whom they greatly admired for their achievements and character (Gallup and Lyons 2002).6
 Furthermore, even those non-familiars 
whom youth do claim to admire are diminishingly likely to be viewed as 
true heroes. Between 1979 and 1996, young people ages thirteen to seventeen were asked annually, “What one man/woman that you have heard or 
read about, living today in any part of the world, do you admire the most—
not including relatives or personal friends?” Consider Table 8.1, which lists 
top ten admired men from 1979, 1986, and 1996 (Lyons 2008).
In contrast to the list from 1979, which includes a number of men 
to whom it is possible to ascribe heroism of some sort (although Gerald Ford?), it is hard to imagine that many teens in 1996 would have 
142 Meira Levinson
defi ned most of the men they listed as ‘heroes,’ despite their potentially 
fervent admiration for them. Perhaps even more to the point, if they did 
in fact view Pitt, Hardaway, Smith, or Carrey (say) as heroes, that would 
suggest as much about the diminishment of the contemporary conception of heroism as about teens’ propensity for selecting heroes in the 
fi rst place.
Young people aren’t operating in a vacuum, of course. Their contemporary disavowal of heroism arguably refl ects a more general cultural 
shift. As I was researching the literature on heroes for this chapter, I was 
taken aback by the rash of articles starting in the late 1970s specifi cally 
titled “Where have all of the heroes gone?” Articles by this title have 
shown up in publications as diverse as the New Statesman, Columbia 
Journalism Review, Newsweek, Control Engineering, Journal of Sport 
and Social Issues, and Journal of the American Osteopathic Association
(Axthelm 1979; Hanson 1996; Marr 1998; Silverman 2003; Truchard 
2005; McDorman, et al. 2006). As far as I can tell from a fairly extensive electronic database search, there are few if any articles with such 
titles before the mid-1970s. I suggest that the sheer breadth of articles 
with this title signifi es a common sentiment within American culture 
over the past thirty years. Control Engineering is not trying to present a new idea about the loss of heroism in contemporary life (or even 
in contemporary engineering); rather, it is tapping into a loss already 
collectively felt and acknowledged. Book titles have undergone a similar transformation. Consider the ambivalent The Hero in Transition
(Browne and Fishwick 1983) and the despairing Everybody Is Sitting 
on the Curb: How and Why America’s Heroes Disappeared (Edelstein 
Table 8.1 Top Ten Most Admired Men: 1979, 1986, and 1996
1979 1986 1996
Jimmy Carter Ronald Reagan Michael Jordan
Anwar Sadat Jesse Jackson Bill Clinton
Gerald Ford Don Johnson Brad Pitt
Menachem Begin Pope John Paul II Jesse Jackson
Richard Nixon Desmond Tutu Anfernee Hardaway
Muhammad Ali Lee Iacocca Emmitt Smith
Jerry Lewis Bob Geldof/Prince (tie) Ken Griffey Jr.
Pope John Paul II/ 
Gov. Jerry Brown (tie)
Tom Selleck
Rob Lowe/ Bruce Springsteen (tie)
Cal Ripken Jr.
Michael Jackson
Jim Carrey/ Shaquille 
O’Neal (tie)
John Travolta
Let Us Now Praise 143
1996), in comparison to such previous studies of heroism as The Hero, 
American Style (Fishwick 1969) or Dixon Wecter’s 1941 classic The 
Hero in America: A Chronicle of Hero-Worship (Wecter 1941). Along 
the same lines, in “Hero Worship in America,” published in 1949, sociologist Orrin E. Klapp grapples with the challenge of explaining why 
there is so much hero worship (Klapp 1949). It is hard to imagine a 
sociologist identifying such a challenge today.
Admittedly, every age bemoans the loss of great heroes of previous ages 
and their replacement by apparently transient and superfi cial stars of the 
present. “[T]oday seems always less heroic than yesterday” (Wecter 1941, 
489). Churchill himself regretfully noted in 1925, “The great emancipated 
nations seem to have become largely independent of famous guides and 
guardians. They no longer rely upon the Hero, the Commander, or the 
Teacher as they did in bygone rugged ages, or as the less advanced peoples 
do today.” After asking, “Can modern communities do without great men? 
Can they dispense with hero-worship?” he commented in sorrow, “We miss 
our giants. We are sorry that their age is past” (Churchill 1925).
Churchill’s regret, however, was rooted in heroes’ replacement by measures, machines, and “‘the common sense of most’” (Churchill 1925). He 
didn’t bemoan generalized indifference or even antipathy toward heroes 
and heroism in general, the way many do today. Tyler Cowen remarks:
The modern image of a leader is not Theodore Roosevelt charging up a 
hill, but rather Jimmy Carter fi ghting off a rabbit with a canoe paddle, 
Gerald Ford stumbling and bumping his head, or George Bush vomiting in the lap of the Japanese prime minister. Bill Clinton will be 
defi ned forever by his handling of the Monica Lewinsky affair. These 
images demystify power and produce a culture of disillusionment with 
politics and moral leadership. (Cowen 2000)
In recent decades, Cowen’s comments accurately suggest, I think, that the 
conception of heroism—especially to the extent that it has historically been 
tied to leadership—has become diminished and even potentially debased. 
Heroes are no longer ‘great men’ and women straddling the world like a 
colossus. “Today,” by contrast, “many Americans defi ne heroes as decent 
people who sacrifi ce or try to make a difference. They name streets after 
local World War II veterans, parks after teachers, bridges after local politicians and philanthropists. . . . [T]hey democratize the word hero and 
jettison the Greek notion of the hero as superhuman and godlike” (Gibbon 2002, 11).
One potent contemporary example of this trend may be found in CNN 
Heroes, a “global initiative” that intentionally “showcase[s] examples of 
ordinary people who have accomplished extraordinary deeds” (CNN 2008). 
When I randomly checked CNN’s links to “Heroes in the News” one afternoon (16 August 2008, 4:19 p.m.), every single link highlighted a person 
144 Meira Levinson
who had intervened in a crisis to save someone’s life: “Missing toddler found 
safe,” “Wheelchair-bound woman pulled from train’s path,” “Baby pulled 
from burning car,” “Boy, 8, saves pal choking on rock,” and so forth. This 
vision of heroism is totally divorced from any notion of societal change, 
greatness of character, or even intentionality. Perhaps even more to the point, 
this list hardly presents a model for civic emulation, unless we want young 
people to grow up quite literally to become ambulance chasers.7
None of this evidence suggests that admiration and even emulation of 
others is impossible or even unusual in contemporary American society—
just that heroes are not the means by which such admiration and emulation 
are likely fostered. In place of outsized heroes, I believe that Americans have 
come to value life-sized role models. ‘Role models,’ as the concept was fi rst 
defi ned in the 1950s—interestingly, just as conceptions of ‘hero-worship’ 
seem to have been drawing to a close (Addis 1996, 1381; see also Gibbon 
2002, 12)—and continues to be used today, are people whom we admire 
and attempt to emulate. Heroes could in theory thus also be role models. 
But as an empirical psychological matter, at least in contemporary times, 
heroes do not serve as role models. Instead, role models are almost inevitably ‘ordinary’: they are people who seem generally similar to ourselves 
and whose differences from us tend to be along one particular dimension, 
rather than those who are truly extraordinary, especially across multiple 
dimensions (Addis 1996; see also Kemper 1968; Speizer 1981; Lockwood 
and Kunda 1997, 2000). It is their very ordinariness that inspires us to act 
differently and to emulate their achievements, not any overarching greatness of character, stature, or even impact.
Americans’ shift from emulating (at least admiring) extraordinary 
heroes to emulating ordinary role models may help explain recent poll 
and survey results in which family members and friends have come to 
trump others in meriting mention as heroes or role models. Among adults, 
for example, the percentage of Gallup poll respondents identifying a family member or friend as their “most admired” living man has sextupled 
over the past sixty years; it has likewise doubled for most admired living 
woman.8
 Youth over the past twenty years have similarly embraced their 
family and close friends as being among the most admirable people. At the 
beginning of this section, I mentioned that one quarter of youth surveyed 
in 2000 identifi ed a family member as their hero. This response was not 
anomalous. Studies of children, adolescents, and college students in the 
1980s and 1990s consistently showed that young people more frequently 
selected their parents as heroes than anyone else (Averett 1985; Porpora 
1996, 222; Pomper 2004, 22). In a 2002 study of young children, for 
example, 34 percent “named their parents as role models and heroes” and 
another 22 percent named friends and acquaintances (Anderson and Cavallaro 2002, 166); a 2003 study likewise showed that teenagers were most 
likely to identify their parents as their “most admired” living woman and 
man (Robison 2003; see also Yancy et al. 2002).9
Let Us Now Praise 145
Maria, a young woman whom I interviewed in Boston when she was a 
senior in high school, exemplifi es this rejection of the distant, extraordinary hero in favor of the intimate, ordinary role model. In response to my 
questions, “Who do people try to teach you to take as role models? And 
who are your actual role models?” her reply speaks volumes:
Of course, famous leaders. Martin Luther King, Malcolm X, people who 
have brought changes in our culture. But. . . . the one role model . . . 
that’s like my hero or whatever you may call it, is my father. I didn’t have 
the privilege for him to raise me as a child, as a baby or whatever. . . . 
My father was in jail. He served his time. He got out and the fi rst thing 
he did was move from New York to Boston to start life. So I kind of got 
my father like 10 or 11 years old. And from then we’ve been growing as 
father and daughter. . . . You see my father now and you don’t think that 
he had a hard life and that he did that stuff or whatever. Because he’s 
left that behind and he started something new. And through his trial and 
error he succeeded through everything.
Maria is well aware of who she is supposed to view as a hero. But she is 
equally aware that these “famous leaders” do not directly inspire her in the 
way her father does. To some extent at least, it is her father’s very weaknesses and struggles—matched by his slow but steady success “through 
everything”—that makes him a hero. Maria’s attitude in this regard is 
absolutely typical of the young civic leaders (Maria was a representative 
on her neighborhood council) whom I interviewed in 2004 as a means of 
determining how and why some youth from historically disenfranchised 
backgrounds beat the “civic achievement gap” (Levinson 2007). Well over 
half of the youth civic leaders I talked with selected a formerly incarcerated family member as a role model or hero. Again, this was not because 
they were unaware of more traditional heroes. Rather, it was the personal 
relationship that was key, as Joel, a seventeen-year-old high school student 
in Boston, explained:
Like all my teachers want me to look at Martin Luther King and Caesar Chavez. Martin Luther King. And I look at them and I don’t see 
them as role models. You know?. . . . I mean, they were great leaders 
and all of that, but I don’t mean, like, “Wow, that’s a fi ne role model.” 
You know, my role model is Jésus [the youth organizing leader at the 
nonprofi t where Joel worked]. He has helped me so much. He’s talked 
to me, you know. He’s done things for me that I don’t know if anybody 
would have ever done for me. And I’m so grateful for him. That’s my 
role model right there. I look up to him.
I found identical results in a survey I conducted with approximately 100 
young people in four communities. One of the survey questions asked them 
146 Meira Levinson
to complete the sentence, “My role model(s) is (are) . . .” Of those who 
answered, 93 percent included at least one family member or friend and/or 
a religious fi gure such as God, Muhammad, or Jesus—someone with whom 
the students also seemed to feel a direct, personal relationship. Again, this 
is not because students were unaware of the more famous or extraordinary 
exemplars. They uniformly mentioned leaders such as Martin Luther King 
and others in listing four people “everybody from the United States has 
heard of.” Rather, this data strongly reinforces the notion that as a practical matter, personal relationships totally trump abstract knowledge of 
distant heroes with respect to role model identifi cation.
Are Democracies Better Off Without Heroes?
What are the civic implications in a democracy of this contemporary disavowal of extraordinary heroes in favor of ordinary role models? Not surprisingly, it’s complicated. Some thinkers assert that the hero’s fall from 
grace, and the role model’s concomitant upswing, is actively good for a 
democracy. Four arguments support this contention. First, democracies are 
founded on a notion of equality—especially civic equality—that seems profoundly at odds with the public recognition and elevation of heroes.
[T]he most important component in our unease about authority or 
greatness is surely democracy. Previous generations had democratic 
machinery and rhetoric: the outside scaffolding. We have gone further. 
We have a democratic culture: the spirit, the essence. . . . We fi nd the 
notion of people being innately better or worse than we are frankly offensive. (Marr 1998, 26)
Marr’s claim here seems to be about democratic psychology, but the point 
here can and should be made more broadly. To the extent that democracy is rule ‘by the people,’ we should not look for or expect signifi cant 
distinctions between ourselves and our leaders. All citizens should be 
capable of democratic deliberation and participation. Citizens may well 
learn from and be inspired by fellow-citizen role models in this process 
because role models are in essence equal to oneself except for in defi ned 
particulars. It is antithetical to democratic egalitarianism, on the other 
hand, to identify ‘heroes’ whose achievements and strength of character ordinary citizens could never hope to match. As Christopher Kelly 
explains it,
Liberal democrats tend to be suspicious of hero worship, fearing that it 
encourages inequality and dependency on those who are, or claim to be, 
superior. While they can be generous in their praise of heroic action, in 
their ordinary speech they frequently replace heroes with ‘role models,’ 
for whom the part played or the function fulfi lled predominates over 
Let Us Now Praise 147
intrinsic admirable qualities. It is easier to consider oneself as equal to 
one’s role model than to one’s hero. (Kelly 2003, 82–83)10
This preference for well-defi ned “functions” over personal virtue 
inspires Gerald Pomper’s more radical, second argument that “Within the 
structures of a democracy, heroism is based on institutions, not personalities. . . . [D]emocratic heroes are ordinary men and women who ably perform their institutional responsibilities in times of crisis” (Pomper 2004, 
4). According to this vision of democratic citizenship, the whole point is to 
create “roles [that] can be taken over by interchangeable equal individuals” 
(Kelly 1997, 348) within democratic institutions, while fostering each individual’s skills and commitment to the democratic enterprise so that they 
inevitably perform at a high level, even at times of crisis. Democracy is premised on the value of the individual, including a belief in each individual’s 
potential to contribute to the collective good. Along this line of reasoning, 
if democratic structures are designed correctly, citizens will almost automatically be enabled to contribute to the collective good through their ordinary actions. No extraordinary efforts of will would be required, or even 
be desired, because democratic institutions should be structured so as to 
anticipate and provide for a nation’s needs through the everyday acts of its 
citizens, all of whom have the capacity to so contribute. “The basic premise 
of self-government is that the people themselves have enough character and 
collective wisdom to chose appropriate leaders and resolve their common 
problems. . . . Reliance on . . . heroes too easily leads to disdain for the 
staple of democracy, the ordinary citizen. . . . Human success will require 
common effort, not extraordinary intervention” (Pomper 2004, 5).11
Following on this, third, it is arguably profoundly dangerous for a country to put its faith in individuals’ greatness with regard to civic leadership.
[W]e so often look for champions to protect us and preserve our society. . . . [W]e search for the charismatic leader who will easily solve 
the complex problems of modern life. This conventional view, however, 
has serious—and worrisome—implications for democratic politics. 
Demigods—people like Achilles—are few and far between. Relying on 
such heroes makes human welfare contingent on the exceptional intervention, often unreliable and always arbitrary, of these unique individuals. The successful resolution of crises then depends essentially on 
luck—on the chance that extraordinary people will be found to meet a 
crisis or that some person will undergo an ennobling transformation at 
the critical moment. (Pomper 2004)
In a way, this argument turns Schlesinger’s claims about historical fatalism 
on their heads. Pomper agrees with Schlesinger that history’s direction and 
outcomes are not inevitable. People—especially heroes—can make a profound difference in shaping the history of a nation. Pomper and Schlesinger 
148 Meira Levinson
part ways, however, on who should be expected—or accorded the right and 
responsibility—to make such changes. It is not the individual actor, acting 
almost as a legislator unto him or herself, who should be reshaping the 
destiny of a democracy. This would be antidemocratic in the extreme. As 
Sidney Hook warns, “If the hero is defi ned as an event-making individual 
who redetermines the course of history, it follows at once that a democratic 
community must be eternally on guard against him” (Hook 1943, 229). 
By contrast, the point of democratic governance is that all citizens should 
be empowered to work in concert to decide the direction of the nation and 
shape history. In addition, as a practical matter, it would be catastrophic 
for a nation’s fate to depend on the heroism of a single, extraordinary individual. This is truly the path toward fatalism and historical impotence, for 
the reasons Pomper elucidates above.
Finally, a fourth argument against ‘heroifi cation’ in a democracy is 
that the presentation especially of those in power as heroic can discourage 
citizens from exercising the level of scrutiny that is necessary for a wellfunctioning and just democracy. In his infl uential Lies My Teacher Taught 
Me, for example, James Loewen argues that history textbooks that seem 
inevitably to heroize the state are essentially “anticitizenship manuals—
handbooks for acquiescence” (Loewen 1995, 216). Citizens in a democratic 
society should maintain a healthy skepticism about their leaders and the 
claims made on behalf of the state. If they do not, then they are effectively 
abandoning their governance and oversight role. But one does not treat 
heroes with healthy skepticism; to do so is effectively to deny their heroism. 
Thus, democracies may be better off without heroes—or at least, without 
the heroifi cation of those in power.
Democracies Need Heroes
Even if all of the above arguments are true, there may well be other reasons 
to identify and honor heroes within contemporary democracies. Many of 
the civic functions of heroes enumerated above, for example, may remain 
desirable and even necessary in democratic states despite heroes’ potentially 
antidemocratic implications in other respects. For example, even democracies—perhaps especially democracies—need to unify themselves around 
some common cause, identity, sense of history, idea, norms, or civil religion. As I discussed earlier, heroes have historically played a signifi cant role 
in exemplifying, transmitting, symbolizing, and/or inspiring such unifying 
beliefs or characteristics (functions 2 and 5–7). Second, democratic leaders 
both need and deserve respect for doing their jobs. The diminishment or 
even negation of the heroic aspect of leadership arguably weakens those 
who have demonstrated the courage and commitment to take on responsibility, as well as discourages other good men and women from assuming 
the mantle of leadership when they know they will be granted little honor 
or respect for so doing. Andrew Marr eloquently exposes this tension:
Let Us Now Praise 149
The democratic culture shies away from the authority that gives democracy its focus, its story. We want, in our hearts, to have everyone 
on one level. That is the source of the pleasure when another big fi gure 
topples, boxer shorts round his legs. But the trouble is that effective 
representative democracy requires authority and respect—that willingness to look up to someone which we fi nd increasingly hard to grant 
elected leaders. (Marr 1998, 26)
Relatedly, democracies as much as any system of governance—and possibly more than most—need to hold high expectations for their elected leaders 
and representatives (this was function 3 discussed in the fi rst section). There 
was much talk in the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections about President 
Bush’s appeal to the electorate as a ‘regular guy’ with whom they would enjoy 
sitting down and sharing a beer—unlike Al Gore and John Kerry, who few 
people at the time saw even as beer-drinking types, let alone as enjoyable bar 
stool company. In this context, Bush’s poor grades in college, drunk-driving 
arrest, verbal miscues, and other peccadilloes made him more attractive to 
the electorate rather than less. “While the purpose of democracy was to give 
everyone a fair chance to rise, its method enabled rancorous men to invoke 
‘equality’ as an excuse for keeping all down to their own level” (Schlesinger 
1968, 343). But democracies are not well served by mediocrity (nor was it 
well served by Bush, as even most Republicans would agree), and they do 
not have to foster it. “[G]reat men have been chosen President. Democracy 
demonstrates a capability for heroic leadership quite as much as it does a 
tendency toward mediocrity,” even if “the dislike of great men” is “a permanent potentiality in a democracy” (Schlesinger 1968, 344). 
By 2008, in fact, the American electorate seemed to have overcome its 
infatuation with electing someone who seemed ordinary (Sarah Palin and 
“Joe the Plumber’s” populism notwithstanding), perhaps recognizing that 
the country is better served by presidents who have extraordinary rather 
than merely run-of-the-mill skills and capacities. This recognition was 
arguably refl ected in, and potentially even encouraged by, the candidates’ 
emphasis on their own heroic qualities. John McCain’s entire general election campaign was conducted on his basis of his status as a war hero and 
his heroism as a ‘maverick.’ Although Barack Obama’s campaign did not 
argue directly that Obama himself was a hero, he was certainly treated 
as—and invested with the expectations of—a hero by a signifi cant portion of the American electorate and even the global population. To the 
extent that these appeals to and invocations of heroism raised the electorate’s expectations for their future president and led them to demand more 
rather than less from each candidate, that can only be to the good. There 
is no innate democratic virtue in mediocrity—and much to recommend 
greatness instead.
In addition, democracies depend on virtuous and vigorous citizens to 
remain healthy, legitimate, and effective. As I discussed above, heroes can 
150 Meira Levinson
be used to promote qualities of civic virtue, active civic engagement, and 
belief in and pursuit of excellence (functions 1 and 8–10). Continuing with 
some refl ections on the 2008 presidential election, Obama quite transparently refl ected his ascribed heroism back onto his acolytes, repeatedly 
claiming, “We are the ones we’ve been waiting for” (Obama 2008), and 
featuring at the top of every page of his Web site “I’m asking you to believe. 
Not just in my ability to bring about real change in Washington . . . I’m 
asking you to believe in yours” (Obama for America 2008). The tenor of 
these messages is to draw upon the implicit greatness ascribed to him by his 
followers (even the language of ‘acolytes’ and ‘followers,’ which comes so 
much more naturally in Obama’s case than merely ‘supporters’ or ‘voters,’ 
emphasizes his heroic stature in some circles)—and to try to expand that 
attribution of greatness to include heretofore ‘ordinary’ citizens. Whether 
or not one agrees with Obama’s beliefs, policy positions, or readiness for 
the presidency, it’s hard to deny the power of these messages to energize 
and even potentially transform a democracy. Obama’s candidacy also provided a tangible example of the way in which the perception of extraordinariness in another (i.e., in Obama) can both bring joy to those who revel 
in human possibility, and can push observers toward their “higher, better 
selves” (functions 9 and 10).
At the same time, one reason that people have been both suspicious of 
Obama himself and concerned about his message of citizens’ being their 
own salvation (or at least their own change agents) is that both have been 
perceived as self-satisfi ed in a way that undercuts another potential civic 
function of heroes in a democracy: namely, to promote a healthy skepticism of oneself, and a recognition of one’s own fallibility. As George W. 
Bush’s presidency demonstrated as well as any, implacable self-confi dence 
and refusal to doubt one’s actions or judgments may have profoundly antidemocratic consequences. Recognition of others’ greatness—including 
others’ superiority even to ourselves—may be necessary to combat such 
hubristic self-satisfaction. Schlesinger, as usual, puts it pithily: “When we 
do not admire great men, then our instinct for admiration is likely to end 
by settling on ourselves. The one thing worse for democracy than hero 
worship is self worship” (Schlesinger 1968, 349). This is not to disavow 
the egalitarian concerns raised earlier; teaching citizens their (lowered) 
place in contrast to others’ heroism (function 4) is clearly problematic from 
an egalitarian democratic perspective. But there is a democratic version 
of this attitude, by which the encouragement of humility, skepticism, and 
self-doubt can actually contribute to such democratic virtues as tolerance, 
willingness to deliberate with others, and acceptance of the burdens of 
judgment (Rawls 1971).
Most of the goals historically served by society’s elevation and recognition of heroes thus may remain desirable in a democratic society, at least 
when pursued in moderate fashion and with non-overreaching aims. All 
could be pursued tyrannically, but none (except for the unreconstructed 
Let Us Now Praise 151
version of function 4, ‘teaching citizens their place’) need be so; I think that 
all others if suitably checked have a place in a democracy. It is worth raising 
expectations for our leaders and elected offi cials, for example, even though 
at the same time we do want young people, and citizens in general, in a 
democratic society to feel as if they have the capacity and opportunity to 
become civic leaders. This is the contrast between feeling as if we could be 
president and wanting a president to be the same as ourselves. It’s a surprisingly complex position to make sense of. Returning to the rather frivolous 
but nonetheless politically potent example of beer drinking, I suggested 
above that our decision about who is better qualifi ed to be president should 
not depend on whom we would feel comfortable having a beer with. At the 
same time, it is not unreasonable to expect that a presidential candidate 
know approximately what a beer (or a gallon of milk—consider Bush 41) 
costs, and it is also appropriate for a president to drink a beer—in other 
words, for a president to be human.12
Even if the public recognition and elevation of heroes is on balance desirable in a democracy, however, the evidence that I shared earlier suggests 
that heroes can no longer help us achieve all of these aims. Heroes may 
still be suffi ciently comprehensible and salient to American citizens that 
they can fulfi ll some of the civic functions listed above. But they defi nitely 
cannot fulfi ll all. This brings us, therefore, to the fi nal section of this essay, 
in which I explore the implications of heroes’ theoretical civic uses and 
contemporary practical demise for civic education.
HEROES IN CONTEMPORARY CIVIC EDUCATION
The survey, interview, and other data presented above suggests that 
heroes—especially heroes such as civic leaders or activists, in contrast to 
movie stars or athletes—may no longer speak much to young people. But 
there is little in this data to suggest that the majority of young people are 
actively opposed to heroes, i.e., that teaching about heroes for a particular purpose would inevitably backfi re. Furthermore, many extraordinary 
individuals are still known to young people, as the example of Martin 
Luther King Jr. demonstrated in the introduction to this chapter and in 
the interviews I discussed. Given this, I think that examples of extraordinary individuals (whether defi ned explicitly as ‘heroes’ or not) could 
effectively be used to promote civic aims that are based upon passive 
admiration and/or identity formation as opposed to active emulation. 
Specifi cally, it is possible that civic education about heroes could impart 
and reinforce common civic values and norms; establish touchstones for 
the qualities citizens should expect of elected offi cials and other civic 
leaders; inspire patriotism; unify the country via establishment and reinforcement of symbolic, inclusive membership; and symbolize human possibility. I do not think that any of these would come about easily, nor 
152 Meira Levinson
even that education about heroes is necessarily the best way to achieve 
these goals. But I also see no reason that teaching about heroes would be 
actively detrimental to these aims.
To the extent that we aim to inspire active emulation, however, then 
I think the evidence is quite clear that ordinary role models instead of 
extraordinary heroes should lie at the heart of civic education. There is 
already some empirical evidence of the promise of this approach. In their 
study of ten effective civic education programs, for example, Joseph Kahne 
and Joel Westheimer found that
[S]everal students emphasized that exposure to ‘ordinary’ rather than 
‘famous’ individuals often had the greatest impact. In contrast to the 
ubiquitous school programs that hold up Martin Luther King, Jr., as 
a hero to be respected (but not necessarily emulated), these programs 
offered role models who appeared to be ordinary people—not unlike 
the students. Encountering such people spurred students to imagine 
themselves as civic actors formulating and pursuing their own civic 
goals. (Kahne and Westheimer 2003, 64)
What would this look like in practice?
Based on my own teaching experience, I am inclined to think that there 
are four important steps to this process. First, educators need to select and 
introduce students to civically effi cacious people who share some range of 
characteristics (racial, ethnic, cultural, religious, national origin, residence, 
and/or class related) with the students themselves in order to increase the 
chance that students will actually see them as role models—i.e., people 
mostly like themselves who inspire emulation. Second, students need to 
have the opportunity truly to get to know and feel a connection with these 
people, just as they feel intimately connected with the family members and 
friends they most often identify as their role models. Third, students need 
to learn how the ordinary, everyday actions taken by these people make signifi cant differences to their communities. If they don’t learn this, students 
have little to be inspired about or to think is worthy of emulation. Fourth, 
educators need to help students identify and practice the key skills deployed 
by these ordinary role models as a means of becoming effi cacious, engaged 
civic and political actors themselves.
One year when I was teaching eighth grade, for example, we hosted Sam 
Yoon as a guest speaker. Yoon was then working for the Asian Community 
Development Corporation and running to be Boston’s fi rst Asian American 
city councilor. (He won.) After his presentation, students easily picked out 
such generic attributes as getting an education, caring about others, and working hard as keys to his success. But students’ mouthing of these platitudes is 
hardly civically empowering—nor even a proof of learning, since students 
could equally easily have lauded such attributes before Yoon’s presentation. 
Instead, therefore, I goaded students to examine the specifi cs of his efforts for 
Let Us Now Praise 153
social change: how he tried to use the media’s interest in his personal story 
as the fi rst Asian American candidate for citywide offi ce in order to focus 
attention on the issues he cared about, such as affordable housing. Students 
were inspired to learn about how to communicate with the media, present 
themselves publicly, and use their own personal stories to direct others’ attention to issues such as neighborhood violence and lack of job opportunities for 
youth. They developed valuable communication and presentation skills while 
incorporating their own backgrounds, interests, and concerns. The fact that 
students actually met and talked with Yoon, and that he lived nearby—one 
student saw him in a neighborhood diner a few days later, and another ran 
into him on the bus—helped keep them energized and fostered their sense that 
learning these skills might enable them to make a difference.
This active, relationship-oriented, and experiential approach contrasts 
signifi cantly with the well-intentioned but, I think, fatally fl awed approach 
to ordinary role models promoted in contemporary civics textbooks. 
Contemporary civics textbooks do an admirable job of at least gesturing 
toward the importance of ordinary role models. In reviewing fi ve of the 
most popular civics books from this decade, I discovered they all placed 
signifi cant emphasis on ordinary people doing great things, under the various headings of “Teens in Action” and “American Biographies” (Glencoe/
McGraw-Hill 2005), “The Power of One” (Wolfson 2005), “Young Citizens in Action” and “Biography” (Hartley and Vincent 2005), “Students 
Make a Difference: The Active Citizen” and “Citizen Profi les” (Davis et 
al. 2005), and “You Can Make a Difference” (McClenaghan 2003). Each 
of these textbooks promotes a much more active, engaged, and ‘ordinary’ 
vision of effective citizenship than did comparable civics books from the 
1950s that I reviewed—including 1950s editions of some of these same 
textbooks—which had no such ‘profi les’ or resources. Youth Faces American Citizenship from 1956, by contrast, emphasizes the civic importance of 
developing a “pleasing personality” and a good smile, and teaches students 
how to be good dates (Alilunas and Sayre 1956).
Despite contemporary textbook publishers’ evident good intentions, however, there are at least three enormous problems with a textbook-based, 
one-paragraph ‘young citizens in action’ approach. First, given standardized curriculum and especially standardized testing mandates, teachers have 
no incentive—in fact, they have a negative incentive—to use these textbook 
resources. By defi nition, ‘ordinary,’ unknown people will not be included in 
state curriculum frameworks or national content standards. When I taught 
eighth grade, therefore, I skipped over almost every one of the sidebars, insets, 
and pages emphasizing active citizenship because they did not fi t into the curriculum calendar or district ‘pacing guide.’ It is hard to see how and why 
teachers might be led to make a different choice. This is a signifi cant problem 
as well, of course, for teachers’ more signifi cant incorporation of ordinary role 
models into their classrooms and curricula as I describe above. But paradoxically, the greater effort, resources, and allocation of curricular time required 
154 Meira Levinson
to incorporate meaningful role models via experiential education may actually increase its potential for implementation in comparison to the relatively 
minor cost of reading a paragraph about ‘teens in action.’ In the latter case, 
no one in charge of developing state curriculum frameworks or fi nalizing 
the district pacing guide, say, would explicitly set aside time to incorporate 
these various examples of civic engagement. The assumption would be that 
these examples would naturally be woven in— but the curriculum is inevitably 
already so overstuffed, and assessments are frequently so high-stakes, that 
these sidebars become an obvious candidate for automatic elimination by the 
teacher. In the former case, by contrast, no one could or would assume that 
teachers will simply ‘fi nd the time.’ If it is agreed that students should be learning about, developing relationships with, and practicing the skills or strategies 
of local, ordinary role models, then it would also be agreed that time must be 
set aside in the curriculum for teachers to help facilitate this. If time is not set 
aside, then it is clear to everyone that this is not a priority. If time is set aside, 
then teachers get the clear message that this is a priority and, with appropriate 
professional support, are more likely to do it.
A second and even more signifi cant fl aw with these paragraph-long 
snapshots of ‘young people making a difference’ in textbooks is that they 
are inevitably superfi cial, even pro forma. How much are students actually 
going to learn or get inspired by reading a paragraph about what some 
other teenager did? A single paragraph cannot teach students actual techniques or strategies for civic empowerment. In fact, four to fi ve sentences 
cannot actually achieve any of the civic purposes discussed in the beginning of this chapter. They may be nicely symbolic of the importance of 
individual citizens’ contributions to public life, but a snippet of this length 
cannot be anything more than symbolic.
Third, these references in textbooks to ordinary people whom no student actually knows utterly misunderstand the source and nature of role 
models. As we saw, role models are people with whom students feel a direct 
connection, usually because they know them personally. Four or fi ve, even 
ten, sentences about a random teenager in a textbook are not going to promote the kind of personal identifi cation and change in behavior that we 
hope for from young people who are inspired to emulate actual role models. Thus, the ‘ordinary role model’ approach when mediated by textbooks 
may end up being the worst of both worlds. Young people neither learn 
about extraordinary heroes who help them envision the expanse of human 
possibility, say, nor do they identify true role models (usually people they 
know personally, not just people like them such as random teenagers in a 
textbook) in order to learn to emulate them.
What can be done, then, in the context of a traditional, textbook-oriented, even coverage-driven civic education class that cannot or will not 
take on the more ambitious agenda I outlined above? In this case—and in 
fact, in every case, I believe—students should learn about collective action 
as an essential lever of power in civic life. Ordinary role models and even 
Let Us Now Praise 155
extraordinary heroes are rarely lone actors. Collective action by scores, 
hundreds, thousands, even millions of people frequently underlie the success of an apparently individual civic actor. Julian Bond makes this point in 
a compelling way with respect to Martin Luther King Jr.:
Americans long for single, heroic leadership, the lone fi gure delivering salvation. King became that fi gure, but he came from a movement 
that was group-centered, representing democracy at its best. He did 
not march from Selma to Montgomery by himself. He did not speak 
to an empty fi eld at the March on Washington. There were thousands 
marching with him and before him, and thousands more who one by 
one and two by two did the work that preceded the triumphal march. 
Black Americans did not just march to freedom; we worked our way 
to civil rights through the diffi cult business of organizing. Registering 
voters one by one. Building a solid organization, block by block. Building interracial coalitions, state by state. (Bond 1993)
In this respect, teaching about Martin Luther King Jr. requires that one 
simultaneously teach about the thousands of ordinary Americans who sustained the civil rights movement and actually ensured its victories. It is 
simply factually inaccurate—and civically disempowering—to teach in any 
other way.
This kind of curricular change could, at least in theory, be made 
fairly easily by reframing history and civics textbooks’ civic narratives. 
Right now, they tend to focus relentlessly on the individual, neglecting 
the collective action lying at the heart of individuals’ achievements. Sam 
Wineburg and Chauncey Monte-Sano thus complain with respect to 
Rosa Parks:
Instead of a story about a mass-organizing movement—a narrative of 
empowerment and agency among ordinary people who in a single weekend printed 52,500 leafl ets (enough, and then some, for every member 
of Montgomery’s black community) and distributed them to churches 
while organizing phone trees and Monday morning car pools so that no 
one would have to walk to work—we meet the singular fi gure of Mrs. 
Parks. Together with King, she sets out on her civil rights walkabout, 
only to return to lead a passive and faceless people in their struggle for 
racial equality. (Wineburg and Monte-Sano 2008, 1201–1202)
This is a tragedy, but it is totally unnecessary. Textbooks could tell Rosa 
Parks’ story as clearly, in the same amount of space, and much more accurately, by framing her actions as part of a “mass-organizing movement” 
of essentially ordinary people. Herb Kohl provides a model of how to do 
this in an essay that attempts to recover the collective action narrative by 
rewriting the story traditionally told about Rosa Parks’ action.
156 Meira Levinson
The revised version is still about Rosa Parks, but it is also about the 
African American people of Montgomery, Alabama. It takes the usual, 
individualized version of the Rosa Parks tale and puts it in the context 
of a coherent, community-based social struggle. This does not diminish Rosa Parks in any way. It places her, however, in the midst of a 
consciously planned movement for social change. (Kohl 1995, 46)
Howard Zinn has similarly and famously done this for all of American history in his best-selling People’s History of the United States (Zinn 1980). 
The Covenant Curriculum: A Study of Black Democratic Action, a recent 
civic curriculum initiative supported by Tavis Smiley and Cornell West, 
also promotes this historical civic understanding of the power of the collective. Assignment #2 in the curriculum, for example, states:
Black Democratic Action requires individual courage and collective organization. Therefore all of our work for human dignity and freedom 
must be informed by the extraordinary efforts of ordinary men and 
women who served and sacrifi ced for the precious ideals of democracy. 
You are charged to fi nd and interview a person in your family or community who was a part of the black freedom movements of the 1960s 
and 1970s. (West and Glaude 2006)
In sum, I believe that extraordinary heroes and ordinary role models can 
be used in concert to promote the civic purposes listed in the beginning of 
this chapter. This is in part because they can each can fi nd their own place 
and serve their own set of purposes in the curriculum, but even more because 
they can actually reinforce each other by helping young people (and in fact all 
citizens) come to understand that even the most profound civic changes, led 
by the greatest and most extraordinary of human beings, are usually brought 
about by the collective work of ‘ordinary’ people working together—of “men 
and women obscure in their labor,” as Obama put it in his Inaugural Address 
(Obama 2009). Churchill commented about scientifi c heroes, “The throne 
is occupied; but by a throng” (Churchill 1925). I think this is terrifi c. The 
throne should be occupied by a throng—not just in science, but in all human 
endeavor—because it is in fact the throng that has the greatest capacity to 
bring about and sustain change in a democratic society. In this respect, as in 
so many others, it will be fascinating to see how President Obama and his 
team continue to mobilize and empower the ‘throngs’ who swept him into 
offi ce. If the almost-daily e-mails I receive from David Plouffe are any indication—including the most recent ones urging me to attend a house meeting so 
supporters can “plan on how they can bring change to both Washington and 
their own communities” (Obama for America 2008)—this vision of cooperation and even codependence between an individual leader and the democratic 
masses may be encountering a renaissance. How this will affect civic education in schools, of course, is another conundrum indeed.
Let Us Now Praise 157
NOTES
 1. I would like to thank Edward Copenhagen, Shari Dickstein, Leslee Friedman, Judith Keneman, Cynthia Levinson, Carla Lillvik, Linda Lyons, Jal 
Mehta, Meredith Mira, Justin Reich, Anna Rosefsky, and the members of 
the Penn Global Citizenship group for their considerable assistance with and 
contributions to this essay.
 2. It is possible that Barack Obama’s presidency will change this, but at this 
writing it is way too soon to know or tell.
 3. I am passing over here whether our selective civic memory about his principles and practices is itself some cause for concern or even shame.
 4. Daniel Boorstin wryly notes in this regard, “The universal lament of aging men 
in all epochs . . . is that greatness has become obsolete” (Boorstin 1968, 326).
 5. As Sam Wineburg and Chauncey Monte-Sano put it, “We doubt that many 
high school students in an all-white classroom in Montana (or anywhere else) 
would recognize the King who told David Halberstam in 1967 ‘that the vast 
majority of white Americans are racists, either consciously or unconsciously’; 
the King who linked American racism to American militarism, calling both, 
along with economic exploitation, the ‘triple evils’ of American society; the 
King who characterized the bloodbath in Vietnam as a ‘bitter, colossal contest 
for supremacy’ with America as the ‘supreme culprit’; or the King who in a 
speech two months before his assassination accused America of committing 
‘more war crimes almost than any nation in the world’” (Wineburg and MonteSano 2008, 1201).
 6. Unfortunately, there’s little way to get a longitudinal view of young people’s 
attitudes toward heroes—at least with regard to their selection of a family 
member or other person known to themselves—since prior to 2000, the poll 
question specifi cally excluded family and friends from the list of possible 
answers: “What one man (woman) that you have heard or read about, alive 
today in any part of the world, do you admire the most, not including any of 
your relatives or personal friends?” Data is also unavailable on the percentage of youth who declined to name any person they admired prior to 2000.
 7. Even this notion of heroism, which at least highlights the accomplishment 
of a heroic deed, seems to have become optional in contemporary usage. 
The fi fteen-year-old “Harvard Heroes” program, whose purpose is to “spotlight[] exceptional staff members while emphasizing the excellence required 
to run an institution of Harvard’s immense scale and complexity,” recently 
‘honored’ an editorial assistant “for her role as calendar editor for the Harvard Gazette” (Farrell 2008). I have no doubt that this woman does an excellent editing job. To designate her as a ‘hero,’ however, suggests an almost 
irretrievable debasement of the term.
 8. In 1949, when the question was fi rst asked and coded for this kind of response, 
only 1 percent of survey respondents named a family member or friend as the 
man that they “have heard or read about, living today, in any part of the world” 
whom they admired the most. Similarly, 3 percent of survey respondents named 
a family member or friend when asked about their most admired woman. These 
numbers stayed steady in 1955, the next year that results were broken down in 
this way. By 1966, however, the numbers started creeping up—3 percent for 
men and 5.6 percent for women—and they more than doubled again for men by 
2006, when a full 9 percent of those identifi ed were family or friends. Women 
have held steady at around 6 percent since the 1970s; I conjecture this is because 
of a shrinking gender gap with respect to recognition and publicity of public fi gures (original analysis of Gallup Organization 1949, 1955, 1966, 1977, 2006).
158 Meira Levinson
 9. Although I am confi ning my discussion for the sake of clarity and brevity to 
the United States, there is ample evidence that young people in Europe also 
overwhelmingly select their parents, and then others directly known to them, 
when asked to identify heroes or role models (Bucher 1997; Bricheno and 
Thornton 2007).
 10. It should be noted, though, that Kelly thinks that heroes arise in democracies nonetheless. “Democratic regimes have never lacked heroes. They have 
always found people who pledge their lives, fortunes, and sacred honor to 
establish governments based on democratic principles and people who give 
their last full measure of devotion to see that these governments endure” 
(Kelly 1997, 347).
 11. Thomas Carlyle would be appalled, albeit unsurprised, by this utter rejection of heroes’ desirability in a democratic society. He famously castigated 
“Democracy, which means despair of ever fi nding any Heroes to govern you, 
and contented putting up with the want of them” (Carlyle 1918, 249).
 12. I will refrain here from entering the fraught whisky vs. beer vs. latte debates 
that arose during the 2008 Democratic presidential primary between the 
Clinton and Obama camps (Parsons and McCormick 2008).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Addis, A. “Role Models and the Politics of Recognition.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 144, no. 4 (1996): 1377–1468.
Alilunas, L. J., and J. W. Sayre. Youth Faces American Citizenship. Chicago: J. B. 
Lippincott, 1956.
Anderson, K. J., and D. Cavallaro. “Parents of Pop Culture? Children’s Heroes and 
Role Models.” Childhood Education no. 78, 2002: 161–168.
Averett, J. “Facets: Today’s Kids and Hero Worship, Who Can They Look Up To?” 
The English Journal 74, no. 5 (1985): 23.
Axthelm, P. “Where Have All the Heroes Gone?” Newsweek, August 1979.
Bond, J. “Remember The Man and The Hero, Not Just Half The Dream.” The 
Seattle Times, 4 April 1993. http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/special/mlk/perspectives/refl ections/bond.html (accessed 21 August 2008).
Boorstin, D. 1968. “From Hero to Celebrity: Human Pseudo-Event.” In Heroes 
and Anti-Heroes: A Reader in Depth, ed. H. Lubin, 325–40. San Francisco: 
Chandler Publishing Company.
Bricheno, P., and M. Thornton. “Role Model, Hero, or Champion? Children’s 
Views Concerning Role Models.” Educational Research 49, no.4 (2007): 383–
396.
Browne, R. B., and M. W. Fishwick. The Hero in Transition. Bowling Green, OH: 
Bowling Green University Press, 1983.
Bucher, A. A. “The Infl uence of Models in Forming Moral Identity.” International 
Journal of Educational Research 27, no. 7 (1997): 619–627.
Carlyle, T. On Heroes, Hero-Worship and the Heroic in History. New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1893.
 . 1918 [1843]. Past and Present. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Churchill, W. Mass Effects in Modern Life. 1925. http://www.teachingamericanhistory.org/library/index.asp?documentprint=1032 (accessed 16 August 2008).
Clark, N. I., J. B. Edmonson, and A. Dondineau. Civics for Americans. New York: 
Macmillan, 1954.
CNN. CNN Heroes: A Note to Educators. CNN, 21 February 2008. http://www.
cnn.com/2008/LIVING/studentnews/02/08/heroes.educator.note/index.html 
(accessed 16 August 2008).
Let Us Now Praise 159
Cowen, T. “The New Heroes and Role Models.” Reason, May 2000. http://fi ndarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1568/is_1_32/ai_62162015/pg_1?tag=artBody;col1 
(accessed 15 August 2008).
Davis, J. E., P. Fernlund, and P. Woll. Civics: Government and Economics in 
Action. 2005 ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2005.
Dimond, S. E., and E. F. Pfl ieger. Civics for Citizens: Annotated Edition. Rev. ed. 
Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1974.
Edelstein, A. Everybody Is Sitting on the Curb: How and Why America’s Heroes 
Disappeared. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1996.
Emerson, R. W. Representative Men: Seven Lectures. Leipzig: Bernhard Tauchnitz, 1907.
Farrell, A. “Who Does Harvard Call a Hero?” The Harvard Community Resource, 
July 2008: 1, 4.
Fishwick, M. W. The Hero, American Style. New York: D. McKay, 1969.
Gallup Organization. Survey by Gallup Organization, December 2–December 7, 
1949. iPoll Databank: The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut, 1949. http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu.ezp-prod1.hul.
harvard.edu/ipoll.html (accessed 5 December 2008).
 . Survey by Gallup Organization, December 8–December 13, 1955. iPoll 
Databank: The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut, 1955. http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/
ipoll.html (accessed 5 December 2008).
 . Survey by Gallup Organization, December 8–December 13, 1966. iPoll 
Databank: The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut, 1966. http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/
ipoll.html (accessed 5 December 2008).
 . Survey by Gallup Organization, December 9–December 12, 1977. iPoll 
Databank: The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut, 1977. http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/
ipoll.html (accessed 5 December 2008).
 . Survey by Gallup Organization, December 11–December 14, 2006. iPoll 
Databank: The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut, 2006. http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/
ipoll.html (accessed 5 December 2008).
Gibbon, P. H. A Call to Heroism: Renewing America’s Vision of Greatness. New 
York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 2002.
Giraffe Heroes Project. “Kids Page: Guided Tour Stop 1.” Langley, WA: Giraffe 
Heroes Project, 2008. http://www.giraffe.org/guidedtour1_text.html (accessed 
5 December 2008).
 . “Kids Page: Guided Tour Stop 2.” Langley, WA: Giraffe Heroes Project, 
2008. Available from http://www.giraffe.org/guidedtour2_text.html (accessed 
5 December 2008).
Glencoe/McGraw-Hill. Civics Today: Citizenship, Economics, and You. New 
York: Glencoe, 2005.
Glicksberg, C. I. “The Tragic Hero.” In Heroes and Anti-Heroes: A Reader in 
Depth, ed. H. Lubin, 356–66. Scranton, PA: Chandler Publishing, 1968.
Gomes, P. “Foreword.” In A Call to Heroism: Renewing America’s Vision of 
Greatness, by P. H. Gibbon, xi–xix. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 2002.
Hanson, C. . “Where Have All the Heroes Gone?” Columbia Journalism Review
34, no. 6 (1996): 45–48.
Hartley, W. H., and W. S. Vincent. Holt American Civics. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 2005.
Hook, S. The Hero in History: A Study in Limitation and Possibility. New York: 
John Day, 1943.
160 Meira Levinson
James, W. “Great Men, Great Thoughts and the Environment.” The Atlantic 
Monthly 46, no. 276 (1880): 441–59.
Kahne, J., and J. Westheimer. “Teaching Democracy: What Schools Need to Do.” 
Phi Delta Kappan 85, no. 1 (2003): 34–40, 57–66.
Kammen, M. G. Mystic Chords of Memory: The Transformation of Tradition in 
American Culture. 1st ed. New York: Knopf, 1991.
Kanner, E. Day care report re: MLK. Email from E. Kanner to M. Levinson. Boston, 7 March 2007.
Kelly, C. “Rousseau’s Case For and Against Heroes.” Polity 30, no. 2 (1997): 347–
366.
 . Rousseau as Author: Consecrating One’s Life to the Truth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Kemper, T. D. “Reference Groups, Socialization, and Achievement.” American 
Sociological Review no. 33 (1968): 31–45.
Klapp, O. E. “Hero Worship in America.” American Sociological Review 14, no. 
1 (1949): 53–62.
Kohl, H. Should We Burn Babar? Essays on Children’s Literature and the Power 
of Stories. New York: The New Press, 1995.
Levinson, M. “The Civic Achievement Gap.” CIRCLE Working Paper 51, Jonathan 
M. Tisch College of Citizenship and Public Service, Tufts University, Medford, 
MA, 2007. http://civicyouth.org/PopUps/WorkingPapers/WP51Levinson.pdf.
Lockwood, P., and Z. Kunda. “Superstars and Me: Predicting the Impact of Role 
Models on the Self.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73, no. 1 
(1997): 91–103.
 . “Outstanding Role Models: Do They Inspire or Demoralize Us?” In Psychological Perspectives on Self and Identity, ed. A. Tesser, R. B. Felson, and 
J. M. Suls., 147–171. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 
2000.
Loewen, J. W. Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History Textbook Got Wrong. New York: The New Press, 1995.
Lyons, L. “No Heroes in the Beltway.” Gallup, 30 July 2002. http://www.gallup.
com/poll/6487/Heroes-Beltway.aspx (accessed 15 August 2008).
 . “Results for Teens, Ages 13–17, Most Admired Men + Women.” Fax to M. 
Levinson. Princeton: August 21, 2008.
Marr, A. “Where Have All of the Heroes Gone?” New Statesman, 2 October 1998, 
25–26.
McClenaghan, W. A. Magruder’s American Government. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 
1953.
 . Magruder’s American Government. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2003.
McDorman, T. F., K. Casper, A. Logan, and S. McGinley. “Where Have All the 
Heroes Gone?” Journal of Sport and Social Issues 30, no. 2 (2006): 197–218.
Moreau, J. Schoolbook Nation: Confl icts over American History Textbooks from the 
Civil War to the Present. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 2003.
Newport, F. “Martin Luther King Jr.: Revered More After Death Than Before.” 
Gallup News Service, 16 July 2006. http://www.gallup.com/poll/20920/Martin-Luther-King-Jr-Revered-More-After-Death-Than-Before.aspx (accessed 18 
August 2008).
Obama, Barack. 2008. “Remarks of Senator Barack Obama: Super Tuesday.” Chicago. 5 February 2008. http://www.barackobama.com/2008/02/05/remarks_
of_senator_barack_obam_46.php (accessed 8 December 2008).
 . “Inaugural Address.” Washington, DC, 20 January 2009.
Obama for America. “Barack Obama and Joe Biden: The Change We Need.” Obama 
for America, 2008. http://www.barackobama.com (accessed 7 December 2008).
Let Us Now Praise 161
 . “Barack Obama, Change We Need, Change Is Coming.” Obama for America, 2008. http://my.barackobama.com/page/content/changeiscoming/ (accessed 
10 December 2008).
Ostroushko, M., with E. Botein and B. Shapiro. “The Promised Land: Different 
Takes on the Legacy of Martin Luther King.” In The Promised Land, ed. M. B. 
Kirchner. United States: Launch Minneapolis, 2009.
Pangle, L. S., and T. L. Pangle. “What the American Founders Have to Teach Us 
About Schooling for Democratic Citizenship.” In Rediscovering the Democratic 
Purposes of Education, ed. L. M. McDonnell, P. M. Timpane, and R. Benjamin, 21–46. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2000.
Parsons, C., and J. McCormick. “Blue-Collar Vote Tough for Obama: Group More 
Likely to Give Clinton Edge.” Chicago Tribune, 10 February 2008.
Pomper, G. M. Ordinary Heroes and American Democracy. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2004.
Porpora, D. V. “Personal Heroes, Religion, and Transcendental Metanarratives.” 
Sociological Forum 11, no. 2 (1996): 209–229.
Rawls, J. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1971.
Robison, J. “Teens Search for Role Models Close to Home.” Gallup, 2003. http://
www.gallup.com/poll/8584/Teens-Search-Role-Models-Close-Home.aspx 
(accessed 17 August 2008).
Schlesinger Jr., A. M. “The Decline of Heroes.” In Heroes and Anti-Heroes: A Reader 
in Depth, ed. H. Lubin, 341–351. San Francisco: Chandler Publishing, 1968.
Schwartz, B. “The Reconstruction of Abraham Lincoln.” In Collective Remembering, ed. D. Middleton and D. Edwards, 81–107. London: Sage, 1990.
Silverman, W. M. “Where Have All the Heroes Gone?” Journal of the American 
Osteopathic Association 103, no. 1 (2003): 27–28.
Speizer, J. J. “Role Models, Mentors, and Sponsors: The Elusive Concepts.” Signs
6, no. 4 (1981): 692–712.
Truchard, J. “Where Have All the Heroes Gone?” Control Engineering, March 
2005. http://www.controleng.com/article/CA509812.html (accessed 4 December 2008)
Tyack, D. “School for Citizens: The Politics of Civic Education from 1790 to 1990.” 
In E Pluribus Unum? Contemporary and Historical Perspectives on Immigrant 
Political Incorporation, ed. G. Gerstle and J. Mollenkopf, 331–370. New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 2001.
Wecter, D. The Hero in America: A Chronicle of Hero-Worship. New York: 
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1941.
West, C., and E. S. Glaude Jr. Standard Covenant Curriculum: A Study of Black 
Democratic Action. Covenant with Black America, 2006. http://www.covenantwithblackamerica.com/resources/covenant_StandardCovenantCurriculum.doc (accessed 10 December 2008).
Wineburg, S., and C. Monte-Sano. “‘Famous Americans’: The Changing Pantheon 
of American Heroes.” Journal of American History 94, no. 4 (2008): 1186–
1202.
Wolfson, S. C. Civics for Today: Participation and Citizenship. Rev. ed. New York: 
Amsco School Publications, 2005.
Yancy, A., J. M. Siegel, and K. L. McDaniel. “Role Models, Ethnic Identity, and 
Health-Risk Behaviors in Urban Adolescents.” Archives in Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 156, no. 1 (2002): 55–61.
Zimmerman, J. Whose America? Culture Wars in the Public Schools. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2002.
Zinn, H. A People’s History of the United States. New York: Harper & Row, 
1980.

Part III
Moral and Religious Education

9 Privilege, Well-being, and 
Participation in Higher Education
Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
An undergraduate degree from an elite university in a developed country provides access to membership of elites. The managers and leaders of national 
and international businesses, of government departments and national governments, of NGOs and of intergovernmental organizations are almost all 
drawn from the ranks of those who attended such universities. Many, if 
not, most, graduates of such universities can expect to command and consume far more resources than most of the world’s population, and to have 
asymmetric power and authority over others, many of whom live in other 
countries and on other continents. In an economy that is already highly 
globalized, and in which skilled elites are geographically highly mobile, it 
is more likely than ever that they will spend some portion of their lives in 
other countries than those in which they were raised.
Membership of elites is not earned. Whether or not one can join the 
elite depends a great deal on luck. Whether one has the right kinds of parents, has engaged with schooling in the right way, where one is born, and 
whether one was born with the native talents that happen to be highly valued in the existing international market, all play a large role in determining 
one’s prospects. With unearned privilege and asymmetric power come great 
responsibilities that are not always readily understood by those who bear 
them. Universities confer access to the privileges of elite membership. Do 
they, though, foster understanding of the accompanying responsibilities?
Until the 1960s American universities, and especially elite universities, 
took themselves to be in loco parentis and evinced a concern with the development of their students’ characters. There was not a little of the noblesse 
oblige about this—in fact, there had long been a ready acknowledgement 
that higher education was a privilege, not a right, and that those who 
enjoyed it incurred obligations to others. There was also a strong element 
of paternalism; it was widely thought that adults in general, and college 
administrators and professors in particular, knew better what was good for 
students than the students themselves.
The 1960s saw an end to the role of in loco parentis. Regulations of dormitory life were relaxed, as was regulation of campus life generally, including of 
the curriculum. Most professors came to see their role as arm’s-length from 
166 Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
the students, to teach their subject without interfering with their personal lives. 
Similarly, universities backed off the role of character formation. Students go 
to college primarily to enhance their career prospects, and that motive is not 
questioned or undermined by the organization of campus life.
Recent years have seen modest moves back toward the more traditional 
approach to campus life. We welcome this, and would welcome less modest 
steps even more. The current chapter attempts to justify these modest moves 
on normative grounds. First we present an argument for a concern with 
character formation grounded in the claim that the traditional view that 
higher education was a privilege, not a right, was correct; and, we would 
add, that in the current era of globalized economic and political power, it 
is even more urgent to understand the responsibilities that accompany that 
privilege. Those who enjoy the benefi ts of higher education incur a debt 
to many of those who do not, and forming their character in a way that 
increases the probability that they will discharge that debt is a legitimate, 
and desirable, aim of higher educational institutions. Second, we present an 
argument that, independently of the privilege students enjoy, it is appropriate for college administrators to organize campus life paternalistically, to 
enhance the students’ long-term prospects for well-being. Then we shall 
make some comments about what sort of actions and initiatives universities might undertake in the light of these arguments. Finally, we’ll explore 
the rather obvious objection that our arguments are unduly paternalistic 
with respect to the students; that the reversion to some element of in loco 
parentis involves the university in too much parenting.
THE ARGUMENT FROM PRIVILEGE
It is sordid and ungrateful . . . to receive an education at the public expense, and then devote it to purely private ends. (W. F. Allen 1890)
Higher education (HE) makes an important contribution to success, as measured in terms of lifetime expected incomes and access to interesting jobs. 
The precise amount of the wage premium attached to a degree is unclear: 
what is clear is that it is substantial. A recent Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development report (OECD) claims a premium in the 
UK of 17 percent (exceptionally high for OECD countries),1
 taking into 
account foregone earnings, costs of tuition, and tax rates (2002); and a 
Labour Force Survey study shows graduates ages twenty to twenty-four 
earning (gross) 25 percent more than those with A-level (and equivalent) 
qualifi cations.2
 Even if we assumed as low as a 10 percent all-things-considered premium, that is a substantial benefi t, especially when combined 
with the relatively more interesting and autonomous jobs that are available 
to the HE graduate.3
 The premium attached to attending elite, as opposed 
to non-elite, institutions is almost certainly higher.
Privilege, Well-being, and Participation in Higher Education 167
In the US the premium attached to completing higher education is even 
greater. Graduates with bachelor degrees can expect lifetime earnings 70 
percent higher than high school graduates, and 100 percent higher than high 
school dropouts. Professional (further) degrees (such as MBAs, LLBs and 
MDs) yield lifetime earnings three times that of a high school graduate (see 
Day and Newberger 2002 for extensive data). These gross fi gures obscure 
considerable differences among kinds of degree and also among institutions. 
The premium is higher for science than for arts graduates, and it may be 
higher for graduates of elite than for graduates of low-prestige institutions. 
And variation itself, of course, varies over time and across countries.
Is this premium caused by an increased supply of human capital? Some 
of it must be. But a lot of it, we know, is about credentialism—universities 
playing the role that employers would otherwise have to play in preparing students for work, and playing another role of assuring social closure. 
Rapid increases in HE participation in wealthy democracies have always 
been driven by government action. Governments are under pressure from 
non-college-educated voters who see HE as a route to social mobility for 
their children and from college-educated voters who see it as a means of 
social closure.
Whatever the size of the premium, it is an artifi ce of the design of taxtransfer policy. As one would expect, the OECD estimates that HE has 
much a lower monetary benefi t in those countries with more progressive 
tax-transfer policies. It is also an artifi ce of the private costs of higher education; if students had to pay the full cost of their tuition, that would make 
some inroads into the net monetary benefi t. In principle it should be possible 
to design a tax-transfer regime in which the income maximizer was indifferent to, or even averse to, higher education. All this gives us a reason to 
be rather cautious in assuming that much of the premium is about increased 
human capital (though this is not to deny that human capital might be being 
increased while students are in college). Regardless, HE is highly segmented, 
and students, teachers, and employers are well aware of the purposes of the 
different segments. It is probably just as good if not better to attend UWMadison at a low price as to attend Harvard at a high price, partly because 
UW–Madison at a low price enables you, if successful, to enter a graduate 
program at Harvard or somewhere similar. But attending UW Parkside is 
worse than Harvard at a high price, and this is widely understood. Similar 
segmentation occurs within the UK and other mass HE markets, and is 
well-enough understood in the culture, that it is able to play the sorting and 
social closure role that the Marxist conception assumes.
HE is required not only to enter or stay in the elite; it is required in 
order to have a reasonably secure sub-elite position. Once it has become 
standard for large numbers of people to use HE, employers are free to 
use the sorting effects of HE completion to screen potential employees. 
In terms of the skills, traits, and dispositions required, few jobs intrinsically require HE. But if HE is a general expectation, it makes sense for 
168 Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
potential employers to allow governments and parents to bear the direct 
costs and potential employees the opportunity costs of education, and 
to disregard anyone who has not borne those costs—not only lawyers, 
accountants, journalists, chemists, and engineers, but also managers, technicians, nurses, and police offi cers. However, once employers use college 
completion as a gatekeeping mechanism, as they are bound to in an era of 
mass HE, this creates insuperable barriers for those who do not take up 
HE. To overstate the case, but not by much, there is a brief opportunity in 
one’s late teens or early twenties, rejecting which makes it near impossible 
to advance beyond a certain level within the occupational structure; mass 
higher education rigidifi es this fact. This is especially serious for those 
children whom school does not suit.
In sum, HE, and elite HE in particular, confers considerable private 
advantages to those who take it up. Those who take it up already generally come from the most advantaged sectors of society. Their advantages 
prima facie operate to the detriment of those who do not take up HE. What 
could justify a social institution, participation in which brings such a large 
private return, but the barriers to participation in which are substantial? It 
seems to us that there is, in fact, a very natural justifi cation; that the private 
returns can be turned to the benefi t of a larger public, and in particular 
to those who do not themselves participate. Requiring high standards for 
admissions to MD programs and allowing successful applicants to earn 
remarkably high wages as well as to enjoy an interesting and high-status 
position in society is justifi ed if it produces effective doctors who serve others well. Similarly so for lawyers, businesspeople, agricultural consultants, 
and professors. Something like John Rawls’s (1971) difference principle 
seems appropriate: society does right to allow some to get advantages that 
others do not get, if those advantages end up redounding to the benefi t of 
the least advantaged.
But do the benefi ts of higher education redound to the benefi t of the least 
advantaged? It all depends on two things: the structure of the economy, 
which includes the structure of the tax/benefi t system and the regulatory 
framework within which the economy operates. An economy in which the 
CEO of a large company nets 10 times the (net) income of the average worker 
in that company appears to more closely meet the demands of the difference 
principle than one in which he nets 500 times the net income of the average 
worker. Regulation, or transfers, that reduce income inequalities while still 
permitting the incentives needed to spur production work to the benefi t of 
the least advantaged. Tax cuts that essentially create rents for high-income 
workers who would have acted much the same way even at higher tax rates 
do not. The second factor concerns the motivations of those workers whose 
talents are best rewarded in the existing social environment, whatever that 
is. A society governed by a public service ethos in which those with marketable talents generally assume that, while they are permitted to pursue 
their own interests to some extent, they have considerable duties to the less 
Privilege, Well-being, and Participation in Higher Education 169
advantaged generated by their own good fortune, is one in which we can 
predict that they are more likely to turn their productive talents to the use 
of those who are less advantaged. A brilliant surgeon might choose to earn 
200k per annum working in a public facility rather than ten times that 
amount providing cosmetic surgery or heart surgery for the very wealthy. 
A brilliant mathematician might choose to teach mathematics on a public 
school teacher’s income rather than work on Wall Street.
Universities are implicated in providing access to all sorts of socially 
constructed benefi ts. They are ill-placed to infl uence the structure of the 
economy. But they are well-placed to infl uence the structure of the motivations of the students they teach, to promote an ethos of public service, a 
sense of privilege and of what the duties are that accompany it. This, we 
think, is what they should do.
THE ARGUMENT FROM WELL-BEING
In short, a curriculum is not complete which does not move the Eros, as 
well as the mind of the young, from where it is to where it might better 
be. (Schwab 1978)
Our second argument is more conservative in that it calls for a return 
to a former understanding of an ‘educated self’ that addresses the intellectual and moral development of the undergraduate. This is a response 
to the fractured environment of the modern research university in which 
faculty members are primarily focused on their own research and peer 
approval, leaving the undergraduate student body to devolve into what is 
often times a self-destructive, anti-intellectual, conformity-driven party 
culture.
It is diffi cult to know exactly how pervasive this behavior is on university campuses, and there are certainly many intellectually engaged students 
who make good decisions and are eager to learn. At the same time there 
is signifi cant evidence that shows when the university takes a laissez-faire 
approach to the student ethos, they place 18-year-olds into a hedonistic crucible and are consequently creating well-positioned, but unhappy, people. 
In Female Chauvinist Pigs, Ariel Levy (2006) reports that the previously 
male “raunch” culture of sexual conquest has been embraced by young 
women who appear to delight in their own exploitation and unabashedly 
use men for sex. In Unhooked, Laura Sessions Stepp (2007) details how 
young women negotiate the ‘hook-up culture’ of high schools and colleges 
and argues that men and women who engage in this sex-without-dating 
behavior lie to themselves when they think there are no emotional consequences and are not, as other generations did, practicing how to be intimate 
and form lasting relationships. Donna Freitas of St. Michael’s College in 
Vermont explains that:
170 Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
Sexual promiscuity is the elephant in the dorm room: Every student 
knows that it’s there one way or another—pressure, expectation, reality—but is either afraid to face the fact or too ashamed to admit that he 
fi ts the profi le, or doesn’t. If a student feels dissatisfi ed with the campus 
ethic of hedonism, he may well assume that something must be wrong 
with him because, after all, isn’t unrestricted sexual freedom the collegiate version of the Promised Land? (Freitas 2005)
Further, undergraduates today are part of a pornography generation that 
has grown up with the Internet, and they have received untold number 
of e-mails inviting them into pornography sites. This, plus explicit cable 
television, has contributed to the normalization of sex as a commodity. 
The hook-up culture Stepp describes is, in fact, about using others to get 
what you want and divorcing sex from any emotion whatsoever. If the primary avenue for making friends and having a social outlet is to drink, have 
casual sex, and “work hard, play hard,” then students are left with the 
unfortunate choice of conforming in order to develop a social network, or 
resist and choose, to some extent, isolation.4
One response to this situation might be to say that students are adults, 
and so long as they are acting within the rules and expectations of the university, then it is not the university’s job to regulate private life. We agree 
that ‘regulation’ of private life is an inappropriate response, but disagree 
that the status of legal adulthood eliminates the university’s obligation 
to pay attention to the social development of students. When university 
administrators think of exerting their infl uence on the behavior of undergraduates, the discussion is often focused on what type of rules should be 
imposed and how they should be enforced. Certainly, immediate safety 
concerns warrant some attention to the basic codes of conduct. However, by assigning egregious behavior problems to the administration and 
intellectual development to the faculty, the university fails in its properly 
understood aim, to develop the educated person. Further, by not responding seriously to the social needs of undergraduate students, the university 
enables the anti-intellectual forces of a hyperindividual, hypersexualized 
marketplace to become the major moral infl uence on campus.
In the modern research university we consider one to be educated when 
she has completed the minimum credits for a degree. In this university-ascredentialing-agency model the students’ freedom of choice is of primary 
importance. In the general education curriculum, students are given tremendous latitude to select from a menu of courses, which are often unrelated 
and simply aim to expose students to a breadth of ideas and disciplines.5
These courses hold mastery of the content as the primary aim, and do little 
to consciously cultivate a particular type of character. When the degree 
becomes about obtaining the credential, the student is severed mind and 
body. The institution cares about courses passed, professors are focused on 
the content of the class, and the private lives of students are mostly ignored 
Privilege, Well-being, and Participation in Higher Education 171
so long as they do not violate basic behavior codes. The tenure structure 
of the modern research university cultivates this faculty–student divide by 
encouraging professors to focus their gaze on their research and senior colleagues. Mentoring undergraduates, especially pre-tenure, receives no institutional approval.
This understanding of what it means to be educated is much weaker 
than the ideal of the educated self imagined by philosophers of education. 
We are not able to provide a complete discussion of the debates within the 
fi eld, but argue instead that most representations of what it means to be 
educated include the development of intellectual and moral capacities. Educated people know how to think ethically, practice good self-care, refl ect 
before they act, and critically think about the messages they receive in the 
modern world. Most importantly, educated people want to act justly. They 
do not justify their behavior for their own advantage and instead weigh 
their desires against ethical principles. Mastery of particular disciplines, 
of course, plays a role in developing the educated person, but the content 
is not separate from the moral aim, and rigorous study ought to engage 
students in discussion of the good and virtuous life.6
 This is not a call for 
a complete return to the nineteenth-century liberal arts curriculum, but a 
return to the idea that universities ought to reunite the mind of the student 
with her lived experiences and fuse right behavior with good thinking.
This understanding of the aim of a university education does not allow 
the institution to take a hands-off approach to the student culture. In fact, 
a university is obligated to consciously cultivate a climate that supports the 
development of the type of character we have described. To understand 
this obligation, the university must fi rst accept that a student culture will 
develop whether or not the university interferes with it. If we are correct 
that a laissez-faire approach invites Budweiser and Bacardi to establish the 
culture through T-shirt giveaways at local bars and advertisements to spring 
break foam parties in Mexico, even if a minority of students participate, the 
party culture becomes high-profi le behavior and the image of a ‘normal’ 
undergraduate experience. Some undergraduates enroll and are eager to 
participate in this culture, others are drawn in later, and still others hope to 
hold on to more traditional values. By allowing the values of the alcohol and 
pornography industry to dominate, the university makes it more diffi cult for 
traditional and middle-of-the-road students to fl ourish at the university. For 
those wanting to participate fully in the ‘unrestricted freedom’ of university 
life, the university supports the development of a character that is antithetical to its aims. Just as a business is held responsible for creating a safe work 
environment and cannot argue that, so long as employees are getting their 
work done, it is not the management’s responsibility to monitor how they 
are treating each other, so too must the university cultivate a culture that 
supports the development of healthy, educated individuals.
Some readers may think that the environment we have described is not 
a bad environment, all things considered, or that we have mischaracterized 
172 Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
it. One might think that the hook-up culture embodies a healthy balancing 
of sexual immediacy and deferred intimacy, given the interests students 
have in establishing long-term careers. Or one might think that we, and the 
journalists who write about it, exaggerate the hedonism and sexualization 
of campus culture.
The portrayal of campus life we have given is, we realize, incomplete. 
Some campuses exert considerable control over the cultural mores, partly 
through selecting students, and partly by enforcing strongly paternalistic 
rules. Even large public university campuses have very diverse student populations; movements like the Campus Crusade for Christ and the smaller 
left-wing political organizations provide countervailing infl uences to the 
corporate sponsorship of pornography and alcohol, and numerous students are able to construct intellectually and emotionally healthy microenvironments. But we think that the portrayal we have given captures some 
of the changeable reality of campus life. And we think that reality is deeply 
unhealthy for most though not all of the students involved in it.
If you disagree, you will fi nd the substance of this part of our argument 
uninteresting. But you might still fi nd the more fundamental argument 
interesting. The more fundamental argument is that the university should 
take considerable steps to shape students’ attitudes and choices in ways 
that are likely to serve their well-being in the long term. If you think there 
is no need to do that because their choices already serve that interest, you 
should ask yourself whether, and to what extent, it would be legitimate 
for the university to exercise such power in the less happy circumstance in 
which prevailing environment is unhealthy.
WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
One way to respond to this argument would be to conceive of two kinds 
of programs: those that promote service and those that promote well-being 
and character. Another approach is more Deweyian and views these character attributes (service and well-being) as interconnected qualities of the 
educated self. Consequently, the best policies will work to develop both of 
these dispositions, not through rule making, but through the purposeful 
development of the curriculum and culture of the university.
One common theme arising out of our two arguments is the value 
of promoting cross-age interaction. The large university creates for 
the students a very unusual environment, one in which most of their 
daily interactions, and almost all of their intimate interactions, are with 
other people in the eighteen- to twenty-three-year-old age range. They 
are thus intensely exposed to the infl uences of others in that age group 
and the infl uences that those others mediate. No workplace, no family, 
and hardly any other social environment has this feature (even retirement homes tend to have a wider spread of ages, and probably of life 
Privilege, Well-being, and Participation in Higher Education 173
experiences, than the undergraduate classes on most elite college campuses). A central aim is to expand and diversify the range of infl uences 
on the formation of the students’ characters and attitudes. To that end, 
universities could design academic programs so that students interact 
with the same professor and with a cohort of students throughout their 
undergraduate careers. They might also create, as several smaller universities have done, faculty residences attached to undergraduate residences 
and encourage more faculty interaction in the lives of undergraduate.7
This type of programming is fairly common within small liberal arts 
colleges, but is quite rare in larger research institutions. College halls 
and their faculty mentors might also become ‘communities of service’ in 
which, as part of their graduation requirements, residents are charged 
with identifying a local, national, or global problem and executing a program for change.8
 Encouraging faculty–student interaction beyond the 
classroom should have two outcomes. First, the student culture would be 
infused with adult role models who, we hope, have a greater understanding of well-being and could help counter the anti-intellectualism within 
the peer group. Second, as the faculty became more aware of the issues 
and concerns of their students, they could take this information into the 
classroom to, as Schwab suggests, move students “from where [they are] 
to where [they] might better be” (1978).
Universities might also restructure the general education curriculum to 
be less about the delivery of information in discrete courses, and more 
about engaging students in contemporary ethical and social problems—
especially problems of interest to young adults. In ‘foundational studies,’ 
students would select interdisciplinary course clusters that focus on a particular issue.9
 One example might be a cluster called Love in the Modern 
World in which students would enroll in a psychology course on social 
relationships, a literature course that examines the origins and representations of romantic love, a sociology course on families, and a religious 
studies course focused on how different belief systems view spiritual and 
interpersonal love. In addition, the students in the cluster might have a 
discussion group in which they would read several journalistic accounts 
of the undergraduate hook-up culture and discuss how the information 
in the courses do and do not intersect. Or, clusters could have community components in which students might observe family court, work at a 
rape hotline, or organize a poetry reading on campus. Ideally, these cluster courses would be designed around questions that would help students 
think about how they ought to live as adults in the modern world in addition to introducing them to a variety of disciplinary lenses. Within these 
clusters students would have more interaction with each other and would 
build relationships within classrooms. In addition, given that professors 
know that these students are also working with three of their colleagues, 
when academic or behavioral issues arise, they might be able to address 
the problems as a group, rather than be left to deal with them alone.
174 Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
Such policies reshape how the university views its obligations to students, 
but also obviously have implications for the role of the professor. We have 
already identifi ed that one factor contributing to the laissez-faire ethos is 
that tenure requirements lure the focus of junior faculty away from engaging in student life. In large research universities it is easy for a student to go 
an entire four years with barely a personal word with a professor; and for 
many students it is diffi cult to engage with professors at all. Professors see 
research as their main job, teaching as something to be devolved to graduate students, and engagement with students on matters of personal life and 
career advice as no part of their job at all. Some of the measures above (for 
example, arranging academic schedules to make it more likely that professors encounter the same students several times in the course of their undergraduate careers) would make teaching more rewarding. We would also 
advocate measures such as release from administrative burdens to make 
space for more personal interactions with students, and tenure rewards for 
getting involved in, for example, the resident hall initiatives. We believe 
that daily and close interaction with people who have relatively stable lives, 
whose values are diverse, and many of whose values and ways of living 
are discordant with those promoted by the cultural forms with which the 
students have the most direct contact, would inject an alternative—and 
broadly speaking, healthy—infl uence into their lives.
There are also policies outside of the university that interfere with creating the type of character we describe. In most of the United States the 
drinking age is twenty-one, a fact that puts the university in the role of 
enforcing prohibition, rather than modeling moderation. With a drinking 
age of nineteen, a resident hall could create a policy that allows students to 
have drinks in the common area, but disallow drinking games and alcohol 
at parties.10 In an environment in which more adults were interacting with 
students, the university could consciously create a culture of moderation 
and adult, rather than Animal House, drinking habits.11 American universities could do more to advocate for a drinking policy that would be more 
conducive to the well-being of their student bodies. To help universities 
cultivate a character of public service, a national loan forgiveness policy for 
students who choose particular career paths would, at least, remove some of 
the disincentives for students who would leave school carrying debt. More 
helpful yet would be a national policy that would give all graduates who 
worked for fi ve years in the public or nonprofi t sectors a $15,000 stipend 
that would help offset the opportunity cost for choosing a service career. 
We are not in a position to fully argue for these national- or state-level 
policies, but hope that they illustrate the kind of policymaking that would 
contribute to reshaping the educational aims of a research university.
These suggestions have a common aim of using the university to (1) facilitate healthy, intellectual interaction between students; (2) provide students 
with more adult mentoring; and (3) encourage students to puzzle about how 
they ought to live in the world. Further, we argue that the university must 
Privilege, Well-being, and Participation in Higher Education 175
take an active hand in molding the ethos of student life by actively resisting 
the culture of hedonism and self-interest promoted by popular culture targeted at young adults. Just as universities have taken action (although there 
is certainly room for improvement) to create an ethos of cultural tolerance 
on campus, so must they actively cultivate a climate that nurture students’ 
well-being and their sense of obligation to serve those who enjoy fewer 
advantages than they do throughout their lives.
SHOULD THE UNIVERSITY ACT IN LOCO PARENTIS TO ADULTS?
Our analysis and proposals give rise to a very natural objection: that we 
are endorsing a level of paternalism that is unacceptable. Most students in 
universities are adults; they are legally eligible to drive, to vote, to marry, to 
join the armed forces, to choose whether or not to undergo higher education, and to do almost all the other things that adults do,12 so they should 
be permitted to make their own judgments about how to live their lives. 
The institutions they attend have no business trying to shape or constrain 
their choices, except insofar as they must obey the law. This kind of reasoning was used in the 1960s and 1970s by students trying to break down 
the institution of in loco parentis; it could be used now to oppose the kinds 
of measures that we have suggested, and one of our arguments—the wellbeing argument—for them.
We believe that we can meet the objection.
Before explaining how, it is worth seeing exactly what the objection 
touches in our argument. Our argument from privilege is not paternalistic. 
The argument from privilege does not motivate the proposed reforms by 
appeal to the good of the students themselves, but by appeal to the good of 
others—those less-advantaged people to whom the students have stringent 
duties of justice. The idea is that the students are enjoying an unearned 
and artifi cially constructed advantage, and that advantaged is justifi ed only 
if it redounds to the benefi t of others who are less advantaged. The argument from privilege justifi es reforms on the grounds that they make it more 
likely that the unearned benefi ts will, in fact, redound to the benefi t of the 
less advantaged and will therefore more likely be justifi ed. There is nothing 
paternalistic, or wrong, about placing conditions on receipt of such a benefi t, 
especially when the recipient is in a position to refuse the whole package.
But our argument from well-being is indeed motivated by a concern for 
the students themselves, so is open to the charge of paternalism.
We have four responses. First, let’s assume the premise of the objection, which is that eighteen-year-olds are truly adults with fully developed 
capacities for making good judgments about how to live their lives. Then, 
they have an easy option for avoiding the paternalistic measures we propose: they can choose not to go to college. Most eighteen-year-olds, in fact, 
do not go to college but instead enter workplaces in which their daily lives 
176 Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
at work are far more stringently regulated than that of most students, but 
in which their private lives are left to their own management. The paternalistic measures we are proposing are optional. Think, by comparison, of the 
way that a military shapes the dispositions and characters of its recruits; or 
the way that the emergency services train recruits. There is an explicit goal 
of developing certain kinds of character traits—this is part of the game. It 
is possible to dispute that the military develops undesirable traits, but when 
the military consists solely of true volunteers, it is hard to make the case 
that they have some complaint against their characters being shaped. So 
the charge that there is something wrong with the paternalism we propose 
is weakened by the fact that students volunteer for the environment we are 
proposing.
Second though, we doubt the premise that in our social environment, 
eighteen-year-olds—in fact, eighteen- to twenty-two-year-olds—are for the 
most part fully formed adults who know their own good better than anyone 
else does. Rather, most (though certainly not all) of them are still persons in 
formation. This is not to say that in all social environments people of this 
age are still minors. In another social environment, in which children are 
encouraged to take responsibility for their own lives and those of others by 
their early teens, it might well be that at eighteen most people are close to 
as mature as they are going to become. But in our environment, where at 
eighteen very few children have substantial experience of being responsible 
for themselves or others, they are at a stage where they have to experiment 
with how to live and get to know themselves separately from their parents. 
Of course, the reason they haven’t matured is because they have not had to 
take responsibility for themselves or others, so it would be inappropriate to 
maintain exactly the level of monitoring and regulation that the good parent maintains. But our proposals do not embody that level of monitoring 
and regulation. It might be wrong to prohibit sexual activity and alcohol 
consumption, and even to enforce reasonable sleeping hours, but it is not, 
we think, wrong to intervene in the environment in ways that fall short of 
prohibiting self-destructive behavior, but encourage other kinds of behavior and careful refl ection.
Part of what worries the anti-paternalist objector to our argument is 
probably the observation that we want an institution to devise and enforce 
rules concerning behavior, rather than the advice about living that underlies 
the rules. Think about an idealized apprenticeship relationship, in which 
the apprentice works closely with the artisan to whom he is apprenticed. 
Not only does he closely observe the job being done and gradually learn 
how to do it, but if he turns up late or tired or hung over, his overseer 
enquires why this is and advises the apprentice on how to manage his life in 
order to succeed in work. The anti-paternalist, presumably, has no problem 
with this kindly advice. But in most universities, most students will not 
have a close enough relationship with any particular adult for such advice 
to be usefully offered, or for it to be taken in good faith. One aspect of our 
Privilege, Well-being, and Participation in Higher Education 177
proposals is to alter this fact by creating a presumption among faculty that 
they have some responsibility for advising students on life management, 
both through impersonal and very occasional class-level discussion, and 
through personal encounters with students.13 For good or ill (and we suspect it is for ill), the only way that most students will be infl uenced by this 
advice is through the establishment and maintenance of rules.
This leads to the third point. Education, if successful, is intrinsically a 
paternalistic process. The point of the student entering into a relationship 
with the teacher is that the teacher either knows what the student does not 
and is skilled at imparting that knowledge, or he knows how to facilitate in 
the student the development of skills and knowledge that, in fact, neither of 
them yet has. The relationship is one in which manipulation is permissible, 
even when the student is an adult, as long as the manipulation is guided by 
the interests of the student and at least when the student enters the relationship voluntarily. A teacher may deliberately withhold information from the 
student in order to make possible the student’s discovery of the information 
herself; or he may withhold praise from very good work in order to trigger 
the further effort that produces excellence; or conversely, he may praise 
less-than-excellent work in order to prompt the same effort. Age makes no 
difference here: a thirty-year-old teacher is charged with the same duties 
to a forty-fi ve-year-old student as to an eighteen-year-old (though may, 
indeed, fi nd it more diffi cult to carry them out).
The fourth point is just that there is no nonpaternalistic default. Universities bring large numbers of young people together into an environment that is created by the university’s administrators and its long-term 
employees. The university administrators have to take responsibility for 
the environment their actions structure. In most elite universities most of 
the students are aged eighteen to twenty-two because universities choose to 
admit people of that age; they choose what factors to weigh and how much 
relative weight to give them in admissions. In other words, they choose for 
each student the main peer infl uences that student will experience. Most 
of the students live on or close to campus and spend most of their daily 
life among other students (roughly their age). Universities, like the rest of 
us, know that most of these students are newly away from their main personal adult infl uences, and that the central impersonal adult infl uences that 
they share are mediated by commercial popular culture. Universities decide 
whether to build student residences with single rooms, double rooms, or 
triple rooms; they decide whether to make them coeducational or not, how 
close to place them to commercial districts, whether to require students 
to live in them; and whether to run academic programming within them. 
Universities decide to hold large lecture classes of 500 or more students, 
whether to ensure that all students have at least one small class with a 
tenure-track or tenured professor in their freshman year, and what mix 
of academic classes to require. Universities know that these decisions will 
have effects on the quality of life of the students themselves, and whatever 
178 Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
they do they have to hold themselves responsible for those effects that are 
foreseeable. If there were a default, generated by some natural necessity 
for rounding up together same-age students into a single place and making 
them live together in a certain kind of environment, then university offi cials 
and professors could take refuge in that fact to disclaim responsibility for 
the effects. But that is just not the case. If they know that a particular environment is bad for those they have enticed to the university, resort to some 
anti-paternalist principle is not a good-faith defense.
CONCLUSION
Universities probably did well to abandon some of the more extreme aspects 
of in loco parentis. But our sense is that they have gone too far. As institutions that facilitate access to unearned advantage, they have a duty to infl uence the benefi ciaries of that advantage to be motivated so that the benefi ts 
redound to the advantage of others who are less advantaged. As institutions 
that bring together large numbers of young people who will inevitably be 
exposed to one another’s infl uence and the infl uence of corporations that 
have no interest in their well-being, universities have a duty of care for 
those young people. Our sense, based only on experience and conversation, 
is that numerous university administrators think hard, and try to act, on 
the motives and in the ways that we recommend. We equally worry that 
they meet resistance from many faculty who have a far more laissez-faire 
attitude toward the students in their charge. Our aim in this chapter has 
been to strengthen the resolve of said administrators and undermine the 
position of said faculty members by showing that the laissez-faire attitude 
is wrongheaded.14
NOTES
 1. OECD, Education at a Glance 2002 (Paris: OECD, 2002), Chapter A: “The 
Output of Educational Institutions and the Impact of Learning.”
 2. Graduate Market Trends, Spring 2001.
 3. J. Borland et al. estimate the return to HE in Australia as AU$300,000 (earnings over a working lifetime) and $90,000 (net monetary benefi t). US and UK 
returns in text.
 4. “Work hard, play hard” is the unoffi cial motto of students at Duke University (Sessions Stepp 2006).
 5. The primacy of the value of choice is in part a result of student movements 
in the 1960s that challenged the traditional Western canon and rightly 
demanded the inclusion of minority voices into the university curriculum. 
In fact, this movement has left us with what is arguably the only clear moral 
message supported by the university, which is the cultivation of multicultural 
toleration—a message that comes through the curriculum and student organizations and is promoted, to some extent, in student life through diversity 
training programs. This is not to say that universities are free of racism. 
Privilege, Well-being, and Participation in Higher Education 179
Instead, the promotion of ‘tolerance’ is an example of institutional support 
for the idea that an educated person ought to be culturally sensitive.
 6. This description of the ‘educated person’ is largely drawn from John Dewey’s 
Democracy and Education (1944) and R.S. Peters’ Ethics and Education
(1966).
 7. To offer one example, Washington University in St. Louis has a Faculty Associates Program in which a faculty member works with a resident advisor 
to create community and act as a mentor for the fl oor. Associates receive a 
modest stipend with which they plan events and activities. In addition, the 
university is working to create faculty housing attached to residence halls, a 
policy that brings family living onto campus. Thanks to Mary Elliott, Assistant Director of Residential Life at Washington University, for alerting us to 
this example.
 8. Ideally, these would move students beyond ‘charitable’ activities such as 
canned food drives, and instead put students in contact with organizations working for more systematic change. For example, a hall might have a 
human rights theme and be charged with educating the campus by bringing 
in speakers, organizing fundraisers for international rights organizations, 
and traveling together on a campaign with a group like Global Exchange 
(http://www.globalexchange.org/index.html).
 9. A similar program is being used at University of Wisconsin–Madison as an 
optional freshman seminar called Freshman Interest Groups or FIGS. In 
these, a lead professor is chosen who identifi es a theme and teaches one seminar course and then selects two other courses, roughly on the same theme, 
that the same group of students must take concurrently.
 10. Thanks again to Mary Elliott for pointing out this possibility.
 11. The current drinking age causes students to head to house parties in their 
fi rst few years of school, where research has shown they are more likely than 
they are at public drinking locations to fi nd illicit drugs and to play drinking 
games that increase overall alcohol consumption (Clapp et al. 2006).
 12. Drinking alcohol is one striking exception in most states in the US.
 13. For example, Brighouse recently taught a freshman class for the fi rst time. 
One of the students was regularly sleeping in class, another was regularly a 
couple of minutes late. He spoke to both of them about their problems and 
offered relevant advice. The late student was never late again; the sleeping 
student improved (slightly). But both subsequently said appreciatively that 
no other professor had mentioned their respective problems, despite their 
manifesting them in every class.
 14. We’re grateful to numerous undergraduate students for conversations that 
helped us to shape and moderate our views and arguments—to name a 
few, Jessica Pung, Emma Milbhauer, Elise Volkman, Wasim Salman, and 
Dustin McMahon. Thanks also to Lindsey Chambers for incisive comments on an early draft, and to an audience at the Philosophy of Education 
Society of Great Britain annual conference. Due to the sensitive nature 
of our argument, we are more than usually obliged to relieve all those 
thanked of any responsibility for the substantive claims and arguments of 
the chapter.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allen, W. F. “Practical Education.” In Essays and Monographs by William Francis 
Allen, 136–150. Memorial volume ed. Boston: G.H. Ellis, 1890.
180 Harry Brighouse and Paula McAvoy
Borland, J., P. Dawkins, D. Johnson, and R. Williams. Returns to Investment 
in Higher Education Program Report No. 1: Report to the Vice Chancellor, 
the University of Melbourne. Melbourne, AU: Melbourne Institute of Applied 
Economic and Social Research, 2000. http://www.melbourneinstitute.com/
research/micro/rihe.pdf (accessed 22 June 2008).
Clapp, J., M. Reed, M. Holmes, J. Lange, and R. Voas. “Drunk in Public, Drunk 
in Private: The Relationship Between College Students, Drinking Environments 
and Alcohol Consumption.” American Journal of Drug & Alcohol Abuse 32, 
no. 2 (2006): 275–285.
Day, J., and E. Newburger. The Big Payoff: Educational Attainment and Synthetic 
Estimates of Work-Life Earnings. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau, 2002.
Dewey, J. Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education. New York: The Free Press, 1944.
Freitas, D. “Taste: Excess and longing.” Wall Street Journal, 20 May 2005, Eastern 
edition. Document ID: 842296811, retrieved from http://wallstreetjournal.com 
(accessed 17 December 2007) 
Levy, A. Female Chauvinist Pigs: Women and the Rise of Raunch Culture. New 
York: The Free Press, 2006.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Education at a Glance
2002: OECD Indicators. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, 2002.
Peters, R. S. Ethics and Education. London: Allen and Unwin,1966.
Rawls, J. A Theory of Justice Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971.
Schwab, J. “Eros and Education.” In Science, Curriculum, and Liberal education, 
eds. I. Westbury and N. Wilkof, 105–132. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1978.
Sessions Stepp, L. Unhooked. New York: Riverhead Hardcover, 2007.
10 In Defense of Multiculturalism
Mark Halstead
THE PROBLEM: HOW TO RESPOND TO 
CULTURAL DIFFERENCE
When many Muslims around the world took offense at the publication of 
cartoons in the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten and elsewhere depicting the Prophet Muhammad as a terrorist and began to protest vigorously 
against them (Modood 2006), the incident highlighted not only the gulf of 
misunderstanding and fear that still exists between different cultures (in 
this case, between Islam and the West), but also the diffi culty of fi nding 
an appropriate response to cultural difference. This chapter argues that in 
spite of recent devastating critiques of multiculturalism, it remains a philosophically sound concept and is in fact the approach to cultural difference 
that holds out most hope for the future. The chapter begins by considering contemporary claims by journalists and politicians about the ‘death’ of 
multiculturalism before turning to a closer examination of the actual arguments and debates. The chapter concludes with a brief examination of the 
implications for education. In the discussion, examples are drawn mainly 
from Muslims in the UK, for three reasons. First, the impact of cultural 
diversity in the British context is seen most clearly in the case of the Muslims because they are less likely than other groups to be integrated in terms 
of religious practices, language, food, dress, intermarriage, or core values. 
Secondly, it is Muslims more than any other minority group who are implicated in and affected by recent changes in attitudes to multiculturalism—so 
much so that some commentators fi nd it hard to be sure “whether it is 
‘multiculturalism’ or ‘Muslims’ and ‘Islam’ that is being questioned” (Allen 
2007, 127). Thirdly, the situation of Muslims in the UK is closely watched 
in other Western countries with signifi cant cultural minorities, including 
the Netherlands, Germany, and Denmark, and thus any arguments developed are likely to be of international interest.
The initial response to the cartoons among most westerners was one of 
bewilderment at the Muslim reaction: how can people take such offense 
at a joke? From a Western perspective, even if one found the cartoons 
distasteful or offensive, one would acknowledge the cartoonists’ right to 
182 Mark Halstead
freedom of expression and respond with tolerance. The principles involved 
are thus the same as those in the Satanic Verses affair (Akhtar 1989; 
Ahsan and Kidwai 1991). But the bewilderment was just as strong on the 
other side, with the Muslim protestors calling the cartoons both blasphemous and provocative because it was clear that the cartoonists knew that 
Islam forbids any depictions of the Prophet Muhammad, let alone one that 
shows him as a terrorist. Muslims thus interpreted the affair as a failure 
to respect their most sacred beliefs, the very foundation of their distinctive 
way of life. The gulf between Muslim and non-Muslim perceptions was 
picked up and exaggerated by the Western media, which both refl ects and 
shapes public opinion.
The problem of how to respond to cultural difference is also illustrated 
by the growing practice among Muslim women in Britain and elsewhere in 
the West of wearing the niqab (veil) in public places. After former British 
Foreign Secretary Jack Straw wrote an article expressing his dislike of the 
veil and his intention to ask any constituents wearing one to remove it when 
they spoke to him (Straw 2006), a massive debate ensued. Some participants in the debate considered it disrespectful to Muslim women and damaging to good community relations to try to tell them what to wear; but 
many welcomed the invitation to express their opinions, and some newspapers took the opportunity to express anti-Muslim or racist sentiments. 
At an individual level, many westerners feel uncomfortable with the veil at 
least partly because they are used to communication that combines speech 
and body language (such as smiling and frowning), and the veil makes the 
latter form of communication impossible. More fundamentally, many see 
the veil as an obstacle to integration and to women’s participation on equal 
terms in society. It is often assumed that women are forced by men to wear 
it. Even more extreme responses included claims that women wearing veils 
are “frightening and intimidating” (Woolas 2006), that they are trying to 
impose Islamic law on British society, and that the veil is an “invitation to 
rape” (Lévy 2006, 35). Muslim explanations are often ignored; namely, that 
it is a symbol of commitment to Allah by putting his will fi rst, particularly 
in relation to the requirement of modesty and not fl aunting one’s sexuality. 
The veil may also be a symbol of identity and of resistance to expectations 
of assimilation into “corrupt” Western values (Gereluk 2008). There seems 
to be little support among non-Muslims for the right to wear the veil, and 
policymakers frequently seem to be looking for excuses to ban it. This happened in the case of Aishah Azmi who was sacked as a teaching assistant in 
Dewsbury for refusing to remove her niqab when men were present, and in 
the case of defense lawyer Shabnam Mughal who was taken off an immigration appeal case after refusing the judge’s request to remove her niqab
in court. The reasons given for seeking to ban or discourage the wearing of 
the veil in public include diffi culty in communication, safety issues, security 
issues (because there have been claims that male criminals have donned the 
niqab or the burqa to escape detection and arrest), and protecting women 
In Defense of Multiculturalism 183
from oppression—though, ironically, if it is the Muslim women themselves 
who choose to wear the veil, as generally seems to be the case, then this 
protection of women’s freedoms itself becomes oppressive.
In both the Danish cartoons affair and the extended debate about the 
veil, a common strand of underlying thinking is ‘Why can’t they be more 
like us?’ This of course ignores the fact that they are part of us, if by ‘us’ 
we mean British citizens. Among the many strengths of multiculturalism 
are that it highlights the moral duty citizens have to tolerate differences 
in fellow citizens, so long as the differences do not lead to public harm; 
and also that it draws attention to the danger of alienation or confl ict if 
a particular minority feels itself oppressed or not treated with the same 
respect as other citizens. Multiculturalism insists on giving a voice to all the 
different cultures represented in a country and ensuring that members of 
different cultural groups are treated with equal respect. We therefore need 
to distinguish between private and public reactions to cultural difference. 
Private reactions may include emotional responses such as bewilderment 
and resentment alongside other, more morally considered responses such 
as benevolence, respect, and concern. Clearly, not everyone is persuaded by 
the multicultural agenda. Public reactions, on the other hand, can be seen 
in the policies adopted by the government or by public institutions such as 
the BBC, where there is an expectation that these will be rationally justifi -
able and broadly in line with the fundamental liberal values of society. This 
means in effect that policies will be multicultural, or at least it did so until 
the start of the new century. How far things have changed in the last nine 
years will be discussed in the next section.
So far, multiculturalism has been treated as if it were a single way of 
responding to cultural difference, but in fact it is a broader term encompassing at least three different possible responses. The fi rst, which I shall 
call ‘strong multiculturalism,’ requires respect for all cultural differences 
except those that demonstrably harm the public interest or result in serious 
physical abuse. It allows minority groups, if they wish, to live their lives in 
accordance with their own beliefs and traditions, virtually untouched by 
contact with the values of the broader society (so long as there is peaceful 
coexistence among the different faiths and traditions), and it allows them 
to pass these on in an undiluted form to future generations. It thus accepts 
that religious or other deeply held cultural beliefs and practices can trump 
other, more rational considerations or the practices of the majority culture 
in any decision about how minorities should live their lives. In Lustgarten’s 
words, cultural minorities should have “unrestricted freedom to follow their 
own customs and religious practices, be governed by their personal law and 
receive education in their language and cultural tradition” (1983, 101). The 
key point is that they should never be forced into a position where they 
have to act against their own fundamental beliefs (for example, by being 
provided with food in schools or hospitals that their religion forbids them 
to eat). Strong multiculturalism usually includes the claim that the state 
184 Mark Halstead
has the duty to support the minority cultures of law-abiding citizens, for 
example, by granting holidays on religious festivals, encouraging minority 
languages, allowing time for prayer at work, accepting Muslim dress codes, 
providing facilities for single-sex swimming in public swimming pools, 
allowing mosques to broadcast the call to prayer, and so on. Some people 
associate strong multiculturalism with an obligation to celebrate diversity, 
but in fact this is not a necessary condition. We cannot expect Muslims to 
celebrate the fact that westerners are insulting their prophet any more than 
we can expect supporters of free speech to accept the banning of certain 
cartoons simply because they cause offense to some people. These freedoms 
are tolerated, but not necessarily celebrated.
The second, which I shall call ‘weak multiculturalism,’ accepts a more 
limited form of cultural diversity but at the same time emphasizes community cohesion. On the one hand, it accepts that minority groups should 
be recognized and represented in any common institutional structures 
and decision-making processes of the broader society, but on the other, 
it requires a strong commitment on the part of all citizens to the shared 
values of the broader society. The roots of weak multiculturalism are found 
in the Swann Report (DES 1985), which describes a “genuinely pluralist 
society” as “both socially cohesive and culturally diverse” (8, 316–317). 
According to this report, members of minority groups should be free to 
maintain their distinctive cultures and lifestyles, at least in areas of life 
“where no single way can justifi ably be presented as universally appropriate” (ibid., 4). But this freedom is subject to two major constraints: First, 
priority must be given to taking on “the shared values of the wider pluralist 
society,” for without these there would be the danger that society would 
fragment along ethnic or religious lines; and second, the group’s authority 
and control over the individual is constrained by the requirement of “free 
choice for individuals” (ibid., 6). It is clear from the report that the roots of 
contemporary thinking about community cohesion (which lies at the heart 
of weak multiculturalism) go back many years. The aim is that all groups 
should feel suffi ciently comfortable with local and national policies that 
they are prepared to resolve any remaining issues or disagreements through 
discussion and negotiation rather than through confl ict or violence. The 
approach therefore presupposes certain liberal values, particularly democracy, negotiation, individual freedom, and equality.
The third is ‘minimal’ or ‘tokenistic multiculturalism,’ which makes only 
small concessions to cultural minorities and which may indeed become a cover 
for assimilationism. For example, specifi c minority cultural practices including culinary and musical ones may be tolerated or welcomed, but few if any 
concessions are made to the distinctive beliefs and values of cultural minorities (especially those that are comparative newcomers to the West), and they 
are expected to conform to the majority culture. This is seen as in their own 
best interests as well as in the interests of the broader society. If they choose 
not to, they are themselves responsible for any unpleasant consequences. This 
In Defense of Multiculturalism 185
view is associated with the politics of the Right, but even liberals have argued 
that if the life offered to the young in minority religions or immigrant communities is too impoverished, then “assimilationist policies may well be the only 
humane course, even if implemented by force of law” (Raz 1986, 423–424).
The difference between these three versions of multiculturalism can be 
illustrated by reference to the veil. The fi rst would allow Muslim communities to police their own members and require women to wear the veil if 
the community considered this a religious duty. The second would permit 
the wearing of the veil, but only if it were a matter of autonomous individual choice. The third would refuse Muslim women the freedom to wear 
the veil in public because such cultural or religious symbols are divisive and 
might fan the fl ames of confl ict. It is argued in the next section that in recent 
years the fi rst of these versions of multiculturalism has been discredited as an 
acceptable response in the eyes of many people, and that though the second 
remains offi cial policy, what we are seeing in practice is a signifi cant slide in 
the attitudes of the broader population from the second to the third version. 
This slide is seen more in the metaphors and emotive language used in the 
popular press to describe multiculturalism than in any philosophically coherent discussion of the topic (Halstead 2007). Indeed, it is argued here that the 
third version is philosophically, politically, and morally unsound. Assimilation takes for granted the superiority of Western moral values and can be 
seen as a disguised form of cultural domination (Halstead 1988, 145–147).
THE CONTEXT: THE DRIFT AWAY 
FROM MULTICULTURALISM
There is a long-standing tradition of opposition to multiculturalism in some 
quarters of the UK that is mainly associated with right-wing politics. For 
example, in his retirement speech as Secretary of State for Education in 1986, 
Sir Keith Joseph strongly criticized multicultural education and called for 
schools to “transmit British culture” (Halstead 1988, 281). In this speech he 
was echoing the views of the Bradford head-teacher Ray Honeyford, who 
was forced into early retirement the same year because of his resistance to 
local multicultural policies. What is different since the turn of the new century, however, is the coincidence of a stronger emphasis on national identity 
and community cohesion with a perceived threat to the West from Islamic 
extremism, with multiculturalism being blamed for providing the context in 
which extremism can thrive. The emphasis on national identity is seen, for 
example, in the “Life in the UK” test that must be taken by all those seeking to settle permanently in the UK or apply for British citizenship, and in 
a series of speeches on Britishness by the Prime Minister; for example, in a 
speech in 2007, he claimed that Britain is defi ned “not by ethnicity but . . . 
by common values and shared interests,” that Britain needs “a stronger sense 
of patriotic purpose” and that “what was wrong about multiculturalism was 
186 Mark Halstead
not the recognition of diversity but that it over-emphasized separateness at the 
cost of unity” (Brown 2007). Concern has been expressed that recent rises 
in net immigration (the net increase in 2007 was 237,000) have led to lower 
levels of community cohesion in the areas most affected (HCCLGC 2008). 
The perceived threat from Islamic extremism resulting from what Allen calls 
“urgent and historical events” (namely 9/11, Bali, Madrid, 7/7, and Mumbai), 
and the responses in terms of the “war on terror” (Allen 2007, 125–126; cf. 
Modood 2005) have resulted in a new defi nition of the global situation in the 
form of a vicious circle. Islamic extremism is defi ned as a major threat in the 
world, therefore Muslims in the West are treated with greater suspicion and in 
turn become alienated by what they perceive as unjust and inequitable treatment, and in the end some may become more sympathetic to extremism. This 
is commonly described as the ‘legacy of multiculturalism’ (Carmichael 2007). 
Johnston (2008) argues that multiculturalism has metamorphosed from an 
expression of “Britain’s characteristic toleration of other people’s ways, religions, cuisines, languages and dress” into a “political creed that held that 
ethnic minority groups should be allowed to do what they liked” and that this 
new creed has allowed Islamic extremists to separate themselves from the rest 
of British society, with murderous results.
In 2004 Trevor Phillips said that multiculturalism was effectively moribund 
as a political ideal because it emphasized difference rather than shared British 
values (Baldwin 2004) and the following year in a speech to the Manchester 
Council for Community Relations claimed that Britain was “sleepwalking” 
toward segregation (Phillips 2005). Such remarks captured the popular imagination, coming as they did from the mouth of someone who as chair of the 
Equality and Human Rights Commission is in some sense a spokesperson 
for Blacks in the UK, and there followed numerous newspaper articles and 
television programs on the theme of the ‘death of multiculturalism.’ However, 
an immediate problem with this phrase is clear: multiculturalism has two 
distinct dimensions. The fi rst is to do with recognizing rather than ignoring the distinctive cultural identities of British citizens from minority backgrounds and with acknowledging their right to cherish, preserve, or modify 
those identities as they choose while enjoying the privileges and exercising 
the responsibilities of British citizenship. The second is to do with harmonious coexistence among the different groups that make up British society, and 
this involves welcoming diversity, encouraging cross-cultural understanding between groups, ensuring institutional justice and participation for all 
groups, and eradicating inequality and discrimination. Phillips was criticizing 
only one of these dimensions, because he was worried that it could result in 
some groups leading self-contained lives in isolation from the broader society, 
but the slide to include both dimensions has been an easy one.
Some British newspapers proceeded to test the bounds of acceptability with 
a regular crop of front-page headlines presenting negative images of Muslims, 
and the use of increasingly intemperate language in articles about multiculturalism. For example, Melanie Phillips depicted multiculturalism as “enforcing 
a doctrine of state-mandated virtue to promote racial, ethnic and cultural 
In Defense of Multiculturalism 187
difference and stamp out majority values” and spoke of a continuum in Islam 
“that links peaceful, law-abiding but nevertheless intensely ideological Muslims at one end and murderous jihadists at the other” (Ashley 2006, 8; cf. 
Phillips 2006). Julie Burchill earlier expressed similar sentiments: “Call me a 
fi lthy racist—go on, you know you want to—but we have reason to be suspicious of Islam” (2001). Politicians and Christian leaders such as Archbishop 
John Sentamu and Bishop Nazir Ali have also expressed open opposition to 
multiculturalism. In a speech in 2006 the Labor cabinet minister Ruth Kelly 
appeared to signal the end of multiculturalism as an offi cial policy. In 2008, 
the Conservative leader David Cameron attacked multiculturalism for creating a “cultural apartheid” (Watt 2008, 9). Substantial sections of society are 
becoming increasingly hostile to Muslims and other minority communities 
and see multiculturalism as a threat to the traditional British way of life. In 
his Manchester speech Trevor Phillips noted that most white Britons could 
not name a single nonwhite friend (Phillips 2005). Perhaps David Harrison is 
right when he claims that “a consensus has emerged that the multiculturalism 
experiment was necessary, but that its time is over” (2008).
One result of this new climate has been a drift toward more discriminatory policies and practice toward Muslims, including discrimination in 
recruitment, employment, and the workplace; Islamophobic attacks on individuals and mosques; bureaucratic delays in responding to Muslim requests 
for planning applications for mosques or schools, or for cultural sensitivity 
in hospitals and healthcare generally; and disproportionate targeting under 
antiterrorist legislation. Such things not only have a disruptive effect on the 
daily lives of ordinary Muslims in Britain, but can also cause deep-seated 
resentment (Richardson 2004). Modood’s point in relation to the Danish 
cartoons has wider application: “From the Muslim side, the underlying 
causes of their current anger are a deep sense that they are not respected, 
that they and their most cherished feelings are ‘fair game’” (2006, 2). As he 
notes, the combination of “inferior protective legislation, socio-economic 
marginality, cultural disdain, draconian security surveillance, the occupation of Palestine, and the international ‘war on terror’” (ibid.) makes life in 
Britain an uncomfortable experience for many Muslims.
The questions arise as to how far these trends result from a gut response 
of what I have elsewhere called “cultural racism” (Halstead 1988, 145ff.), 
and how far they are underpinned by a coherent framework of philosophically justifi able values and arguments. The next section identifi es the main 
arguments that are put forward against multiculturalism and subjects them 
to closer analysis.
THE DEBATE ABOUT MULTICULTURALISM: 
ARGUMENT AND COUNTERARGUMENT
Among the polemic, invective, innuendo, myth-making, and mischiefmaking noted in the last section, three signifi cant arguments against 
188 Mark Halstead
multiculturalism can be identifi ed. The fi rst is that it undermines social 
cohesion and can result in the self-segregation of minority communities. By 
encouraging different attitudes and values to thrive, it is socially divisive 
and fosters fragmentation. What is needed to counter this divisiveness is 
more integration and more emphasis on the shared values of the broader 
society. The second argument is that because it supports group rights and 
group identities, multiculturalism pays inadequate attention to individual 
needs and individual autonomy and fails to provide an escape route for 
individuals from pressures to conform to group expectations. Multiculturalism is also said to involve an essentialist approach to religious, cultural, 
and ethnic identity, and because many minority cultures have traditionally 
involved beliefs and practices that are discriminatory against women (or 
other groups, such as gays) there is a danger that multiculturalism’s support for the right of minority cultures to maintain their traditional values 
and practices might harm women—or at least fail to support their right to 
escape oppression and determine their own future (cf. Okin 1999). The third 
argument is that by allowing traditional beliefs and practices to be uncritically maintained, multiculturalism provides a context in which extremist 
attitudes can fl ourish within Western nations, and “impressionable young 
men” (to use Philip Johnston’s term, 2008) from minority groups can be 
exploited. None of these arguments is purely philosophical, but it is worth 
considering rather more closely how they relate to the dominant values of 
liberal democratic societies.
Divisiveness
With regard to the fi rst argument, it is important to note that neither holding different personal or cultural values nor making different institutional 
provision for distinctive sub-groups in society is necessarily socially divisive. Difference is not the same as divisiveness. On the contrary, difference 
is healthy in a democracy, and democratic values and practices assume the 
existence of difference. The key issue is whether the differences exist in a 
context of mutual respect. Recognition of difference can be a positive thing 
both for minorities and for the broader society: for minorities because it 
symbolizes respect and the freedom to follow one’s own worldview, and 
therefore it generates feelings of loyalty to the state that recognizes such 
rights; and for the broader society because it is enriching, encourages 
democratic debate, and facilitates autonomous choice. However, there are 
some situations when difference can lead to divisiveness. For example, if 
the adherents of one faith maintain that their lifestyle is the only one that 
is morally acceptable and that all other faiths are a waste of time, this can 
undermine the respect for other groups that is essential to the fl ourishing 
of liberal democracies and encourage a sense of identity based on opposition to, rather than positive interaction with, the broader society. This can 
lead to ghettoization and a breakdown of social cohesion (Halstead and 
In Defense of Multiculturalism 189
McLaughlin 2005, 64–65). However, it would be a mistake to assume that 
every situation in which communities are ghettoized and live ‘parallel lives’ 
is the result of self-segregation. For example, if the majority responds to 
minority groups with prejudice, discrimination, and social exclusion, then 
this will cause alienation and withdrawal. Often, talk of ‘self-segregation’ 
proves to be a way of blaming victims for something that is not initiated 
by them. Some empirical examples may help to clarify the point. The Muslim ghettos in many inner cities in the UK came about as mainly a result 
of white fl ight rather than the desire of Muslims to set up self-contained 
residential districts, and so the fact that Muslims are now trying to make 
the best of the situation by creating institutions within the ghetto to meet 
their cultural needs does not make this a case of self-segregation. Indeed, 
to condemn black or Muslim institutions as ‘self-segregated’ but not white 
or Christian ones, as the Swann Report does, appears discriminatory (DES 
1985, 515). Nor is it reasonable to blame Muslim schools for not meeting the level of 25 percent non-Muslim admissions as recommended in the 
Cantle Report (Community Cohesion Review Team 2001); their admission 
policies normally welcome non-Muslim students, but the problem is the 
lack of applicants.
In a similar vein, Anthony O’Hear writes of “concentrations of Muslims 
who show little inclination to integrate with the host society” (2006, 97), 
thus putting the blame fi rmly on the shoulders of the Muslims themselves. 
If what I wrote in the previous paragraph is correct, however, there is fi rst 
a need for the ‘host’ society to eradicate racist and Islamophobic attitudes 
and practices, and then to introduce a set of policies based on trust, tolerance, acceptance, respect, and a commitment to pluralism; Muslim groups 
can be blamed for self-segregation only when such positive policies are 
already in place. If this seems an impossible dream in the current social 
and political climate, we should remember that the establishment of the 
fi rst state-funded Muslim schools in the UK, which occurred barely ten 
years ago, had highly important symbolic value in Muslim eyes (although 
it affected only one percent of the Muslim children in the country) in terms 
of recognition, trust, and respect. If this climate of respect can be restored 
(though this is unlikely to be achieved by forcing minorities to adopt an 
artifi cial, static, middle-class notion of Britishness), then perhaps Muslims will cease to be too fearful to engage in democratic discussions with 
non-Muslim groups about how to achieve an appropriate balance between 
integration and cultural maintenance, or to put it another way, a balance 
between shared and legitimately distinctive values. What many Muslims 
want is economic and political integration, plus Islamic personal and social 
values (Halstead 1986, 16). Economic and political integration implies a 
set of shared values, but these must be genuinely shared (or at least agreed 
upon in democratic discussion), not imposed by the broader society, or else 
they will be seen as another example of cultural domination. Examples of 
such shared values include a basic social morality without which no form of 
190 Mark Halstead
social life would be possible and the acceptance of a common system of law 
and democratic government. Islamic personal and social values are what 
give meaning and structure to the lives of individual Muslims. They are not 
static; indeed, they will evolve in their own sometimes unexpected ways (cf. 
Stratton 2006) and may exemplify unusual blends of the traditional and the 
new, which only a situation of genuine cultural pluralism can deal with.
Group Control
The second argument against multiculturalism relates to the tensions that 
can exist between group identity and individual rights and needs, especially 
when group identity is defi ned in a rigid and uncompromising way. As noted 
in the fi rst section of this chapter, stronger forms of multiculturalism accept 
the right of groups not only to live their lives in accordance with their own 
beliefs and traditions, virtually untouched by contact with the values of the 
broader society, but also to pass these on in an undiluted form to future 
generations. There are two problems with allowing groups this level of freedom. First, if there are injustices within the traditional culture, such as 
forced marriage and honor killings, these are more likely to be perpetuated 
under a system of strong multiculturalism. Okin (1999) rightly notes that 
many of these injustices disproportionately affect women. Second, if groups 
are free to uncritically socialize the next generation into their own values 
and practices, the consequent cultural encapsulation may become oppressive, especially to those individuals who feel they have no realistic chance to 
exit their community (cf. Okin 2003). Such problems as these have led some 
to question the right of groups to preserve their identity in this way (cf. Sen 
2006) and to argue (in line with much traditional liberal thinking) that 
individual rights must trump group rights. As Crittenden points out, “in 
classical liberal theory there was no commitment to intermediate groups 
as essential constituents of a corporate society. The fundamental units are 
individuals and the state. The former make up an aggregate whose collective will is expressed by the state” (1982, 13). In line with this view, the 
recently introduced citizenship courses in the UK encourage young people 
to think of their primary identity in terms of membership of a state (‘British’) rather than a faith (‘Muslim’), and a common educational experience 
for all children is widely supported (perhaps justifi ed in terms of children’s 
rights) irrespective of their religious or cultural background. A corollary 
of this view is the claim that “the responsibility for the adaptations and 
adjustments involved in settling in a new country lies entirely with those 
who have come here to settle” (Honeyford 1982). An even more extreme 
response would be to try to exclude anything to do with cultural values and 
cultural identity from the school curriculum altogether.
But these responses in turn are not without their problems. Education 
cannot take place in a cultural vacuum (Merry 2007, 72ff.), and it is unrealistic to expect that schools should play no part in identity formation. 
In Defense of Multiculturalism 191
If schools are not conscious of their part in the process, they will still be 
engaged in it unconsciously. So it may be better to make explicit the cultural values and assumptions that underpin the school’s ethos and teaching. 
However, once it becomes apparent that certain forms of primary identity 
(such as nationality) are being privileged at the expense of others (such as 
religion), this may be perceived as oppressive by those groups whose identity is determined solely or mainly by religion—Sen calls it their “singular 
affi liation” (2006, 20)—thus causing resentment and undermining commitment to the very citizenship that is being promoted. A further problem 
is that children and young people may end up with a confused identity 
just when they most need cultural coherence, stability, and continuity. The 
phrase ‘between two cultures’ has often been used to describe the predicament of such children, though the phrase itself is ambiguous. It may refer 
to (a) being in the process of crossing over from one culture to another, 
(b) fl oundering or drowning away from the safety of either culture, or (c) 
seeking out or creating a middle path (Halstead 1994, 317–320). The fi rst 
of these, I have argued, is oppressive unless voluntary; I shall discuss the 
second shortly under the heading ‘Extremism;’ but for now I shall turn 
to the third and argue that a careful study of identity theory and identity 
formation (cf. Merry 2007, 75–76) can lead to a more moderate solution to 
the problem of group identity and individual rights.
First, it is clear that multiculturalism does not require an essentialist 
approach to cultural identity. There is considerable diversity among Muslims anyway, in terms of levels of commitment and practice (ibid, 95–96), 
though doubtless certain beliefs and practices can be identifi ed as providing 
a fall-back position that most Muslims agree on as central to their religion. 
But change over time is normal, indeed inevitable. For example, Muslims 
are not immune to fashions—in clothes, music, entertainment, living styles, 
even personalized number plates (Stratton 2006). A more serious change is 
that second and third generation British Muslims often have a much deeper 
knowledge of the Qur’an and the hadith than their parents, who may have 
a more traditional, ethnically oriented form of religious practice. This is 
likely to result in a sharp decline in traditional practices such as fi rst cousin 
marriage, forced marriage, and female circumcision because these have no 
basis in Islamic teaching. There is clearly scope now for younger Muslims to 
make a bigger contribution to British society, and it is ironic that this stage 
has been reached at a time of unprecedented anti-Muslim sentiment. There 
is a growing recognition that a strong cultural identity can also be a route 
to the development of personal autonomy (Merry 2007, 75; McLaughlin 
2008, 189ff.). I have argued elsewhere that education should combine three 
elements: education for democratic citizenship, education for a specifi c cultural attachment, and education for cross-cultural understanding (Halstead 
2003, 288ff.). The last of these seeks to encourage mutual understanding, 
tolerance, respect between groups with different cultural values, rational 
deliberation about cultural difference, and an awareness of the diffi culty 
192 Mark Halstead
of trying to live with difference. This might be understood as a precondition to autonomy by making children aware of alternatives. It could also 
provide a catalyst for change and development as a result of interaction 
between groups, and a safety valve for those who fi nd the culture of their 
parents and community too suffocating and need an exit strategy. A commitment to multiculturalism thus requires respect for different cultures, 
but not an uncritical acceptance of all cultural practices. As Bikhu Parekh 
points out, multiculturalism does not imply that all cultures
are equally rich and deserve equal respect, that each of them is good 
for its members, or that all cultural differences deserve to be valued. 
All it means is that no culture is wholly worthless, that it deserves at 
least some respect because of what it means to its members and the 
creative energy it displays, that no culture is perfect and has a right to 
impose itself on others, and that cultures are best changed from within. 
(Parekh 2006, 337)
Extremism
The third argument against multiculturalism links it to extremism, or at 
least involves the claim that multiculturalism provides a context in which 
extremist attitudes can develop freely. The concern here is not so much 
that multiculturalism may allow the development of fundamentalist attitudes toward women or homosexuals, for example, or the indoctrination of 
young people into beliefs such as creationism that lack scientifi c credibility 
(though such beliefs may indeed lead to an undermining of the democratic 
values of the broader society, particularly freedom of expression), but that 
multiculturalism involves misplaced tolerance that is not suffi ciently rigorous in challenging the sort of extremist violence that endangers civil liberty 
and security. Extremist violence has escalated in many parts of the world 
since the start of the twenty-fi rst century, and can be seen in the UK in 
the mainly Muslim riots in the northern cities of Bradford, Oldham, and 
Burnley in 2000 and 2001, as well as in the 7/7 terrorist attacks. Multiculturalism, it is claimed, because of its support for diversity of all kinds and 
its insistence on treating all cultures equally irrespective of their merits, has 
allowed the UK to become a ‘breeding ground for terrorism.’ I shall argue 
(avoiding the emotive language) that it is not multiculturalism but political 
injustice and economic exploitation in Western policies toward the Muslim 
world that has led to a growth of ‘extremism’ among some Muslims in the 
West (and indeed worldwide), and that the answer is not to abandon multicultural values and adopt a more hard-line approach, but to encourage 
greater respect and cross-cultural understanding and thus peaceful coexistence and cooperation. From an educational perspective, this includes 
helping young Muslims in the West to develop a strong self-identity and 
treating them fairly and justly, and from a political perspective it involves 
In Defense of Multiculturalism 193
not adopting unjustifi able aggressive policies toward Muslim states. This 
kind of multicultural approach, in my view, holds most promise for ensuring that young Muslims in the West will grow up into tolerant, balanced, 
and responsible citizens with much to offer the broader society.
’Extremism,’ like knowledge generally, is defi ned by those in power. The 
current dominant defi nition is based on the belief that the West needs to 
protect itself from an axis of evil, made up of countries like Iran that support terrorism and subcultural movements like al-Qa’ida in countries that 
don’t openly support terrorism. However, this does not adequately explain 
why some terrorists were born and brought up in the UK or other Western 
countries. An alternative explanation is that even the worst terrorist atrocities such as 9/11 should be understood not as proactive acts of evil, but as a 
form of protest full of lethal symbolism, a re-action to what is perceived as 
continuing injustice from America and its allies. The question then is how 
to react to the reaction. It is clear that an escalation of violence and injustice will lead to an increase in sympathy toward those engaged in active 
resistance to what is seen as continuing unjustifi ed aggression. The answer 
is not to try to crush all signs of resistance through military power; nor to 
offer fi nancial incentives to Muslim organizations defi ned as ‘moderate’ 
(i.e., pro-Western); nor to put in place leaders who support the West even 
though they do not carry their people with them; nor to give free rein to 
a racist press, and thus encourage popular prejudice and discrimination 
against Muslims. Extremism is nurtured by violent opposition, just as it is 
marginalized by respect and understanding. This is where multiculturalism 
has a role to play, in encouraging greater acceptance and cross-cultural 
understanding toward Islam and Muslims, as a way of moving toward 
mutual recognition and cooperation. Extremism is most likely to develop 
among Muslims in the West if they have no sense of democratic belonging 
or inclusion and if they feel alienated as a result of continuing persecution, 
oppression, discrimination, and injustice.
This section has implied that far from undermining universal liberal 
values, as D’Souza (1991) and Barry (2001) suggest, multiculturalism has 
actually grown out of core liberal principles such as justice, equality, rights, 
freedom, tolerance, and respect for persons and that it is best understood 
as a liberal response to the increased number of people from diverse cultural backgrounds living in Western states (cf. Dhillon and Halstead 2003, 
146). It has sometimes been claimed that multiculturalism operates on the 
second-best principle: if Muslims, for example, are not prepared to fully 
participate in the life of the broader society, it may be better to grant them 
certain rights and make certain accommodations that will encourage partial participation rather than have them withdraw into complete isolationism. However, there are good grounds for arguing that multiculturalism is 
much more than this. Parekh, for example, presents an upbeat case for multiculturalism, arguing that cultural diversity is both inescapable and desirable and that it encourages mutually benefi cial dialogue between different 
194 Mark Halstead
cultures, so long as they treat each other with equal respect. He recognizes 
that all citizens of a multicultural society need a common sense of belonging, but argues that this can be achieved only if the state offers a “just 
recognition” to all its constituent communities as well as a “just share of 
economic and political power” (2006, 343).
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR EDUCATION
These can be sketched in fairly briefl y because they follow on naturally from 
what has been said above, and in any case a number of educational issues 
have already been touched on. Educational policy is currently being constructed to fi t in with the new post-multicultural agenda, and this involves a 
greater emphasis on surveillance in schools and universities than has existed 
in the past. At the level of higher education, the new policies may include 
monitoring student Islamic societies, banning certain groups such as Hizb 
ut-Tahrir from university campuses, and watching Muslims at universities 
for signs of extremism (DIUS 2008). At the school level, they include the 
banning of a student from wearing the jilbab to school (Dyer 2006); the new 
guidance issued to schools on the detection of extremism (DCSF 2008); and 
the requirement that all schools, including all faith schools, promote community cohesion, understood partly as having a “common sense of identity” and 
a “common vision and sense of belonging” (DCSF 2007, 1, 3). It is clear that 
what is happening here is that the new ways of thinking about extremism 
and terrorism are being introduced directly into schools and generating new 
requirements relating both to curriculum and to educational ethos. Diversity 
is perceived as potentially dangerous in educational contexts just as in society 
at large, as it is a route through which extremism can take hold.
However, if the analysis of the ‘death of multiculturalism’ discourse 
earlier in this chapter is correct, then this emphasis on mistrust, surveillance, and monocultural values may be the worst possible way to achieve 
a cooperative and harmonious society and the most likely way to generate 
a sense of alienation. If they are to offer a positive experience to all children equally, schools must provide an education that recognizes rather than 
ignores the cultural identity of children from minority groups and the distinct needs that arise from that identity; or at least, parents must have the 
option to send their children to separate (but not divisive) schools that give 
equal emphasis to the religious and cultural values of the parents and the 
political and economic values of the broader society. This is precisely what 
multicultural education offers, with its double emphasis on (a) respecting 
minorities, caring for their cultural needs, and making sure they are not 
subject to cultural domination or discrimination or put in a position where 
they are required to act against their fundamental values, and (b) meeting the needs of all children by preparing them for life in a multicultural 
society (cf. Dhillon and Halstead 2003). There are three main arguments 
for multicultural education. First, it provides a better-quality education 
In Defense of Multiculturalism 195
that involves broadening the mind, expanding horizons, being open to new 
possibilities, and learning particular values such as respect and tolerance. 
Second, it is more democratic, egalitarian, and respectful toward children 
from minority groups than monocultural education. Third, it is better for 
society at large, as it is more likely to result in social cohesion than policies 
based on compulsion. A minority group’s commitment to its host society 
will be much stronger if it feels trusted and respected enough to be given 
the same choices and privileges as members of the majority group (in terms 
of whether or not to send their children to a faith school, for example). A 
country that can allow minority faiths the freedom to establish their own 
faith schools is a country that is comfortable with its own cultural diversity 
and one that is determined to treat all its citizens with justice and respect.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ahsan, M. M., and Kidwai, A. R. Sacrilege Versus Civility: Muslim Perspectives 
on “The Satanic Verses” Affair. Leicester: Islamic Foundation, 1991.
Akhtar, S. Be Careful With Muhammad: The Salman Rushdie Affair. London: 
Bellew Publishing, 1989.
Allen, C. “‘Down with Multiculturalism, Book-Burning and Fatwas’: The Discourse of the ‘Death’ of Multiculturalism.” Culture and Religion 8, no. 2 
(2007): 125–138.
Ashley, J. “The Multicultural Menace, Anti-Semitism and Me.” The Guardian, 16 
June 2006.
Baldwin, T. “I Want an Integrated Society With a Difference.” The Times, 3 April 
2004.
Barry, B. “The Muddles of Multiculturalism.” New Left Review, 8, 2001: 
49–71.
Brown, G. “We Need a United Kingdom.” Daily Telegraph, 13 January 2007.
Burchill, J. “Some People Will Believe Anything.” The Guardian, 18 August 
2001.
Carmichael, W. “The Death of Multiculturalism.” BillCarmichael.20six.co.uk., 
2007. http://billcarmichael.20six.co.uk/billcarmichael/art/4378306 (accessed 3 
September 2008).
Community Cohesion Review Team. Community Cohesion: Report of the Independent Review Team Chaired by Ted Cantle. London: Home Offi ce, 2001.
Crittenden, B. Cultural Pluralism and Common Curriculum. Carlton: Melbourne 
University Press, 1982.
Department for Children, Schools and Families (DCSF). Learning Together to be 
Safe: A Toolkit to Help Schools to Contribute to the Prevention of Violent 
Extremism. Nottingham: DCSF, 2008.
 . Guidance on the Duty to Promote Community Cohesion. Nottingham: 
DCSF, 2007.
Department for Education and Science (DES). Education for All (the Swann 
report). London: HMSO, 1985.
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills (DIUS). Promoting Good Campus Relations, Fostering Shared Values and Preventing Violent Extremism in 
Universities and Higher Education Colleges. London: DIUS, 2008.
Dhillon, P. A., and J. M. Halstead. “Multicultural education.” In The Blackwell 
Guide to Philosophy of Education, eds N. Blake, P. Smeyers, R. Smith, and P. 
Standish, 146–61. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2003 .
196 Mark Halstead
D’Souza, D. Illiberal Education: The Politics of Race and Sex on Campus. New 
York: The Free Press, 1991.
Dyer, C. “Muslim Girl Loses Lords Fight Over Jilbab.” The Guardian, 23 March 
2006.
Gereluk, D. Symbolic Clothing in Schools. London: Continuum, 2008.
Halstead, J. M. The Case for Muslim Voluntary-aided Schools: Some Philosophical Refl ections. Cambridge: Islamic Academy, 1986.
 . Education, Justice and Cultural Diversity. London: Falmer Press, 1988.
 . “Between two cultures? Muslim children in a western liberal society.” 
Children and Society 8, no. 4 (1994): 312–26.
 . “Schooling and Cultural Maintenance for Religious Minorities in the Liberal 
State.” In Citizenship and Education in Liberal-Democratic Societies: Teaching 
for Cosmopolitan Values and Collective Identities, eds. K. McDonough and W. 
Feinberg, 273–295. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
 . “Multicultural metaphors.” In Education in the Era of Globalization, eds. 
K. Roth and I. Gur-Ze’ev, 147–60. Dordrecht: Springer, 2007.
Halstead, J. M., and T. H. McLaughlin. “Are Faith Schools Divisive?” In Faith 
schools: Consensus or Confl ict? eds. R. Gardner, J. Cairns, and D. Lawton, 
61–73. London: RoutledgeFalmer, 2005.
Harrison, D. “After ‘No-go’ Bishop, Multiculturalism Debated.” Daily Telegraph, 
4 February 2008.
Honeyford, R. “Multiracial Myths.” The Times Educational Supplement, 19 
November 1982.
House of Commons Communities and Local Government Committee (HCCLGC). 
Community Cohesion and Migration. London: Stationery Offi ce, 2008.
Johnston, P. “Multiculturalism is Breeding Intolerance.” Daily Telegraph, 7 January 2008.
Lévy, B-H. Interview reported in J. Frazer “the pop philosopher unveiled,” The 
Jewish Chronicle, 13 October 2006.
Lustgarten, L. S. “Liberty in a Culturally Plural Society.” In Of Liberty, ed. 
A. Phillips Griffi ths, 91–107. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
McLaughlin, T. H. Liberalism, Education and Schooling. Eds. D. Carr, J. M. Halstead, and R. Pring. Exeter: Imprint Academic, 2008.
Merry, M. Culture, Identity and Islamic Schooling. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
Modood, T. “Remaking Multiculturalism After 7/7.” OpenDemocracy.net, 2005. 
http://www.opendemocracy.net (accessed 16 March 2006).
 . “The Liberal Dilemma: Integration or Vilifi cation?” OpenDemocracy.net, 
2006. http://www.opendemocracy.net (accessed 16 March 2006).
O’Hear, A. Plato’s Children: The State We Are In. London: Gibson Square, 2006.
Okin, S. M. Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women? Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999.
 . “‘Mistresses of Their Own Destiny’: Group Rights, Gender and Realistic Rights of Exit.” In Citizenship and Education in Liberal-Democratic Societies: Teaching for Cosmopolitan Values and Collective Identities, eds. K. 
McDonough and W. Feinberg, 325–350. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2003.
Parekh, B. Rethinking Multiculturalism: Cultural Diversity and Political Theory. 
2nd ed. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
Phillips, M. Londonistan: How Britain is Creating a Terror State Within. London: 
Gibson Square, 2006.
Phillips, T. “After 7/7: Sleepwalking to Segregation.” Speech given to the Manchester Council for Community Relations, Commission for Racial Equality, 
London, 22 September 2005.
In Defense of Multiculturalism 197
Raz, J. The Morality of Freedom. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986.
Richardson, R., ed. Islamophobia: Issues, Challenges and Action. Stoke-on-Trent: 
Trentham Books, 2004.
Sen, A. Identity and Violence: The Illusion of Destiny. London: Allen Lane, 
2006.
Stratton, A. Muhajababes: Meet the New Middle East—Cool, Sexy and Devout. 
London: Constable, 2006.
Straw, J. “I Want to Unveil My Views on an Important Issue.” Lancashire Evening 
Telegraph, 5 October 2006.
Watt, N. “Cultural Sensitivity Putting Rights at Risk, Warns Cameron.” The 
Guardian, 27 February 2008.
Woolas, P. “Muslim Women Who Wear the Veil Can be Frightening and Intimidating.” Sunday Mirror, 8 October 2006.
11 Children’s Autonomy and 
Symbolic Clothing in Schools
Help or Hindrance?
Dianne Gereluk
INTRODUCTION
Political, religious, and social symbolic clothing in schools has come under 
great scrutiny, particularly by the media and the general public. Most 
notably, France’s legislation banning all ‘ostentatious’ religious symbols 
in schools took a bold stance in protecting its civic republican tradition in 
schools, despite not having established uniform policies in schools (Bowen 
2007). Schools in England have come under greater pressure to address 
various religious requests to provide alternative uniforms to accommodate 
various religious symbolic clothing (DCSF 2007). American schools are 
grappling with how to create a cohesive and safe school environment when 
certain political and social symbolic clothing may challenge, disrupt, or 
cause offense to other students and the greater local community (Brunswa 
2004). An increasing number of legal cases in the United States have ruled 
in favor of school authorities having more discretion to ban various symbolic clothing (Gereluk 2008).
In these (and numerous other) instances, banning symbolic clothing 
provokes an interesting dilemma about whether such bans undermine the 
theoretical ideals of fostering liberal aims in education, in particular, protecting and fostering children’s future autonomy. Proponents of banning 
symbolic clothing and those in opposition both lay claim to protecting 
children’s autonomy within the boundaries of the school gates. I consider 
both of these claims of autonomy by applying Rawls’ principles of capacity for a conception of the good and a capacity for a sense of justice, and 
consider whether autonomy is impeded by the permissibility or banning of 
symbolic clothing.
Before moving on to this theoretical discussion, it is important to lay 
out what constitutes symbolic clothing. A possible interpretation is that 
all clothing is symbolic to a certain extent. What one wears, whether consciously or subconsciously, partially constitutes part of an individual’s 
identity. While I do not completely disagree with the position that all clothing to a varying extent helps to form an individual’s identity, I start from 
the assumption that ‘symbolic’ clothing must go beyond a mere fashion 
Children’s Autonomy and Symbolic Clothing in Schools 199
statement or preference, and must have a deliberate communicable intent 
that signifi es that person’s identity. I further suggest that broadly speaking there are three large categories of symbolic clothing: religious, political, and social. However, such categories need not be separate from one 
another, and symbolic clothing often may cross over in such a way that in 
many cases distinctions between the three categories may not exist. “The 
Islamic doctrine of tawhid, for example, suggests that politics, like everything else, exists only beneath the broad umbrella of religion” (Gereluk 
2008, xii). Given this premise, let us turn to the issue of autonomy and how 
it is applicable to the permissibility of symbolic clothing in schools.
SYMBOLIC CLOTHING AND THE PROTECTION 
OF CHILDREN’S AUTONOMY
Underpinning Rawls’ notion of autonomy are two higher-order interests—
those of a capacity for a conception of the good and a capacity for a sense of 
justice. In this section, I wish to consider whether a capacity for a conception of the good may provide guidance regarding the extent to which children should be allowed to wear symbolic clothing in schools. The capacity 
for a conception of the good entails having the capacity “to have, to revise, 
and rationally to pursue a conception of the good” (Rawls 2001, 19). Let us 
consider this principle within the context of symbolic clothing.
The fi rst part of guaranteeing a capacity for a conception of the good 
entails that individuals must have suffi cient opportunities to partake in 
activities that they fi nd worthwhile and important to them. Wearing symbolic clothing may be valuable to individuals, particularly if the clothing 
is not just an accessory but is integral to their belief system. The fi ve Ks of 
Sikhism highlights this point in that the physical symbols are not just an 
outward sign of one’s faith, but are part of the customs and rituals that 
show one’s devotion and commitment to the religion. The second suggests 
that individuals need not have a fi xed conception of themselves, but “form 
and develop as they mature, and may change more or less radically over the 
course of life” (Rawls 1993, 20). Schools may provide children with various 
opportunities to be exposed to and understand different ways of life. The 
protections of both having the ability to pursue and to revise one’s conception is integral to Rawls’ notion of autonomy.
Given these principles within a capacity for a conception of the good, 
two drastically different positions can be drawn on the basis of protecting children’s autonomy. On the one hand, the curtailment of symbolic 
clothing may be viewed as a way of protecting the future autonomy of 
children. Children will be infl uenced largely by the way that they are raised 
within the private sphere of their family and local community. Children 
should have an opportunity to shed their private conceptions to explore 
alternative lifestyles. On the other, the curtailment of symbolic clothing 
200 Dianne Gereluk
may be considered in direct violation of protecting children’s conception of 
the good. Children require opportunities to develop their identity, and one 
important way is identifying themselves through their clothing. Is it possible to reconcile these two opposing positions regarding the permissibility 
of symbolic clothing?
A justifi able concern is whether children that are inducted into a particular belief system will be able to consider, explore, and revise their conceptions, particularly if the belief system is entrenched in various customs and 
rituals such as in the case of symbolic clothing. Harry Brighouse argues:
Autonomy-facilitation requires a modicum of discontinuity between 
the child’s home experience and her school experience, so that the opportunities provided by the home (and the public culture) are supplemented, rather than replicated, in the school. (Brighouse 2006, 23)
If parents belong to a particular religious affi liation of which their associations and shared sense of belonging is tied to symbolic clothing, it may 
be very diffi cult for children to resist the infl uences of their parents and 
community in not wearing the stated piece of clothing. Being born into an 
Amish community, for instance, will inevitably result in that child being 
inducted into symbolic clothing that is associated with that particular 
religious community. With very little exception, children will adhere to 
the customs and rituals that are a part of their parents’ and community’s 
beliefs, and if that particular community has symbolic clothing attached as 
part of their customs, then children inevitably will follow the customs.
If children have relatively little to no say regarding symbolic clothing, 
should schools provide a ‘safe haven’ that allows no symbolic clothing? 
The notion of laïcité—the separation of church and state in France—
seems to argue such a point (Gereluk 2006, 2008). The notion of equal 
exclusion is prioritized in the French education system whereby all individuals are to shed their private associations at the school gates. The 
school is hoped to promote civic republican ideals that can be fostered 
without the hindrance or constraint of individuals’ private identities. The 
aim is that children will be better-placed to consider and explore alternative perspectives and life choices without the encumbrance of their private 
familial and communal ties.
While the belief that schools should attempt to foster children’s future 
autonomy is a desirable liberal aim and worthy of pursuit, it is diffi cult to 
see how well schools can achieve this aim by banning symbolic clothing in 
the hopes of creating a neutral space. Three potential problems exist with 
this position. The fi rst is whether individuals are able to shed their private 
conceptions by removing their symbolic clothing. If the symbolic clothing is part of their belief structure—particularly if it is an integral part of 
their rituals and customs—removing the piece of clothing will either cause 
them great distress by compromising their identity or will not change their 
Children’s Autonomy and Symbolic Clothing in Schools 201
fundamental views about their viewpoints. The potential repercussion is 
that by taking a hard stance in the hopes of exposing children to different 
ways of living, schools potentially create a situation whereby they become 
more resilient and defi ant in considering alternative lifestyles.
The second weakness is that by banning symbolic clothing in schools 
educators may potentially miss a substantive opportunity to openly discuss 
different perspectives. In effect, having children wear symbolic clothing 
may provide the impetus for signifi cant teaching opportunities in direct 
and meaningful ways for children. Diversity and respect do not become 
theoretical abstractions, but become pressing issues that are experienced in 
the daily lives of students and staff.
The fi nal concern, as I have argued elsewhere (Gereluk 2005), is whether 
schools can really create a neutral space. The ideal of laïcité in France 
highlights the practical problems of attempting to create such a ‘neutral’ 
environment. It may be the case that schools can limit or exclude certain 
curricular texts in the hopes of providing a neutral space, but in so doing, 
it creates a default position in what it excludes. Consider two examples: 
removing all religious texts in France, and removing the teaching of evolution in some American states. In both instances, by removing the particular texts, one creates another default perspective: in France, that of either 
secularism or the underpinning of the Catholic tradition, and in the United 
States, that of Christianity, or more accurately, Christian fundamentalism. 
Withdrawing contested issues in the curricula sends clear messages of what 
is privileged by the absence of its content. What is not said becomes an 
increasingly important factor. Removing evolution from the curriculum on 
the grounds that equal weight must be given to the different perspectives 
of how humans came to be sends a strong message that more weight must 
be given to religious perspectives. Attempting to create neutrality within 
the school walls may have the opposite effect of highlighting the absence of 
that which schools are trying to equalize.
Even if one claims that schools can be educative and neutral safe-havens 
for students to thrive, the way in which schools are structured make them 
less-than-neutral spaces. Most schools in Western countries are structured 
around the Christian calendar, which provides certain advantages to those 
who are of the Christian faith. Schools are closed on Sundays in France, 
rather than on another day of the week (for example, Saturday, which is the 
day of Sabbath). School holidays that coincide with Christian festivities will 
naturally favor students who share Christian beliefs. The historical vestiges 
of how children are taught may have strong Protestant or Catholic undertones. The subtle, hidden forms of the curriculum are pervasive in schools 
and it is virtually impossible to make a school ‘value free’ despite one’s 
efforts. Selectivity about how children are taught, what is taught, and when 
it is taught are all laden with implicit and explicit values, making the school 
the least likely institution for being a neutral space. This line of argument is 
not compelling given the impossibility of a school to become neutral.
202 Dianne Gereluk
If the aim is to foster autonomy by banning symbolic clothing in schools, 
the likely effects are that at minimum, this will be ineffective because individuals do not simply ‘shed’ their identities at the door, particularly if the 
clothing is integral to their sense of identity. It is more likely that banning 
symbolic clothing in schools in the hopes that children will be more able 
to explore new cultures and lifestyles will only make them more defensive 
about their own associations, rather than able to explore new ways of life in 
an open and challenging way. And fi nally, schools will simply do a poor job 
of providing a ‘neutral’ space given the impossibility of such a task.
Let us move on to the argument that favors allowing symbolic clothing 
with the hopes of increasing children’s future autonomy. This line of reasoning suggests that facilitating and developing children’s future autonomy 
rests with allowing children to have increasing levels of informed decisions 
about how they wish to lead their life, which may or may not include what 
they wear. Children may view clothing as a signifi cant part of their identity in how they wish to defi ne themselves. This is particularly the case in 
adolescence, when much of their identity may be constituted by what they 
wear. Sports apparel, drama or music clubs, political and social symbols are 
often used by individuals to show their affi liations and allegiances. Given 
that clothing is an identifi er of an individual’s preferences, one might argue 
that allowing students to wear symbolic clothing may assist in developing 
children’s future autonomy.
Allowing children to decide about the clothing that they wear based 
on reasons of autonomy, however, seems unconvincing as well in most 
instances. While individuals’ autonomy might be infl uenced in the way that 
an individual dresses to express and associate themselves to things that they 
value, that does not seem to be an important enough reason to allow children to wear symbolic clothing in schools. And in most cases, the majority 
of students will be infl uenced by consumer-driven, designer label clothing 
targeted to children by the fashion industry.
[T]he US embraces a conception of freedom that is highly individualistic and tightly connected to the free market. Consequently, a walk 
through the “shopping mall” of the typical American high school allows 
one to immediately identify groups as “the preppies”, “the stoners” , 
“the jocks”, “the gangbangers” and the “techies”—And back-to-school 
shopping is as important to an American summer as is the 4th of July. 
(McAvoy 2008, 1)
The pressure to purchase and gain status through the clothing children 
wear is arguably not based on informed critical decisions, but is a result 
of external peer pressure driven by a consumer culture. Children will have 
suffi cient opportunities beyond school hours in which they can express 
and identify themselves in the ways that they dress. The opportunity is 
not closed to students forever, but may be limited to times when they are 
Children’s Autonomy and Symbolic Clothing in Schools 203
not in school. Autonomy does not rely on children’s ability to express 
themselves by what they wear. Critical judgment and a capacity to understand, exercise, and deliberate in meaningful ways during school hours 
will do more to build autonomy in children than allowing them to decide 
what they can or cannot wear. In the second instance, schools may again 
provide a place where children do not have to succumb to the pressures of 
consumerism, and can instead focus on arguably more meaningful experiences that will improve their future autonomy. “If the symbolic clothing 
is non-essential, but forms a part of someone’s identity, it is diffi cult to 
argue, despite the clothing helping to develop one’s sense of individuality 
and autonomy, that this is a fundamental part of becoming an autonomous individual in schools” (Gereluk 2008, 127). Other, arguably more 
meaningful ways to develop children’s autonomy exist beyond the often 
superfi cial realm of clothing.
That being said, allowing symbolic clothing may help facilitate children’s future autonomy not because children get to choose what they wish 
to wear, but by the potentially educative opportunities that symbolic clothing may provide by exposing children to differences found in their school 
community. A heterogeneous student demographic (and one that is visibly 
different by the various symbolic clothing) may provide more opportunities 
for discussion and debate rather than a homogeneous one. For instance, the 
presence of a hijab in a largely white student school may create a dialogue 
between classmates about why one wears the hijab. The discussion about 
alternative lifestyles does not become an abstract theoretical discussion, 
but an integral aspect of the lives of fellow classmates. Despite parents’ 
inabilities or reservations about limiting their children’s exposure to alternative lifestyles, schools provide children with opportunities to be exposed 
to and participate in different meaningful experiences. And while schools 
will not level this out, providing a school system that attends to a number 
of different experiences will reduce such inequalities.
Conversely, the potential withdrawal of students who may wear symbolic clothing creates a narrower homogenous student demographic within 
the school boundaries. Attempts to ban symbolic clothing has often created 
situations whereby families feel compelled to withdraw their children from 
the school in order not to compromise their faith. This has negative consequences for the children who may be withdrawn from the school, and consequently, these children will have less exposure to other students. It also 
has a negative consequence for those students who remain in the school 
and who are not exposed to a more heterogeneous student body. Banning 
symbolic clothing may limit the opportunities for both sets of children to 
have the opportunity both within and beyond the school to meet and share 
different perspectives among friends and acquaintances.
The argument that schools can protect children’s future autonomy by 
creating a neutral place to explore different ways of life seems untenable. 
The opposing argument that children’s autonomy is developed by their 
204 Dianne Gereluk
freedom of expression through clothing seems unconvincing. However, 
exposure to different forms of symbolic clothing in one’s daily school life 
may enhance the potential opportunities for students and staff to create a 
meaningful dialogue that is present in children’s lives. A capacity for a conception of the good offers some guidance for the permissibility of symbolic 
clothing. The strength of this argument does not rest in simply allowing 
children to make decisions about their clothing. Rather, the weight of protecting a capacity for the conception of the good is fostered by creating an 
atmosphere that allows for children to be exposed to different backgrounds 
and perspectives. Such integration seems integral to facilitating autonomy 
in meaningful ways.
A CAPACITY FOR A SENSE OF JUSTICE
Rawls’ principle of a capacity of a sense of justice is arguably applicable 
to symbolic clothing in certain contexts. A capacity for a sense of justice 
includes the “capacity to understand, to apply, and to act from (and not 
merely in accordance with) the principles of political justice that specify 
the fair terms of social cooperation” (Rawls 2001, 18–19). This entails 
ensuring that individuals are informed about rules and regulations that 
will have a direct impact on their lives; having substantive opportunities 
to participate in public matters if they so choose; encouraging a critical 
threshold of citizens to participate in the public sphere of a society in order 
that the political community does not disintegrate; and providing protective mechanisms, should individuals wish to re-enter public deliberation. If 
the overarching stability of a political community requires these factors to 
be fostered and protected, then schools may be one institution to cultivate 
such dispositions in children.
Symbolic clothing has not only been worn as an outward expression as 
part of one’s identity, it also has been used as a sign of political resistance, 
civil disobedience, or solidarity. Simply put, students have used symbolic 
clothing to make a political comment about society. An important landmark American case, Tinker v. Des Moines Independent School District, 
highlights the use of symbolic clothing as a sign of political protest.1
 In 
1965, three students were expelled for wearing black armbands to school 
to protest the Vietnam War. Having heard of the protest a few days earlier, 
the school adopted a policy stating that any student wearing the black armband would be asked to remove it, and failing that, would be suspended 
from school until they agreed to conform to the new policy. The initial 
court ruling was decided in favor of the school, noting that the school’s 
discretion to ban the armband was a safeguard intended “to prevent disturbance of school discipline” (258 F. Supp. 971, 1966). The verdict was 
later overturned by the United States Supreme Court stating that student 
expression should be protected unless the behavior would “materially and 
Children’s Autonomy and Symbolic Clothing in Schools 205
substantially interfere with the requirements of appropriate discipline in 
the operation of the school” (Tinker, 1969). This landmark case proclaimed 
that “students do not shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech 
or expression at the schoolhouse gate” (ibid.).
The Tinker case demonstrated that schools should be tolerant of issues 
of symbolic clothing in protecting students’ free speech unless one could 
show that it would substantially interfere with the daily operation of the 
school. Yet more recently, this landmark case has been challenged with 
more discretion increasingly being given to school authorities in the United 
States. Timothy Gies, an American student, was expelled for wearing various political symbols on T-shirts including a peace sign, an anarchy symbol, 
an upside down American fl ag, and an antiwar quote from Albert Einstein (ACLU 2004). Gies was expelled on the basis that his T-shirts might 
become disruptive to the school by causing offense to his fellow classmates 
and those in the local community.
The rise in Muslim girls wearing the hijab has increased signifi cantly 
in France as a sign of solidarity and political resistance to the banning 
of ostentatious religious symbols (Gereluk 2008). In 1989 three girls were 
expelled from a French state school. The school allowed the girls to cover 
their hair and neck but not their faces on the school grounds, and required 
they take it off once they entered the school. The girls refused and were 
barred until they would comply. After three months of standoff between 
the girls and the school, the girls gave in, and then ten days later rescinded 
their promise to abide by the ban. The debate became much more contested 
when four girls were barred from another school for wearing the hijab in 
1993. This time, however, approximately seven hundred girls joined in support of the four girls, wearing the hijab as a sign of solidarity.
More recently, many American high schools and campuses have allowed 
students to hold Day of Silence protests to draw greater attention to the 
problem of bullying and harassment regarding one’s sexual orientation. 
This initiative was set up by the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network (GLSEN). Students dress in a variety of ways ranging from having 
their mouths taped shut to wearing political T-shirts about the event. The 
message is clear and communicable, and the clothes worn are clearly meant 
to raise awareness. Since 1996, the event has gained in numbers and status across the United States. Paula McAvoy (2008) points out that in raising political awareness toward greater tolerance for sexual orientation and 
gender expression through the Day of Silence event, students opposed to 
the event have begun a counterprotest. Protest T-shirts have been worn on 
the same day with such slogans as “Straight pride” or “Love the sinner, 
hate the sin.” Participating schools are now reconsidering their stance to 
allow the Day of Silence given the potential instability with counterprotests 
among students.
The examples of the black armbands, antiwar T-shirts, the hijab, and 
Day of Silence protests all point to signs of political resistance and protest 
206 Dianne Gereluk
within the school walls. It is clear that schools have a duty to ensure the 
safety of their students and to minimize disruption that may inhibit the 
daily running and educational aims of the school. However, it is diffi cult 
to predict what pieces of symbolic clothing may cause such a disturbance 
that would in turn lead to massive unrest, as well as to volatility among the 
student body. Schools will naturally be inclined to take a cautious stance 
against this. On the one hand, schools wish to provide a safe and stable 
school environment. On the other, in attempting to do so, schools may 
take an overzealous approach to banning any piece of clothing that may be 
deemed inappropriate.
A distinction between symbolic clothing that is ‘offensive’ and that which 
is ‘oppressive’ is helpful here.2
 While symbolic clothing may be offensive, 
this is a relative notion depending on the nature of the offense, the extent 
and duration of the offense, and the number of individuals who may be 
offended. The notion of offense proves unhelpful in determining whether 
a school has strong grounds to ban symbolic clothing given the potential 
disruption. Those pieces of symbolic clothing that are considered offensive 
and that may disrupt the daily routine of school life may still be permissible under my principles. Symbolic clothing that is oppressive, however, 
is impermissible because of the intent to cause undo emotional or physical 
harm or repression to others. The political messages to which I allude are a 
case in point. All four examples, to one degree or another, incite some level 
of disruption or raise the level of debate in a public sphere. The students 
were explicit in making a political statement, and strife between students 
who disagree with the statement is a possible consequence. Symbolic clothing that is oppressive to others seems entirely justifi able to ban in schools—
in this case, the counterprotest T-shirts. Symbolic clothing such as gang 
wear, the Confederate fl ag, and KKK symbols clearly send an explicit message to those who are not part of that group to intentionally suppress or 
harm others. The potential for disruption and unrest is evident, and the 
oppressive symbolic clothing causes undo physical or mental harm. Clearly, 
schools are fully justifi ed in banning all forms of symbolic clothing that fall 
within this category.
If one of the underpinning principles of a liberal aim is to cultivate a 
capacity for a sense of justice, then allowing students to make political 
statements through their clothing may be one meaningful way in which 
students can learn to develop this disposition. Amy Gutmann (1987) argues 
that developing civic virtues in children is not a mere ideal or preference, 
but is vital if we are to preserve and foster democratic sovereignty. Schools 
have the ability to provide a political education that could teach all children 
the civic virtues necessary to participate and shape the political structure 
and stability of society as future adults and citizens.
Schools are integral to preserving the political culture, which is necessary for a liberal democracy to thrive. Understanding and participating in 
a political culture is not something one just comes to know, it encompasses 
Children’s Autonomy and Symbolic Clothing in Schools 207
certain habits, skills, and dispositions that each individual must be inducted 
into in a meaningful way. Eamonn Callan makes this point when he states 
that public institutions play a vital role in the way that they induct individuals into the larger political sphere:
 . . . it is a shared way of public life constituted by a constellation of attitudes, habits, and abilities that people acquire as they grow up. These 
include a lively interest in the question of what life is truly and not 
just seemingly good, as well as a willingness both to share one’s own 
answer with others and to heed the many opposing answers they might 
give; and active commitment to the good of the polity, as well as confi dence and competence in judgment regarding how that good should 
be advanced; a respect for fellow citizens and a sense of common fate 
with them that goes beyond the tribalisms of ethnicity and religion and 
is yet alive to the signifi cance these will have in many people’s lives. 
(Callan 1997, 3)
It requires a logical and coherent political education, deliberately considered and developed in children—not through mere osmosis or exposure, 
but through active and deliberate thought processes and engagement 
about civic virtues and the political structures in society. Viewed in this 
light, the place of symbolic clothing in schools may provide opportunities for meaningful discussion about public life that closely ties in with 
the students’ private conceptions and views. It is an educational opportunity for teachers (and schools) to critically debate, provide open discussion about, and even model how individuals should participate, exercise, 
and understand the dispositions that should parallel the larger political 
public sphere.
If educators are sincere about developing a capacity for a sense of justice, then surely this does not occur through passive, abstract learning. 
Limiting discussion or removing potentially contentious issues that may 
cause offense, unrest, or instability seems antithetical to fostering the 
dispositions of a capacity for a sense of justice. Learning how to contend 
with substantive issues, such as symbolic clothing, that are present and 
real in children’s day-to-day lives is something schools should address and 
confront rather than shy away from. The tendency of schools to avoid 
controversy does little to develop the dispositions required for individuals 
to actively engage in the larger public sphere. Allowing children to wear 
symbolic clothing presents opportunities for students to learn how to critically discuss and refl ect upon their own values and the values of others. 
To be a good citizen also requires inculcating a notion of respect—again, 
for oneself and for others. And learning how to critically and rationally 
debate the merits and complexities inherent in symbolic clothing is central 
to the skills and habits that should be a part of learning to develop a sense 
of justice.
208 Dianne Gereluk
WHEN DOES SYMBOLIC CLOTHING GO BEYOND 
THE PERMISSIBLE BOUNDARIES OF SCHOOLS?
It would be foolhardy to suggest that all symbolic clothing warrants the 
same protections and thus permissibility in schools within the principles 
of autonomy and justice. As I have argued elsewhere (Gereluk 2008), three 
criteria are helpful in banning some forms of symbolic clothing:
 (1) whether the clothing creates signifi cant health and safety concerns
 (2) whether the clothing is oppressive to oneself or to others
 (3) whether the clothing signifi cantly hinders the educational aims of the 
school
It seems reasonable to suggest that it is justifi able to ban clothing that may 
cause signifi cant health or safety concerns for the individual or for others. The onus, however, must be on the school to show how wearing the 
symbolic clothing would cause a signifi cant risk to the student or to others. 
Attempts have been made, for instance, to suggest that the hijab could be a 
safety risk due to the safety pins that girls may use to pin the head covering 
in place. Yet this seems foolish for a couple of reasons. First, alternative 
adjustments can be made to ensure that the pins are not used during classes 
where there might be a potential risk, such as during physical education. 
For example, using an elastic band for the hijab instead of straight pins 
alleviates the potential safety risk.
A Canadian Supreme Court judgment in the case Multani v. Commission scolaire Marguerite-Bourgeoys3
 ruled out the safety concerns posed 
when a Sikh boy brought a kirpan (ceremonial dagger) to school. The kirpan was deemed by the school board to be a signifi cant threat to the safety 
of other students in schools. Yet in a unanimous decision by the Supreme 
Court of Canada the judges stated that the threat of the kirpan is parallel to 
other everyday objects found in schools such as scissors, hockey sticks, and 
other objects that if used inappropriately would cause a potential safety 
risk to other students. Given that the kirpan is a dull object, is never used 
as a weapon by the Sikhs, and would be wrapped in a cloth and sewn inside 
the boy’s trousers, the Supreme Court felt that the threat to other students 
was minimal. The onus is on schools to have strong grounds to ban symbolic clothing based on this criterion lest it be used as a rationalization for 
banning symbolic clothing rather than on signifi cant and potential threats 
to the safety of students.
The second criterion—that of oppression—is based on the idea that symbolic clothing that causes undue and sustained physical or mental harm or 
suppresses an individual’s future opportunities goes beyond the acceptable 
parameters of symbolic clothing. If the aim of schools is to protect children’s 
autonomy, and signifi cant evidence can be found that the symbolic clothing 
is oppressive, then banning the clothing seems appropriate. The criterion 
of oppression provides protections not only to those that are oppressed by 
Children’s Autonomy and Symbolic Clothing in Schools 209
wearing the symbolic clothing, but to others who may be oppressed by the 
message that the symbol may represent. In the former instance, symbolic 
clothing that oppresses individuals by the wearing of that particular accessory seems justifi able to ban. In the latter, symbolic clothing that has a 
clear intent to oppress and is used to show aggression or hostility to others 
is similarly intolerable.
The Day of Silence protest may be less clear cut in determining 
whether to:
 (1) allow the event with the counterprotesters;
 (2) allow the event, but ban the counterprotest T-shirts; or
 (3) simply ban the event in its entirety.
When such an event is endorsed by the school, it might be reasonable to 
argue that all students should have the ability to express their viewpoints—
for or against—even if it creates potential unrest or instability. I argue that 
the criterion of oppression, however, becomes a key distinction in banning 
the counterprotest T-shirts. The counterprotest T-shirts not only express 
a viewpoint that is counter, but their direct motive is to oppress and hinder the views and opportunities and is targeted at a particular group of 
individuals due to their sexual orientation or gender expression. Using this 
criterion, schools can justifi ably ban the counterprotest T-shirts that are 
oppressive while still endorsing the Day of Silence event.
The fi nal reason often cited to ban symbolic clothing is that the clothing may signifi cantly inhibit the educational aims of the school. Similar 
to the fi rst criterion, the burden is on the school to show how the clothing 
may seriously impinge on the educational aims of the school. Instances of 
symbolic clothing that fall in this category seem far and few between. The 
niqab, (a Muslim head dressing that reveals only the eyes) presents signifi cant physical and social obstacles to that individual, and arguably goes 
beyond the permissible boundaries of what should be allowed in schools. 
Commonly, schools may justify banning symbolic clothing because it may 
impede the ability of certain students to partake in physical education 
classes. Two considerations seem important here. First, one must consider 
whether accommodations could be made to the symbolic clothing that 
would not compromise the individual’s beliefs, and still allow the student 
to carry out the activities. Changing the hijab so that girls could wear a 
head covering with elastic rather than safety pins is one such small accommodation that allows the girls to partake in physical education and fulfi ll 
the educational mandate.
Second, if an accommodation cannot be met, one must consider whether 
there are other comparable activities in which the student could partake 
so that the educational mandate need not be compromised. Clearly, not 
all students need to fulfi ll every activity. For instance, not all students in 
every school will be exposed to swimming, horseback riding, or martial 
arts. Rather, what seems to be important is that students are exposed to a 
210 Dianne Gereluk
number of physical activities. Deciding that minimum threshold of activities is near impossible. It may be the case that students who receive little 
exposure to varied activities at home and in the community will require 
more activities within the school environment. Yet, if educational aims can 
be broadly met through a range of activities a student may engage in while 
wearing the particular piece of symbolic clothing, then schools should be 
hard pressed to ban it for its potential limitations on some activities.
CONCLUSION
Symbolic clothing offers some interesting opportunities for children and 
schools in developing Rawls’ two higher-order interests: a capacity for a conception of the good, and a capacity for a sense of justice. In most cases, allowing children to decide what they wish to wear does not substantially develop 
or secure these two interests. Symbolic clothing differs in that the clothing 
goes beyond a mere fashion statement or preference and has a deliberate communicable intent, often associated with political, social, or religious beliefs (or 
a combination of the three). The inherent associations that the symbolic clothing has to these larger belief structures provides a greater and more substantive level of diversity that is visible and present among children and adults.
An attempt to foster autonomy by creating a level of ‘discontinuity’ 
between the school and home life, as Brighouse (2006) argues, may have 
unintended consequences either by increasing a political resilience or a 
withdrawal by those groups of individuals about whom we may have particular reservations regarding their future autonomy. Similarly, attempting 
to dispel any potential disruption or unrest in the school may also suppress 
an educational opportunity for students to develop a capacity for a sense 
of justice through symbolic clothing and the issues that arise from it. Symbolic clothing may offer opportunities for schools to fi nd ways in which to 
provide meaningful opportunities for engagement that will help to facilitate 
children’s autonomy and develop civic virtues.
NOTES
 1. Tinker v. Des Moines Independent School District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969).
 2. See Gereluk 2008, 110–118 for a detailed argument of the distinction 
between symbolic clothing that is offensive and oppressive.
 3. Multani v. Commission scolaire Marguerite-Bourgeoys, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 
256, 2006 SCC 6.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). “Judge Rules in Favour of Michigan Students’ Right to Wear Anti-war T-shirt to School.” Free Speech, 3 October 2003. 
Children’s Autonomy and Symbolic Clothing in Schools 211
http://www.aclu.org/FreeSpeech/FreeSpeech.cfm?ID=13913&c=87 (accessed 5 
November 2005).
BBC. “Cross Row Stokes Christian Anger.” Bbc.co.uk, 15 October 2006. news.
bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6051486.stm (accessed 15 April 2008).
Bowen, J. Why the French Don’t Like Headscarves: Islam, the State and Public 
Space. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2007.
Brighouse, H. On Education. London, New York: Routledge, 2006.
Brunswa, D. The School Uniform Movement and What it Tells Us about American 
Education: A Symbolic Crusade. Landam, MD: Scarecrow Education, 2004.
Callan, E. Creating Citizens: Political Education and Liberal Democracy. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1997.
Department for Children, Schools and Families (DCSF). DCSF guidance to schools 
on school uniform and related policies. London: DCSF, 2007. http://www.dcsf.
gov.uk/consultations/index.cfm?action=conResults&consultationId=1468&
external=no&menu=3 (accessed 12 October 2007)
Gereluk, D. “Should Muslim Headscarves be Banned in French Schools?” Theory 
and Research in Education 3, no. 3(2005): 259–271.
 . Education and Community. London: Continuum, 2006.
 . Symbolic Clothing in Schools. London: Continuum, 2008.
Gutmann, A. Democratic Education. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1987.
McAvoy, P. Symbolic Clothing in Schools: Author Meets Critics. Panel symposium, Cambridge, MA, 12 April 2008.
Rawls, J. Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993.
 . Justice as Fairness: A Restatement, ed. Erin Kelly. London: Belknap Press 
of Harvard University Press, 2001.
12 Global Religious Education
Peter Simpson
INTRODUCTION
Global religious education is the hope of the world. Only through religion 
and education therein can people hope to attain in this life (not to mention 
the next) freedom, happiness, and peace. This thesis will not be accepted 
by most political or social thinkers, and in particular not by liberal ones; it 
commits, or at least is alleged to, the sins of uniting religion to politics and 
of denying people the right not to be religious. Actually, it commits neither 
sin. But, be that as it may, the opposition to it by liberals is self-serving, and 
their alternative form of government commits worse ‘sins.’ I will explain 
these two points in the fi rst two sections that follow. I will then in the fi nal 
two sections argue for my thesis about religious education.
LIBERAL OPPOSITION TO RELIGION IN POLITICS
Liberals base their opposition to the thesis in question on the ground that 
religion is not a publicly enforceable truth. But that religion is not such a 
truth is itself a claim that is either true or false. If it is false then why follow 
it, and why lay it down as the condition of decent politics? If it is true, then 
to form the basis of public life it must be a public truth deserving of being 
taught and implemented as public doctrine. Liberals, therefore, must do 
what they accuse the religious of doing, namely uniting politics to doctrine 
and denying people the right to reject the doctrine.1
Liberals, at least in recent years, have come to recognize this inconsistency. They have tried, therefore, to change their position in order to avoid 
it. The liberalism that is inconsistent, they say, is comprehensive or ‘metaphysical’ liberalism. The liberalism that is not inconsistent, and that can 
and should be made the basis of sound politics, is not comprehensive but 
‘political.’ Political liberalism differs from metaphysical liberalism in that it 
does not make any grand assertions about some comprehensive vision of the 
ultimate goal of life, nor does it base its claim to rule on such assertions. Its 
claim to rule is that it alone can reconcile and harmonize all the confl icting 
Global Religious Education 213
comprehensive visions, including especially religious ones, and end war and 
oppression. It does this by resting its claim to rule on what is politically 
common to all religions and comprehensive visions, namely ‘an overlapping 
consensus.’ This consensus consists of political principles that everyone can 
endorse, even if on different grounds, and that can serve as the basis of a 
free and peaceful life together. Such a consensus, because it is not itself a 
comprehensive vision but is endorsable by all comprehensive visions, can be 
made the basis of political life without requiring, as those visions do, the 
forced imposition or suppression of any controversial doctrine.
This reply misses the point of the original criticism, and the version of 
liberalism it proposes no more escapes the charge of inconsistency than the 
one it replaces. The original criticism is that liberalism is inconsistent, not 
because it is a system of politics based, like religious systems, on a comprehensive vision of the good, but because it is a system of politics at all. 
Any system of politics must espouse some views while rejecting others and 
impose some policies while forbidding others. Liberalism itself espouses 
the view that comprehensive views of the good should not form the basis of 
public life, and it imposes the policy that such views should be forbidden 
from determining policy. So liberalism does forcibly impose one doctrine, 
namely this doctrine of liberalism itself (even if this be only ‘political’ liberalism). Indeed, it cannot fail to do so if it is going to be a working system 
of politics. No system of politics could function as a form of public life if it 
excluded nothing and imposed nothing. Liberals effectively admit this fact 
when they call for the suppression of this or of that (as of religion in state 
schools). They should therefore also admit that this makes their position no 
better or more tolerant than that of their opponents.
One cannot sensibly retort that liberalism is more tolerant in its basic 
idea than other systems, for no system in its basic idea is more tolerant than 
any other. Every prevailing system excludes incompatible ideas from public 
dominance because not to do this is to give up being the prevailing system. 
So when challenged, liberalism too only allows freedom and tolerance to 
liberals, that is, to people who agree with liberalism about what should 
dominate in community and about what the consensus should and should 
not include.2
Nor can one sensibly say that liberalism is more tolerant because it tolerates more things, for that is fi rst not a recommendation and second not 
true. Other systems tolerate things that liberalism thinks intolerable (such 
as racism, sexism, and the like); and those systems are not better for being 
thus more tolerant. There is no necessary merit in a system that tolerates 
more evil things.
Nor again can one sensibly say, in response to this, that liberalism is 
better because unlike the other systems, it tolerates all things that one may 
choose to do that do not interfere with what others choose to do (it only 
refuses to tolerate things which do interfere, like racism and sexism), for 
this begs the question. To adopt such an understanding of what is to count 
214 Peter Simpson
as tolerable is to understand toleration as liberalism understands it. So to 
say that liberalism is better because it is in this way more tolerant is to say 
that liberalism is better because it is liberalism. Any system at all can prove 
itself better like this.
CONSEQUENCE OF LIBERAL POLITICS
What is distinctive of liberalism, and especially in its more recent ‘political’ 
form, is its secularism or its denial of an independent political role to religion. Religion may exist in liberal systems but only as a private belief and 
practice and not as a public one. This privatization of religion, however, has 
proved to have grim practical results.
The prime such result is what we now call the state. Political power and 
organization has, of course, always existed in human life but not, until 
modern times, in the distinctive form that is the state. By ‘the state’ I mean, 
following Max Weber, that organization of political power which takes to 
itself a monopoly of coercion, that is, of the use of force to impose obedience to laws and policies. Let me quote:
Today the relation between the state and violence is an especially intimate 
one. In the past, the most varied institutions . . . have known the use of 
physical force as quite normal. Today, however, we have to say that a 
state is a human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of 
the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory . . .3
What Weber brings to our attention here is the difference between what 
existed before and what exists now. Before the modern emergence of the 
state, no institutional structure had a monopoly of coercive enforcement. 
The power to coerce was not concentrated at any one point but was suffused through the mass of the population. The nearest approach to the state 
in premodern times (though Weber does not mention this) was tyranny, 
where one man did possess something close to a monopoly of coercion over 
everyone in a given area. That was typically why it was called a tyranny: 
instead of all the citizens sharing control, only one or a very few did. Even 
kingships were not tyrannies in this sense because kings ruled through 
powers of coercion diffused in the general mass.
One sign of the accuracy of Weber’s defi nition is the absence of organized 
police forces in the premodern world. The police force is the institutional locus 
of the state’s ordinary coercive power and holds a place analogous to that held 
in the past by the armed guard of the tyrant. The functions we now depute 
exclusively to the police were performed previously by the citizens, who relied 
on themselves and their relatives and friends for the enforcement of rights and 
for defense and protection. Another sign is the professional armies that exist 
in our modern states. What we call a professional army used to be called a 
Global Religious Education 215
standing army, and standing armies were considered a threat to peace and 
liberty. They constituted a permanent power of violence in the hands of the 
rulers that the rulers could use to impose on the people whatever they wished 
and whenever they wished it. Liberty and peace were to be secured, not by 
such permanent forces of coercion, but by occasional armies composed of the 
people themselves, which rulers could only muster at such times and for such 
purposes as the people might approve of and willingly pay for, and which, 
when the time and purpose passed, naturally disbanded themselves.
The emergence of the state was made possible in large part by the advance 
of secularism and liberalism, by which I mean by the suppression of religion 
as a political power. The evidence is twofold: the state of nature doctrine 
invented by Thomas Hobbes and the Protestant Reformation.
The State of Nature Doctrine
This doctrine has two features that deserve special notice: it treats human 
beings as isolated units, and it treats political power as indivisibly single.
In the state of nature doctrine, people are thought of as moved by individual goods that divide and bring them into confl ict. Individuals as such 
could happily unite if the goods they pursued were joint goods that required 
joint pursuit and joint possession. They would not unite, but they would 
live in peace, if the goods they pursued were not mutually exclusive. They 
would unavoidably come into confl ict if one individual cannot pursue his 
goods without preventing other individuals pursuing theirs. Human goods 
would, in this case, divide and set at odds; they would not unite. Such is 
what happens in the state of nature, whether immediately, as in Hobbes’ 
version, or progressively, as in Locke’s and Rousseau’s, or by idealized construction, as in Kant’s and Rawls’.4
 Attached to this idea of the divisive 
character of human goods is also the idea of the equality of all individuals. 
That all human beings, qua human, are equal is an old idea. What is new in 
the state of nature doctrine is that the desires of all human beings are equal 
too. Earlier doctrines taught that some goods were intrinsically superior 
and that those who pursued these goods were superior in character (though 
not in nature) to those who did not. This inequality of character naturally 
carried over into inequality of social and political status. Such inequality 
can fi nd no justifi cation in the state of nature doctrine. What replaces it is 
liberalism. For if, fi rst, goods do not unite but divide people, and if, second, 
all desires are equal, then the solution for keeping a peace that is equal for 
all is that each only pursue his goods to the extent and in the way that all 
others can also pursue theirs.
There is another way of keeping peace. One individual could dominate 
everyone else and pursue his goods at their expense. This solution is the 
very unequal peace of the tyrant. In practice there can be no such tyrant; he 
is only possible in idea. No mere man could manage to be suffi ciently strong 
and clever to keep everyone else in subjection. But while an all-powerful 
216 Peter Simpson
tyrant is impossible, an all-powerful tyranny is not. In fact, as Hobbes 
saw, such a tyranny is necessary. For liberalism is intrinsically unstable. It 
requires people to refrain from doing what, by nature, they most want to 
do, namely pursue to the full their individual goods. Admittedly, anyone 
who attempted to do this would come into confl ict with those around him 
and frustrate himself as much as them. But the temptation to do what one 
really wants must always be strong, and so, because the fear of the war of 
all against all is not enough to deter everyone all the time (or to deter the 
strong and clever much of the time), it needs to be backed up by the fear of 
the state. The state fulfi lls the role of the all-powerful tyrant and imposes, 
by brute force, liberal tolerance on chronically intolerant individuals.
The state as so conceived is the state of Weber’s defi nition. No state 
could do the job required if there were other powers of coercion around 
that could rightly oppose it, for that would just perpetuate the war of nature 
that the state was set up to stop. The state must, by necessity as well as by 
the right of liberal doctrine, be a single, comprehensive power that brooks 
no rival. In particular it must brook no religious rival. The state can allow 
religions to exist, but only on two conditions: that they give up any claim 
to their own coercive power and that they accept the principles of liberal 
tolerance, especially as regards other religions. Otherwise the state must, 
in the name of liberal peace, suppress religion as ruthlessly as it suppresses 
any other opponent.
The state has to take to itself, therefore, a supremacy not just of power 
but also of teaching. It must impose on all religions the overriding belief of 
liberal tolerance and must forbid them the right to teach any doctrine that 
is incompatible with its own doctrine of liberalism. The state cannot, therefore, be neutral between religions. For it could be neutral while also being 
on a par with religions. But, to do its job, the state has to be superior to 
religions. It must dictate to them, if they are to be tolerated, both what they 
may publicly do and what they may publicly teach. For instance, it cannot 
tolerate a religion whose practices and teachings deny the authority claimed 
by the rulers or the rights accorded by them to other state-sanctioned religions. Yet all religions have to do this from time to time because it is of the 
essence of what a religion is that it have authority to interpret the will of the 
gods to men, especially about the proper forms of worship and about resistance to impious rulers. The state, therefore, in order to retain its monopoly 
of control, must take to itself a role and an authority that in all previous 
ages had been denied to everyone except priests.
The Protestant Reformation
Prior to this famous revolution, the religious authorities held a power equal 
and sometimes superior to that of the political authorities. The political 
authorities could not conduct the ordinary business of ruling, to say nothing of the extraordinary business of waging war, without the sanction of 
Global Religious Education 217
the priests and the performance of the due prayers and sacrifi ces. We are 
nowadays inclined to say that in the premodern world there was no separation of church and state. But this is inaccurate. In premodern times there 
was a separation of the religious from the political power. For both powers were powers, that is, sources of control within and over people’s lives. 
Moreover, these powers were independent of each other, or if confl ict arose, 
the religious power took precedence. For, after all, if there are gods, men 
are dependent on them and not they on men. The gods can be infl uenced 
by men through prayers and sacrifi ces, but they cannot be ruled by men. In 
the end, men’s lives and fortunes are dependent on the will of the gods. Woe 
betide any merely human or political power, therefore, that would defy the 
gods or ignore their earthly ministers.
Such convictions are found not only in the pagan world of the Greeks 
and Romans (whereof their poetry and their histories bear eloquent witness), and not only in the pagan world of other ancient peoples, but also in 
the theistic world of the Jews, the Christians, and the Muslims. The Old 
and New Testaments and the Qur’an, together with the postscriptural histories of all three religions, bear as eloquent witness here as do the pagan 
writings. It is medieval Christendom, however, that probably gives us the 
most articulated version of the theory. The independence of the two powers and their duty of mutual support became crystallized in Pope Gelasius’ 
famous doctrine of the two swords,5
 where what is to be noticed is less 
that the swords were two than that they were both swords. The spiritual 
power had as much its own coercive laws as did the temporal, and each 
fought to prevent its own force and authority from being absorbed by the 
other. Because they were two, neither could have, let alone claim to have, 
a monopoly of coercion. Indeed, neither had a monopoly within its own 
sphere, for the feudal system checked the power of the kings through the 
nobles and the power of these through the peasants, while the doctrine of 
apostolic succession endowed the bishops with an authority that neither 
derived from the pope nor depended for its continuance on his sufferance.
This state of affairs could only end, and a monopoly of coercion could 
only be secured by the political power, when the idea that religion and the 
gods were superior to politics and to human rule ceased to have so tight a 
hold over men’s minds. In Europe the fi rst step in this process was taken 
with the Protestant revolt against Rome. That revolt was not just a revolt 
against priests as the authoritative teachers of religion but also, of necessity, 
a revolt against the Church as an independent power in men’s lives. Protestants only succeeded at the time in escaping the power of Rome and of 
the emperor, and only continued to succeed thereafter, because they made 
alliance with rival political powers and won from them both protection and 
support. This de facto dependence of the religious on the political power 
became, as was perhaps inevitable in light of the struggle that had existed 
between them up to that point, an absorption of the religious power into 
the political. No coercive power at all was left on the religious side, and the 
218 Peter Simpson
political power took over the monopoly of it. At the end of the religious 
wars that the Protestant revolt precipitated a key stage was reached when, 
fi rst by the Peace of Augsburg in 1555 and then by the Peace of Westphalia 
in 1648, the principle was adopted of cuius regio eius religio or “whose the 
region his the religion.” It meant that whoever held the political power in 
a given territory was to determine also what religion that territory should 
follow. A neater expression of the doctrine that the state has control over 
religion would be hard to fi nd.
The main ingredient in this growth of monopolistic power was what can 
only be called the apotheosis of the state. Religion, even pagan religion, 
prevented such apotheosis because it taught the subordination of all human 
things to the divine. This subordination prevented men from believing that 
anything human could be the best or most powerful thing to which total 
obedience might be due. But, with the abolition of religion as a center of 
power and authority independent of the state, such belief became actual. 
It found striking expression in the remark of Hegel that the state (not the 
Church) is “the march of God in the world”.6
 To believe that oxen or other 
beasts are gods, or even that the sun and moon and stars are, as the pagans 
did, was indeed foolish, but at least it kept alive the truth that the divine 
must be other than man and not under his control. An extreme of folly is 
only reached when, as in Hegel’s remark, man and the works of man are 
identifi ed with the divine.
So much should serve to falsify the alleged separation of church and state in 
the modern world. One does not separate the religious and the political merely 
by denying political power to religion or merely by denying ruling status to 
priests. One does so by denying divine power to the political. But to endow 
the political with what was previously reserved to religion is not separation 
of church and state; it is absorption of the church by the state. In medieval 
Christendom (as also in other religious civilizations) there was a true separation of the political and the religious powers, for both possessed control and 
authority and each could resist the other. But that was because there was no 
state, or no monopoly of coercive power, in medieval Christendom.7
One might argue in response to this that the state having a monopoly of 
coercion is a good thing. It puts a stop to war and oppression. But this claim 
is false in both its parts. The liberal state is only nonoppressive in the sense 
of oppression that liberalism itself defi nes. This is a frivolous way to discuss 
oppression. Few systems are oppressive by their own defi nition of oppression. 
If the absence of oppression is to be a way to judge between systems, we need 
a defi nition of oppression that does not beg the question from the start.8
The monopolistic state has not served to stop war either. It has created a 
war unparalleled in human history for death and destruction, namely total 
war. The world wars of the twentieth century are the supreme examples. 
Where the political power is only one among several powers, and where 
this political power is diffused through many different orders of society, 
a total mobilization of society for war is impossible.9
 No power has the 
Global Religious Education 219
monopoly of control over society to bring about a total mobilization of it, 
and that all the separate powers should agree to cooperate for this purpose, 
or to do so for long, cannot be credited. The diffusion of power, not the 
concentration of it into the state, would alone prevent total war.
One cannot even say that it was the totalitarian and not the liberal version of the state that caused total war. In the world wars of the twentieth 
century that were fought between liberal and totalitarian states, the liberal 
states caused at least as much death and destruction as the totalitarian ones, 
and these liberal states also pursued war when the totalitarian ones would 
have preferred peace. The Kaiser in 1914 may have wanted to extend the 
German victory over France from 1870, but he did not want to attack Britain or the United States. Hitler too, while he wanted to conquer the Slavic 
peoples to the East (and at least to neutralize France), did not want to fi ght 
Britain or the US. Mussolini did not want to fi ght them either. The German and Italian dictators wanted their own empire, but alongside and not 
against those of Britain and the US.10 That Britain and the US fought, and 
for total enemy capitulation too, was the decision of these liberal states.11
And if it be said they had to fi ght to save liberalism, this only shows that 
liberal states will fi ght for themselves and what they believe in like every 
other political system. So how is liberalism better as regards war then, since 
all systems will fi ght when they think they must? The only difference seems 
to be that liberalism will fi ght total wars while most of these other systems 
will not be able to, and that is an argument against liberalism and the state, 
not for them.
It is hard to see how humanity has gained from any of this.
RELIGION VERSUS THE STATE
In order to be rid of the monopolistic state, we do not have to return to the 
world of pagan Greece and Rome or to the world of medieval Christendom. 
There are many good things about the modern age, not least our advances 
in science and technology, that it would be ridiculous as well as churlish to 
give up. Some sort of mixing of the new and the old is required.
First, as a result of the above argument, we must recognize that the modern idea of the separation of church and state is but propaganda designed, 
consciously or not, to prevent the dismantling of the state’s monopoly of 
coercion. Religion must therefore be brought back as a distinct force and 
motivation strong enough to defeat the state. For if people are to overcome 
the state’s subjection of them and their lives to its all-embracing control, 
they must have somewhere to stand independently of it. To achieve that 
they must cease to believe, or to be tempted into believing, that the state 
is superior to the priest and has authority to determine what is and is not 
tolerable in religion. The best way to achieve this is, in turn, that they 
should believe that there is another god that stands above all human things 
220 Peter Simpson
as lord and judge. The belief in a divine judge is not only rational (and so 
fi t to persuade the learned) but also the instinctive belief of mankind. The 
number of men who can really live as atheists, even in the face of imminent 
death, is vanishingly small. Certainly they are few enough to be able, for 
the most part, to be left to their own devices. The vast majority of mankind 
will always believe in some god or other. The important thing is that they 
believe in a god that stands above all human things and especially above 
the state or the political power. Hence the need for widespread belief in and 
teaching of the existence of such a god.
The teaching should not be in the hands of the state. The state is necessarily hostile to these beliefs (they derogate from its own power), and 
would, if it had to tolerate them as a public force, twist them to its own 
purposes. No teaching at all should, therefore, be in the hands of the state. 
Religious education could not be effective unless it suffused the whole educational process. State education, because of what the state is, is necessarily 
nonreligious if not antireligious. But non-state education, to be real, cannot just be lessons taught in private classrooms. It must fi nd support and 
reinforcement throughout people’s lives, which it will not do as long as the 
state is possessed of extensive control over people’s material and personal 
existence. Internal checks, such as one fi nds in the US Constitution, are not 
enough. Such checks can and do exist alongside monopolistic power. There 
must be external checks coming from within society; or society must have 
a real separation from and independence of the state.
Religion, as already indicated, is the most powerful of these checks, but 
its power extends further. While the state should not be providing all the 
supports it now does, yet this cannot mean that no comparable supports 
should take their place. People are individually weak and dependent on others for almost everything in life. The key point is that they should not have 
to depend on the state, and on its distant and impersonal (and therefore 
eminently idealizable and divinizable) welfare structures and functionaries. Let them depend instead on those immediately known to them, their 
families, whom because of personal closeness they cannot divinize but 
whom they can love. The family is not just parents and children but also 
grandparents and grandchildren, uncles and aunts and cousins, as well as 
close friends. The family has historically been the most powerful source of 
independence from political control. It has got its strength too mainly from 
religion, since this has given the family its fi rst roots and has surrounded it, 
and the rights and duties of parents, with the awe and sanction of the gods. 
Further, the family provides, when not corrupted, the means and substance 
of common life requisite for fi rm and lasting friendships, for mutual loyalty 
and trust, for sustained joint action, for the inventions of thought and art. 
It provides too the haven where there will always be a welcome, and the 
last resting place where the dead may be honored, remembered, and supplicated. Other associations can generate similar bonds, from those forged 
at school to those forged in common physical or intellectual endeavors. The 
Global Religious Education 221
friendships that such unions create form fi xed centers of action independent 
of the state and uncontrollable by it.
That is why the more complete the state, the more hostile it has proved 
itself to be to such things, and in particular to the family where they all 
begin and to which they all somehow relate. The state cannot be all-powerful if there are powers among men that do not depend on it. The liberal 
state has acted in many ways to undermine the family and the independence of the family. The state control of schools takes from parents the 
right to decide how their children are to be educated. It also requires high 
rates of taxation that deprive parents of the freedom of choosing how to 
spend their own money. Similar high rates of taxation are required for the 
provision of public welfare, whose bureaucratic ineffi ciencies and invasions 
of family privacy must be endured by all except the very rich. The free 
availability, even the active promotion, of abortion and artifi cial means of 
contraception are also not without deleterious effects on the stability and 
health of family life. To say that all these things are key elements of individual freedom, which only killjoys or the indifferent could oppose, betrays 
neither thought nor honesty. Free sex is not part of freedom, unless yielding 
to the passions is freedom. Nor is freedom having one’s money taken by 
others to determine how it is spent. Freedom is when one can make one’s 
own decisions for oneself and one’s family, and when one does so by following reason, not passion.
The destruction of the family, and of the religion that supports it, is the 
best way also to destroy the bands of comradeship, since the latter so often 
and so naturally fi nds its roots and supports in the former. The destruction 
is complete when to all this is added the ideology of individualism, born of 
liberalism’s state of nature doctrine, wherein each person is considered a 
separate unit, endowed as a separate unit with his own individual rights and 
beholden to none in his choices, provided he not interfere with the choices 
of others. A doctrine more calculated to divide people than this doctrine of 
rights and of mutual noninterference is hard to imagine. A doctrine more 
calculated to reduce people to slavery is hard to imagine too. If the good, 
as liberalism teaches, is what appeals to each and what each has the right 
to follow, then not only will most people follow their passions most of the 
time, but also an all-powerful coercive state will need to be always on hand 
to stop those passions driving people into violent confl ict. The result is that 
people are made into slaves and the state into a tyrant.
Such a condition is not freedom nor happiness nor peace, at least not a 
happiness or peace worthy of man.
ALTERNATIVE SOLUTION
The solution is to be found, as it has always been found, in traditional religion. By traditional religion I mean religion that teaches the existence of a 
222 Peter Simpson
transcendent God who cares for, as He will also fi nally judge, the creatures 
whom He has made. But a distinction must be drawn between religion’s 
moral teachings and its speculative ones.
By speculative teachings I mean teachings about the nature of God and 
his creative activity. The Christian teaching that God is a Trinity is such a 
teaching, as is also the Jewish teaching that God spoke the world into existence in six days, the Muslim teaching that Mohammad is the last prophet 
of God, or the pagan teaching that things were created by the sexual congress of the fi rst gods. These speculative teachings are often incompatible 
with each other (unless interpreted allegorically), but the moral teachings 
they are associated with are not. Nor do these moral teachings so depend 
on the speculative that if the latter are rejected so must the former. They 
are, moreover, largely the same while the speculative ones much differ. The 
speculative are also optional, even sometimes within the same religious 
community, and can safely be left unenforced (except by excommunication 
if necessary). The moral are not optional and can safely be required.
The moral teachings are twofold. The fi rst, already mentioned, concerns 
the existence of a suprahuman power that is guardian of right, avenger of 
wrong, and fi nal judge of the deeds of men. The second concerns the principles of right and wrong or how men ought to behave, in which alone (and 
not in the pursuit of the passions of liberalism’s state of nature) happiness 
is to be found. Despite surface differences these principles are basically 
the same. The well-known Ten Commandments, inherited from the Jews, 
are a neat summary of them. For although the fi rst three commandments 
about God and the Sabbath are not, as such, the same for all, they are nevertheless so in what they say about the need to pay divine honor, through 
determinate acts on determinate occasions, to the Supreme Being. All these 
commandments, while universal as regards their immediate content, admit 
of much particularity of interpretation and application as one descends to 
the details of concrete actions. In such interpretation and application differences between peoples and religions increasingly appear. But the same 
is true of all principles and laws, even those in force in liberal states. Men’s 
actions, despite a general sameness, vary infi nitely in particular details, and 
require for correct judgment the prudence born of age and experience. Yet 
even here the conviction is universal that there is a correct judgment to be 
made and that particular actions, like general ones, are in themselves right 
or wrong and not merely in relation to opinion or passion or interest.
Implicit in these commandments are the habits to be developed through 
and for keeping them, commonly called virtues. These virtues, like the 
commandments and principles, are also essentially the same and universally acknowledged. Their opposites, the corresponding vices, are no less 
universally recognized and no less universally condemned.
Religions agree in these doctrines. Even those who profess no religion 
agree in them. While it is true that people sometimes act against the moral 
laws and virtues, and while it is also true that none is free of the temptation 
Global Religious Education 223
so to act, few are brazen enough to believe, or to say they believe, that the 
laws are wrong and the virtues detestable. Those who are thus brazen make 
themselves hated and feared by everyone else, even by each other. Who 
would not hate and fear someone who cares not for the life or property of 
others? Such a one is ready to kill or rob whomever he meets and has made 
himself the enemy of mankind.
The moral doctrines form a consensus shared by everyone, religious 
and nonreligious, which one might well call an overlapping consensus. It 
embraces everyone despite their differences in other matters, the religious 
ones in particular. In order to understand and explicate this consensus there 
is no need of the lengthy disquisitions or controversial thought experiments 
beloved of professional academics. The principles of Right (as summarized 
in particular in the Ten Commandments) are this overlapping consensus, 
which has existed explicitly in this form within Christian, Jewish, and 
Islamic civilizations from the beginnings of each, and has existed implicitly 
and in effect in every other civilization and religion (however limited the 
range of others to whom it has at times been applied12). There is no need to 
hunt about for it in hidden places. It is right there in the actual knowledge 
and practice of everyone’s ordinary and daily life.
That this consensus overlaps all religions and is separable from the speculative doctrines proper to each does not mean that it is separable from all 
religious beliefs and behaviors. Because the moral doctrines divide into a 
set of principles of right and wrong on the one hand and a belief in a transcendent guardian of these principles on the other, and because the latter 
involves religious convictions, religion is integral to the moral doctrines. 
Still, the precise relation that holds between these two elements needs 
explication.
First, note that the principles have a certain immediate self-evidence that 
makes them logically independent of the conviction about a divine judge. 
They retain their truth and universality even in the absence of this further 
conviction. That is why the nonreligious can hold to them no less than the 
religious. The moral principles do not logically need to be derived from nor 
to receive confi rmation in any prior truths, whether religious or not. They 
can and do stand in and by themselves.13
Second, note that these principles can be used to judge religions and 
actions undertaken in the name of religions. Those who claim religious sanction for murder or theft or deceit can be judged criminal, for 
instance, and the religion which gives them such sanction can be judged 
corrupt. Or the principles can be used to show that those who think 
their religion counsels action against the principles have misunderstood 
or corrupted their religion. One can argue on these grounds that alQaeda’s support of terrorism is a corruption of Islam, and Muslims have 
so argued. Another case is Bartolomé de Las Casas who condemned, in 
the name of their shared religion, the way the Spaniards conquered and 
ruled the Americas.14
224 Peter Simpson
Third, note that despite the separability of the moral principles from religion, religion is their best and most effective support. People, for whatever 
reason, are naturally religious and are affected in their actions and their 
convictions more or less by religion. Out and out atheism is rare among 
mankind and seldom an early or a natural development when it is. But nonreligious men and atheists, or those who are so by persuasion and not by 
vice or passion, can have no grounds for complaint against the dominance 
of religious convictions in public life and education. Provided they accept 
and follow the associated moral principles that form the overlapping moral 
consensus (which they cannot fail to do except at the expense of what even 
they must concede to be reprehensible irrationality), and provided there is 
no state to force them to be educated in this way rather than that, they will 
suffer no inconvenience nor be forced to live in any way they do not wish.
Finally, note that even were the religious doctrines false, their utility 
could hardly be denied. While there are many motives for virtuous behavior, not least that virtue is good and the source of happiness, for most men 
nothing seems to be a more powerful deterrent from vice than the conviction that, even if they escape human judgment, there is a divine judge who 
they cannot escape. Such a conviction lacks in this form all disutility too 
because if true, it informs men of where lies their ultimate happiness, and 
if false, infl icts on them no harm or loss. No one suffers or is penalized by 
living, if only through fear, a life of virtue. True, it would be better to live 
a life of virtue through love of virtue. But the religious conviction, properly 
understood, cannot but be a most powerful support for this too. It teaches, 
and in a simple way accessible to all, that virtue could not be an object of 
love to the gods nor vice an object to them of hatred were virtue not, of its 
nature, surpassing fair and vice not, of its nature, surpassing foul.15
That is a doctrine whose utility, if not also whose truth, no one could 
rationally gainsay. It is my fi nal proof of the thesis of this chapter: global 
religious education is the hope of the world.
NOTES
 1. I say ‘right’ rather than merely ‘possibility’ because people are always able, 
even in religious societies, to believe what they want. What they are not able 
to do, even in liberal societies, is publicly challenge prevailing beliefs and 
practices without suffering adverse consequences, from social ostracism to 
imprisonment or even death.
 2. Susan D. Collins, Aristotle and the Recovery of Citizenship (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2006), 15, 31–35, 169; Robert B. Talisse, 
Democracy After Liberalism (New York: Routledge, 2005), 59–61.
 3. H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, trans., Politics as a Vocation (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1965), 2.
 4. The sources are Hobbes’ Leviathan, Locke’s Second Treatise of Government, Rousseau’s Social Contract, Kant’s Universal History and Perpetual 
Peace, and Rawls’ Theory of Justice.
Global Religious Education 225
 5. Set forth in his letter Duo Sunt of 494 to the emperor Athanasius, although 
the phrase ‘two swords’ (from Luke 22 v.38 “Behold, here are two swords”) 
is fi rst used for this purpose by Pope Boniface VIII in his bull Unam Sanctam
of 1302.
 6. Georg W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, §258
 7. Note that the state does not cease to have a monopoly of control just because 
the rulers are democratically elected. Elections determine who wields power 
not what power they wield.
 8. A true defi nition of oppression depends on a true account of the human good 
and how it is to be achieved. Disputes about oppression are thus derivative 
from disputes about the good, and if liberalism is wrong about this, it will be 
wrong about oppression too.
 9. The world wars were a function of mobilization, not of weaponry. They 
commandeered the whole society with all its material and mental resources 
for the effort of destroying the enemy. The sophisticated weaponry, and 
its availability in huge quantities, was made possible by this mobilization. 
Modern nuclear weapons have taken death and destruction to an extreme 
even beyond total war. But if anything can stop their use, it will not be the 
monopolistic state (which will use these weapons if it thinks it must, as the 
US did in 1945). Perhaps a renewed reverence for God might do it.
 10. Hitler’s views and intentions were put forward not only in Mein Kampf but 
also, and in some ways more clearly, in his so-called Zweites Buch. This 
book was written in 1928 but, for various reasons, Hitler decided not to 
publish it. A copy was discovered at the end of the war but was fi rst published 
in 1961.
 11. Hitler did, it is true, declare war on the US after Pearl Harbor, allegedly 
because of his alliance with Japan, but he did not attack the US. The US, on 
the contrary, had in effect declared war on Germany long before then by its 
war loans and arms shipments to Britain. Britain’s own declaration of war on 
Germany in 1939 had come against Hitler’s hopes if not entirely against his 
fears.
 12. The commandments about not lying or stealing or killing or committing 
adultery are universally recognized within groups (even a gang of thieves 
needs a basic trust and honesty among its members if its thieving is to be successful). What is not so universal, but should be, is extending them to those 
outside the group.
 13. Moral truths may ontologically depend on a supreme being, but they have a 
certain epistemological independence. Indeed, if there is a process of inference between the moral truths and a supreme being, it is from the former to 
the latter rather than the reverse.
 14. Lewis Hanke, Aristotle and the American Indians (Chicago: H. Regnery, 1959).
 15. I could also mention the works of charity, the involvement in community 
action, and the practical love of neighbor that religion also properly inculcates 
and inspires. These are implied in what I have already said about religion and 
the family and virtue, but an explicit discussion of them would fi gure in a full 
discussion of the values of religion and religious education. Here my focus 
has been on the fi rst principles of religious belief and the moral commandments. I leave the fuller implications for social action to another occasion.

Contributors
Hanan Alexander is Richard and Rhoda Goldman Visiting Professor of 
Education and Israel Studies at the University of California, Berkeley and 
professor of philosophy of education at the University of Haifa where he 
heads the Center for Jewish Education. He is also a senior research fellow of the Van Leer Jerusalem Institute.
Harry Brighouse is Professor of Philosophy and Affi liate Professor of Educational Policy Studies at UW Madison. He is author of On Education 
(Routledge, 2006), and is currently working with Adam Swift on a book 
entitled Family Values, to be published by Princeton University Press.
Randall Curren is professor and chair of philosophy, and professor of education, at the University of Rochester in New York. He is the author of 
Aristotle on the Necessity of Public Education (2000) and many other 
works in philosophy of education, ethics, philosophy of law, and the history of philosophy. He is coeditor of the journal, Theory and Research 
in Education, and editor of A Companion to the Philosophy of Education (2003) and Philosophy of Education: An Anthology (2007), both 
published by Blackwell Publishing.
Dianne Gereluk is senior lecturer in the School of Education at Roehampton University, London, England. She is author of Education and Community and Symbolic Clothing in Schools.
Mark Halstead has an MA from Oxford in Oriental Studies (Arabic 
and Turkish) and a PhD from Cambridge for a thesis on the education of Muslim children in the UK. Early in his career he worked as 
a journalist in Lebanon and a lecturer in Saudi Arabia. He lived and 
worked for many years in Bradford, one of Britain’s most multicultural cities. His most recent academic posts have been at Plymouth, 
Oxford, and Huddersfi eld Universities, and he is currently a research 
professor at Huddersfi eld. He has written widely on values in education, multicultural education, and Muslim schools and has served as a 
228 Contributors
consultant to parliamentary committees on these topics. Recent publications include Citizenship and Moral Education (coauthored with 
Mark Pike, Routledge, 2006) and The Common School and the Comprehensive Ideal (coedited with Graham Haydon, Wiley- Blackwell, 
2008).
Irfan Khawaja is assistant professor of philosophy at Felician College, 
an advisory editor for Democratiya (democratiya.com), and managing editor, with Carrie-Ann Biondi, of Reason Papers: A Journal of 
Interdisciplinary Normative Studies. He is the author most recently 
of “Lesser Evils and Dirty Hands,” Baltic Defence and Security 
Review, vol. 10 (2008) and is at work on a book with the tentative 
title, What Days Are For: Ethical Egoism and the Foundations of 
Ethics.
Meira Levinson is an assistant professor at the Harvard Graduate School 
of Education, following eight years working as a middle school teacher 
in the Atlanta and Boston Public Schools. She is currently completing a 
book on the civic empowerment gap, focusing on civic and multicultural 
education in de facto segregated urban schools. Her previous publications 
include The Demands of Liberal Education (Oxford University Press, 
1999), the coauthored Democracy at Risk (Brookings Press, 2005), and 
a number of articles and book chapters.
Paula McAvoy is a doctoral candidate in the department of Educational 
Policy Studies at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Her area of study 
is the philosophy of education with specifi c interests in political theory, 
the aims of public schooling, and the ethics of teaching. Her dissertation 
is an argument for how public schools should respond to requests for 
cultural and religious accommodation.
Amy North is a research offi cer based at the Institute of Education, University of London. She is currently working with Elaine Unterhalter 
on the Gender, Education and Global Poverty Reduction Initiatives 
Project, which is concerned with global initiatives to advance gender 
equality in and through schooling in contexts of poverty, and the way 
in which these are interpreted and acted upon in different spaces at 
local, national, and international levels. Previously she was the policy 
offi cer for the Beyond Access Project and has worked with civil society 
networks on gender and education issues in Latin America, Tanzania, 
Kenya, and Bangladesh.
Gerhard Preyer is professor of sociology at the Goethe-University Frankfurt 
am Main, Frankfurt a. M., Germany, www.gesellschaftswissenschaften.
Contributors 229
uni-frankfurt.de/gpreyer He is editor of ProtoSociology an International 
Journal of Interdisciplinary Research and Project www. protosociology.de
Yvonne Raley is associate professor of Philosophy Department, at Felician 
College in Lodi, NJ. Her areas of specialization are metaphysics and 
ethics.
Doret de Ruyter is professor in philosophy and history of education at 
the Department of Theory and Research at VU University Amsterdam. 
Before returning to her alma mater she worked as (senior) lecturer at the 
University of Glasgow. Her research interests include ideals in education, 
human fl ourishing, children’s rights, and parental duties.
Harvey Siegel is professor of philosophy and chair of the department at the 
University of Miami. He specializes in epistemology, philosophy of science, 
and philosophy of education. He is the author of Relativism Refuted: A 
Critique of Contemporary Epistemological Relativism (D. Reidel, 1987), 
Educating Reason: Rationality, Critical Thinking, and Education (Routledge 1988), Rationality Redeemed? Further Dialogues on an Educational 
Ideal (Routledge 1997), and many articles on topics in philosophy and education. He is the editor of Reason and Education: Essays in Honor of Israel 
Scheffl er (Kluwer 1997) and The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Education (Oxford University Press, forthcoming). He is past president of both 
the Philosophy of Education Society and the Association for Philosophy of 
Education.
Peter Simpson was born and educated in the UK but is now a naturalized 
US citizen living in New York. He is currently professor of philosophy 
and classics at the City University of New York. His main research interests are in ancient philosophy (chiefl y Aristotle) and moral and political 
philosophy. A lesser, though related, interest is the phenomenological 
philosophy of Karol Wojtyla. He has written books on Aristotle, Moral 
and Political Philosophy, and Wojtyla and several articles ranging over 
the same areas.
Robert Talisse is associate professor of philosophy and political science 
at Vanderbilt University (Nashville, TN). His main area of research is 
political philosophy. He is the author of several articles and the books 
Democracy After Liberalism (Routledge 2005), A Pragmatist Philosophy 
of Democracy (Routledge 2007), and Democracy and Moral Confl ict 
(Cambridge University Press, 2009).
Elaine Unterhalter is reader in Education and International Development 
at the Institute of Education, University of London. Her recent books 
230 Contributors
include Gender, Schooling and Global Social Justice (Routledge) and 
the coedited volumes Amartya Sen’s Capability Approach and Social 
Justice in Education (Palgrave, with Melanie Walker) and Beyond 
Access (Oxfam, with Sheila Aikman). She is currently coordinating 
a number of cross-country research studies on gender, education, and 
global social action.
