UNDERSTANDING THE AMERICAN EDUCATION SYSTEM
Understanding the American Education System
November 7th , 2021
The American education system offers a rich field of choices for international students . There is such an array of schools , programs and locations that the choices may overwhelm students , even those from the U . S . As you begin your school search , it ’ s important to familiarize yourself with the American education system . Understanding the system will help you narrow your choices and develop your education plan . 

The Educational Structure
Primary and Secondary School
Prior to higher education , American students attend primary and secondary school for a combined total of 12 years . These years are referred to as the first through twelfth grades . 

Around age six , U . S . children begin primary school , which is most commonly called “ elementary school .  ” They attend five or six years and then go onto secondary school . 

Secondary school consists of two programs : the first is “ middle school ” or “ junior high school ” and the second program is “ high school .  ” A diploma or certificate is awarded upon graduation from high school . After graduating high school ( 12th grade )  , U . S . students may go on to college or university . College or university study is known as “ higher education .  ” 

Grading System
Just like American students , you will have to submit your academic transcripts as part of your application for admission to university or college . Academic transcripts are official copies of your academic work . In the U . S . this includes your “ grades ” and “ grade point average ”  ( GPA )  , which are measurements of your academic achievement . Courses are commonly graded using percentages , which are converted into letter grades . 

The grading system and GPA in the U . S . can be confusing , especially for international students . The interpretation of grades has a lot of variation . For example , two students who attended different schools both submit their transcripts to the same university . They both have 3 . 5 GPAs , but one student attended an average high school , while the other attended a prestigious school that was academically challenging . The university might interpret their GPAs differently because the two schools have dramatically different standards . 

Therefore , there are some crucial things to keep in mind : 

You should find out the U . S . equivalent of the last level of education you completed in your home country . 
Pay close attention to the admission requirements of each university and college , as well as individual degree programs , which may have different requirements than the university . 
Regularly meet with an educational advisor or guidance counselor to make sure you are meeting the requirements . 
Your educational advisor or guidance counselor will be able to advise you on whether or not you must spend an extra year or two preparing for U . S . university admission . If an international student entered a U . S . university or college prior to being eligible to attend university in their own country , some countries ’ governments and employers may not recognize the students ’ U . S . education . 

Academic Year
The school calendar usually begins in August or September and continues through May or June . The majority of new students begin in autumn , so it is a good idea for international students to also begin their U . S . university studies at this time . There is a lot of excitement at the beginning of the school year and students form many great friendships during this time , as they are all adjusting to a new phase of academic life . Additionally , many courses are designed for students to take them in sequence , starting in autumn and continuing through the year . 

The academic year at many schools is composed of two terms called “ semesters .  ”  ( Some schools use a three-term calendar known as the “ trimester ” system .  ) Still , others further divide the year into the quarter system of four terms , including an optional summer session . Basically , if you exclude the summer session , the academic year is either comprised of two semesters or three quarter terms . 

The U . S . Higher Education System : Levels of Study
First Level : Undergraduate 
 " The American system is much more open . In Hong Kong you just learn what the teacher writes on the board . In America , you discuss the issues and focus more on ideas .  " 



Paolo Kwan from Hong Kong : Studying English and Business Administration at Sierra College in California

A student who is attending a college or university and has not earned a bachelor ’ s degree , is studying at the undergraduate level . It typically takes about four years to earn a bachelor ’ s degree . You can either begin your studies in pursuit of a bachelor ’ s degree at a community college or a four-year university or college . 

Your first two years of study you will generally be required to take a wide variety of classes in different subjects , commonly known as prerequisite courses : literature , science , the social sciences , the arts , history , and so forth . This is so you achieve a general knowledge , a foundation , of a variety of subjects prior to focusing on a specific field of study . 

Many students choose to study at a community college in order to complete the first two years of prerequisite courses . They will earn an Associate of Arts ( AA ) transfer degree and then transfer to a four-year university or college . 

A “ major ” is the specific field of study in which your degree is focused . For example , if someone ’ s major is journalism , they will earn a Bachelor of Arts in Journalism . You will be required to take a certain number of courses in this field in order to meet the degree requirements of your major . You must choose your major at the beginning of your third year of school . 

A very unique characteristic of the American higher education system is that you can change your major multiple times if you choose . It is extremely common for American students to switch majors at some point in their undergraduate studies . Often , students discover a different field that they excel in or enjoy . The American education system is very flexible . Keep in mind though that switching majors may result in more courses , which means more time and money . 

Second Level : Graduate in Pursuit of a Master ’ s Degree
Presently , a college or university graduate with a bachelor ’ s degree may want to seriously think about graduate study in order to enter certain professions or advance their career . This degree is usually mandatory for higher-level positions in library science , engineering , behavioral health and education . 

Furthermore , international students from some countries are only permitted to study abroad at a graduate level . You should inquire about the credentials needed to get a job in your country before you apply to a postgraduate university in the USA . 

A graduate program is usually a division of a university or college . To gain admission , you will need to take the GRE ( graduate record examination )  . Certain master ’ s programs require specific tests , such as the LSAT for law school , the GRE or GMAT for business school , and the MCAT for medical school . 

Graduate programs in pursuit of a master ’ s degree typically take one to two years to complete . For example , the MBA ( master of business administration ) is an extremely popular degree program that takes about two years . Other master ’ s programs , such as journalism , only take one year . 

The majority of a master ’ s program is spent in classroom study and a graduate student must prepare a long research paper called a “ master ’ s thesis ” or complete a “ master ’ s project .  ” 

Third Level : Graduate in Pursuit of a Doctorate Degree
Many graduate schools consider the attainment of a master ’ s degree the first step towards earning a PhD ( doctorate )  . But at other schools , students may prepare directly for a doctorate without also earning a master ’ s degree . It may take three years or more to earn a PhD degree . For international students , it may take as long as five or six years . 

For the first two years of the program most doctoral candidates enroll in classes and seminars . At least another year is spent conducting firsthand research and writing a thesis or dissertation . This paper must contain views , designs , or research that have not been previously published . 

A doctoral dissertation is a discussion and summary of the current scholarship on a given topic . Most U . S . universities awarding doctorates also require their candidates to have a reading knowledge of two foreign languages , to spend a required length of time “ in residence ,  ” to pass a qualifying examination that officially admits candidates to the PhD program , and to pass an oral examination on the same topic as the dissertation . 



Characteristics of the U . S . Higher Education System
Classroom Environment

Classes range from large lectures with several hundred students to smaller classes and seminars ( discussion classes ) with only a few students . The American university classroom atmosphere is very dynamic . You will be expected to share your opinion , argue your point , participate in class discussions and give presentations . International students find this one of the most surprising aspects of the American education system . 

Each week professors usually assign textbook and other readings . You will be expected to keep up-to-date with the required readings and homework so you can participate in class discussions and understand the lectures . Certain degree programs also require students to spend time in the laboratory . 

Professors issue grades for each student enrolled in the course . Grades are usually based upon : 

Each professor will have a unique set of class participation requirements , but students are expected to participate in class discussions , especially in seminar classes . This is often a very important factor in determining a student ’ s grade . 
A midterm examination is usually given during class time . 
One or more research or term papers , or laboratory reports must be submitted for evaluation . 
Possible short exams or quizzes are given . Sometimes professors will give an unannounced “ pop quiz .  ” This doesn ’ t count heavily toward the grade , but is intended to inspire students to keep up with their assignments and attendance . 
A final examination will be held after the final class meeting . 
Credits

Each course is worth a certain number of credits or credit hours . This number is roughly the same as the number of hours a student spends in class for that course each week . A course is typically worth three to five credits . 

A full-time program at most schools is 12 or 15 credit hours ( four or five courses per term ) and a certain number of credits must be fulfilled in order to graduate . International students are expected to enroll in a full-time program during each term . 

Transfers

If a student enrolls at a new university before finishing a degree , generally most credits earned at the first school can be used to complete a degree at the new university . This means a student can transfer to another university and still graduate within a reasonable time . 

Types of U . S . higher education 
 " I like that schedules are flexible , classes are fun , and the variety of activities I can participate in .  " 


Xujie Zhao from China : Studying Computer Networking at Wentworth Institute of Technology in Boston 


1 . State College or University
A state school is supported and run by a state or local government . Each of the 50 U . S . states operates at least one state university and possibly several state colleges . Many of these public universities schools have the name of the state , or the actual word “ State ” in their names : for example , Washington State University and the University of Michigan . 

2 . Private College or University
These schools are privately run as opposed to being run by a branch of the government . Tuition will usually be higher than state schools . Often , private U . S . universities and colleges are smaller in size than state schools . 

Religiously affiliated universities and colleges are private schools . Nearly all these schools welcome students of all religions and beliefs . Yet , there are a percentage of schools that prefer to admit students who hold similar religious beliefs as those in which the school was founded . 

3 . Community College
Community colleges are two-year colleges that award an associate ’ s degrees ( transferable )  , as well as certifications . There are many types of associate degrees , but the most important distinguishing factor is whether or not the degree is transferable . Usually , there will be two primary degree tracks : one for academic transfer and the other prepares students to enter the workforce straightaway . University transfer degrees are generally associate of arts or associate of science . Not likely to be transferrable are the associate of applied science degrees and certificates of completion . 

Community college graduates most commonly transfer to four-year colleges or universities to complete their degree . Because they can transfer the credits they earned while attending community college , they can complete their bachelor ’ s degree program in two or more additional years . Many also offer ESL or intensive English language programs , which will prepare students for university-level courses . 

If you do not plan to earn a higher degree than the associate ’ s , you should find out if an associate ’ s degree will qualify you for a job in your home country . 

4 . Institute of Technology
An institute of technology is a school that provides at least four years of study in science and technology . Some have graduate programs , while others offer short-term courses . 