Merits and Demerits of co-education
Education
Education system plays a very important role in making the world a better place to live in a most civilized way . A country is said to be developed only if it has a very good education system . It works towards creating gender equality in all the fields that also comes with respect . 
Even though gender equality is been respected and nurtured in all parts of the world , there are still thousands of doubts raised about having a co-education in schools , colleges etc . 
Here you will find what is meant by coeducation , the importance of the co-education system , the advantages , and disadvantages of co-education . 

What is Co-Education ? 
Co-education is a system where both the genders ( male and female ) participate in the same learning center or an educational institution . 
In this process , both the genders would benefit equally in learning or attaining knowledge from the institution . This method of education even though is becoming common all over the world , there are still few parts of the country who feel sometimes segregation is for the betterment of the learning process . 
However , there are few who feel , segregation of the genders causes trouble to the learning process and makes it more complicated . 

Importance of coeducation : 
Co-education basically refers to providing education to both girls and boys together , without any discrimination ( specifically gender discrimination )  . This is the actual meaning of coeducation explained in simple terms . 
Gender discrimination is an outrageous atrocity that was and is still prevalent in few countries . Though this is a common debatable topic , its time we need to change our opinions on such factors . There are other few factors that help us get rid of these outdated thinking . 
In ancient times , Greece was the only country which allowed coeducation . But as time passed by , most of the countries in the world have accepted coeducation into their systems . 
The reasons why coeducation is important is because it awakes the spirit of equality and comradeship among all students without any discrimination . 
ADVANTAGES OF CO EDUCATION : 
There are plenty of advantages of coeducation as it helps to create confidence between the males and females . One of the leading advantages of coeducation is help to make the students ready for facing challenging task in professional world which is mixed with females and as well as males . Students of both sexes study , work , and play together in schools , colleges and universities so hesitation between them decreases . It has been seen a high talented student who completes his education in separate education system goes for job interview in front of girl he could not perform well due to lack of confidence thus he is being rejected . 
But on the other hand a average student who studied in co-education system remains successful as he is having lots of confidence to talk with opposite sex . Another great advantage of co-education is economical . Yes co-education is economical as male students and female students share the similar material facilities . We don ’ t have money to build separate building for giving education separately to each sex and money which is wasted to build buildings and bearing other expense can be saved . This saved money can be used for making educational system more effective . 
We are also in favor of co-education system because in co-education institutions , students of both sexes try to get high position to each other so in that situation competition environment is created automatically that is really good thing . Therefore it is the reason we can watch girls working everywhere in different kind of professional fields . To control the class rooms consisted on co-education is easy task but in separate classes it is really hard to control the students because of much noise . 

DISADVANTAGES OF CO-EDUCATION : 
There is no doubt co-education has many advantages but at the same time it has disadvantages . We will discuss here the foremost disadvantages of co-education . One of the leading disadvantages of co-education is lack of concentration . As we all know that opposite sex attracts each other so they lose temperament and momentum to their studies . It has also been seen in co-educational institutions that sexual harassment is causing students . Many cases have been registered about sexual assault and harassment in these kinds of institutions . Co-education is caused to make romantic relationship between class mates thus some students destroy their future by wasting their precious time in unnecessary activities . 
Many people across the world have been seen to say that the coeducation system is against their religious . The country culture does not allow to study together by any means therefore it is the big reason that some parents restricted their daughters to study in coeducation system . 

Moral
Despite all of advantages and disadvantages of coeducation or mixed education is growing rabidly around the corner . But it all depends to us that how we think about this system , how we behave it ? One thing is sure that if we take it positively then co-education is the best system for making our children confident . It is the responsibility of parents to groom their children in such manner which help their children to make difference between good and bad . 