Student Engagement in the Use of Instant Messaging 
Communication in Flexible Education 
Francis Yue 
School of Continuing and Professional Education , City University of Hong Kong , 
83 Tat Chee Avenue , Kowloon Tong , Kowloon , SAR , China 
cmfrayue @ cityu . edu . hk 
Abstract . The use of smartphones to communicate among students using instant messaging is very popular in Hong Kong . Recent research has been done 
on the use of instant messaging in teaching and learning especially in the tertiary education context . The use of instant messaging communication on undergraduate dissertation supervision in the context of flexible teaching and 
learning with the emphasis on student engagement was discussed . Some measures of student engagement in such communication are proposed . 
Keywords : Flexible education , Instant messaging , Student engagement , Teaching and learning . 
1 Introduction 
According to the latest statistics published ( February 2014 ) by the Office of the 
Communications Authority [ 1 ]  , there are 17 , 224 , 652 mobile subscribers in Hong 
Kong . Out of these subscribers , 12 , 525 , 316 of them are 2 . 5G and 3G / 4G mobile subscribers . The mobile subscriber penetration rate is 238 . 6% which is very high in the 
world . The high ownership of mobile phones among local undergraduate students 
coupled with the good communication network infrastructure constitutes a very good 
flexible teaching and learning environment . 
Flexible education has to be student-centered and that continuous guidance and 
support need to be provided to the students . The use of instant messaging ( IM ) communication plays an important role in flexible education in the way that it can facilitate the timely communication with the students . Recent research has been conducted 
to study the use of IM in the flexible teaching and learning context [ 2 ]  . Yue only 
focused on the views of the respondents collected in the survey study . He has not 
considered the actual student engagement in such IM communication and its association with the students ’ final academic performance . 
This paper aims at studying the student engagement issue and the present study is 
based on the same set of questionnaire data collected to investigate the use of instant 
messaging during the dissertation supervision of a group of final-year undergraduate 
students [ 2 ]  . In this paper , the extent of student engagement is proposed to be measured in terms of ( i ) number of instant messages initiated by student to supervisor ; 
2 F . Yue 
( ii ) students ’ response time in responding to instant messages sent from their supervisor concerned . The response time to the first instant message sent from their supervisor concerned over each of the incidents ( relating to the dissertation supervision ) over 
the whole supervision period . Statistical analysis is then carried out to characterize the 
student engagement data collected . The possible relationship of such student engagement and the final assessment result achieved by the group of students is investigated . 
2 Relevant Research 
The topic of student engagement has been considered by Chickering & Gamson in 
their study of good practice in undergraduate education [ 3 ]  . They discuss that student 
engagement can be facilitated through student-teacher contact , cooperation among 
students , active learning , prompt feedback , time on task , high expectations and 
respect for diverse talents and ways of learning . In another study of student engagement [ 4 ]  , the following aspects : level of academic challenge , active and collaborate 
learning , student interaction with faculty members , enrichment with educational experiences and supportive campus environment are found to be effective educational 
practice 
Jeffries et al . describe flexible learning should suit the needs of individual learners 
[ 5 ]  . Haynes suggests that learners should be given greater flexibility to determine 
where they study , what they learn , how they learn and how they are assessed [ 6 ]  . He 
considers flexible learning should be unrestricted in terms of timing and location of 
delivery , the pace of study and the entry requirements . 
Wolcott [ 7 ] and Repman & Logan [ 8 ] point out that timely feedback can enhance 
interaction between the students and supervisors . Supervisors should be sensitive to 
the learning difference of individual students . Light & Cox consider the need to provide student support , encourage independence and develop interpersonal qualities of 
students during dissertation / thesis supervision [ 9 ]  . They also point out that dissertation supervision is a form of formative assessment . Martinez-Pons emphasizes that 
supervisors have to monitor the performance during dissertation supervision [ 10 ]  . 
Phillips & Pugh describe a set of expectations that postgraduate research students 
have of their supervisors [ 11 ]  . Two such expectations are that supervisors should be 
available when needed and are friendly . 
Yue points out that as many IM tools are now available in the market [ 2 ]  . They enable supervisors to be always “ available ”  ( in terms of time ) and “ friendly ”  ( in terms 
of giving feedback ) to students . Dissertation supervision involves a close personal 
relationship between supervisor and student . Yue examines the student reaction to the 
use of an instant messaging ( IM ) tool , WhatsApp [ 12 ]  , used by him in supervising his 
dissertation students . A survey was administered to a group of seventeen students who 
have experienced the communication with their supervisor using instant messaging . 
The survey questionnaire is based on that used by Kovalik & Hosler [ 13 ]  . The questionnaire is divided into three sections . The first part consists of questions relating to 
the behaviour of using IM tools and reasons why the respondents use them . The 
second part consists of questions checking the views of respondents in using IM in 
Student Engagement in the Use of Instant Messaging Communication 3 
teaching and learning . The response to questions is measured on a Likert 5-point 
scale . Point 5 corresponds to full agreement of the testing statements . Yue concludes 
that students are very positive with the use of instant messaging communication [ 2 ]  . 
According to [ 2 ]  , as shown in the Appendix 1 , the Accountancy mean scores for questions 10-21 ( except Q11 and Q16 ) are always lower than the Marketing mean scores . 
The use of IM communication is more popular with the Marketing students . Also , 
there is a clear difference between the male respondents ’ mean scores and those of the 
female respondents for questions 10-21 ( except Q12 )  . The male mean scores are always lower than those of female respondents . The female students are more positive 
in the use of IM communication . 
3 Methodology 
The data used in the present study is the same as that of [ 2 ]  . Further information about 
the data set is given as follows . There are two groups of undergraduate students who 
are supervised by the same supervisor over a 26-week period from July till December 
2013 . The dissertation project lasts for two semesters ( 26 week in total )  . There is 
one group of 10 Marketing students and another group of 7 Accountancy students . All 
the students are aged 18-25 . Eight of the seventeen respondents are male students 
while the other female . All students need to submit a dissertation outline and a dissertation report at the end of the process . A final overall mark ( with a maximum of 100 
marks ) is awarded to each student on their dissertation . The outline accounts for 25% 
while the report accounts for 75% of the overall mark . 
During the whole 26-week dissertation supervision period , several major types of 
instant messages ( using WhatsApp ) were exchanged between the supervisor and students on an individual basis . They are :  ( 1 ) reminders of coming meeting details ( such 
as date , time and venue )  ;  ( 2 ) agenda of the coming meetings ;  ( 3 ) confirmation of 
work required from student for the coming meeting ;  ( 4 ) group announcements made 
by the supervisor ;  ( 5 ) feedback on queries arising from matters discussed or to be 
discussed . 
The instant messages exchanged between the students and supervisor are classified 
into two types :  ( T1 ) messages initiated by the supervisor ;  ( T2 ) messages initiated by 
the student . In this paper , the student engagement in the use of IM communication is 
measured . This involves the recording of the number of instant messages initiated by 
the supervisor and sent to the students , as well as the students ’ first response time to 
such messages . Each valid issue raised for IM communication can be initiated by 
either the supervisor and student involves a series of instant messages exchanged 
them . For each valid issue , the student ’ s response time to the first instant message 
sent to him / her by their supervisor ( T1 message )  , OR the supervisor ’ s response time 
to a student ’ s first instant message ( T2 message ) is recorded . The response time was 
all measured in terms of minutes . It is usual that students and supervisor exchanges 
more than one instant message for each valid issue . There can be more one issue discussed between a student and supervisor in a day . The collected data are analyzed 
using the statistical software SPSS . 
4 F . Yue 
4 Results 
The statistical results obtained are summarized in Table 1 . Students A1-A7 are 
Accountancy students and students M1-M10 are Marketing students . Two measures 
of mean response time are listed , namely , median and 5% trimmed-mean . The 5% 
trimmed-mean values are always higher than the median values indicating the distributions of response time values for both students and supervision are positively 
skewed . 
The overall performance of each student dissertation is assessed jointly by the 
supervisor ( first marker ) and a teaching staff member of the overseas university 
( second marker )  . For confidentiality reason , the actual students ’ final overall marks 
on their dissertations are not listed out in Table 1 . Instead , the rankings of their overall 
marks are listed for reference purpose . There are two sets of rankings classified 
according to the area of study , namely , accountancy and marketing for the seventeen 
students under study . Rank 1 corresponds to the highest mark obtained in the dissertation study . Students A4 and A7 got the same overall mark and therefore have the 
same ranking of 5 . 5 . 
4 . 1 Number of Instant Messages Initiated by Students 
There are altogether 792 exchanges of instant messages between the 17 students and 
the supervisor during the 6-month research period . 314 messages initiated by the 
students while 478 messages initiated by the supervisor . In fact , out of these 314 
messages , the 17 students initiated 190 instant messages during the normal officehour period ( 9am-6pm ) over the week and 124 outside that period . For the supervisor , 
out of 478 messages , he initiated a total of 306 instant messages during the normal 
office-hour period and 172 outside that period to these 17 students . 
4 . 2 Student Response Time to Messages Initiated by Supervisor 
An inspection of some data values appearing in Table 1 indicates that for Students 
A2 , A3 , M1 and M6 , faster ( median ) student response time to supervisor is related to 
the corresponding better result rankings . However , faster ( median ) student response 
time is related to the relatively lower result rankings for students A4 , A7 and M7 . The 
overall effect of these two “ contradicting ” situations could lead to low correlation 
between overall results and student response time . It can be argued that capable s 
tudents are more concerned of their study and would be more responsive to the supervisor ’ s instant messages . On the other hand , those less capable students are also 
responsive to supervisor ’ s messages so as to seek assistance from their supervisor . 
4 . 3 Supervisor Response Time to Messages Initiated by Student 
Based on the results listed in Table 1 , it can be seen that both the median and 
trimmed-mean values of supervisor response time are greater than those of the student 
Student Engagement in the Use of Instant Messaging Communication 5 
response time . It can be understood that the supervisor is busy and might not always 
be available to respond to the students ’ messages quickly in most situations when he 
receive instant messages from them . 
Table 1 . Student engagement statistics obtained for the 17 students under study 
Student 
Sex of 
student 
No . of 
incidents 
that 
student 
initiated 
IM 
Student response 
time 
( in minutes ) 
No . of 
incidents 
that supervisor 
initiated 
IM 
Supervsior response 
time 
( in minutes ) 
Ranking 
based on the 
overall 
marks 
obtained 
Median 
5% 
Trimmed 
mean 
Median 
5% 
Trimmed 
mean 
A1 Female 16 19 . 0 46 . 46 32 52 . 0 176 . 08 
2 
A2 Male 31 0 . 0 3 . 44 30 13 . 0 24 . 09 1 
A3 Female 39 7 . 0 20 . 97 32 27 . 0 114 . 26 3 
A4 Male 11 1 . 0 7 . 93 34 6 . 0 29 . 58 5 . 5 * 
A5 Male 29 12 . 0 24 . 96 31 9 . 0 59 . 00 7 
A6 Female 21 15 . 0 80 . 01 34 24 . 0 46 . 08 4 
A7 Female 12 5 . 0 32 . 81 29 59 . 0 89 . 98 5 . 5 * 
M1 Male 16 5 . 0 12 . 48 31 5 . 5 49 . 92 3 
M2 Male 9 15 . 0 15 . 62 21 8 . 0 28 . 59 2 
M3 Female 19 4 . 5 14 . 92 32 2 . 0 31 . 55 4 
M4 Female 14 7 . 5 33 . 61 26 32 . 5 137 . 38 7 
M5 Male 10 4 . 0 35 . 58 27 21 . 5 25 . 17 6 
M6 Female 15 1 . 0 4 . 78 23 26 . 0 145 . 89 1 
M7 Male 21 3 . 0 8 . 36 25 19 . 0 89 . 10 8 
M8 Male 12 16 . 5 24 . 94 20 25 . 0 35 . 56 9 
M9 Female 14 18 . 0 36 . 85 27 3 . 0 50 . 04 10 
M10 Female 25 2 . 5 5 . 78 24 16 . 0 59 . 36 5 
Total 314 Total 478 
Note : Students A4 and A7 obtained the same overall mark and hence the same 
ranking of 5 . 5 . 
In Table 2 , it can be seen that , on average , Accounting students initiated more instant messages to the supervisor than the Marketing students . When compared to the 
Marketing students , Accounting students are less responsive to the instant messages 
sent from their supervisor . The average student response time is 8 . 64 minutes / 30 . 94 
minutes for Accounting students while 7 . 70 minutes / 19 . 29 minutes for Marketing 
students . Also , male and female students sent similar number of instant messages to 
their supervisor . However , female students are less responsive ( 9 . 00 minutes / 30 . 69 
minutes ) than the male students ( 7 . 06 minutes / 16 . 66 minutes ) in replying to their 
supervisor ’ s messages . 
6 F . Yue 
Table 2 . Student engagement statistics based on the students listed under COURSE and SEX 
COURSE SEX 
Accounting 
( n = 7 ) 
Marketing 
( n = 10 ) 
Male 
( n = 8 ) 
Female 
( n = 9 ) 
Average number of messages 
initiated by student 
22 . 71 
( 10 . 59 ) 
15 . 50 
( 4 . 97 ) 
17 . 38 
( 8 . 70 ) 
19 . 44 
( 8 . 38 ) 
Average student response time 
( based on median values )  ( minutes ) 
8 . 64 
( 7 . 41 ) 
7 . 70 
( 6 . 34 ) 
7 . 06 
( 6 . 47 ) 
9 . 00 
( 6 . 95 ) 
Average student response time 
( based on trimmed-mean values )  
( minutes ) 
30 . 94 
( 26 . 05 ) 
19 . 29 
( 12 . 48 ) 
16 . 66 
( 10 . 91 ) 
30 . 69 
( 23 . 36 ) 
Average number of messages 
initiated by supervisor 
31 . 71 
( 1 . 89 ) 
25 . 60 
( 3 . 89 ) 
27 . 38 
( 5 . 04 ) 
28 . 78 
( 3 . 96 ) 
Average supervisor response 
time ( based on median values )  
( minutes ) 
27 . 14 
( 20 . 89 ) 
15 . 85 
( 10 . 71 ) 
13 . 38 
( 7 . 53 ) 
26 . 83 
( 19 . 40 ) 
Average supervisor response 
time ( based on trimmed-mean 
values )  ( minutes ) 
77 . 01 
( 54 . 32 ) 
65 . 26 
( 44 . 40 ) 
42 . 63 
( 22 . 51 ) 
94 . 51 
( 51 . 31 ) 
Note : Standard deviations are listed in brackets 
Table 3 . Correlation coefficient values found between overall marks and student engagement 
based on the 17 students listed under COURSE and SEX 
COURSE SEX 
Accounting 
( n = 7 ) 
Marketing 
( n = 10 ) 
Male 
( n = 8 ) 
Female 
( n = 9 ) 
Number of messages initiated by student 
0 . 254 -0 . 035 -0 . 110 -0 . 008 
Student response time ( median values ) 
-0 . 238 -0 . 485 -0 . 153 -0 . 581 
Student response time 
( trimmed mean values ) 
-0 . 232 -0 . 636 -0 . 330 -0 . 584 
Number of messages initiated by supervisor 
-0 . 217 0 . 111 -0 . 225 -0 . 299 
Supervisor response time 
( median values ) 
0 . 048 -0 . 125 -0 . 141 -0 . 169 
Supervisor response time 
( trimmed mean values ) 
0 . 022 0 . 082 -0 . 333 0 . 256 
The relationship between student overall marks and student engagement aspects is 
investigated , and the results are summarized in Table 3 . It can be seen that the majority of correlation coefficient values found are of small values ( less than 0 . 3 in absolute 
Student Engagement in the Use of Instant Messaging Communication 7 
term ) indicating weak correlation . There are four highlighted values ( of about 0 . 5 in 
absolute term ) indicating a negative and stronger relationship between overall marks 
and student response time . There is a moderate negative relationship ( correlation 
coefficient values of -0 . 485 / -0 . 636 ) between overall marks and marketing student ’ s 
response time to instant messages sent from his / her supervisor . This negative association is stronger for marketing students than that for accounting students . Also , there is 
a moderate negative relationship ( correlation coefficient values of -0 . 581 / -0 . 584 ) 
between overall marks and female student ’ s response time to instant messages sent 
from his / her supervisor . This negative association is stronger for female students than 
that for male students . 
5 Conclusion 
Student engagement in using IM on dissertation supervision is studied in this paper . 
The number of instant messages initiated by the students and supervisor is found not 
relating to the overall dissertation performance . However , student engagement in 
terms of response time is found associated with student ’ s overall dissertation performance under different course areas and sex of students as explained in the last section 
of this paper . 
Yue ( 2014 ) reported that the student participants are very positive towards the use 
of IM communication during the whole supervision process . Yue also reported that 
many students responded very quickly , sometimes immediately , after the supervisor 
sent them instant messages . The use of IM communication is more popular with the 
Marketing students , and the female students are more positive in the use of IM communication . The findings of this paper establish that the students ’ overall performance 
on their dissertations is better for Marketing students and female students separately . 
Due to the limited number of students included in the present study , the relationship 
between overall dissertation performance and student engagement ( in terms of response time ) under different subject areas ( COURSE ) and sex of students ( SEX ) cannot be studied jointly under a statistical modelling framework . Further research can 
be done on studying the possible joint effect . Also , a further study of other measures 
of student engagement in the IM communication is also of interest . 
References 
1 . Office of the Communications Authority ( 2014 )  , 
2 . Yue , F .  : Use of Instant Messaging Communication in Teaching and Learning . Paper presented at the Inaugural International Conference on Open and Flexible Education ( 2014 ) 
3 . Chickering , A . W .  , Gamson , Z . F .  : Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate 
Education . AAHE Bulletin ( 1987 ) 
4 . NSSE : National Survey of Student Engagement . Main Website ( 2008 )  , 

5 . Jeffries , C .  , Lewis , R .  , Meed , J .  , Merritt , R .  : The A-Z of Open Learning . National Extension College , Cambridge ( 1990 ) 
8 F . Yue 
6 . Haynes , D .  : Mentoring – Flexible Approaches to Staff Development : A Case Study from 
New Zealand . In : Bell , C .  , Bowden , M .  , Trott , A .  ( eds .  ) Implementing Flexible Learning , 
Kogan Page Limited , London ( 1997 ) 
7 . Wolcott , L . L .  : Distant , But Not Distanced : A learner-Centered approach to Distance Education . Techtrends 41 ( 5 )  ( 1996 ) 
8 . Repman , J .  , Logan , S .  : Interactions at a Distance : Possible Barrieres and Collaborative Solutions . Techtrends 41 ( 6 )  ( 1996 ) 
9 . Light , G .  , Cos , R .  : Learning and Teaching in Higher Education : The Reflective Professional . Paul Chapman Publishing , London ( 2001 ) 
10 . Martinez-Pons , M .  : The Continuum Guide to Successful Teaching in Higher Education . 
Continuum , London ( 2003 ) 
11 . Phillips , E .  , Pugh , D .  : How to Get a PhD : A Handbook for Students and their Supervisors . 
Open University Press , Buckingham ( 2000 ) 
12 . WhatsApp ( 2014 )  , 
13 . Kovalik , C . L .  , Hosler , K . A .  : Text Messaging and the Community of Inquiry in Online 
Courses . Journal of Online learning and Teaching 6 ( 2 )  ( 2010 ) 
Appendix 1 
Table 4 . Average score values for 12 questions ( Q10-Q21 ) for 17 respondents grouped under 
different areas of study ( A = Accountancy , M = Marketing ) and sex ( M = male , F = female ) 
Questions 
Mean Mean 
( by area of study )  ( by sex ) 
Q10 . IM is a good way to communicate with instructor 4 . 14 ( A ) 
4 . 40 ( M ) 
4 . 13 ( M ) 
4 . 44 ( F ) 
Q11 . Receive useful information through IM messages 4 . 29 ( A ) 
4 . 20 ( M ) 
4 . 13 ( M ) 
4 . 33 ( F ) 
Q12 . Will follow up IM messages using computers if 
needed 
3 . 43 ( A ) 
3 . 90 ( M ) 
3 . 75 ( M ) 
3 . 67 ( F ) 
Q13 . IM messages from instructor is good to obtain 
course information 
4 . 00 ( A ) 
4 . 30 ( M ) 
4 . 00 ( M ) 
4 . 33 ( F ) 
Q14 . Receiving IM messages from instructor is normal to 
me 
4 . 14 ( A ) 
4 . 50 ( M ) 
4 . 25 ( M ) 
4 . 44 ( F ) 
Q15 . Frequently replied to instructor on receiving IM 
messages 
4 . 00 ( A ) 
4 . 30 ( M ) 
3 . 88 ( M ) 
4 . 44 ( F ) 
Q16 . Received the right number of IM messages from 
instructor 
3 . 86 ( A ) 
3 . 70 ( M ) 
3 . 50 ( M ) 
4 . 00 ( F ) 
Q17 . Initiated instant messages to instructor at least once 
during 1-2 weeks 
4 . 00 ( A ) 
4 . 50 ( M ) 
4 . 25 ( M ) 
4 . 33 ( F ) 
Q18 . Receiving IM messages from instructor help me to 
stay up-to-date with the course 
4 . 14 ( A ) 
4 . 60 ( M ) 
4 . 25 ( M ) 
4 . 56 ( F ) 
Q19 . Instant messages is useful in an educational setting 3 . 71 ( A ) 
4 . 50 ( M ) 
4 . 00 ( M ) 
4 . 33 ( F ) 
Q20 . Receiving instant messages is a positive aspect of 
this course 
3 . 57 ( A ) 
4 . 60 ( M ) 
3 . 88 ( M ) 
4 . 44 ( F ) 
Q21 . IM is useful in the teaching and learning process 3 . 86 ( A ) 
4 . 60 ( M ) 
4 . 25 ( M ) 
4 . 33 ( F ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 9–19 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Investigating Acceptance towards Mobile Learning 
in Higher Education Students 
Kenneth Wong , Fu Lee Wang , Kwan Keung Ng , and Reggie Kwan 
Caritas Institute of Higher Education 
{ kfwong , pwang , sng , rkwan }  @ cihe . edu . hk 
Abstract . Mobile learning or M-learning brings a new aspect of learning environment . Due to the large amount of available applications in mobile devices , 
students use their mobile devices for many purposes including entertainment , 
sharing , communication , video recording , photo shooting and learning . The 
acceptance toward mobile learning has naturally become a major interest for 
educators . In this paper , we will present preliminary findings from a small scale 
study exploring the students ’ experiences on using mobile devices versus desktop computers , as well as perceptions towards mobile learning . The data are 
obtained from the quantitative survey . The preliminary findings indicate that 
students will use mobile devices rather than desktops to access the Internet . 
Students are willing to use mobile devices to conduct learning activities . 
Keywords : Mobile learning , e-learning , mobile technology , motivation , cyber 
behavior , learning activities . 
1 Introduction 
We have seen the processing power of mobile technology grown exponentially while 
becoming more affordable and even ubiquitous . According to a report from CNNMoney [ 1 ] on February 28 , 2014 , Americans used smartphone and tablet apps more than 
PCs to access the Internet last month . It is obvious that mobile devices have been 
overtaking desktop computers and will dominate the future Internet . The current 4thgeneration mobile technologies are so powerful that making mobile devices can serve 
as a tablet , notebook , PDA , telephone , or camera , and data transference as well as 
video and audio files . In this way , the growth and popularity of mobile applications 
have been profoundly impacting on our daily life , including learning activities . Mobile technology seems to open a big door for a new kind of learning and performance 
support in teaching and learning . Students not only learn at school , but also learn 
informally when they are out of school . Students can use their mobile devices to enhance learning anywhere at any time : waiting for bus , travelling on train , dinning at 
restaurant , etc . Since mobile devices are increasingly used for learning in classrooms , 
researches on mobile learning have been becoming a major interest for educators [ 2 ]  . 
This study is to explore the students ’ experiences on using mobile devices versus 
desktop computers , as well as students ’ perceptions towards mobile learning . 
10 K . Wong et al . 
2 Mobile Learning in Education 
Mobile learning or M-learning can be broadly defined as the exploitation of ubiquitous handheld technologies , together with wireless and mobile phone networks , to 
facilitate , support , enhance and extend the reach of teaching and learning [ 3 ]  . Many 
schools recognized that mobile devices are important learning tools for a vast range of 
classroom application [ 4 ]  . To enhance learning , mobile devices can provide educational opportunities for students to access course content , as well as interact with instructors and classmates wherever they are located [ 5 ]  . A study from the Educause 
Center for Applied Research [ 6 ] indicated that 67% of surveyed undergraduate students believed that mobile devices were important to their academic success . They 
would use their mobile devices for academic activities . They are also driving the 
adoption of mobile devices , such as smartphones and tablet computers , in higher education . In this way , mobile learning is an expanded form of e-learning for the use of 
mobile devices that involves connectivity for downloading , uploading and online 
working via Wi-Fi or mobile networks , and linking to institutional e-learning systems 
[ 7 ]  . 
3 Research Methodology 
In this study , students ’ experiences and perceptions on mobile learning versus desktop 
computers were investigated . It used a convenient sampling method to collect the 
data . It was conducted in the academic year 2013-14 , 68 students were invited to participate in this research . They were enrolled in a course called “ Mathematics ”  , one of 
the core curriculum courses required for all students who are pursuing a postsecondary programme in the Institute . They were invited to complete a questionnaire 
about their experiences and perceptions on mobile learning on voluntary basis . 
3 . 1 Research Questions 
This study attempts to answer the following research questions : 
• What are general experiences of students in using the mobile devices versus desktop computer ? 
• What is students ’ perception on using the mobile devices for academic activities ? 
• What are students ’ attitudes on using the mobile devices for academic activities ? 
3 . 2 Data Collection 
A questionnaire was developed and distributed to students during the spring semester 
in academic year 2013-14 . Participation in the survey was on voluntary basis and all 
responses were anonymous . The survey comprised of a combination of Likert scaled , 
and ranking scaled questions . When the data were collected , the later analysis would 
be based on descriptive statistics , frequency distribution and correlation .  
Investigating Acceptance T
4 Preliminary Fin
68 of the students enrolled 
The survey included four b
Internet usage habits usin
e-learning activities , and stu
survey data were analyzed 
the students were male and 
years old , about 77% of the
From the survey , 49% o
through PC . However , 79%
through mobile devices . Th
versus mobile devices was
access measure , students c
result , the most popular pla
students chose this item . Th
devices was at campus and
places to access the Internet
Fig . 1 . The distributions of st
In the e-learning activiti
searching information and d
e-learning activities on mo
signments , as shown in Figu
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
less than 1 
hour
1 t
ho
Towards Mobile Learning in Higher Education Students 
ndings 
in the post-secondary programme took part in this surv
broad types of measures : demographic information , da
ng personal computers ( PC ) and mobile devices , da
udents ’ attitudes on using mobile devices for learning . T
by the “ SPSS ” software . In our sample , 59% and 41%
female respectively . 97% of respondents were below
em were 18 to 20 and 20% of them were 21 to 24 . 
of the students spent 3 hours or more daily on the Inter
% of the students spent 3 hours or more daily on the Inter
he distribution of students ’ Internet daily usage on using 
shown in Figure 1 . In the usual place to get the Inter
ould choose more than one option in this item . From 
ace to access the Internet through PC was at home and
he most popular place to access the Internet through mob
d 61 students chose this item . The distribution of popu
t was shown in Figure 2 . 
tudents ’ Internet daily usage on using PC versus mobile devic
es measure , most of daily e-learning activities on PCs 
downloading documents . On the other hand , most of da
obile devices are searching information and discussing 
ure 3 . 
o 2 
urs
3 to 4 
hours
5 to 6 
hours
7 hours or 
more
PC
Mobile Devices
11 
vey . 
aily 
aily 
The 
% of 
w 25 
rnet
rnet
PC 
rnet
the 
d 55 
bile 
ular 
ces 
are 
aily 
as-
12 K . Wong et al . 
Fig . 2 . The distributions of p
devices 
Fig . 3 . The distributions of
For the student ’ s ’ percep
strongly agreed that using m
tively , as shown in Figure 4
mobile devices are convenie
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
popular places to access the Internet on using PC versus mo
f daily e-learning activities on using PC versus mobile devices
ptions on mobile learning , 68% of the students agreed
mobile devices for learning can enhance their study eff
4 . 87% of the students agreed or strongly agreed that us
ent to access information anywhere anytime . 
PC
Mobile Devices
PC
mobile
obile 
s
d or 
fecsing 
Investigating Acceptance T
Fig . 4 . The distri
In the activities on mobi
using Whatsapp daily or al
dents used mobile devices f
distributions of the daily ac
Fig . 5 . The distr
28% 
3%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Towards Mobile Learning in Higher Education Students 
ibutions of students ’ perceptions on mobile learning 
ile devices measures , 54 students reported that they w
lmost daily for communicating with friends . 45 and 38 
for information surfing and reading news respectively . T
tivities of using mobile devices were shown in Figure 5
ributions of daily activities on using mobile devices 
26% 
42% 
% 1% 
strongly agrere
agree
fair
disagree
strongly disagree
No of student
13 
were 
stuThe 
. 
14 K . Wong et al . 
Table 1 . The summary of the questions ( 5-point Likert scale ) in the survey 
Questions Mean 
Score 
Standard 
Deviation 
1 . In contrast with PC , I will spend more time on using mobile devices for 
Internet . 
3 . 69 1 . 144 
2 . In contrast with PC , I prefer to use mobile devices for Internet . 3 . 46 1 . 078 
3 . In contrast with PC , I prefer to use mobile devices for learning . 3 . 55 1 . 049 
4 . In contrast with PC , I prefer to use mobile devices for discussing assignments with classmates . 
3 . 75 1 . 049 
5 . In contrast with PC , I prefer to use mobile devices as an e-Learning tool . 3 . 31 1 . 076 
6 . In contrast with PC , I prefer to use mobile devices for conducting learning 
tasks . 
3 . 45 1 . 034 
7 . In contrast with PC , I prefer to use mobile devices to view learning materials . 
3 . 27 1 . 075 
8 . In contrast with PC , I prefer to use mobile devices for conducting quiz . 3 . 13 1 . 072 
9 . In contrast with PC , I prefer to use mobile devices for watching learning 
video . 
3 . 31 1 . 104 
Average 3 . 43 1 . 07 
A total of 9 items were used to measure the students ’ attitudes on learning through 
mobile devices versus PC , Table 1 shows the summary of findings . The results 
showed average ratings of 3 . 43 on a five point Likert scale and all items were higher 
than the average . The results indicated that students would prefer using mobile devices for discussing assignments with classmates . The average mean of this item was the 
highest score 3 . 75 out of 5 . Regarding the students ’ attitudes on using institute ’ s mobile apps , 58% of students agreed or strongly agreed that instructors can design more 
learning activities through mobile apps . 64% of students agreed or strongly agreed 
that our institute should develop more mobile apps for them to enhance their learning , 
details as shown in Table 2 . Furthermore , it is found that 9 items related to “ students ’ 
attitudes on learning through mobile devices versus PC ” and 2 items related to “ students ’ attitudes on using institute ’ s mobile apps ” could be combined into one factor . 
The factor named “ M-learning attitude ” was formed . The Cronbach ’ s alpha of these 
items was 0 . 935 , as shown in Table 3 . These items were significantly related . 
Regarding the students ’ attitude of using institute ’ s mobile apps , 74% of students 
reflected that they were willing to use our institute ’ s mobile apps for reading and 
learning . This finding echoes the research results from [ 6 ]  . 
Table 2 . Students ’ attitudes on using institute ’ s mobile apps 
Questions Strongly 
agree 
Agree Fair Disagree Strongly 
disagree 
1 . wish instructors can design more learning activitie
sing mobile apps . 
17% 41% 30% 9% 3% 
2 . wish our institute can develop more mobile apps 
or us to enhance learning . 
23% 41% 29% 4% 3% 
Investigating Acceptance Towards Mobile Learning in Higher Education Students 15 
Table 3 . The Cronbach ’ s alpha of the 11 items related to students ’ attitude towards social 
networking for learning 
Cronbach ' s Alpha 
Cronbach ' s Alpha 
Based on Standardized Items No of Items 
. 935 . 935 11
Table 4 . The correlation among the items related to students ’ spending time on mobile devices 
and perceptions 
Spending time 
on Internet using 
mobile devices 
Spending Time 
on learning 
using mobile 
devices 
Enhance learning effectively 
Spending time on Internet 
using mobile devices 
Pearson Correlation 1 . 006 . 241 * 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 963 . 049 
N 68 68 67 
Spending Time on learning 
using mobile devices 
Pearson Correlation . 006 1 . 325 *  * 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 963 . 007 
N 68 68 67 
Enhance learning effectively Pearson Correlation . 241 *  . 325 *  * 1 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 049 . 007 
N 67 67 67 
*  . Correlation is significant at the 0 . 05 level ( 2-tailed )  .  
*  *  . Correlation is significant at the 0 . 01 level ( 2-tailed )  . 
5 Discussion 
This study provided a useful view of what students are currently doing and of what 
they can do with mobile devices regarding learning . It has provided valuable insights 
for the mobile learning . The results of the survey indicate that the majority of the 
students perfered using mobile devices to conduct learning activities . It is 
hypothesized that students would benefit from the mobile learning . 
For the general experiences of students on using the mobile devices versus desktop 
computers , the finding seems confirm the trend that people used more mobile devices 
than PC to access the Internet daily . In contrast with PC , students prefer using mobile 
devices to perform more activities , including academic activities . The reasons why 
students like using mobile technology as a learning tool may be simply their habits or 
daily usual rituals . We may conclude that mobile devices become necessities for our 
daily life and people are willing to spend more time there . We can forecast that mobile learning will play a dominant role in e-Learning in the near future . 
16 K . Wong et al . 
For the second research question , the findings may indicate that students generally 
have positive views towards the use of mobile devices for learning , particularly that 
accessing information conveniently ( 38% of students agreed and 49% of students 
strongly agreed ) as well as enhancing learning effectively ( 42% of students agreed 
and 26% of students strongly agreed )  . Moreover , the items “ mobile devices can 
effectively enhance learning ”  ,  “ students spending time on learning through mobile 
devices ” and “ students spending time on the Internet through mobile devices ” are 
significantly correlated , as shown in Table 4 . It seems that those respondents who 
are frequently using mobile devices will be more eager to use mobile technologies as 
their learning tool . 
For the third research question , the findings may reflect that students generally 
have positive attitudes towards the use of mobile devices for learning . On the other 
hand , we further analyzed the items “ Spending time on Internet using mobile ”  ,  “ Enhance learning effectively ” and “ M-learning attitude ”  . The results show that they are 
significantly correlated , as shown in Table 5 . These findings also demonstrated that 
students have positive views towards mobile learning and they may also have positive 
attitudes . 
Table 5 . The correlation among the items related to students ’ spending time on mobile devices , 
perceptions and attitudes 
Enhance learning effectively 
Spending time 
on Internet 
using mobile 
M-learning attitude 
Enhance learning effectively Pearson Correlation 1 . 617 *  *  . 519 *  * 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 000 . 000 
N 67 67 67 
Spending time on Internet 
using mobile 
Pearson Correlation . 617 *  * 1 . 485 *  * 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 000 . 000 
N 67 67 67 
M-learning attitude Pearson Correlation . 519 *  *  . 485 *  * 1 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 000 . 000
N 67 67 67 
*  *  . Correlation is significant at the 0 . 01 level ( 2-tailed )  . 
However , in terms of academic performance , no significant relations were demonstrated between the students with positive attitudes and their academic performance . 
We analyze the items related to students ’ attitudes towards mobile learning and examination results of English and Mathematics in the last semester . The results indicate that Mathematics and English examination results are significantly correlated ; 
however , there are no significantly correlations between the examination results and 
students ’ attitudes , as shown in Table 6 . It may be due to the lack of academic 
activities designed for mobile learning . However , students are eager to wish that our 
Investigating Acceptance Towards Mobile Learning in Higher Education Students 17 
instructors can design more learning activities through mobile apps . They also hope 
that the institute develops more mobile apps for them to enhance learning . For this 
reason , we have developed our own Mobile Native App for language learning . The 
mobile app allows end users to download and access learning materials anywhere and 
anytime , so that language learning is no longer constrained by the limited time and 
space . In the preliminary results , students reported that the mobile app could help 
them review their understanding and concepts of particular subjects . The app system 
is user-friendly and efficiently [ 8 ]  . It is hypothesized that the students ’ acceptance 
towards on mobile learning is increasing . 
Table 6 . No significantly correlations found in students ‘ attitude and their academic performance 
M-learning 
attitude 
Mathematics 
Examination 
Results 
English 
Examination 
Results 
M-learning attitude Pearson Correlation 1 - . 153 - . 044 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 217 . 728 
N 67 67 65 
Mathematics Examination Results 
Pearson Correlation - . 153 1 . 374 *  * 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 217 . 002 
N 67 67 65 
English Examination 
Results 
Pearson Correlation - . 044 . 374 *  * 1 
Sig .  ( 2-tailed )  . 728 . 002 
N 65 65 66 
*  *  . Correlation is significant at the 0 . 01 level ( 2-tailed )  . 
Although findings have indicated that students are likely to use mobile devices to 
perform academic activities , this study still has some limitations . Firstly , the participant size was small that only 68 students participated in this study . Secondly , the 
respondents were limited to students in sub-degree programme . As most of them 
intended to pursue a higher diploma or even degree programme in the near future , 
tracing their further learning path would better reflect the effectiveness of mobile 
learning . Thirdly , as all the samples were drawn from a self-financing post-secondary 
institute in Hong Kong , it would be doubtful whether it was a fair picture for other 
students in other institutes in Hong Kong . In this way , conducting another study with 
students coming from other institutes in Hong Kong would be highly recommended . 
Finally , the findings would be more convincing and reliable if the study could include 
an empirical practice in mobile learning . 
6 Conclusion 
This study has demonstrated that the mobile learning may be effective on enhancing 
students´ learning in terms of students´ experiences and perception . The significance 
of the research lies in three ways . Firstly , the study has confirmed that students gener-
18 K . Wong et al . 
ally use mobile devices which are becoming necessities on daily life . Secondly , the 
finding has indicated that students ’ perceptions are towards mobile learning . Thirdly , 
students ’ attitudes are also positive towards on mobile learning . 
The finding of this study suggests that mobile technologies have the potential to 
provide new learning experiences . In this study , students felt that mobile devices will 
have great potential to replace desktop computers on conducting learning . Other researchers [ 9 ]  [ 10 ]  [ 11 ] have reported positive reactions of students on using mobile 
devices for language learning because of the portability and perceived convenience . 
However , there are also some limitations ; for example , students might have limited 
access to mobile devices due to device and service costs . Some students may frustrate 
with new technology when using it as a learning tool . Moreover , small screen size of 
mobile phones may limit the mobile content presented . 
The Mobile technologies are perceived as an effective tool in improving communication and learning [ 12 ]  . As more students make use of mobile learning , they become 
more comfortable with using mobile devices for learning . We can see empowerments 
in adopting new technology in their study . Educators should be more likely to use 
mobile devices for pedagogical purposes in their future classes . Finally , mobile 
learning is certainly an interesting approach in learning . The world of learning will 
become more mobile , more flexible and more exciting . The mobile learning age is 
approaching . 
References 
1 . CNNMoney ,  
mobile-apps-Internet / 
2 . Meurant , R . C .  : iPad Tablet Computing to Foster Korean EFL Digital Literacy . International Journal of u- and e-Service , Science and Technology 3 ( 4 )  , 49–62 ( 2002 ) 
3 . Hashemi , M .  , Azizinezhad , M .  , Najafi , V .  , Nesari , A . J .  : What is Mobile Learning ? Challenges and Capabilities , Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 30 ( 2011 )  , 2477–2481 
( 2011 ) 
4 . Johnson , L .  , Adams , S .  , Cummins , M .  : NMC horizon report : 2012 K-12 edition . The New 
Media Consortium , Austin ( 2012 ) 
5 . Gikas , J .  , Grant , M . M .  : Mobile computing devices in higher education : Student perspectives on learning with cellphones , smartphones & social media . The Internet and Higher 
Education 19 , 18–26 ( 2013 ) 
6 . ECAR : ECAR Study of Undergraduate Students and Information Technology ( 2012 )  ,  

7 . Simkova , M .  , Tomaskova , H .  , Nemcova , Z .  : Mobile Education in Tools . Procedia - Social 
and Behavioral Sciences 47 ( 2012 )  , 10–13 ( 2012 ) 
8 . Wong , K .  , Ho , W . S .  , Kwan , R .  , Wang , F . L .  , Leung , K .  , Cheung , I .  : The design and 
implementation of a mobile app for language learning . In : Proceedings of the Inaugural 
International Conference on Open and Flexible Education ( 2014 ) 
9 . Cavus , N .  , Ibrahim , D .  : m-Learning : An experiment in using SMS to support learning new 
English language words . British Journal of Educational Technology 40 ( 1 )  , 78–91 ( 2009 ) 
10 . Lu , M .  : Effectiveness of vocabulary learning via mobile phone . Journal of Computer 
Assisted Learning 24 , 515–525 ( 2008 )  
Investigating Acceptance Towards Mobile Learning in Higher Education Students 19 
11 . Stockwell , G .  : Vocabulary on the move : Investigating an intelligent mobile phone-based 
vocabulary tutor . Computer Assisted Language Learning 20 ( 4 )  , 365–383 ( 2007 ) 
12 . Al-Fahad , F . N .  : Students ’ attitudes and perceptions towards the effectiveness of mobile 
learning in King Saud University , Saudi Arabi . The Turkish Online Journal of Educational 
Technology 8 ( 2 )  , 111–119 ( 2009 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 20–32 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
An Adaptive Mobile Learning Application for Beginners 
to Learn Fundamental Japanese Language 
S . C . Ng , Andrew K . Lui , and Y . K . Wong 
The Open University of Hong Kong 
30 Good Shepherd Street , Ho Man Tin , Kowloon , Hong Kong SAR , China 
scng @ ouhk . edu . hk 
Abstract . It is difficult for beginners to learn Japanese by self-learning because 
there is no teacher can give any guidance and feedback to them for 
improvement . Besides , most of the beginners may not have any basic 
knowledge of Japanese language , for example , Japanese alphabets or 
phonology , they don ’ t have any idea how to get start with and what should be 
learnt at the beginning . This paper introduces an Android mobile application for 
the beginners to acquire fundamental knowledge of Japanese language so as to 
gain the self-learning proficiency in Japanese . This application provides 
learning materials , auto-generated exercises , handwriting practice tool , voice 
recording and recognition tool for beginners to learn Japanese . Besides , this 
application proposes an adaptive learning system to users , which aims to 
provide different supplementary exercises or learning approaches to learner 
based on the current performance of an individual learner . 
Keywords : mobile learning application , Android apps , learning Japanese 
Language . 
1 Introduction 
Although many people want to learn Japanese by self-learning , many of them have no 
idea how to get started to learn Japanese because there is no teacher to direct them 
what kind of topics should be studied or how to study during self-learning . Besides , 
most of the beginners do not have any fundamental Japanese language knowledge , 
like Japanese alphabets or phonology . Without learning the basic Japanese language 
knowledge , beginners may not be able to learn further difficult Japanese topics because they do not have the self-learning proficiency in Japanese yet . 
Another serious problem beginners may encounter in their self-learning process is 
that no one can provide suitable comments or teach them how to improve even if 
learners have done some exercises , practiced speaking or written Japanese . 
Comparing with using textbook or computers to learn Japanese , mobile learning is 
a better choice . Mobile learning is a kind of e-learning which learns with mobile devices [ 1 ]  . It increases the ubiquity and accessibility of e-learning [ 2 ] since most of the 
mobile devices , like smart phone or tablet , are wireless and much more portable than 
desktop and laptop computers . Learners can acquire knowledge ubiquitously via mo- 
An Adaptive Mobile Learning Application for Beginners 21 
bile devices anywhere , anytime with mobile learning [ 3 ]  . Learning Japanese not only 
involves reading materials but also involves listening , speaking and writing . Mobile 
applications can provide interactive activities with using multimedia , like animation 
or audio , for learner to leaner Japanese in different aspects interactively . 
Besides , adaptive mobile learning can be applied in the self-learning process . It 
adjusts the learning process depending on the learning performance of individual 
learners by providing different learning materials , exercises or learning approaches in 
order to create an individual learning style for each learner [ 4 ]  ,  [ 5 ]  . With adaptive 
mobile learning , learners can have a virtual teacher who gives them feedbacks or 
assign suitable exercises to learners just like what a real teacher does . 
2 Current Applications for Learning Japanese 
In the current app markets , there are many apps for learning Japanese . However , most 
of the apps are not suitable for beginners to learn fundamental Japanese topics for 
several reasons : 
• Lack of teaching sessions , only focus on exercising 
• Lack of adaptive learning element 
• Lack of assessment to measure the learning performance of learners 
• Syllabus is not all-rounded . For example , only vocabulary or Japanese character is 
taught in an applications 
• Some applications are exam-oriented , e . g . Japanese-Language Proficiency Test 
• Lacks of explanation of the learning material 
• The target of the applications is not beginners 
• Purpose of some applications is mainly for travelling but not learning 
 “ Learning Japanese Tool ”  [ 6 ] is a pretty good and nearly all-rounded mobile application for learning Japanese . It contains learning tools for learning Japanese alphabet , 
vocabulary and exercises . However , the application does not have any learning materials and adaptive learning system . It may be difficult for beginners who have never 
learnt Japanese to use . 
Other than learning syllabus and materials , learning tools are also very important 
for learning Japanese insides a mobile application . For example , many mobile applications for learning Japanese have handwriting practicing tools for learners to learn or 
practice writing Japanese characters . The mobile application “ Japanese Kana by 
Hand ”  [ 7 ] is one of an example . However , it only recognizes the handwriting of users 
but not teaching them how to write . Even if learners write the character in a wrong 
way , the tool still can recognize the handwriting without telling learners whether it is 
correct or not . Some applications , like the app “ Japanese Hiragana Handwriting ”  [ 8 ]  , 
do not have any recognition or checking function . It simply allows learners to follow 
the mold to write Japanese characters , just like writing on a copybook . 
22 S . C . Ng , A . K . Lui , and Y . K . Wong 
Therefore , this paper introduces an adaptive mobile learning application for beginners to acquire basic knowledge of Japanese language in order to gain the 
self-learning proficiency in Japanese . This application aims to assist learners to learn 
fundamental Japanese language topics , such as Japanese alphabet , phonology and 
simple vocabulary with providing learning materials , auto-generated exercises , learning tools with recognition function , adaptive learning system and assessment system 
to learners . 
3 Implementation of the Application 
The mobile application is called “ Hello Japanese ” and it is developed in the Android 
operating system for touch screen mobile devices . According to Fig . 1 , there are 6 
mains components in the application , which are learning materials , exercises , practicing tools , adaptive learning system , assessment system and learning log book . 
Fig . 1 . The System architecture of the Hello Japanese application 
Fig . 3 is the main menu page of the Hello Japanese application . The 6 main components are arranged into 5 main use cases to show in the main menu page of the application . The 5 main use cases are studying learning material , doing exercise , using 
practicing tools , checking learning performance and checking learning process . 
Fig . 4 below describes the suggested flow of using Hello Japanese application . At 
the beginning , users need to take a lesson first . After finishing a unit of learning material , users can do the related general exercise to practice what they have learnt . 
When the exercise is done , users can check their performance to see how well they 
did . If the performance is not good , user will get some learning advices from the system and they will be asked to do supplementary exercise which contains questions 
that users did poorly in order to strengthen users ’ weak points . At the same time , users 
can check their learning process , practice handwriting and pronunciation or enquire 
the pronunciation of some Japanese words or sentences . Finally , users will start a new 
lesson to learn new things .  
An Adaptive Mobile Learning Application for Beginners 23 
Fig . 2 . The first page of the Hello Japanese 
application 
Fig . 3 . The main menu page of the Hello 
Japanese application 
Fig . 4 . Activity diagram of the flow of using Hello Japanese application 
3 . 1 Learning Materials 
Learning materials of fundamental Japanese language topics are provided to learners . 
Introduction of Japanese , Japanese alphabets , phonology and vocabulary are the key 
topics which the learning materials cover . The learning materials are in the form of 
e-book with multimedia , such as text or audio . For example , audio is used to teach the 
pronunciation of words . 
24 S . C . Ng , A . K . Lui , and Y . K . Wong 
3 . 2 Exercises 
According to the content of the learning materials , exercises of related topic are provided to learners in order to review what they have learnt . There are three kinds of 
exercises in the application : kana , vocabulary and listening . 
Exercise Generating System
In order to make the exercises more challenging so as to attract users to do it again , an 
exercise generating system is created to generate different questions for exercises 
every time . Even if the user does the same exercise for several times , the questions in 
the exercise will be different from time to time . 
Fig . 5 below shows how the exercise generating system generates different questions for an exercise . For each exercise , it contains several kinds of questions . Each 
kind of questions is generated by its own question generator randomly . The information of the kinds of questions in each exercise is stored in the Android SQLite database . 
When a user requests to do an exercise , like adjective exercise , the exercise generating system will read the exercise data in the database to see which several kinds of 
questions the exercise contains . As each kind of question type has its own question 
generator to generate that specify kind of question , the system will call the relevant 
question generators to generate the kinds of question the exercise want . All the data of 
the questions are stored in the SQLite database . The question generator will read the 
relevant data to generate a set of question randomly and return it in a list . The system 
will group all the questions which are returned from different question generators 
together to form an exercise . There are at most ten questions in an exercise . 
Fig . 5 . Diagram of how the exercise generating system generates exercises 
An Adaptive Mobile Learning Application for Beginners 25 
Questions Insides the Exercises
Kana and vocabulary exercises are in the form of multiple choice questions . For example , choose the correct pronunciation of the character or choose the correct meaning of the word . 
To generate random multiple choice questions , the question generator first reads 
the related question data in the SQLite database . Then , it selects one question randomly . To make the exercise more challenging , the options of the multiple choice questions will also be generated randomly based on the correct answer of the question in 
one of the following two ways : 
1 . Generate Similar Wrong Options Based on Modifying the Correct Answer 
The correct answer of the question will be modified in the following ways to form the 
wrong optional answers : 
1 . Swap two positions of characters inside a word 
2 . Change one of the characters of a word 
3 . Delete one of the characters of a word 
Fig . 6 . Generate similar wrong options based on modifying the correct answer 
2 . Generate Options by Directly Selecting from Database Randomly 
For listening exercises , each question is associated with an audio recording . Learners 
need to listen to the recording and input the answer according to the recording . All the 
listening questions are also auto-generated . The corresponding question generator will 
generate a string as the question , for example ,  “ two thousand and three ”  . An external 
function Google text to speech [ 9 ] is applied . The question string generated by question generator will be sent to the Google text to speech for retrieving an audio recording . Learners can listen to that audio recording and answer the question . 
26 S . C . Ng , A . K . Lui , and Y . K . Wong 
Fig . 7 . Generate multiple choice question options by directly selecting from database randomly 
3 . 3 Practicing Tools 
There are three kinds of practicing tools to assist the learners to learn Japanese in the 
application , including fifty sounds table , vocabulary list and Japanese pronunciation 
enquiring tool . 
Fifty Sounds Table with Handwriting Practicing Tool 
The fifty sounds table is a 5×10 table for learners to learn Japanese alphabets and its 
pronunciation . The table orders the Japanese characters according to their sounds and 
type . There are two modes for users to select in the table , the pronunciation mode and 
handwriting practicing mode . If pronunciation mode is selected , users can hear the 
pronunciation of the Japanese character they selected when they click on a character 
of the table . If handwriting practicing mode is selected , users can use the handwriting 
practicing tool to practice handwriting of the selected character . Users can switch the 
mode by clicking the “ 寫 ” button . 
Fig . 8 . Usage of different configuration buttons of the fifty sounds table 
An Adaptive Mobile Learning Application for Beginners 27 
Handwriting Practicing Tool with Recognition Function 
The handwriting practicing tool allows learners to practice writing different Japanese 
characters . A writing box will appear with a mold which displays the strokes of the 
character . Learners need to follow the mold to write the character . After finishing 
writing , the tool will check if learner write the character correctly . 
To be able to do the recognition and checking on the user written character , some 
data of the characters must be collected first , including the following things : 
1 . Number of strokes in a character 
2 . The stroke order of the character 
3 . The starting point and ending point of each stroke 
4 . The turning points in the middle part of each stroke 
Fig . 9 . Data collection points of a Japanese character 
In Fig . 9 , the number indicates the stroke order of the character and the character 
 “ あ ” has totally 3 strokes . The circles are the starting point and ending point of each 
stroke which are needed to be collected . The “ X ” marks are the turning points in the 
middle part of each stroke . 
When users touches the touch screen , moves and finally puts up their finger , it is 
considered as inputting a stroke . The tool will save a stroke immediately after the user 
has inputted so that the input order of strokes of the character can be reserved . Saving 
a stroke includes saving its starting point , ending point and multiple middle points . A 
stroke will be saved in a stroke class and a character class contains one or more stroke 
objects . After user inputting all the strokes and click the finished button , the checking 
will be started . 
The tool will check three things of a user written character to determine whether 
the inputted character is written correctly : 
1 . Number of stroke user has inputted 
2 . The writing direction of each stroke 
3 . The writing position of each stroke 
If the user written strokes are correct , the strokes will become green . Otherwise , 
the strokes will become red to indicate that the strokes are written wrongly . 
28 S . C . Ng , A . K . Lui , and Y . K . Wong 
Fig . 12 is an activity diagram that shows how the tool determines if a character is 
written correctly . First , the tool will compare the number of stroke user has inputted 
with the correct one . If the number of inputted stroke is correct , the checking can be 
progressed to the next stage . Otherwise , the stroke will be considered as wrong . 
Next stage is to check each stroke one by one . The writing direction of each stroke 
will be checked first . It can be checked by comparing the ( x , y ) coordinate of the 
starting point and the ending point of the user written stroke with the correct stroke . If 
one of these two points is not matched with the correct stroke , the stroke will be considered as wrong . 
Fig . 10 . Write a stroke with wrong direction 
The writing position or shape of each stroke can be checked by comparing the ( x , 
y ) coordinate of multiple middle points of the user written stroke with the correct 
stroke . The correct stroke has a list which contains some ( x , y ) coordinates of the key 
turning points of the stroke . If the user written stroke has points which match those 
key turning points of the correct stroke , the stroke will consider as correct . Otherwise , 
the stroke will be considered as wrong . 
Fig . 11 . The shape of the stroke is wrong 
Checking of the points by comparing two ( x , y ) coordinates directly is not accurate 
as it is impossible for the users to write all the strokes of the character in the exact 
correct positions of the mold . Users may write the strokes out of the border of the 
An Adaptive Mobile Learning Application for Beginners 29 
mold but they do write the character correctly . Therefore , the ( x , y ) coordinate of the 
correct position will add and subtract a threshold value to create the threshold for 
comparing with the position of the user inputted stroke . For example , if the correct 
starting point of a stroke is ( 120 , 450 ) and the threshold value is 50 , the valid area for 
the user to write the starting point of the stroke is ( 70-170 , 400-500 )  . 
Fig . 12 . Activity diagram of how to determine if a character is written correctly 
3 . 4 Assessment System 
The assessment system assesses the performance of exercises that the users have 
done . With the help of question generator of the exercise generating system , different 
types of questions will be generated for exercises . After the users have answered the 
questions , the answers will be checked if they are correct . Then , the assessment system will store the result into the SQLite database , which will be used for evaluating 
users ’ learning performance later . 
All exercises are defined into different types , like vocabulary , listening or kana . 
The system stores the result of the exercises with their type . When learners want to 
check their performance , the system will show the result of different kinds of exercise 
30 S . C . Ng , A . K . Lui , and Y . K . Wong 
they have done and generate suitable comments and advices to tell learners how to 
improve . 
3 . 5 Adaptive Learning System 
The adaptive learning system personalizes the learning process for individual learners . 
The system starts with checking the performance of exercises which learners have 
done by retrieving data from the SQLite database through the assessment system . It 
will calculate the mark of each exercise and check frequency of doing the exercise . If 
there is an exercise which learner has done it for several times but still could not get a 
good result , the system will analysis the performance of each question type in that 
exercise . 
As the assessment system has recorded the performance of each question type 
inside an exercise independently , the adaptive system can spot out what kind of 
question type learner is poor at . Then , the adaptive learning system can provide information for question generator to generate supplementary exercises to learners with 
suitable type of questions according to the weakness of learners . The information of 
the supplementary exercise generated by the adaptive learning system will be stored 
in the database . When learners visit the exercise page , the system will notify the 
learner that the supplementary exercise is ready for them . Learners can strengthen 
their weak points by doing the supplementary exercise . 
Fig . 13 . Dialog box notifies learner for 
supplementary exercise 
Fig . 14 . Supplementary exercise in the 
exercise menu 
4 Evaluation 
To evaluate whether the learners can acquire the knowledge of fundamental Japanese 
topics and be able to read , write , speak and listen some basic Japanese after using this 
application , fifteen people were invited to use Hello Japanese application for a week . 
They are required to learn the twenty Japanese characters using the application in a 
week . After finishing learning , they were requested to take a test to see if they can 
An Adaptive Mobile Learning Application for Beginners 31 
acquire basic knowledge of Japanese . Besides , a questionnaire was designed to obtain 
comments and feedbacks from interviewees . 83% of the interviewees have never 
learnt Japanese before using this application and 13% of interviewees have learnt 
Japanese at an elementary level . 
Fig . 15 . Mark distribution of the Japanese Test 
According to Fig . 15 , 63% of the learner got 80-100 marks and 37% of the learner 
got 60-79 marks in the Japanese test after using the application . No one got fail in the 
test , which was a very outstanding result . 
Fig . 16 . Achievement in reading , writing , listening and speaking simple Japanese 
For the questionnaire part , it asked whether the learners can read , write , listen and 
speak simple Japanese after using the application . From Fig . 16 , over 60% of learners 
agreed or strongly agreed that they can read , write , listen and speak simple Japanese 
after using the application and no one chose disagree or strongly disagree option . 
32 S . C . Ng , A . K . Lui , and Y . K . Wong 
5 Conclusion 
An adaptive mobile learning application has been developed for beginners to learn 
fundamental Japanese language . It provides an all-in-one and adaptive learning experience to the learners . Learners can study learning materials , do exercises , use practicing tools to practice Japanese handwriting or pronunciation as well as check their 
learning performance and progress . 100% of the learners who had used the application agree that using “ Hello Japanese ” was effective in learning Japanese . Over 60% 
of them agreed or strongly agreed that they can read , write , listen and speak simple 
Japanese after using the application . Many learners commented that the hand-writing 
practicing tool of the fifty sounds table was the most attractive feature in the application . More interactive elements should be brought into the application in the future . 
For example , the voice recognition can be added to check the pronunciation of learners or more multimedia can be added into the learning materials . 
References 
1 . Houser , C .  , Thornton , P .  , Kluge , D .  : Mobile Learning : Cell Phones and PDAs for Education . In : International Conference on Computers in Education , pp . 1149–1150 ( 2002 ) 
2 . Hockly , N .  : Mobile learning . Elt Journal 67 ( 1 )  , 80–84 ( 2013 ) 
3 . Zimmermann , M .  : Adaption of multimedia E-Learning services to mobile environments . In : 
2011 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference , pp . 671–678 ( 2011 ) 
4 . Abouelfetouhs , A .  , El-bakry , H . M .  : A Novel Adaptive Mobile E-Learning Model . International Journal of Computer Applications 63 ( 14 )  , 12–25 ( 2013 ) 
5 . Jones , V .  , Jo , J . H .  : Ubiquitous learning environment : An adaptive teaching system using 
ubiquitous technology . In : Beyond the Comfort zone : Proceedings of the 21st ASCILITE 
Conference ( 2004 ) 
6 . Learning Japanese Tool - Google Play Store ,  
apps / details ? id = com . sage . ljp
7 . Japanese Kana by Hand - Google Play Store ,  
apps / details ? id = se . tokotoko . android . kanabyhand
8 . Japanese Hiragana Handwriting - Google Play Store ,  
store / apps / details ? id = com . teachersparadise . japanesealphabethi
raganahandwriting & hl = zh_TW
9 . Google Text to Speech ,  
tts ? tl = ja & q
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 33–44 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
A Mobile Application for Preparing 
the Driving Tests in Hong Kong 
S . C . Ng , Andrew K . F . Lui , and S . W . Ng 
The Open University of Hong Kong 
scng @ ouhk . edu . hk 
Abstract . This paper presents an educational mobile application in Android 
platform called “ HK driving tests All-In-One ” to help young private automatic 
car learners prepare for driving tests in Hong Kong . Car learners who are going 
to take the driving tests may do revision at anytime and anywhere provided that 
they have an Android device on hand . They can learn in an interesting way and 
understand the driving techniques more easily with notes , mock tests , animations and games . It will also help in reducing dangerous driving and promoting 
proper driving skills . The results indicated that developing a mobile application 
to prepare driving tests in Hong Kong is useful and helpful . 
Keywords : mobile learning , driving tests in Hong Kong , Android apps , educational mobile application . 
1 Introduction 
It is difficult for people who are going to take driving tests in Hong Kong to revise the 
driving skills and theories themselves because most of the driving schools will not 
provide many materials or notes although learners have paid ten thousand or more for 
about fifteen driving lessons . 
This paper presents an educational mobile application on the Android platform for 
preparing both the driving theory test and road test in Hong Kong . It provides guidebooks , mock tests , animations and virtual driving games to help users , especially 
young private automatic car learners who are going to take the driving tests , to do 
revision and pass the driving tests in Hong Kong easily . 
1 . 1 Impact and Value of this Mobile Application 
Car learners who are going to take the driving tests in Hong Kong may practice and 
revise the main points of driving anywhere at any time provided that they have a mobile device in their hands . They can have most of the driving materials in one application without bringing a lot of notes or heavy books . Also , those materials inside the 
application would definitely clam them down and bring back the memory before taking the tests , thus having a better performance . 
34 S . C . Ng , A . K . F . Lui , and S . W . Ng 
Also , there are animations and virtual game-based driving practice for the road 
driving tests so the users can learn in an interesting way and understand the techniques more easily . Learners can experience driving a car with a first-person view and 
similar physical settings in real life to get familiar with driving a car . Those materials 
with graphics and games which contextualize the learning may help users to have a 
long term memory and a better performance in revision .  [ 1-2 ] 
It is free of charge so everyone who is interested in driving may know more about 
driving in Hong Kong and pre-learners can understand some basic driving concepts 
before learning driving without paying . Therefore , this application does not only help 
learners to pass the driving tests , but also helps in increasing road safety and reducing 
dangerous driving . 
1 . 2 Hong Kong Driving Tests 
There are three parts of the tests which are written test ( Part A )  , Competence test 
( Part B ) and the on-the-road test ( Part C )  . The learners have to pass the written test 
before learning to drive and the two driving test parts can be tested separately or combined to test at the same time . 
In the written test , candidates have to answer twenty multiple-choice questions 
about driving theories in twenty minutes . Competence test is the basic driving and 
parking techniques test including parking the car , making a U-turn on a narrow road 
and stop on the steep road . Candidates will be asked to drive for around twenty minutes on the real road in the city in the on-the-road test ( Part C ) where their driving 
skills and responses in real situation can be tested . 
1 . 3 Review of Existing Solutions 
There are about five driving applications for Hong Kong driving theory test and two 
are listed to compare with the other two applications from the United Kingdom and 
Mainland China respectively [ 3-6 ]  . Table 1 below compares those applications which 
have been downloaded more than 10 , 000 times in Google play store . It shows that all 
the applications focus on the driving theory part only by providing practice and mock 
test but there is no handbook for users to study the theories before doing exercise or 
mock test . There is no application that provides lessons on the road test part . 
Table 1 . Comparison of Existing Applications 
Function \ App Driving Theory 
Test ( UK )  [ 3 ] 
HK Driving Written 
Mock Exam [ 4 ] 
Hong Kong 
Driving Test [ 5 ] 
考駕照 [ 6 ] 
1 . Theory Handbook ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
2 . Theory Test practice ✔ ✘ ✔ ✔
3 . Theory Mock Test ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
4 . Driving animation ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
5 . Virtual driving test ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
6 . Game ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
7 . Language used English Traditional Chinese Traditional 
Chinese 
Simplified 
Chinese 
A Mobile Application for Preparing the Driving Tests in Hong Kong 35 
2 Methodology 
The application platform will be Android OS which is written in the Java language 
with Eclipse . Android OS is preferred because it is an open-source mobile phone 
operating system where its application market is popular and has less restriction so it 
is easier for beginners to develop mobile applications [ 7-8 ]  . 
A game engine called Unity will be used to develop all the animations and games 
contained in the application . JavaScript and C +  + language are used for coding and the 
libraries of Unity are widely used to get the best quality of the graphics and object 
design . Most of the animations and games are drawn in 3D if possible [ 9 ]  . 
For the simple 2D graphics in the application , Adobe Photoshop or some simple 
graphics applications such as Paint are used . All of the graphics will be designed and 
drawn by myself , except some special logos which have been permitted [ 10 ]  . 
All the questions , answers , theories and other text-based contents inside the application are mostly stored in a rational database using a popular free relational database 
management system called SQLite because it is a reliable embedded database which 
is fast , powerful and simple to use [ 11 ]  . 
2 . 1 Design of the Application 
There are two main sections in the application which are the theory test and road test . 
The overview of the application is shown in Fig . 1 . 
Fig . 1 . Overview of the application 
Fig . 1 shows the structure of the application . In the theory test section , there are 
three parts including a theory handbook , theory test practice and theory mock test . 
There are driving guidebooks with animations , driving step test and virtual road test 
games inside the road test section . 
All materials in the application are sorted by topics so users can follow the flow to 
revise step by step . Also , the format of the mock tests is similar to the real driving 
tests so users can get familiar with it . 
36 S . C . Ng , A . K . F . Lui , 
3 Implementation
The starting page of the mo
menu which is entered by c
page . 
Fig . 2 . Starting page of th
3 . 1 Theory Test Part 
In theory test section , there
practice and theory mock te
3 . 1 . 1 Theory Handbook 
The handbook shows all th
Sliding layout is used to ha
of the handbook will be dis
Users can turn the page by 
the top right corner in the a
ranged into essential notes
Also , fewer activities will b
the performance of the appl
3 . 1 . 2 Theory Test Practi
There are practices for the t
slider with FrameLayout . Q
randomly chosen from the 
, and S . W . Ng 
n
obile application is shown in Fig . 2 . Fig . 3 shows the m
clicking the rotating red car in the animation on the start
he application Fig . 3 . Main menu of the application 
e are three parts including a theory handbook , theory 
est . 
he theories from the Road Users ’ Code sorted by top
ave a multi-plane layout on top of the UI and each chap
played in a slider which is designed to look like an e-bo
swiping the slider to left or right or clicking the button
action menu bar . The content will be interpreted and re
s so learners can study the theories easily and efficien
be created so the structure of the program will be clear 
lication will be improved [ 12-14 ]  . 
ce 
theory test sorted by topics without time limit using scr
Questions on the topic selected will be displayed in a sli
database . There are three options in each multiple cho
main 
ting 
test
pics . 
pter 
ook . 
n on 
earntly . 
and 
reen 
ider 
oice 
A Mobile Ap
question and the options w
morizing the correct optio
choosing and submit the o
answer from the database . 
question like the one in Fig
wrong . Fig . 5 shows the fin
users may revise the topic 
practices of the same topic
closing the slider . The prac
to know which topic should
Fig . 4 . Answer correctly in 
the Theory Practice 
3 . 1 . 3 Theory Mock Test 
The theory mock test can h
theory test or not . The form
answer twenty multiple-ch
started , the timer will start a
in Fig . 6 . The questions wi
options selected by the us
the question . If the user doe
marked as incorrect . 
During the test , all answ 
 “ Next ” buttons unless the a
answers will be shown afte
tions user selected which a
pplication for Preparing the Driving Tests in Hong Kong 
will also be randomly generated to prevent users from m
on instead of the answer . After answering a question
ption , the answer chosen will be compared to the corr
The result will then be shown right after answering e
g . 4 and the correct answer will be given if the answe
nal score after answering all the questions in that topic
if the score of the topic is low . Users may keep doing 
c until getting full mark or they may stop at any point
tices may help users to get used to the question format 
d be strengthened . 
Fig . 5 . Last Question in 
Theory Practice Slider 
Fig . 6 . Last Question in 
Mock Test
help learners to check if they are ready for the real writ
mat is the same as the real test where candidates have
hoice questions within twenty minutes . When the tes
and is always on the right hand side in blue which is sho
ll be randomly chosen from all topics in the database . T
ser will be saved into the database after user answer
es not select any option in a question , that question will
wers can be checked and modified by clicking “ Back ” 
answers are submitted or time is up . The result and corr
er the end of test by comparing the correct answer and 
are stored in the database . Users will pass the test if t
37 
men by 
rect 
each 
er is 
c so 
the 
t by 
and 
tten 
e to 
st is 
own 
The 
ring 
l be 
and 
rect 
opthey 
38 S . C . Ng , A . K . F . Lui , and S . W . Ng 
answered 16 or more questions ( out of 20 questions ) correctly and the user may check 
the solution after receiving the result . 
3 . 2 Road Test Part 
There are four parts in the road test section which are the driving guidebook , animation , driving steps test and virtual driving test . 
3 . 2 . 1 Driving Guidebook 
The driving guidebook is kind of a driving textbook with some basic driving techniques . There are some driving skills and techniques written in texts which stored in 
the resource file . The content of each topic is shown on pages with the use of screen 
slider similar to the theory handbook . Users can swipe the slider or click the “ Previous ” or “ Next ” button in the action menu bar to turn page . Learners can study the 
driving steps and skills to have pre-learning before driving a real car or practice in 
mind when there is no car for users to drive . Also , there will be some reminders and 
techniques of driving , such as some solutions in different situations , for users ’ references . 
3 . 2 . 2 Driving Steps Test 
After studying the driving guidebook , there are some mini game-based tests about the 
driving steps sorted by topic . The driving steps of the same topic will be stored in an 
arraylist in correct order . After selecting the test topic from menu and enter the test , 
there are buttons with different driving steps assigned randomly and users have to 
select the step buttons in the correct order . If correct step button is chosen , the text of 
driving step on the corresponding button will disappear ; else , nothing will happen . 
Fig . 7 shows a partially completed test . The timer will start at once the step button is 
clicked and the time used to finish the test will be shown after all the driving steps are 
selected correctly . All the driving steps will be reassigned randomly and the test will 
be reset if users clicked the restart button . The more the user study , the shorter the 
time may be used . 
3 . 2 . 3 Driving Animations 
For further demonstration , users can watch the driving animations to understand the 
driving skills shown in the guidebook more clearly which is especially helpful for 
those who have not driven before to have the fundamental images in mind . Those 
animations are recorded with Unity player which are the game scenes in the virtual 
driving tests . 
There are three animations including S-shape parking , L-shape parking and the onthe-road driving which are stored in the raw file in resource and one of them will be 
played in the video view after the user has selected it from the drop down menu like 
the one in Fig . 8 and Fig . 9 . The animations will show the correct driving steps 
A Mobile Ap
through the whole driving 
that the driver is doing so u
mations can be the demons
to do in the virtual road test
Fig . 7 . Half-completed 
Driving Steps Test 
3 . 2 . 4 Virtual Road Tests
Learners can take the virtu
have studied the guidebook
are the L-shape parking test
the game engine Unity . 
The car used in these tes
it is designed like a sport c
gether such as car engine , g
sories to decorate the interi
and speedometer board . Dif
driver view , rear mirrors vi
with specific angles of view
nent to handle user input , 
conditions . Finally , the phy
ing and artwork can be adde
There are two parts in th
parking test and on-the-roa
where the parking tests are
test is held in a city with tra
pplication for Preparing the Driving Tests in Hong Kong 
test and there are narrations in Chinese telling the acti
users can understand the driving steps easily . Also , the a
tration of the virtual road tests so the users can know w
ts with these instructions showing in animations . 
Fig . 8 . Driving Animation 
Dropdown Menu 
Fig . 9 . S-shape parking 
Animation
ual road tests after watching the animations to see if t
k well enough . There are three virtual driving tests wh
t , S-shape parking test and on-the-road test developed w
sts is not powerful with an automatic transmission althou
car . The car is created by putting different components
glasses , brake and indication lights . Then , adding the acc
ior of the car like the steering wheel , rear mirror and d
fferent cameras have to be used for different views like 
ew and map view so they have to put in different positi
w . A C-sharp ( C #  ) script will be written for each com
update the states and do different actions under spec
ysical settings of the car have to be adjusted and the pa
ed to make the car look better . 
he virtual road tests similar to the real tests , which are 
ad test . Therefore , the settings of the tests are not the sa
e held in a car park with parking lots and the on-the-r
affic lights , buildings and street light poles . However , th
39 
ions 
aniwhat 
they 
hich 
with 
ugh 
tocesdash 
the 
ions 
mpocific 
aintthe 
ame 
road 
heir 
40 S . C . Ng , A . K . F . Lui , and S . W . Ng 
environments are similar , for example , there is a sun on top with the same intensity 
and the texture of the roads is the same . Most of the components in the test environment are created by adding the object with deciding shape and size , and then put the 
textures designed with Photoshop on it and set its physical properties . Some common 
components can be added from the assets downloaded from the Unity Assets Store . 
The test scenes in all tests are designed as the first-person view which is the view 
of the driver and there are the major components of car which are required for driving 
such as the rear mirror , steering wheel and dash and speedometer board . The steering 
wheel is controlled by rotating the mobile device like turning the steering wheel and 
the brake is on the left half of screen and the gas input is on the right half of screen so 
users can use the thumbs to control the driving speed easily when holding the mobile 
device with two hands . 
On-the-Road Test
Users have to follow the driving steps to drive like having driving lessons or tests in 
real car with an instructor so there are instructions and warning given in form of both 
voice and text . During the test , users have to choose the actions in the correct order or 
do the right things in different situations . The scripts of each component will detect 
whether the user is doing correctly . For example , the left indicator light should be 
turned on before turning left by turning the steering wheel so there is a function in 
indicator light script to check if the correct indicator light is turned on when it received the turning angle from the function of the steering wheel script . 
Users will be asked to drive according to the instructor ’ s commands where the 
soundtracks will only be played once with text version shown in the scene when the 
car is detected in a specific position . 
When the mistakes that users have made are detected from all the component 
scripts , they will be sent to the result script and the records will be saved . Also , the 
warning voice message will be played like what the examiners or instructors do in the 
real world and there will be a text box on the scene showing the warning . There will 
be reminder when minor mistake is made where Fig . 10 shows as an example that 
users forget to turn off the indicator light . 
If there is any big serious mistake , such as car crash and driving speed over 
90km / h , the test will immediately stop and a special menu will show the serious mistake that the user has just made and users may choose to restart or exit the test from 
that menu . This mechanism is designed for preventing users misusing this application 
as a car racing game instead of an educational virtual driving practice . 
The marking scheme will be similar to the real one where the users will pass if 
there is no big mistake or there are no more than three minor mistakes . The result 
script collects all the mistakes detected by different component and integrates them to 
a clear mark sheet . The final mark sheet will be shown after finishing the test with 
showing the numbers of different mistakes have been made during the whole test and 
the result of passing the test or not . 
Users can get used to the driving test environment and format with a virtual examiner and driving scene . The warning and the final result can remind users to be 
A Mobile Application for Preparing the Driving Tests in Hong Kong 41 
careful of those mistakes they have made and can practice more on those aspects in 
real driving lessons . 
Fig . 10 . Examiner ’ s reminder in On-the-road test 
Parking Tests
There are two parking tests , L-shape and S-shape parking where Fig . 11 and Fig . 12 
show the overview of the car park , for users to choose as different style of parking 
will be tested in random in the real competence test where Different position of the 
parking lots need different way to park the car but the control of the car and driving 
skills are the same .  

Fig . 11 . S-shape parking test Fig . 12 . L-shape parking test 
The target car park lot is always on the left hand side of the users ’ car and users 
can make use of the three rear mirrors to help checking the parking position . 
The driving steps and the control of the car in this test are the same as the virtual onthe-road test where it is similar to the real driving . For example , the car cannot move 
backwards without gear R and the car should be parked with gear P where those are 
controlled in the car controller script . 
42 S . C . Ng , A . K . F . Lui , 
Similar to the virtual on
and the warning will be sh
any mistakes . If there is an
collision detection , the test 
After finishing parking , 
corner to get the test result 
era to the a top view which 
there is no big mistake and
of the parking lot detected b
Fig . 
4 Evaluation Resu
The purpose of the evaluat
whether it can help car lea
participants are invited to e
data including the results of
questionnaires and commen
but there is still room for im
4 . 1 Evaluation Data 
• 90% and 100% of the pa
Test and the Virtual ontion for five days . 
• The average score of the
tion is 4 . 2 out of 5 ( 84 / 10 
, and S . W . Ng 
n-the-road test , the warning voice message will be pla
own in a text box on the scene when the users have m
ny big serious mistake like crashing other car detected
will immediately end . 
users can click the “ Switch View ” button on the top ri
and see if the car is parked correctly by switching the ca
allows users to overlook the car . Users will pass the tes
d the car is parked inside the lot without touching the li
by the car tires where Fig . 13 shows as an example .  
. 13 . Passed in the L-shape parking test 
ults and Findings 
tion is to check the effectiveness of the mobile applicat
arners to prepare the driving tests in Hong Kong . Twe
valuate the application . There are three kinds of evaluat
f tests in the application done by the participants , data fr
nts from interview . The overall results tend to be posit
mprovement . 
articipants in ( Group A ) get a better result in Theory M
-the-road Test respectively after revision with the appli
e ability on helping in preparing driving test of this appli
00 )  . 
ayed 
made 
d by 
ight 
amst if 
ines 
tion 
enty 
tion 
rom 
tive 
ock 
icaica- 
A Mobile Application for Preparing the Driving Tests in Hong Kong 43 
• The average overall score of the application is 4 out of 5 ( 80 / 100 )  . 
• Fig . 14 shows that 100% , 50% and 70% of participants agree that the application 
help in preparing written test , competence test ( Part B ) and on-the-road ( Part C ) 
test in Hong Kong respectively . 
• 100% of participants agree that the application helps in preparing the driving tests 
in Hong Kong and gives basic driving concepts . 
• 100% , 75% and 80% of participants believe that the attractiveness of this application is free of charge , multi-purpose ( helps in preparing all parts of driving tests ) 
and the multimedia ( helps in memorizing ) respectively . 
Fig . 14 . Participants ’ attitude toward the help of the application in preparing driving tests in 
Hong Kong 
4 . 2 Interpretation 
The mobile application helps in preparing both the driving theory test and road test in 
Hong Kong and gives basic driving concepts to learners . Users are quite satisfied with 
the application with score of 4 out of 5 in average . 
This application provides enough materials for car learners to do revision themselves 
and they may pass the driving tests in Hong Kong easily with better result . The virtual 
road tests provide a contextual learning which may help learners to learn driving effectively in an interesting way . It is believed that the multimedia in the application can help 
learners to have long term memory which is in favor of preparing driving tests . 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper , an Android educational application for car learners to prepare driving 
tests in Hong Kong is developed . The virtual examiner and the function of detecting 
driving mistake in virtual road tests is one of the big successes to make the road test 
practice more useful and realistic . Also , the use of slider layout in the theory practice 
and handbook greatly reduces the number of activities used and the memory usage 
because of the decrease of the activities in the stack . It also helps with the file size 
due to the reduction of coding . The design will be optimized and the application can 
become more user-friendly . 
44 S . C . Ng , A . K . F . Lui , and S . W . Ng 
However , there are some limitations in the virtual road test because the physical 
setting of Unity is slightly different from the real world . For example , the side rear 
mirrors cannot be shown together in the scene without clicking the button because the 
number of cameras shown in one scene is limited . Also , the road test part will only be 
available for the learners who want to learn driving a car with an automatic transmission due to the lack of driving techniques of the manual one . However , the basic 
driving skills and theories are still useful to all private car learner drivers except the 
motorbike learners . 
It is suggested that more scenario cases can be added to test the users ’ response and 
increase their experience for future work . For example , someone runs under the pedestrian red-light or the driving test is held under a special environment or weather condition . Also , the results of all the tests and exercises can be saved and shown with 
charts so the users may know their weaknesses and practice more on those topics 
which can have a better learning outcome and efficiency . 
References 
1 . Ally , M .  : Foundations of educational theory for online learning . Theory and Practice of 
Online Learning 2 , 15–44 ( 2004 ) 
2 . Imel , S .  : Contextual Learning in Adult Education . Practice Application Brief No . 12 
( 2000 ) 
3 . Deep River Development LTD . Driving Theory Test ( UK )  ( version 1 . 3 . 2 )  ( October 5 , 
2013 )  , apps / details ? id = com . 
deepriverdev . carlite
4 . Studenttwok HKDrivingWrittenMockExam ( version1 . 0 )  ( 2012 )  , 
apps / details ? id = net . hklight . HK
DrivingWrittenMockExam
5 . Party Shop Studio : Hong Kong Driving Test ( version 2 . 0 . 0 )  ( 2012 )  , 
apps / details ? id = air . com . driver 
. writtentest
6 . 易點時空 : 考駕照 ( version 2 . 1 . 0 )  ( 2013 )  ,  
store / apps / details ? id = cn . eclicks . drivingtest 
7 . Rogers , R .  , et al .  : Android application development : Programming with the Google SDK . 
O ’ Reilly Media , Inc .  ( 2009 ) 
8 . Mednieks , Z .  , et al .  : Programming Android : Java Programming for the New Generation of 
Mobile Devices . O ’ Reilly ( 2012 ) 
9 . Unity Technologies : Unity ( version 4 . 2 . 2 )  ( 2013 )  , 
10 . Adobe Systems : Photoshop CS6 ( version 13 . 1 . 2 )  ( 2013 )  ,  
mena_en / products / photoshop . html
11 . Owens , M .  : The definitive guide to SQLite . Apress ( 2006 ) 
12 . Government of HKSAR : Road Users ’ Code ( 2000 )  ,  
road_safety / road_users_code / index . html
13 . Morris , J .  : Android User Interface Development : Beginner ’ s Guide ; Quickly Design and 
Develop Compelling User Interfaces for Your Android Applications . Packt Publishing Ltd .  
( 2011 ) 
14 . Android developer ( 2011 )  ,  
android / support / v4 / widget / SlidingPaneLayout . html
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 45–54 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
A Case Study on the Students ' 
Attitude and Acceptance of Mobile Learning 
Simon K . S . Cheung
The Open University of Hong Kong 
Good Shepherd Street , Homantin , Kowloon , Hong Kong 
kscheung @ ouhk . edu . hk 
Abstract . Transcending the time and geographical constraints of traditional 
classroom-based learning , mobile learning allows students to study anywhere 
and at any time . Learning is facilitated , and students generally welcome this 
flexible mode of learning . According to a study recently conducted by the Open 
University of Hong Kong , mobile learning is effective for enhancing language 
proficiency . This paper reports the results of this case study . In brief , it is found 
that students generally show a positive attitude towards mobile learning and its 
effectiveness in learning languages . There is a significant acceptance among 
students towards mobile learning , especially on the usefulness , efficiency , interactivity and convenience . The results further affirm that mobile learning can be 
an effective means to delivering language proficiency courses , not only for its 
accessibility from virtually anywhere and allowing the students to learn at any 
time , but also for enriching learning experience and arousing learning interest 
by making good use of multimedia components and features . 
Keywords : mobile learning , e-learning , online learning , students ' acceptance , 
learning effectiveness , learning experience . 
1 Introduction 
Evolved as a new mode of learning , mobile learning is usually regarded as a logical 
extension or a variety of e-learning or online learning that possesses the potentials to 
further expand and make learning available anywhere and anytime through mobile or 
portable devices [ 1 ]  [ 2 ]  . In the past decade , with the advent of new mobile devices 
( mobile phones , smart phones , tablets , etc .  ) offering sophisticated functional features , 
students become adapted to mobile learning . 
Mobile learning essentially transforms the learning process and changes the ways 
of learning . A number of unique advantages and pedagogical outcomes are identified , 
as reported in the literature [ 3 ]  [ 4 ]  [ 5 ]  [ 6 ]  [ 7 ]  . In summary , mobile learning creates learning opportunities beyond the traditional classrooms , offers flexibility and mobility in 
learning , expands learning experience in terms of time and space , facilitates the communications and interactions among teachers and students , and encourages collaborative learning and group learning . 
46 S . K . S . Cheung 
According to Cheung et al .  , there are three factors for successful adoption of mobile learning , namely , technological feasibility of mobile learning , learners ' needs of 
flexible learning , and pedagogical benefits [ 8 ]  . Similarly , Poon and Koo considered 
the students ' behaviour , technology or system , and interactive application as the three 
factors influencing the readiness of mobile learning [ 9 ]  . Also , according to Economides , the students ' learning needs and learning quality are important considerations 
for mobile learning [ 10 ]  . 
In Hong Kong , the advent of telecommunication , broadband and wireless network 
infrastructure has provided the opportunities for mobile learning . According to the 
Census and Statistics , in November 2013 , 81 . 9% households had personal computers 
at home [ 11 ]  . For those households with personal computers at home , 97 . 6% had 
connections to the Internet . 59 . 3% had portable or notebook computers while 37 . 8% 
had tablet devices . As revealed in a survey conducted in the Open University of Hong 
Kong , mobile devices are popular among its students , no matter pursuing full-time 
studies or distance-learning studies [ 12 ]  [ 13 ]  . Nearly all the students owned mobile 
devices , and about half of them owned more than one device . The high penetration 
rates , especially on students , imply the readiness of mobile learning in Hong Kong . 
In the past two years , the Open University of Hong Kong has developed a number 
of mobile learning modules with an aim to enhance the Chinese and English language 
efficiency of students . Target for the first-year students of the University , these mobile learning modules essentially cover a wide range of language elements such as 
vocabulary , grammar rules , sentence structure , advanced level syntax and idioms , 
conversation techniques , and the basic language skills . Combined with some tailormade practices and scenario-based contents , each module is designed to cater for 
students ' individual language learning needs . All the modules are presented in e-book 
format , allowing students to learn in a mobile environment . They are context-based 
with multimedia and interactive materials . Students ' learning progress is examined by 
a continuous assessment . 
The mobile learning modules were deployed in 2013 , and trial used by a batch of 
159 students of the University . An evaluative survey comprising questionnaire and 
interview was conducted , immediately after the deployment of the mobile learning 
modules . Among the first batch of 159 students taking the modules , a total of 61 students agreed to participate in the survey . One purpose of the survey is to investigate 
the students ' attitude and acceptance of mobile learning for language learning . The 
survey results clearly show the students ' positive attitude towards mobile learning and 
its effectiveness in language learning . The results also show a significant acceptance 
among students towards mobile learning , especially on the usefulness , efficiency , 
interactivity and convenience . This paper reports the survey results and shares some 
findings on the students ' attitude and acceptance of mobile learning for language 
learning . 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows . Section 2 gives the background of 
the four mobile learning modules in the study . Section 3 describes the evaluative survey and reports the survey results with a discussion of the findings . Section 4 briefly 
concludes this paper .  
A Case Study on the Students ' Attitude and Acceptance of Mobile Learning 47 
2 Mobile Learning Modules for Language Learning 
This section provides a background on the four mobile learning modules developed 
by the Open University of Hong Kong for enhancing language efficiency of students . 
The functional components of these language modules are described , with a highlight 
on the design features . 
In 2011 , the Open University of Hong Kong successfully secured a grant from the 
Government for developing four mobile learning modules for enhancing the language 
proficiency of students [ 14 ]  . Primarily targeted for the first-year students of the University , these languages modules are in the areas of English for communication , the 
use of Chinese and English , and the command of Putonghua , as highlighted below . 
• English for Effective Communication . This module aims to enhance the students ' understanding of advanced level grammar rules and sentence structures , 
and provide practice to improve their listening and writing skills for effective 
communication in English . 
• Business Communication for Executives . This module aims to develop the students ' basic and advanced level Business English . Practical workplace topics 
are included to prepare students for their careers , such as handling electronic 
mails , preparing meeting notes , writing proposals and giving presentations . 
• Use of Chinese . This module aims to sharpen the students ' reading and writing 
skills in formal Chinese language . Some advanced level syntax and idioms are 
also covered in the module to improve sentence composition and reading 
comprehension . 
• Use of Putonghua . This module aims to enhance students ' understanding of 
advanced sentence structures and vocabulary in Putonghua . Scenario-based 
content is included for effective communication in travel , dining , job interview 
and shopping . 
The mobile learning modules are presented in e-book format , readily readable in 
Apple devices such as iPhone and iPad . They can be downloaded through the Apple 
iTunesU [ 15 ]  . The modules use context-based contents and adopt an interactive approach to learning languages . Multimedia materials are incorporated to enrich the 
students ' learning experience . Intended for mobile learning , students can study at their 
own pace without time and space constraints . The modules encourage collaborative 
learning among students . A virtual environment ( including an online discussion forum 
and an online platform for interactive communications among teachers and students ) 
conducive to collaborative learning and group learning is provided to enhance the 
students ' learning efficiency . 
The design features of these modules are summarized as follows . 
• Use of context-based contents , together with multimedia , animations and 
graphical elements ; 
• Provision of interactive and game-based learning activities , and recording exercise and interaction summary ; 
• Continuous assessments for monitoring learning progress ; 
• Provision of a discussion forum for students to discuss and share useful learning experience . 
48 S . K . S . Cheung 
3 Evaluative Survey 
The mobile learning modules were deployed in 2013 , and trial used by 159 students 
of the University . The students were invited to participate a survey on completion of 
study . A total of 61 students agreed to participate by completing a questionnaire and 
attending an interview . In this section , the questions of the survey are reported and the 
findings are discussed . 
3 . 1 Survey Questions and Responses 
There are 16 questions relevant to the study on students ' attitude and acceptance of 
mobile learning . These questions and the responses are listed below .  
Q1 . How often did you study the modules ? 
Frequency % of respondents
Every day 5% 
Once to twice a week 79% 
Three to four times a week 16% 
Five to six times a week 0% 
More than six times a week 0% 
Q2 . Where did you usually study the modules ? 
Location % of respondents
Classroom 2% 
Library 3% 
Other School settings ( e . g . canteen ) 8% 
On the move 13% 
Home and other settings ( e . g . dinning place ) 74% 
Q3 . Which part ( s ) of the modules do you like the most ( select all that apply )  ? 
Parts or components % of respondents
Audio component 36% 
Case scenario 44% 
Online discussion forum 0% 
Practice activity 44% 
Vocabulary section 41% 
Interactive summary 25% 
Other features ( recording , dictionary , etc .  ) 31% 
A Case Study on the Students ' Attitude and Acceptance of Mobile Learning 49 
Q4 . I think it is convenient to learn a language by using mobile device ( s )  . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 25% 
Agree 62% 
Neutral 11% 
Disagree 2% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q5 . I think it is effective to learn a language by using mobile device ( s )  . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 13% 
Agree 52% 
Neutral 31% 
Disagree 3% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q6 . I think the mobile learning module is interactive . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 15% 
Agree 46% 
Neutral 31% 
Disagree 8% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q7 . I think the interactive exercises are effective to help learn the concepts . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 13% 
Agree 70% 
Neutral 15% 
Disagree 2% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q8 . I think the scenario-based learning is effective to help learn the concepts . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 13% 
Agree 66% 
Neutral 20% 
Disagree 2% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
50 S . K . S . Cheung 
Q9 . I think the design features ( e . g . note-taking , bookmark , audio recording ) of 
the mobile learning module are useful to assist learning . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 8% 
Agree 64% 
Neutral 25% 
Disagree 3% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q10 . I think mobile learning can enhance my overall academic performance . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 2% 
Agree 43% 
Neutral 49% 
Disagree 7% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q11 . I think using the mobile learning module ( s ) for study enhances my language proficiency . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 0% 
Agree 70% 
Neutral 26% 
Disagree 3% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q12 . I think the mobile learning module arouses my interest and motivates my 
self-study . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 11% 
Agree 56% 
Neutral 23% 
Disagree 10% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
A Case Study on the Students ' Attitude and Acceptance of Mobile Learning 51 
Q13 . I think my level of engagement using the mobile learning module for language learning was high . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 3% 
Agree 48% 
Neutral 41% 
Disagree 8% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q14 . I think my level of satisfaction using the mobile learning module for language learning is high . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 7% 
Agree 59% 
Neutral 33% 
Disagree 2% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q15 . I enjoy self-paced learning by using the mobile learning module . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 18% 
Agree 64% 
Neutral 16% 
Disagree 2% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
Q16 . I think this learning experience with the mobile learning modules adds 
value to my overall school performance . 
Responses % of respondents
Strongly agree 3% 
Agree 51% 
Neutral 43% 
Disagree 3% 
Strongly disagree 0% 
52 S . K . S . Cheung 
3 . 2 Findings from the Survey Results 
 ( a ) Most of the respondents study the modules once or twice a week , as shown 
in Q1 . According to Q2 , they usually study at home and other fixed settings , 
such as a dining place . Only 13% of the respondents usually study on the 
move , and 5% of the respondents usually study in a place for serious study 
such as a classroom and library . These show that mobile learning is preferred 
in a fixed setting but not a place for serious study .  
 ( b ) According to Q3 , respondents mostly like audio components and interactive 
activities as well as case scenario and practice activities . However , they are 
not interested in the online discussion forum . This reflects that collaborative 
learning and group learning are not adopted .  
 ( c ) Most of the respondents considered that mobile learning made learning more 
convenient and effective , as shown in Q4 and Q5 . According to Q6 and Q7 , 
they generally agreed that mobile learning is interactive and that interactive 
activities are effective for learning . They considered scenario-based learning 
and other features ( such as note-taking , bookmark and dictionary ) useful for 
understanding the concepts , as shown in Q8 and Q9 .  
 ( d ) When asked whether the mobile learning modules could enhance academic 
performance in Q10 , about half of the respondents ( 49% ) responded neutral 
while another 45% strongly agreed or agreed . However , more respondents 
( 70% ) agreed that the mobile learning modules could enhance their language 
proficiency , as shown in Q11 . This implies a discrepancy in the students ' 
views on the learning effectiveness between academic performance and language proficiency enhancement .  
 ( e ) According to Q12 , more than half of the respondents strongly agreed or 
agreed that the mobile learning modules could arouse their interests and motivate self-study . When asking on the learning engagement in Q13 , about half 
of the respondents ( 51% ) strongly agreed or agreed that the level of engagement in mobile learning was high while another 41% considered neutral . 
These show that mobile learning can arouse learning interest and motivate 
self-study and help engage learning .  
 ( f ) Based on Q14 and Q15 , the respondents generally agreed that the level of 
satisfaction was high in learning language through the mobile learning modules . They also consider the mobile learning modules added positive values 
to their overall learning experience , as indicated in Q16 . These demonstrate 
that mobile learning can raise learning satisfaction and enrich or expand 
learning experience . 
4 Conclusion 
Mobile learning has become a reality that makes learning available anywhere and 
anytime . As claimed in many researchers and practitioners , mobile learning has the 
advantages in enriching learning experience and enhancing learning satisfaction . In 
2013 , the Open University of Hong Kong conducted an evaluative study on the effec- 
A Case Study on the Students ' Attitude and Acceptance of Mobile Learning 53 
tiveness of mobile learning for enhancing the language proficiency of students . This 
paper reported some results of this study , which is on the students ' attitude and acceptance of mobile learning in language learning . 
It is found that the students generally show a positive attitude towards mobile 
learning and its effectiveness in language learning . Most of them considered mobile 
learning made learning convenient and effective , and agreed that mobile learning 
could arouse learning interest and motivate self-study and help engage learning . Mobile learning could also raise the students ' learning satisfaction and enrich or expand 
their learning experience . 
While the findings are mostly positive , it is also revealed that the students prefer 
mobile learning to take place at home or a fixed setting but other than a place for serious study . They do not usually study on the move , such as walking on street , or 
riding on transportation . Besides , some features designed for collaborative learning or 
group learning , such as the online discussion forum , are not popular as compared to 
other online interactive features , such as multimedia elements , interactive summary , 
case scenario and practice activities . 
The findings further affirm that mobile learning can be an effective means to delivering language proficiency courses , not only for its flexibility to learn anywhere and 
at any time but also for enriching the learning experience and arousing learning interests by making good use of interactive and multimedia components . However , it is 
not clear whether mobile learning can encourage collaborative learning or group 
learning . These findings would provide a reference for researchers and practitioners in 
designing and deploying mobile learning modules . 
Acknowledgement . The author would like to acknowledge the support of the Education Bureau of the Government of Hong Kong SAR in offering a grant of HK$1 . 5 
million under the Quality Enhancement Grant Scheme for the project " Development 
of Four Mobile Learning Modules to Enhance the Language Proficiency of Students " 
in 2011 . This paper reports the findings of an evaluation study based on the project . It 
is noted that the author is one of the Principal Investigators of the project . 
References 
1 . Ellis , K .  : Moving into M-Learning . Training Journal 40 ( 10 )  , 56 ( 2003 ) 
2 . Winters , N .  : What is Mobile Learning ? In : Sharples , M .  ( ed .  ) Big Issues in Mobile Learning , Report of a Workshop by the Kaleidoscope Network of Excellence Mobile Learning 
Initiative , University of Nottingham , pp . 7–11 ( 2007 ) 
3 . Lam , J .  , Yau , J .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  : A Review of Mobile Learning in the Mobile Age . In : 
Tsang , P .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  , Lee , V . S . K .  , Huang , R .  ( eds .  ) ICHL 2010 . LNCS , vol . 6248 , 
pp . 306–315 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2010 ) 
4 . Muyinda , P . B .  , Lubega , J . T .  , Lynch , K .  : Unleashing Mobile Phones for Research Supervision Support at Makerere University , Uganda : The Lessons Learned . International Journal 
of innovation and Learning 7 ( 1 )  , 14–34 ( 2010 ) 
5 . Peng , H .  , et al .  : Ubiquitous Knowledge Construction : Mobile Learning Re-defined and a 
Conceptual Framework . Innovations in Education and Teaching 46 ( 2 )  , 171–183 ( 2009 ) 
54 S . K . S . Cheung 
6 . Sharples , M .  , Taylor , J .  , Vavoula , G .  : A Theory of Learning for the Mobile Age . In : 
Andrews , R .  , Haythornthwaite , C .  ( eds .  ) The Sage Handbook of e-Learning Research , 
pp . 221–247 . Springer ( 2007 ) 
7 . Traxler , J .  : Defining , Discussing and Evaluating Mobile Learning : The Moving Finger 
Writes and Have Writ .  .  . The International Review of Research in Open and Distance 
Learning 8 ( 2 )  , 17–28 ( 2007 ) 
8 . Cheung , S . K . S .  , Yuen , K . S .  , Tsang , E .  : A Study on the Readiness of Mobile Learning in 
Open Education . In : Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on IT in Medicine 
and Education , pp . 133–136 . IEEE Press ( 2011 ) 
9 . Poon , W . C .  , Koo , A . C .  : Mobile Learning : The Economics Perspective . International 
Journal of Innovation and Learning 7 ( 4 )  , 412–429 ( 2010 ) 
10 . Economides , A . A .  : Requirements of Mobile Learning Applications . International Journal 
of Innovation and Learning 5 ( 5 )  , 457-49 ( 2008 ) 
11 . Census and Statistics : Thematic Household Survey on Personal Computer and Internet 
Penetration , Report No . 53 , Census and Statistics Department , The Government of Hong 
Kong SAR ( November 2013 ) 
12 . Cheung , S . K . S .  : A Study on the Use of Mobile Devices for Distance Learning . In : 
Cheung , S . K . S .  , Fong , J .  , Kwok , L . -F .  , Li , K .  , Kwan , R .  ( eds .  ) ICHL 2012 . LNCS , 
vol . 7411 , pp . 89–98 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2012 ) 
13 . Cheung , S . K . S .  : A Survey on the Use of Mobile Devices for Learning Purposes . International Journal of Innovation and Learning 16 ( 2 )  , 192–202 ( 2014 ) 
14 . Yuen , K . S .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  : Development of Four Mobile Learning Modules to Enhance 
the Language Proficiency of Students , Funded Project , Quality Enhancement Grant 
Scheme , Education Bureau of the Government of Hong Kong SAR ( 2011 )  , 

15 . iTunes U : Website of Apple ’ s iPad in Education – the iTuneU Courses ( 2014 )  , 

K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 55–60 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Wearable Technology in Education : 
From Handheld to Hands-Free Learning 
Daniyar Sapargaliyev 
Almaty Management University 
227 , Rozybakiyev Str .  , Almaty , Kazakhstan 
dsapargalieff @ gmail . com 
Abstract . The use of wearable computers in education can significantly help 
teachers and students in the near future . Last years we can observe the appearance of new wearable devices such as bracelets , clothing , watches , and glasses . 
One of the most popular wearable computers is Google Glass . In our article we 
will try to analyse a number of quantitative and qualitative researches on the use 
of wearable devices in teaching and learning . We found that Google Glass successfully using in pharmacology and healthcare . The Google Glass allows the 
teacher to demonstrate the practical skills ( such as a doctor performs surgery ) 
for the students in real time from any places . In spite of the fact that Google 
Glass has some technological limitations , any learner needs only a short adaptation period for comfortable usage . The Google Glass helps to create seamless 
interaction between educators and learners . 
Keywords : wearable technology , Google Glass , handheld devices , hands-free 
devices . 
1 Introduction 
It is becoming increasingly difficult to ignore the wide dissemination wearable technology in everyday life . First wearable computer was invented and tested in the early 
1960s of the twentieth century . Then this cigarette pack sized analog device was used 
for predictions in the roulette game [ 1 ]  . Today , various types of wearable computers 
( such as bracelets , clothing , watches , and glasses ) are used in medical centers , libraries and universities . 
One of the most significant current discussions in mobile or handheld learning is 
the use of wearable technology in education . As Kukulska-Hulme argues :  ‘ mobile 
learning is taking on new qualities and characteristics as devices become ever more 
integrated with everyday life and wearables intensify the increasingly close relationship between people and technology ’  [ 2 ]  . 
In fact , one of the most popular wearable devices is Google Glass . This computer 
displays information in a smartphone-like hands-free format that can interact with the 
Internet via natural language voice commands [ 3 ]  . 
56 D . Sapargaliyev 
Nowadays , a wearable device such as Google Glass allowing people to capture the 
flow of everyday life and link these experiences to resources such as web pages or 
information sources [ 4 ]  . 
The purpose of this paper is to review recent researches into the use of wearable 
technology in medicine and higher education . 
2 Literature Review 
More recently , literature has emerged that offers some findings about using wearable 
devices in different areas ( Table 1 )  . A number of studies have found that wearable 
computers help to seamlessly integrate consumers ’ bodies into network infrastructure 
and virtual world [ 5 ]  [ 6 ]  [ 7 ]  . Moreover , Pedersen argues that wearable technology 
strives to change human-centric interaction with computers [ 8 ]  . Starner investigated 
how to create interfaces for technology which are designed for creating " microinteractions " to fit a user ' s lifestyle [ 9 ]  . 
Table 1 . Possibilities of wearable technology 
Wearables allows… Authors Key words and ideas 
To integrate consumers ’ bodies into 
network infrastructure 
Gates , 2013 Wearable technology is designed to literally integrate 
bodies more seamlessly with devices . 
Pace , 2013 Wearable devices will empower users or will detach 
them from reality . 
Norman , 
2013 
Paradox of wearable technologies and myth of multitasking . 
To change humancentric interaction 
Pedersen , 
2013 
Dehumanizing representations and human-centric 
interaction with wearable computers . 
To create interactions to fit a user ' s 
lifestyle 
Starner , 
2013 
Design principles for creating " microinteractions " 
with wearable devices . 
To use it in augmented reality 
games and services 
Ackerman , 
2013 
Wearable technology could lead to an unprecedented 
loss of control over personal information . 
Campbell , 
2013 
It was designed a game that puts a Google Glass 
wearer in the role of an ant in a colony . 
Furlan , 
2013 
The use of wearable technology will enable to create 
a wide range of augmented cognition applications . 
Wang et al .  , 
2013 
Wearable devices could be effectively used towards 
enabling humancentric augmented reality . 
To explain the expectations of society 
in privacy issues 
Hong , 2013 Gap in the community ' s understanding in the use of 
wearable computers . 
There is a volume of published studies describing the use of wearable computers in 
augmented reality games and services [ 10 ]  [ 11 ]  [ 12 ]  [ 13 ]  . Some studies have attempted 
Wearable Technology in Education : From Handheld to Hands-Free Learning 57 
to explain the expectations of society in privacy issues of using Google Glass and other 
wearable computers [ 14 ]  . However , the practical using of wearable technology ( such 
as Google Glass ) can be found in two main areas : medicine and higher education . 
2 . 1 Wearable Devices in Medicine 
Medicine is one of the most successful areas where wearable technology can be used . 
Many medical centers have already tested Google Glass in its daily practice . For example , Fox & Felkey described their experiences with Google Glass in a medical 
center and suggested ways how it can be used in the hospital pharmacy setting [ 15 ]  . 
The another researcher , Marks studied the ways of using Google Glass in healthcare , 
such as helping to predict glucose levels in the food of diabetics [ 16 ]  . 
Some researchers consider the functionality of Google Glass to create a new medical applications and software . For example , Wiltz analysed the medical application 
for Google Glass that allows doctors and nurses to look up patient records through 
voice command or by taking a picture of the patient ' s face [ 17 ]  . The author argues that 
face recognition is the most efficient way to bring up data relevant to helping the 
wearer in many use cases . Jonas et al . propose a novel concept of system for supporting everyday clinical pathways with Google Glass [ 18 ]  . The system supports clinical 
staff as a documenting observer and has the capability to boost clinical care . 
2 . 2 Using Google Glass in Medical Education 
Medical faculties of the universities are the most frequent places where Google Glass 
is using in teaching and learning . A professor of medicine can use wearable technology 
for training students with real time video . For example , Vallurupalli et al . conducted 
the experiment with the use of live video stream from the professor ' s Google Glass 
which was transmitted to the mobile devices of students [ 19 ]  . The authors concluded 
that wearable technology has great potential to enhance medical education in the near 
future . Another scientist , Glauser points out how students watched medical procedure 
in real time from Google Glass video camera [ 20 ]  . The physicians are excited about 
how Glass could revolutionize medical education . The wearable camera is also a helpful educational tool when it puts on a patient or mannequin . Because the camera allowing residents to view the bedside manner from the patient ’ s perspective . In same time , 
Wu et al . found that Google Glass is successfully integrated into simulation-based 
training exercises without disrupting the medical students ’ experience [ 21 ]  . 
2 . 3 Hands-Free Learning 
Wearable technology allows teacher and student to better collaborate between each 
other by using hands-free devices . Llorente & Morant highlight the need to use interconnected devices such as Google Glass in higher education [ 22 ]  . The authors suggested that professors can communicate with a large computing infrastructure , which 
can be data-mined to monitor the knowledge-building process . Additionally , wearable 
58 D . Sapargaliyev 
computers have unique research and information discovery potential in using its in 
universities ’ libraries [ 23 ]  . 
Nevertheless , Penny & Schugar had claimed that Google Glass has sparked a mix 
of curiosity and skepticism in education [ 24 ]  . The authors consider that teachers 
should understand how to use wearable devices in the classroom and promote model 
digital citizenship and responsibility . However , Buchem & Pérez-Sanagustín argued 
that the type of educational transmission from an eye-level perspective allows both 
educators and learners to capture the surrounding environment and participate in realtime activities [ 25 ]  . The learners can link physical and virtual learning spaces and 
participate in global learning activities . 
3 Discussion 
This study set out with the aim of assessing the importance of using wearable devices 
in education . Wearable technologies can bring into our lives a number of issues that 
involve matters of network security , privacy and health . However , the largest change 
can occur in methods of communication between users of wearable devices . Especially it will be noticeable in the learning and teaching . 
How will the emergence of Google Glass impact on the learning process and the 
work in the classroom ? Perhaps the teacher can easily get instant information about 
any student just looking at him through augmented reality glasses . These amazing 
features of wearable technology can greatly simplify the process of getting streaming 
information at any time . But probably such devices violate personal space and academic freedom of students . 
We think that wearable technology is allowing the opportunities that should help to 
improve the relationship between students and a teacher . We should pay close attention to changes in the daily lives of the students who will use Google Glass at the 
university . Some features of the Google Glass ( such as video recording and other ) can 
be used in a secretive mode . Thus , the using of these devices will entail a widespread 
violation of privacy and increase mistrust among students to each other . 
Wearable device ( such as Google Glass ) can become a " Trojan horse " in pedagogy , 
which will destroy the atmosphere of academic freedom at the universities . May be 
the constant presence of a teacher or a student in the information flow will distract 
their attention on learning and teaching . 
On the other hand , thoughtful actions and rules of using Google Glass in learning 
environment can significantly improve the process of getting knowledge . For example , using Google Glass will free the hands of the professor for demonstration his 
practical skills by broadcasting live video to surgical students around the globe . Students can interact with each other in different locations ( a library , an auditorium , a 
concert hall , a stadium and other places ) by using hands-free devices and improve the 
understanding in practical exercises . 
In general , therefore , it seems that we need to further study the implications of the 
Google Glass in education . This technology is just starting to penetrate at the universities and this paper has examined the role of Google Glass as a new learning tool in 
higher education . Future research should therefore concentrate on the investigation of 
cultural and ethical issues of using wearable technology among students and teachers . 
Wearable Technology in Education : From Handheld to Hands-Free Learning 59 
4 Conclusion 
The emergence of new technologies in the classroom is almost always associated with 
high expectations of its effective implementation . But very often , new technologies do 
not immediately show their advantages and disadvantages . In the case of wearable 
technology , the expectations of teachers and students will be matched . Wearable devices provide unrestricted access to information , together with the hands-free use 
voice control and the possibility of changing the position of the bodies anytime . This 
freedom allows professors and students to interact in a more seamless mode and at the 
same time creates the illusion of easy access to the knowledge and practical skills . 
The permanent interaction and teaching support can significantly improve the academic achievements , but at the same time can reduce the ability for independent 
learning . Here is the problem of the correct use of wearable technology that should 
justify many positive expectations of professors and students in the classroom and 
everywhere . 
References 
1 . Thorp , E . O .  : The Invention of the First Wearable Computer . In : Proceedings of the 2nd 
IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers , pp . 4–8 ( 1998 ) 
2 . Kukulska-Hulme , A .  : Mobile , Wearable , Companionable : Emerging technological challenges and incentives for learning . Encontro sobre Jogos e Mobile Learning , pp . 12–15 . 
CIEd , Braga ( 2014 ) 
3 . Google : Google Glass ( 2014 )  , it-does / 
4 . Sharples , M .  , McAndrew , P .  , Weller , M .  , Ferguson , R .  , FitzGerald , E .  , Hirst , T .  , Gaved , M .  : 
Innovating Pedagogy . Open University ( 2013 ) 
5 . Gates , K .  : Key Questions for Communication and Critical-Cultural Studies : Posthumanism , 
Network Infrastructures , and Sustainability . Communication and Critical / Cultural Studies 
10 ( 2-3 )  , 242–247 ( 2013 ) 
6 . Norman , D .  : The paradox of wearable technologies . Technology Review 116 ( 5 )  , 101–103 
( 2013 ) 
7 . Pace , S .  : Looking at innovation through CCT glasses : Consumer culture theory and 
Google glass innovation . Journal of Innovation Management 1 ( 1 )  , 38–54 ( 2013 ) 
8 . Pedersen , I .  : Ready to wear ( or not )  : Examining the rhetorical impact of proposed wearable devices . In : International Symposium on Technology and Society Proceedings , 
Toronto , pp . 201–202 ( 2013 ) 
9 . Starner , T .  : Wearable computing : through the looking glass . In : Proceedings of the 17th 
Annual International Symposium on International Symposium on Wearable Computers , 
pp . 125–126 . ACM ( 2013 ) 
10 . Ackerman , E .  : Google gets in your face : Google Glass offers a slightly augmented version 
of reality . IEEE Spectrum 50 ( 1 )  , 26–29 ( 2013 ) 
11 . Campbell , M .  : Hive-mind solves tasks using Google Glass ant game . New Scientist 
219 ( 2928 )  , 20 ( 2013 ) 
12 . Furlan , R .  : Google Glass this wearable computer augments the self , not reality . IEEE 
Spectrum 50 ( 10 )  , 24 ( 2013 ) 
60 D . Sapargaliyev 
13 . Wang , H .  , Bao , X .  , Choudhury , R . R .  , Nelakuditi , S .  : InSight : Recognizing humans without 
face recognition . In : ACM HotMobile 2013 : The 14th Workshop on Mobile Computing 
Systems and Applications ( 2013 ) 
14 . Hong , J .  : Considering privacy issues in the context of Google Glass . Communications of 
the ACM 56 ( 11 )  , 10–11 ( 2013 ) 
15 . Fox , B .  , Felkey , B .  : Potential uses of Google Glass in the pharmacy . Hospital Pharmacy 
48 ( 9 )  , 783–784 ( 2013 ) 
16 . Marks , P .  : A healthy dose of Google Glass . New Scientist 219 ( 2936 )  , 22–23 ( 2013 ) 
17 . Wiltz , C .  : Google glass bans facial recognition , sets medical apps back . Medical Device 
and Diagnostic Industry 35 ( 6 )  ( 2013 ) 
18 . Jonas , S .  , Hannig , A .  , Spreckelsen , C .  , Deserno , T . M .  : Wearable technology as a booster 
of clinical care . In : Medical Imaging 2014 : PACS and Imaging Informatics : Next Generation and Innovations ( 2014 ) 
19 . Vallurupalli , S .  , Paydak , H .  , Agarwal , S . K .  , Agrawal , M .  , Assad-Kottner , C .  : Wearable 
technology to improve education and patient outcomes in a cardiology fellowship program 
- A feasibility study . Health and Technology 3 ( 4 )  , 267–270 ( 2013 ) 
20 . Glauser , W .  : Doctors among early adopters of Google Glass . Canadian Medical Association Journal 109 ( 2013 ) 
21 . Wu , T .  , Dameff , C .  , Tully , J .  : Integrating Google Glass into simulation-based training : 
experiences and future directions . Journal of Biomedical Graphics and Computing 4 ( 2 )  , 
49–54 ( 2014 ) 
22 . Llorente , R .  , Morant , M .  : Wearable Computers and Big Data : Interaction Paradigms for 
Knowledge Building in Higher Education . Innovation and Teaching Technologies . New 
Directions in Research , Practice and Policy , 127–137 ( 2014 ) 
23 . Booth , C .  , Brecher , D .  : Ok , library . Implications and opportunities for Google Glass . 
College & Research Libraries News 75 ( 5 )  , 234–239 ( 2014 ) 
24 . Penny , C .  , Schugar , J .  : Ok Class .  .  . Google Glass in Education . In : Searson , M .  , Ochoa , M .  
( eds .  ) Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education International Conference , pp . 2059–2060 . AACE , Chesapeake ( 2014 ) 
25 . Buchem , I .  , Pérez-Sanagustín , M .  : Personal Learning Environments in Smart Cities : 
Current Approaches and Future Scenarios 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 61–73 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
A Parse Tree Based Computation Technique 
for Generating Comprehension Style Questions 
from Chinese Text 
Andrew Kwok-Fai Lui , Sin-Chun Ng , and Yin-Chun Fung 
School of Science and Technology , The Open University of Hong Kong 
30 Good Shepherd Street , Ho Man Tin , Kowloon , Hong Kong SAR , China 
alui @ ouhk . edu . hk 
Abstract . This paper describes our research and development work on a computational method that takes a piece of Chinese unstructured text and generates 
a set of questions and answers as the output . Our method is largely based on 
Heilman & Smith ' s over-generation approach [ 1 ] and is included with techniques specific for handling Chinese text . Using the syntactic and semantic features identified in a sentence , various question types can be generated with 
answers also available . Automatic question generation is potentially a key component in future intelligent e-learning systems , but it is also a very challenging 
problem . A major objective of this work is to investigate technical issues and 
limitations that would provide direction of future research . 
Keywords : question generation , question taxonomy , online learning . 
1 Introduction 
Text reading remains a main activity in many types of learning scenarios , despite the 
widespread adoption of multimedia learning where pictures , animations , and videos 
providing learners with other dimensions of learning experience . Education psychologies have recognized that text content and visual content have difference uses for different purposes , and texts as descriptive representations have higher representation 
power than visual materials [ 2 ]  . However , effective text comprehension depends on a 
number of readers ' characteristics such as vocabulary identification , background knowledge , and structural awareness [ 3 ]  . An active and effective reader knows how to make 
connection with text , but many second school students and even university students are 
not capable readers . To help students comprehend their text-based learning materials , 
teachers should develop strategies to increase student-text interaction [ 4 ]  [ 5 ]  . 
Asking readers relevant questions can promote intrinsic reading motivation and 
reading engagement [ 6 ]  . It can also prepare readers with a focus to search for core 
information as they read . The Do You Know feature in the online encyclopedia Wikipedia is a prime example of attracting visitors to read selected articles . This paper 
describes our research and development work on computational question generation 
methods that take a piece of text as an input and generate a set of questions as the 
output . Computational question generation is a relatively new research area that aims 
62 A . Kwok-Fai Lui , S . 
at reducing or eliminating
scenarios . Our work focuse
Chinese text , thus in the lon
tems enhanced with questio
1 . 1 Background 
Computational question ge
online learning delivery m
with reduced or no human 
such as factual or discussio
different difficulty levels . A
sion or assessment . In fully
provide assessment questio
systems , and even Massiv
potential application is for 
ered to be beneficial to lear
discourse into a question a
logue between two avatars . 
The focus of this work i
already literature on genera
tionaries . On the other hand
and began to appear only 
existing approaches : article
factoid question generation 
Kalady , Elikkottil ,  & D 
( see Figure 1 )  [ 9 ]  . Definitio
a concept . The main appro
used to determine the corre
There are a number of statis
Fig . 1 . Typical processes for d
tion based on the over-generati
-C . Ng , and Y . -C . Fung 
human effort in creating questions for various learn
es on generating questions from good quality unstructu
ng run we aim at providing tools for future e-learning s
on-guided learning . 
eneration is becoming a crucial component in emerg
modes for its ability to generate large amount of questi
effort . It can potentially generate various question typ
on questions , on different topics found in the text , and
A teacher can then choose and refine the questions for re
y automated mode , computational question generation 
ons needed in intelligent tutoring systems , adaptive test
vely Open Online Courses ( MOOCS ) platforms . Anot
vicarious learning , where observing a dialogue is con
rning [ 7 ]  [ 8 ]  . Converting a piece of plain text of descript
and answer format is one useful way of producing a d
is in generating questions from unstructured text . Ther
ating questions from structured data in databases and d
d , papers on generating questions from English text are f
recently . In the following we briefly describe two ma
e-based definitional question generation and sentence-ba
based on over-generation approach . 
Das proposed a method to generate definitional questi
onal questions challenge people to answer the definition
oach is to look for keywords ( called up-keys )  , which 
esponding question-word for the generation of a questi
stical based methods to discover suitable keywords . 
definitional question generation ( left ) and factoid question gen
ion approach ( right ) 
ning 
ured 
sysging 
ions 
pes , 
d at 
evican 
ting 
ther 
sidtive 
diare is 
dicfew 
ajor 
ased 
ions 
n of 
are 
ion . 
nera- 
A Parse Tree Based Computation Technique 63 
Heilman & Smith proposed a sentence-based approach that generates questions 
asking for facts [ 1 ]  . The generation of question begins with replacing answer phrases 
with appropriate question-word in every sentences and then reordering the sentence 
parts to form a question . This is called an over-generation method , because there are 
some valid and many invalid questions generated , and a ranker or filter at is needed at 
the end to select the valid questions . Generating high-level questions and open-ended 
questions is less likely but this method is more consistent and stable than then the first 
method . 
2 Question Generation from Chinese Text 
This section describes our method of automatic question generation from Chinese 
unstructured text . The method is largely based on the over-generation approach proposed by Heilman & Smith [ 1 ] and in our research work we have investigated how 
the various stages in Heilman & Smith ' s approach can be adapted for processing Chinese text . Results and discussions can be found in Section 4 . 
2 . 1 Overview 
Our method works on the structure and semantics at the sentence level to identify 
potential features that characterizes seven types of questions . Five of them belong to 
the description ( concept completion ) question type and the other two are explanation 
question types as defined in the question taxonomy by Nielsen et al .  [ 10 ]  . Each Chinese sentence is turned into a tree structure called a parse tree , which describes the 
superordinate-subordinate relation between terms and phrases . Potential questions are 
identified based on specific patterns of the parse tree or its parts . The generation of 
explanation question types also exploits the existence of keyword markers such as因
為 ( because ) 所以 ( therefore )  . 
2 . 2 System Architecture 
Figure 2 shows the architecture of a prototype system based on the automatic question 
generation method . 
Our method begins with refining source text into a form suitable for question generation . The source text should be in plain Unicode format made up of traditional or 
simplified Chinese characters and punctuations . The Sentence Splitter converts the 
source text into a set of sentences based on punctuations , and each sentence will become the unit of processing in the later stages . The Parser then analyses each sentence and produces a parse tree , which depicts the semantic relation between phrases 
and terms , as well as the part-of-speech ( i . e . noun , verb , preposition , etc .  ) and the 
entity type ( i . e . person , organization , etc .  ) of each term . These recognized semantic 
features inform the two Question Generators the potential questions and the question 
type , but because it could happen , the Sentence Pre-processor attempts to prune the 
parse tree to remove irrelevant parts , and to extract independent sub-parts of a sentence . The two Question Generators are designed to over-generate questions , which 
64 A . Kwok-Fai Lui , S . 
produce a lot of poorly stru
Filter selects the good ques
Figure 3 illustrates the fu
represents this Chinese sen
際港口。 " from Chinese W
Fig . 2 . System arch
Fig . 3 . The parse tree on the l
amount of indentation , and on 
-C . Ng , and Y . -C . Fung 
ctured questions as well as some good ones . The Ranke
stions from the poor ones based on rules and patterns . 
unction of the Parser and an example of a parse tree , wh
ntence " 在室町時代，兵庫津作為日明貿易的據點曾是一座
Wikipedia article titled " 神户市 "  . 
hitecture of our Chinese automatic question generator
eft is displayed with nodes in brackets and the depth of node
the right is a graphical representation of the same tree 
er & 
hich 
座國
s by 
The above Chinese sen
sentences separated by a c
between terms , such as室町
child of a pre-positional ph
formation is to be exploited
Our Chinese automatic
reNLP1 
. In natural language
to rely upon available natu
vides the following set of to
1 . Sentence splitter : It 
defined delimiters . W
our method . 
2 . Segmenter : It segme
a dictionary or accep
3 . Part-of-speech tagge
a pre-trained model . 
4 . Name entity recogni
location , or organiz
stem for a noun-ba
nonu )  . Figure 4 sho
generation . 
5 . Parser : It converts a 
Fig . 4 . The role of the name e
the noun 鎌倉時代 is recogn
used accordingly . 
Finally , our implementat
tion tools Tregex and Tsurg
terns in a parse tree with 
structure . For examples , a 
means an immediate sub-tr
lowed by phrase B , and " A
speech or actual keywords .  

1 
A Parse Tree Based Computation Technique 
ntence , terminated by a full stop , consists of two s
comma . The parse tree carries key relational informat
町时代 ( i . e . an era in Japanese history ) is a noun that i
hrase with the head term 在 ( during )  . Such relational 
d in the question generation stage of our method .  
question generator is implemented with Stanford C
e processing research and development work , it is comm
ural language programming tools . Stanford CoreNLP p
ools that work in a pipeline of input text processing : 
splits a piece of text into sentences according to a se
We used full stop , question mark and exclamation mark
ents a sentence into terms based on a pre-trained model 
ptable terms . 
er : It annotates terms with their part-of-speech according 
. 
izer : It annotates nouns with an entity type such as pers
ation . It is crucial for generating the appropriate quest
ased question ( e . g . a where question for location type
ows an example of how this tool could help in quest
sentence into a parse tree based on a pre-trained model . 
entity recognizer is to determine the question stem . For exam
ized as a time ( era )  , and the question term何時 ( where ) can
tion work also depends on parse tree query and manipu
geon [ 11 ]  . The former allows identification of specific p
rules based on part-of-speech , keywords , and parse t
dot means immediately follow and a left shaped arr
ree relation . So " A . B " means phrase A is immediately 
A < B " means A is the parent of B . A and B can be part- 

du / software / corenlp . shtml
65 
subtion 
is a 
inComon 
prot of 
k in 
and 
g to 
son , 
tion 
e of 
tion 
. 
mple , 
n be 
ulapattree 
row 
fol-
-of-
66 A . Kwok-Fai Lui , S . 
2 . 3 Qualities and Pre-p
Source text must be syntact
ing a parse tree . Parsing Ch
ity of often multiple ways
terms [ 12 ]  . It is found that f
are generally acceptable by
from Hong Kong newspap
style and inclusion of novel
We attempted to impro
words . Most parsers , includ
tionary . We also added a p
terms before putting it to th
We also dealt with the i
simplified Chinese characte
on a character conversion m
match the better performing
2 . 4 Pruning of Parse T
Heilmen and Smith ' s work
generation stage [ 1 ]  . The ta
that could be removed wi
phrases may also be cons
Figure 5 )  . 
However , in our Chinese 
( 1 ) marking out prepositio
considering the phrase as a
noun modifier . After markin
Fig . 5 . Marking out 
2 . 5 Part-of-Speech-Bas
The part-of-speech based q
phrases or terms , works ou
stem . This method is capab
We defined five part-ofTregex rule for identifying 
-C . Ng , and Y . -C . Fung 
processing of Source Chinese Text 
tically correct for the Parser to have any chance of prod
hinese text is known to be difficult due to semantic ambi
s of segmenting a sentence into terms and of connect
formal academic text sources , including Wikipedia artic
y common parsers such as the Stanford CoreNLP . Artic
per are found to be problematic due to colloquial writ
l terms . 
ve the accuracy by helping the parser to recognize n
ding Stanford CoreNLP , allow adding new words to a d
pre-processing stage that segment a sentence into spa
he parser [ 13 ]  . 
issue of source text that is made up of either traditiona
ers . We converted all text into simplified characters ba
map . The choice of using simplified characters is found
g lexicon resources available for Stanford CoreNLP . 
Trees 
k emphasizes pruning of parse trees before the quest
arget is to identify auxiliary phrases in a complex sente
ithout affecting the main clause . The removed auxili
sidered as a new sentence for generating questions ( 
e question generation method , we only defined three ru
onal phrases ,  ( 2 ) marking out phrases that ended with
appositive , and ( 3 ) marking out adjective phrase that i
ng out the phrases , we used Tsurgeon to prune them . 
a prepositional phrase for pruning or further processing 
sed Question Generation 
question generation method first identifies possible answ
ut the entity type , and replaces it with a suitable quest
le of generating the concept completion type of question
speech rules as described below . The bracketed code is 
the answer phrases for those who are interested . 
duciguting 
cles , 
cles 
ting 
new 
dicaced 
al or 
ased 
d to 
tion 
ence 
iary 
( see 
ules : 
h的 , 
is a 
wer 
tion 
ns . 
the 
A Parse Tree Based Computation Technique 67 
1 . Numeric questions ( QP < CD = number < CLP ) 
This rule looks for a quantifier phrase with a number and a classifier phrase . 
2 . Rank questions ( QP < OD = number ) 
This rule looks for a quantifier phrase with an ordinal number ( e . g . 第六 )  . 
Source sentence : 它是薩克森第六大城市。
Question : 它是薩克森第幾大城市？
Answer : 第六
3 . Time questions ( NP = time < NT ) 
This rule looks for a temporal noun within a noun phrase . 
Source sentence : 神戶港在1868年開港之後再次發展為國際港口。
Question : 神戶港在何時開港之後再次發展為國際港口？
Answer : 1868年
4 . Positional and relational questions ( LCP <  ( NP | IP = place )  < LC ) 
This rule looks for any phrase followed by a localizer such as中or外 . 
Source sentence : 1919年時 日本的貿易額中有34%的都是經由神戶港進行。
Question : 1919年時，那裡中有34%的都是經由神戶港進行？
Answer : 日本的貿易額
5 . Noun questions ( NP = noun !  > LCP !  < NT !  < < PN ) 
This general rule looks for all noun phrases and depends on the name entity 
recognizer for the question type and suitable question stem . The recognition of 
a pronoun is essential for questions with meaningful answers . 
Source sentence : 在明治和大正時期，神戶港就已經多次實施築港工程。
Question : 在明治和大正時期，神戶港就已經多次實施甚麼？
Answer : 築港工程
2 . 6 Keyword-Based Question Generation 
The keyword based question generation method makes use of keywords such as因為
and所以to generate explanation type questions . We defined two keyword-based rules 
as described below . 
6 . Cause and effect questions ( ROOT [  < <  (  (  ( IP | PP = reason < < 由于 | 因为 )  )  
.  .  ( IP | PP | VP )  )  |  < <  ( IP | PP = reason [  ( PU .  ( IP | PP | VP < < 所以 | 
于事 | 如此 )  )  |  .  ( IP | PP | VP < < 所以 | 于事 | 如此 )  ]  )  ]  ) 
This rule looks for sentences stating cause and effect and identifies the reason 
part as the answer and generates a question asking what causes the result . The 
answer should be the remaining part of the sentence . 
Source sentence : 然而由於日本在江戶時代實施鎖國政策，兵庫津轉變為
國內港口，但仍然擁有重要的地位。
Question : 日本在江戶時代實施鎖國政策，導致甚麼？
7 . Argumentative questions ( ROOT [  < <  (  ( IP | PP = front < < 虽然 | 尽管 | 
虽 | 虽说 | 即使 )  [  . IP = however |  .  ( PU . IP = however )  ]  )  |  
< <  ( IP | PP = front [  .  ( PU .  ( IP | PP | VP = however < <  ( 但 | 但
是 | 可 是 | 不 过 | 可 惜 | 竟 然 | 居 然 | 然 而 | 而 | 却 | 然 | 只 | 只 是
68 A . Kwok-Fai Lui , S . -C . Ng , and Y . -C . Fung 
)  )  )  |  .  ( IP | PP | VP = however < <  ( 但 | 但是 | 可是 | 不过 | 可惜 | 竟然 | 
居然 | 然而 | 而 | 却 | 然 | 只 | 只是 )  )  ]  )  ]  ) 
This rule looks for sentences changing the narrative or argument flow . It identifies the phrase before and after the change , and generates a question that asks 
the effect of the change . 
Source sentence : 戰後神戶港雖然很快就開始復興，然其日本第一大港的
地位在1960年代被橫濱港取代。
Question : 戰後神戶港雖然很快就開始復興，但怎樣了？
2 . 7 Name Entity Recognition and Pronoun Resolution 
Table 1 describes the mapping between the question stems and the entity types of 
noun questions . 
Table 1 . Entity type and question stem 
Entity types Question stems Examples 
Organization 甚麼 神戶港不僅是甚麼，也是日本重要的客運港？
Location 哪裡 神戶港亦開通有前往哪裡的定期客船航線？
Person 誰 誰是當時的神戶市長？
Time 何時 神戶港在何時開港之後再次發展為國際港口？
A good performance name entity recognizer is important for generating correct 
question stem . We constructed a name entity recognizer based on the category of 
Wikipedia articles . Proper nouns such as 大正時期and神戶港 are often titles found in 
Wikipedia and their category information can be exploited . This technique is however 
very slow and not used in this implementation . 
Pronouns are often used for concise writing , but their original nouns are often 
found in previous sentences . In our sentence-as-an-unit approach , their real identity 
must be resolved before a question with a proper answer can be generated . We 
adopted a simple approach of replacing the pronoun with the nearest noun phrase of 
pervious sentence . 
2 . 8 Filtering and Ranking 
The over-generation approach leads to generation of some good questions and more 
poor questions . A filtering and ranking stage is essential to weed out those unwanted 
questions . If a question satisfies any one of the rules below , it is removed from the 
question set . 
1 . Duplicated questions . 
2 . Length of answers is rather long with respect to the length of questions . 
3 . Number of commas in a question is 2 or more . 
4 . Length of questions is shorter than 8 characters . 
5 . The answer is found in the question .  
A Parse Tree Based Computation Technique 69 
3 Results 
We successfully implemented the prototype system with Java , Stanford CoreNLP , 
Tregex and Tsurgeon . There were two focal points in the system evaluation : question 
generation and filtering of valid questions . 
3 . 1 Evaluation on Chinese Question Generation 
We used five excerpted Wikipedia articles as our source text in the evaluation : 
1 . 哥利茲 : describing Goerlitz , a city in Germany . 
2 . 樹熊 : describing Koalas , with some long sentences . 
3 . 日本料理 : describing Japanese cuisine with a poor writing style . 
4 . 神戶港 : describing the Kobe Port . 
5 . 大時代 : describing a soap drama with a story-telling tone . 
We applied the seven rules of question generation and the number of times each 
rule was applicable are summarized in Table 2 . The noun rule has been applied the 
most , which is not surprising given that noun is the most common part-of-speech 
type . We noted that the cause-effect rule has been applied more in the two articles , 樹
熊 ( koala ) and日本料理 ( Japanese cuisine )  . These two articles contain many long 
sentences with conjunctions to connect the ideas . Although a number of reasoning 
questions are generated but most of them do not have a very strong relation between 
the marked causes and effects . The article 大時代 ( a HK TV drama ) produces the 
most argumentative questions . It introduces a TV drama with a story-telling tone and 
narrative change is common . 
Table 2 . Number of times each of the question generation rules is applied in the evaluation 
Rule types 哥利茲 樹熊 日本料理 神戶港 大時代 Total 
Numeric 1 4 0 0 0 5 
Rank 3 0 0 1 2 6 
Time 5 0 2 8 3 18 
Position 4 7 2 4 14 31 
Noun 58 163 119 151 184 675 
Cause-Effect 0 30 10 2 6 48 
Argumentative 0 6 1 3 17 27 
Total 71 210 134 169 226 810 
Length ( Char ) 250 967 518 664 961 
Sentences 17 88 43 43 107 
3 . 2 Analysis of Deficiencies of Generated Questions 
Analysing the deficiencies of generated questions is a major objective of this research 
because this area is at a very preliminary stage . Tables 3 and 4 show the distribution 
of deficiency types , and the results of manual evaluation of question quality . Two 
70 A . Kwok-Fai Lui , S . -C . Ng , and Y . -C . Fung 
coders carried out the manual evaluation with reliable inter-coder reliability . Eleven 
types of deficiencies are found in the generated questions , which are listed in Table 5 . 
Table 3 . Summary of number of poor and valid questions generated from each article 
Articles Total Deficient Valid % of valid question 
哥利茲 71 43 28 39 . 4% 
神戶港 169 77 92 54 . 4% 
日本料理 134 104 30 22 . 3% 
樹熊 210 113 97 46 . 2% 
大時代 226 128 98 43 . 4% 
Table 4 . Number of questions with deficiency generated from each article 
Deficiency types 哥利茲 神戶港 日本料理 樹熊 大時代 Total 
1 16 29 10 19 63 137 
2 5 7 29 6 22 69 
3 5 1 14 7 10 37 
4 0 12 10 58 1 81 
5 0 13 17 17 6 53 
6 4 1 2 0 0 7 
7 1 2 0 0 3 6 
8 8 9 6 2 10 35 
9 4 2 2 1 4 13 
10 0 0 6 0 6 12 
11 0 1 8 3 3 15 
Total 43 77 104 113 128 455 
3 . 3 Discussion 
The percentage of valid questions is apparently very low , ranging from 22% to 54% . 
We argue that this is a baseline performance that could be drastically improved with 
better filtering and ranking methods . The over-generation approach developed by 
Heilman and Smith for English text relies on a machine-learning based ranker to select only a small percentage of questions . Similar techniques have not yet been developed in this work . 
The deficiencies found in the evaluation may be categorized into 3 causes . 
1 . Poor quality source text : causing the generation of a wrong parse tree . 
2 . Error in pre-processing : causing irreversible problems such as separation of 
noun subject from its related text , and separation of cause and effect parts of a 
statement . 
3 . Error in part-of-speech and entity type annotations : causing errors in parse 
trees .  
A Parse Tree Based Computation Technique 71 
Table 5 . Common deficiency types found in generated questions 
Deficiency types Causes Examples ( Answer in brackets ) 
1 . Wrong question word Annotation problem – 
wrong NER analysis 
丁蟹母親為方家的家佣，丁蟹自小
與甚麼相識？ ( 方家少爺方進新 ) 
2 . Missing subject Effect after sentence splitting 
所以不論是高湯、調味、刀工、烹
調方式都是以甚麼為前提？ ( 保留
食物的自然原味 ) 
3 . Ambiguous question Original sentence too short 耳有甚麼？ ( 茸毛 ) 
4 . Long question Original sentence is written poorly 
甚麼貼合自然風物，並且被認為能
體現四季的分明、地理多樣性以及
日本人尊重自然的精神，營養均
衡，也與正月、插秧等傳統節慶密
切相關，代表了日本獨有的價值
觀、生活樣式和社會傳統？ ( 裝盤 ) 
5 . Missing preface Effect after sentence splitting 
所以當地人稱它甚麼？ ( 克瓦勒 ) 
6 . Ungrammatical Annotation problem – POS 
tagger wrongly identify a 
verb as a noun 
以桉樹葉和嫩枝為食，幾乎從不下
地甚麼？ ( 飲水 ) 
7 . Ungrammatical Annotation problem – 
wrong parsing 
哪裡的發展有着密不可分的關係？ 
( 神戶的歷史和神戶港 ) 
8 . Ungrammatical Annotation problem – 
wrong segmentation 
丁蟹母親甚麼家的家佣，丁蟹自小
與方家少爺方進新相識？ ( 為方 ) 
9 . Vague The answer phrase is a low 
information content 
她何時是一名中學生？ ( 當時 ) 
10 . Does not make sense Keyword is matched but it 
does not change the narrative flow 
二弟益蟹是黑社會的打手，但怎樣
了？ ( 性格衝動而殘忍 ) 
11 . Does not make sense Wrong clause captured 是劇中完全的反派人物，但怎樣
了？ ( 但丁蟹這自以為是仁義 ) 
Annotation of Chinese terms is found to be difficult because , first , Chinese is a delimiter-free language , second , many Chinese terms can be both a noun and a verb , 
and , third , proper nouns are not lexicographically distinguishable from other nouns . 
Table 5 shows that wrong question word is the most frequent deficiency type . The 
correctness could be improved if we would adopt a better algorithm that better determine name entity of a noun . 
72 A . Kwok-Fai Lui , S . -C . Ng , and Y . -C . Fung 
4 Conclusion 
A computational Chinese question generation method was developed and evaluated . 
Automatic question generation from unstructured text is a very difficult problem , and 
this study found out that Chinese language would pose much more challenges due to a 
number of language specific reasons . Chinese sentences are formed by looser grammar rule and there are often a variety of ways of parsing a Chinese statement . There 
are far fewer prepositions in Chinese sentences so that relations between terms are not 
as clear as in English . Process like appositive removal and prepositional phrase 
removal in English question generation algorithm cannot be performed in Chinese 
sentences . 
Despite the apparent unsatisfactory rate of generating good questions , the overgeneration approach should be highly promising . Future work should be focused on 
two aspects : a more accurate noun phrase and entity recognition method , and a higher 
precision ranking method . The former aspect requires advances in lexical resources 
for Chinese or more intelligent methods of using existing resources such as Chinese 
Wordnet and Wikipedia . The latter aspect requires more understanding about syntactic and semantic characteristics of proper question in Chinese . 
References 
1 . Heilman , M .  , Smith , N . A .  : Question generation via overgenerating transformations and 
ranking . Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh ( 2009 ) 
2 . Schnotz , W .  : Commentary : Towards an integrated view of learning from text and visual 
displays . Educational Psychology Review 14 ( 1 )  , 101–120 ( 2002 ) 
3 . Eason , S . H .  , Goldberg , L . F .  , Young , K . M .  , Geist , M . C .  , Cutting , L . E .  : Reader–text 
interactions : How differential text and question types influence cognitive skills needed for 
reading comprehension . Journal of Educational Psychology 104 ( 3 )  , 515 ( 2012 ) 
4 . Tierney , R . J .  , Readence , J . E .  : Expository reading-writing think-sheets . In : Tierney , R . J .  , 
Readence , J . E .  ( eds .  ) Reading Strategies and Practices , 5th edn .  , pp . 278–284 . Allyn & 
Bacon , Boston ( 2000 ) 
5 . Collins , J . L .  , Madigan , T . P .  : Using writing to develop struggling learners ’ higher level 
reading comprehension . Building Struggling Students ’ Higher Level Literacy : Practical 
Ideas , Powerful Solutions , 103–124 ( 2010 ) 
6 . Guthrie , J . T .  , Wigfield , A .  , Barbosa , P .  , Perencevich , K . C .  , Taboada , A .  , Davis , M . H .  , 
Tonks , S .  : Increasing Reading Comprehension and Engagement Through ConceptOriented Reading Instruction . Journal of Educational Psychology 96 ( 3 )  , 403 ( 2004 ) 
7 . McKendree , J .  , Stenning , K .  , Mayes , T .  , Lee , J .  , Cox , R .  : Why observing a dialogue benefit learning . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 14 ( 2 )  , 110–119 ( 1998 ) 
8 . Craig , S . D .  , Gholson , B .  , Brittingham , J . K .  , Williams , J . L .  , Shubeck , K . T .  : Promoting 
vicarious learning of physics using deep questions with explanations . Computers & Education 58 ( 4 )  , 1042–1048 ( 2012 ) 
9 . Kalady , S .  , Elikkottil , A .  , Das , R .  : Natural language question generation using syntax and 
keywords . In Proceedings of QG 2010 : The Third Workshop on Question Generation , 
pp . 1–10 ( 2010 )  
A Parse Tree Based Computation Technique 73 
10 . Nielsen , R .  , Buckingham , J .  , Knoll , G .  , Marsh , B .  , Palen , L .  : A Taxonomy of Question for 
Question Generation . In : Proceedings of the Workshop on the Question Generation Shared 
Task and Evaluation Challenge ( 2008 ) 
11 . Levy , R .  , Andrew , G .  : Tregex and Tsurgeon : tools for querying and manipulating tree data 
structures . In : Proceedings of the fifth International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation , pp . 2231–2234 ( 2006 ) 
12 . Levy , R .  , Manning , C .  : Is it harder to parse Chinese , or the Chinese Treebank ? In : 
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics , 
vol . 1 , pp . 439–446 . Association for Computational Linguistics ( 2003 ) 
13 . Xia , F .  : The segmentation guidelines for the Penn Chinese Treebank ( 3 . 0 )  . IRCS Technical 
Reports Series ( 2000 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 74–85 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
A Web-Based Computer-Aided Assessment 
Creation and Invigilation System 
Jeff K . T . Tang1 
, Hei-Chun Yeung2 
, Yat-Fai Man2 
, Kwok-Kwan Li2 
, 
Tak-Lam Wong3 
, Wai-Man Pang1 
, and Wai-Shing Ho1
1 Department of Computer Science , Caritas Institute of Higher Education 
18 Chui Ling Road , Tseung Kwan O , New Territories , Hong Kong 2 The Open University of Hong Kong 
Good Shepherd Street , Ho Man Tin , Kowloon , Hong Kong 3 The Hong Kong Institute of Education 
10 Lo Ping Road , Tai Po , N . T .  , Hong Kong 
jtang @ cihe . edu . hk 
Abstract . Computer-Aided Assessment ( CAA ) is more than managing course 
materials and assignment submissions . In recent years , automated assessment 
has become more popular . Public examinations such as the Internet-Based Test 
( iBT ) of TOEFL and IT Certificate Examinations are computerized assessments 
with multiple-choice questions ( MCQ ) and the answers are automatically 
scored . This is an efficient way of assessing students and especially useful for 
self-financing degree awarding institutes in Hong Kong that are lacking of 
resources such as time and manpower . In this paper , we propose a web-based 
computer-aided assessment creation and invigilation system that promotes a 
paper-free electronic assessment and it is environmental friendly . The system 
provides a user interface for the teachers to input questions to the database , and 
generate a computerized assessment paper by the teacher inputting the desirable 
topics and difficulty levels . In addition , the system allows the examiners to 
customize assessment rules and regulations in a in-class examination . It 
automatically saves the data over time to prevent accidental crashes . Also , 
cheating is prevented by software measures . We have invited some users from 
education sector to try out our system and evaluated their satisfaction , and the 
overall result is positive . 
Keywords : assessment creation , question bank , online examination , online invigilation . 
1 Introduction 
Assessments are necessary for teachers to evaluate the learning performance of their 
students . According to Hurst , a good assessments should show what the students 
actually have learned [ 1 ]  . However , preparing good assessment materials ( especially a 
good examination paper ) always spends teachers a lot of time . Hence computer-aided 
tools that make the process easier are desired , especially for teachers at self-financing 
A Web-Based Computer-Aided Assessment Creation and Invigilation System 75 
degree awarding institutes as they have limited resources and supports . If less time to 
be spent in such tedious and repetitive assessment preparation works , teachers can 
spare more time to improve their teaching skills and materials , and discuss and communicate with students . 
Computer-Aided Assessment ( CAA ) has been widely used in managing course materials and assignment submissions in the last decade . In recent years , automated assessment is becoming more popular . For example , IT certificate examinations are 
computer-based , which are consisting of Multiple-choice questions ( MCQ ) automatically retrieved from a question bank ( a database that contains a vase amount of questions of different topics )  . The answers input by the participants are automatically 
scored at the end of the examination . However , existing computerized examinations 
are simple and not flexible . In fact at higher education institutes , different courses or 
assessments ( e . g . short quiz and final examination ) may have different styles such as 
sectioning , question type , topics and the distribution of difficulty levels . Existing CAA 
systems cannot satisfy the needs of teachers . 
In this paper , we propose a web-based computerized assessment and invigilation system that reduces the teachers ’ workload in preparation of different types of assessments , 
and also promotes an environmental friendly paper-free electronic assessment . The system consists of two parts : the assessment creation tool , and the computer-based invigilation tool . The former tool provides a user interface for the teachers to input questions to 
enrich the question bank . And then , by inputting the desired sectioning , question types , 
topics and their difficulty levels , the tool can generate an assessment paper in XML format , which can be outputted to PDF version for traditional paper-based examination 
and / or directly used in computer-based examination . The computer-based invigilation 
tool provides a platform that able to conduct an online computer-based examination , 
such that both invigilator and students are required to login to the system . The students ’ 
activities and status are monitored by the invigilator in real-time . In order to make sure 
the examination is fair for every participant , accidental crashes are handled and cheating 
are prevented by software methods . 
2 Related Work 
In the last two decades , Learning Management Systems ( LMS ) such as Blackboard [ 2 ] 
and Moodle developed by Dougiamas and Taylor [ 3 ] have widely been used in high 
schools and universities . These systems are mainly for managing course materials and 
assignment submissions . In comparing with Blackboard , which is a commercial product , Moodle is an open source platform that provides a large amount of plugins for 
system administrators to customize according to their colleges ’ needs , for example , 
some useful reporting and statistic tools are available . 
In recent years , Computer-Aided Assessment ( CAA ) is getting more popular . 
The majority of them are web / Internet-based , so we called them online assessment . 
The TOEFL Internet-Based Test [ 4 ] and Cisco Certification Examination [ 5 ] are online assessments consist of Multiple-choice questions ( MCQs ) that are automatically 
76 J . K . T . Tang et al . 
retrieved from a question bank . The answers input by the participants are automatically scored at the end of the examination . 
Traditional LMS ( such as Moodle ) also provide the capability for creating simple 
online assessments with MCQs too . The plugins found in the “ Quiz ” category of 
Moodle ’ s official website provide a great variety of question types and formats to be 
used in Moodle system . Testmoz [ 6 ] is a free web-based platform that allows users to 
create online tests and it supports True / false , MCQs , multiple response , and fill in the 
blank questions . Valentín et al . used the Google Forms to implement online assessments in an IMS Learning Design course [ 7 ]  . The above systems could perform 
automated scoring by exact-matching with the given model answers . However , they 
could not maintain a question bank ( i . e . every time the user has to input new questions )  . In fact , teachers are desired to keep a record of questions created over time , 
and reuse / update them in future [ 8 ]  . 
To maintain the fairness , invigilation is also an important issue in online assessments . NetSupport School shows the current status of every student during the lesson 
[ 9 ]  . It can be applied in invigilation such as the invigilator can monitor and take over 
the control of the student ’ s computer for emergence . Besides , according to our best 
knowledge there seems no existing system available for in-class invigilation purpose . 
3 Proposed System 
Our proposed system consists of two major components : the Assessment creation tool , and the 
Computer-based assessment invigilation tool . The login interface and the main menus for different roles are shown in Fig . 1 .  
( b ) The menu accessible by teachers .  
( a ) The login roles .  ( c ) The menu accessible by students . 
Fig . 1 . The teachers and students can see different menu after logging in our system 
After logging in , the user will see an icon that specifies his / her role as shown in 
Fig . 1 ( a )  . The two major user roles teacher and student access to distinct main menus 
that contain different functions as shown in Fig . 1 ( b ) and Fig . 1 ( c ) respectively . The 
teacher can create / edit questions and assessments , conduct invigilation and view the 
result ; while the student can check the assessment schedule , take the assessment and 
view his / her own result . We will describe these components and functions in the following sub-sections .  
A Web-Based Compu
3 . 1 Assessment Creatio
The assessment creation to
generate an examination pa
Firstly , the teachers shou
the provided interface . Ou
tions )  . The teachers are requ
time . The questions stored 
prototype , we support clos
blanks , as well as Open-end
The second step is to cr
significant amount of ques
ment ( e . g . an examination
covered in the assessment . 
sessment by retrieving the q
right sections according to t
Fig . 2 . 
Build the Question Bank . A
create a new question that 
Fig . 3 . The teacher can create
uter-Aided Assessment Creation and Invigilation System 
on Tool 
ool is only accessible by teachers . There are two steps
aper and its flow is shown in Fig . 2 . 
uld build the question bank by creating new questions w
r system maintains a question bank ( a database of qu
uired to input the questions along with model answers o
in the database can be reused or updated in future . In 
se-ended questions such as MCQs , True / False , Fill in 
ded questions . 
reate the structure of an assessment . Provided there ha
stions , the teachers could design the structure of a asse
n paper ) including how many parts , and the topics to 
Finally , the system could automatically generate the 
questions from the question bank and arrange them into 
the requirements .  
. The flow of the assessment creation tool 
An interface as shown in Fig . 3 is provided for teacher
to be stored in the question bank . S / he should input 
a question and save into the question bank through this interf
77 
s to 
with 
uesover 
this 
the 
as a 
esso be 
asthe 
s to 
the 
face 
78 J . K . T . Tang et al . 
mandatory information such as the content , question type , the marks it carries , difficultly level , and model answer . If it is a MCQ , the teacher should provide the option 
choices and specify which one is the correct option ; otherwise , the teachers are still 
needed to input the textual answer for open questions . 
Note that , our system only capable to score the MCQs , the open questions still 
need to be marked by the teachers themselves . Each question can be attached with one 
optional image . It is necessary to specify the difficulty level , in terms of the number 
of stars . The marks input here is mainly use for open question type . In practical , the 
MCQs in the same section are always carrying the same mark . Hence , the mark of 
each MCQ will be overridden by the sectional subtotal divided by number of MCQs 
in the next stage . After validate the entered information are correct , the question will 
store in the database . The question may not be suitable for the examination over a 
period of time . 
The teachers can review the questions stored in the question bank through the interface as shown in Fig . 4 . They can set each question either private , public , or just 
share among the teachers who are teaching the same course . The teacher who authors 
( i . e . owns ) the question reserves the rights to change the access rights or remove the 
question from the database if s / he found a particular question is no longer usable or 
outdated . As the database could grow to huge size , the questions are able to be 
browsed by their course codes and disciplines . 
Create the Structure of an Assessment . We provide another user interface for the teachers to create an assessment by retrieving the questions from the inventory . For each 
assessment , we separate the question content and layout in order to make it easier to 
be updated . The layout consists of a structure and a style sheet . The structure 
describes the sectioning information and a collection of requirements , which are necessary for instructing the system to retrieve relevant questions from the question 
bank and arrange them according to the teacher ’ s preference . Besides , the style sheet 
defines the outlook of the printed assessment papers . 
Fig . 4 . This interface lists all the questions from question bank that are created by the teacher . 
S / he can delete any inappropriate question ( s )  
A Web-Based Computer-Aided Assessment Creation and Invigilation System 79 
Fig . 5 shows a sample structure defined by a teacher , who has to input required information such as course code , question type , topic , difficulty level , and ratio , etc . The 
ratio is the proportion of a particular topic to be appeared in an assessment . In this 
prototype , we assumed each assessment only for a single course . We restrict the structure to have one single type of questions per section . After entering the above information , an examination structure is created and saved in XML format , and its local 
path is added into the database .  
( a ) Section 1 with MCQs ( b ) Section 2 with open questions 
Fig . 5 . The teacher defines the structure ( e . g . the sectioning and topics ) of an assessment 
Finally , the teacher can review and pick any one of the created assessments with 
the user interface as shown in Fig . 6 . The teacher loads a structure template for generating a new assessment . The system retrieves questions randomly from the question 
bank that satisfy the given requirements . The teacher can either output the assessment 
in printable format , or set an online examination by inputting the examination details 
such as the date / time as shown in Fig . 7 . The examiner can tailor made the examination rules with the existing options as shown in Fig . 8 . 
Fig . 6 . The teacher loads a structure template for generating a new assessment 
80 J . K . T . Tang et al . 
Fig . 7 . The teacher can set an online examination with the generated assessment ( if necessary ) 
The electronic version of examination paper can be exported to a PDF format version , which can be saved to hard-disk and printed out as hard copies in traditional 
examination sessions . We used the PDF Toolkit developed by Alfresco [ 10 ]  , which is 
a software add-on that capable for generating the file to be a PDF format . It helps the 
user to insert the PDF file on some specific page , PDF Encryption , etc . According this 
information , our system focus on generate the examination paper in PDF format from 
database only without encryption and inserting pages . Fig . 9 ( a ) and 9 ( b ) shows the 
cover and content pages of the exported PDF file respectively . 
3 . 2 Computer-Based Invigilation Tool 
The invigilation tool is designed for online assessment , and we highlight how the tool 
can be used for in-class examination . Fig . 10 shows the user interface to be seen by 
the invigilator . They can observe the status of each candidate on the screen , such as 
the presence of examination participants . The invigilator has the authority to 
Fig . 8 . The examiner can tailor made the assessment rules with the existing options 
A Web-Based Computer-Aided Assessment Creation and Invigilation System 81 
end / pause the examination session of any suspicious students at any time . The students ( i . e . the examination participants ) can see another user interface as shown in 
Fig . 11 . The questions are shown on the left hand side , while the assessment rules and 
remaining time are shown on the right hand side . The students have to answer the 
questions within the given time . The tool will automatically save the input text of 
open questions per minute , and every time the student click-select a radio box . When 
the time is up , the examination will be closed and the answer will be saved and submit 
to the system automatically .  
( a ) The generated examination paper cover 
after formatting 
( b ) The generated content after formatting 
Fig . 9 . An example of the generated ( a ) cover , and ( b ) content formatted with a style sheet 
Fig . 10 . The invigilation tool allows the invigilator to observe the status of each candidate 
82 J . K . T . Tang et al . 
Fig . 11 . What a student would see of s / he is taking the online examination . The students can 
click the “ Complete ” button to submit the answer script within the allowed time . 
The invigilation tool also provides the capability for examiners to grade the answers . As shown in Fig . 12 , our system could automatically check the answers of 
close-ended questions such as MCQs , True / False , Fill in the blanks , etc . The open 
questions will not be graded automatically in this version ( but it will be one of our 
future works )  . However , the tool will display the model answer below the students ’ 
answer as shown in Fig . 13 , so the examiner can compare them easier . The sub-total 
marks of close-ended questions will be calculated automatically , while the marks of 
open questions have to be input by the examiner . The system will add up all sub-total 
marks . The tool allows the examiner to select either releasing the total marks to the 
students by email , or sending to the registry for further administration procedures if 
the assessment is a coursework or a final examination respectively . 
Fig . 12 . The close-ended questions are checked by our system automatically . The correct and 
wrong answers are highlighted in green and red colors respectively .  
A Web-Based Computer-Aided Assessment Creation and Invigilation System 83 
Fig . 13 . The model answer is shown below the student ’ s answer , which helps examiner to 
check them more efficiently 
4 Evaluation and Discussion 
We have conducted a preliminary system evaluation . We have invited 18 subjects to 
try out our system and answer a post-test questionnaire . All these subjects are belonging to the education sector ( they are either teachers or students from education institutes )  . The subjects are told to do some tasks focus on the assessment creation part , 
such as create new questions , create a new structure , and generate a new assessment . 
We also show them the usage of the user interfaces of our invigilation tool . In the 
post-test questionnaire , their feelings and comments are collected . 
Table 1 . The result regarding the usability and usefulness of the assessment creation tool 
Score 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Count 0 0 0 0 1 4 6 5 2 0 
Percentage 0% 0% 0% 0% 6% 22% 33% 28% 11% 0% 
Firstly , there are over 80% ( 15 / 18 ) subjects agreed that the system save their time 
and effort for creating new assessments . Secondly , the subjects scored the usability 
and usefulness of the assessment creation tool in a 10-point scale ( the higher the 
score , the better the subject feels )  , and the result is shown in Table 1 . The average 
score is 7 . 16 that implied that the education professionals felt our system is easy to 
use and useful to them . In which , the majority of subjects have given score higher 
than the average , and 94% of the subjects felt positive to our system (  > 5 marks )  . Besides , according to their written feedback , the assessment creation tool is easy to learn 
and they can master the assessment creation process shortly . 
There are two potential risks of our system : the accidental crashes and cheating by 
students . In order to prevent accidental crashes during the online examination , after 
the students login the examination system the web server generates a temporal file on 
84 J . K . T . Tang et al . 
the client side , which records the answers of the completed questions as well as the 
system status before the student submit the examination . Once the system has crashed 
accidentally or even shutting down , the examination environment can be restored in a 
short time that tries to minimize the affect the students continue to answer . Cheating 
can be prevented by randomizing the sequence of the questions to be displayed on 
screen . We also require an invigilator and all students present at the venue at the same 
time , and their system clock are needed to be synchronized . 
5 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper , we proposed the web-based computer aided system that helps teachers 
to create , invigilate , and grade assessments . The assessment creation tool allows the 
teachers to input questions to the question bank for future reuse / update . It also allows 
the teachers to customize the assessment structures by setting requirements such as 
sectioning , topics , difficulty levels . An electronic assessment can be generated afterwards , and it can be outputted into printable ( PDF ) format by giving an examination 
paper style sheet . With this tool , the teachers can reduce their time spent in tedious 
assessment preparation tasks . Besides , the online invigilation tool allows teachers to 
conduct in-class examination . The close-ended questions can be checked automatically while the open questions are still needed to be marked by teachers . 
As future work , we propose to apply Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) techniques to extract and highlight the topics and concepts in both the questions and answers , which help the teachers to mark the open questions . Moreover , open questions 
could be evaluated in a semi-automated way . 
References 
1 . Hurst , M .  : Qualities of Good Assessments : Standardization , Practicality , Reliability & Validity . Psychology 102 : Educational Psychology ( 2014 )  , http :  /  / educationportal . com / academy / topic / assessments-of-learning . html ( retrieved 
May 31 , 2014 ) 
2 . Blackboard : Blackboard Inc .  ( 1997 )  ,  ( retrieved May 
31 , 2014 ) 
3 . Dougiamas , M .  , Taylor , P . C .  : Moodle : Using learning communities to create an open 
source course management system . In : Proceedings of the EDMEDIA 2003 Conference , 
Honolulu , HI ( 2003 ) 
4 . TOEFL iBT : About the Test . ETS ,  ( retrieved May 31 , 2014 ) 
5 . Cisco Certification : Pearson Vue ,  ( retreived ) 
6 . Johnson , M .  : Testmoz ,  ( retrieved May 31 , 2014 ) 
7 . de la Fuente Valentín , L .  , Pardo , A .  , Delgado Kloos , C .  : Using Third Party Services to 
Adapt Learning Material : A Case Study with Google Forms . In : Cress , U .  , Dimitrova , V .  , 
Specht , M .  ( eds .  ) EC-TEL 2009 . LNCS , vol . 5794 , pp . 744–750 . Springer , Heidelberg 
( 2009 )  
A Web-Based Computer-Aided Assessment Creation and Invigilation System 85 
8 . Aldridge , J .  : Why and how to create a question bank ( 2013 )  ,  . 
com / blog / bid / 94628 / Why-and-How-to-Create-a-Question-Bank ( retrieved May 31 , 2014 ) 
9 . NetSupport School : NetSupport ( 2014 )  ,  
( retrieved May 31 , 2014 ) 
10 . Alfresco : Alfresco PDF Toolkit , Alfresco add-ons ( 2013 )  ,  . 
com / addons / alfresco-pdf-toolkit ( retrieved May 31 , 2014 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 86–97 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
The Development of a Final Year Project Management 
System for Information Technology Programmes 
Chun-Hang Leung1 
, Chung-Lun Lai1 
, Tsun-Kit Yuan1 
, Wai-Man Pang1 ,  *  , 
Jeff K . T . Tang1 
, Wai-Shing Ho1 
, and Tak-Lam Wong2
1 
Department of Computer Science , Caritas Institute of Higher Education , 
Hong Kong SAR , China 
wmpang @ cihe . edu . hk 2 
Department of Mathematics and Information Technology , 
The Hong Kong Institute of Education 
Abstract . This project tries to develop an online platform which facilitates the 
final year projects ( FYP ) process implemented by our information technology 
programme . The whole FYP is a year-long process involving groups of students 
and their supervisors to accomplish a theme based project . It is very necessary 
to employ the latest technologies in order to allow different parties to contribute 
and communicate more efficiently . Therefore , we have designed and developed 
a comprehensive web-based system to better support the three kinds of users ; 
they are the FYP programme organizer ( PO )  , project supervisors and the project 
group members . 
Before the academic year starts , PO will have to assign project topics according to the preferences and academic record of the formed project groups . 
This is a tedious and error prone task to manually complete the allocation of 
projects . The system is therefore useful to help PO to arrange project selection 
and allocation procedure , as well as helping the students to submit their preferences and group member information . During the academic year , the system 
would provide different functionalities for the PO to collect student ’ s assessments and markers ’ scores via the submission and grading module . 
Project supervisors will also be able to employ the system for keep tracking 
the progress of the projects with the use of the project management tools , and 
online chat function . Both the students and supervisors will be benefited from 
these functionalities and allow the project to run more smoothly even face-toface meetings are not held very frequently . 
Project group members themselves are provided with similarly effective 
communication tools to allow easy of discussion on project issues among members . Moreover , they can share resources about the project including source 
code and data files using our online repository 
Keywords : project management , online communication , team work , project 
supervision , final year project .  
 
* 
Corresponding author .  
The Development of a Final Year Project Management System 87 
1 Introduction 
In most of the curriculums in information technology ( IT ) undergraduate programmes , it is common that students are expected to complete a comprehensive 
software development project in their final year studies . That is also why it is usually 
known as final year project ( FYP )  . This project based study aims to provide an integrated training on their team working skill , technical knowledge learnt from different 
courses , and project management skill . 
In the IT degree programme offered in Caritas Institute of Higher Education , this 
project based course is delivered throughout 2 semesters in the fourth year of the 
study . Students are grouped to work on a project under the supervision of a professor . 
Before the semester starts , students are required to form groups of three , and involve 
in a project allocation process . The project allocation process is trying to match the 
interest of student to expertise of the professor . Each group of the students can choose 
their favorite project topics which are proposed by professors , and the allocation will 
help to resolve any conflict in the choices between groups based on their academic 
records in last year . Therefore , each project group will be assigned with a theme to 
work when the semester starts . Apart from prototyping the software according to the 
project theme , students are required to have meetings with supervisor , hand in project 
proposals , progress report and carry out presentation of their completed works 
throughout the whole academic year . As a result , both the supervisor and the students 
have to work closely , face challenges and deadlines when finishing the project . 
As the first implementation of the FYP in Caritas began two years before this paper 
is written , many of the processes are carried manually and highly rely on traditional 
ways for communication and assessment submission . For example , in project selection and allocation , students have to form group and choose their favorite project 
topics by filling in forms on paper . Programme Organizer ( PO ) will collect all these 
hardcopy forms and start the project allocation manually . It can become a tedious and 
time consuming task when the number of groups arrived 20 or more . Moreover , the 
assignment of projects requires sorting out the priorities of groups based on their average GPA , and this sorting must be done very careful in order to have a fair result , as 
conflict of choices between groups will always occur and priority do affect the final 
assignment . Apart from the project allocation , many of the deliverables from the 
project are submitted via hardcopy or email . Although the FYP is supported by a 
course management system similar to other courses delivered in the institute , it is not 
very well suited for a project or group based works submission . 
To keep track of students ’ progress , supervisors usually meet students in a weekly 
or biweekly basis . However , as supervisors commonly have to mentor three or more 
groups in a year , a face-to-face meeting has to be limited to as short as an hour or 
half , or even lesser . Students will just have enough time to report their progress and 
setup goals for the coming weeks during the meeting . It does not allow students and 
supervisors to discuss or solve challenges when the project encounters problems . It is 
kind of hard for students to communicate with their supervisor out of the meeting 
time purely by email , as the feedback time is prolonged , and progress of the project 
will be significantly affected . In addition , students usually found it difficult for them 
to keep up the original planned progress after the project starts . This can due to the 
88 C . -H . Leung et al . 
lack of project management knowledge and tools , their busy schedule during the 
semester , and poor management of their prototype ’ s source code and files . 
To overcome the various problems encountered during the implementation of the 
FYP in the previous years , we decided to develop our own final year project management system to serve the whole process . Figure 1 lists a number of procedures in 
the FYP and the corresponding system module to facilitate that procedure . First of all , 
the project allocation module provides a web-based interface for students to form 
groups and select favourite topics , supervisors to promote their project themes and PO 
to automatically complete the project assignments . As all the selections are kept in the 
online database , PO can easily manage the information without keeping hardcopy 
forms . In addition , the project allocation is performed by the system ; this reduces the 
chance of mistakes in the assignment . 
Our system also consists of modules for assessment submission , project management , members ’ communications and sharing . Deliverables of the project like proposal , reports and presentation slides can be uploaded to the system in a submission 
per group manner . Instant chat module helps students and supervisors to communicate 
and discuss problems faced in any time and places . A task management tool is provided for students to record tasks to be completed and keep track of finished tasks in 
the next meeting . Finally , the management and sharing of deliverables and source 
codes among group members can be done effectively with the file sharing and repository module . All of these modules in the system facilitate the whole FYP to run more 
smoothly and efficiently , reduce miscommunication and mistakes to happen as well . 
In the following of this paper , we will give a short review of similar systems from 
other institutes or parties , and then we will focus on the introduction of every module 
in our system in detail . Finally , we will present a preliminary evaluation of the system 
through a small scale user study about the current prototype system . 
Fig . 1 . Overview of the FYP procedures and related system functionalities from the point of 
view of students 
2 Related Works 
Our FYP management system is similar to a typical course management system 
( CMS )  , or a project management system . The comprehensive comparisons of CMS 
had been made by various parties like [ 1 ] and [ 2 ]  , especially the two commonly 
employed systems : Moodle [ 3 ] and Blackboard [ 4 ]  . ClockingIT is a general project 
management system with licensing free of charge [ 5 ]  . It provides basic management 
The Development of a Final Year Project Management System 89 
function like task management with priority assignment to tasks , so that project manager can better arrange manpower and plan the schedule of project . Moreover , it has 
chat function and forum for ease of communication , while at the same time , it provides share folders for user to access documents and source code simultaneously . This 
system also included some advanced functions like Gantt chart generator which is a 
standard tool for project scheduling . 
Clement and Bounds shared similar goal as our system in facilitating the management of FYP [ 6 ]  . While , their focus was to better connect students with potential supervisors before the project allocation starts . Their system also included tools for 
assessment submission and collection which are normal functions in a CMS . Bakar et . 
al . had reported their experience in developing and using an FYP management system 
at Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia [ 7 ]  . Their system consists of three major modules 
including user profile , project monitoring and appointment setting modules . Our system also contains similar functional modules as Barkar ’ s , while we have additional 
modules like project allocation , file repository and online communication . The HKU 
CS Project Management System is a project management system that developed in 
the University of Hong Kong , Department of Computer Science [ 8 ]  . The system can 
show project information , news , schedules and project allocation . In the main page of 
this system , it includes functions like blogs , calendar and forms downloading . Also , 
there is a list of projects and related information , as well as some advanced function 
like providing a virtual machine for students as servers for their FYP . 
3 System Overview 
Our system is divided into five modules based on their functionalities ; they are project 
allocation module , communication module , project management module , file sharing 
& repository , and submission & grading module . These modules are useful for different parties involved in the FYP , they are the Programme Organizers ( PO ) or Administrator , Supervisor / Marker and Students . 
Before the beginning of a year , PO will use the project allocation module to create 
all users ’ accounts and make it ready for supervisors to input their proposed project 
themes . Later , students can form groups and select project topic through the project 
allocation module . Before the start of the first semester , PO will allocate projects to 
each group of students by the automatic allocation function provided , and students 
will be informed via the system . 
When the semester starts , students and supervisors are supported by the system 
with functions like task management , file sharing , and instant chat and discussion . 
Finally , students have to submit deliverables like proposals or reports by uploading to 
the submission and grading module . Marker and supervisors will be notified and insert their score to each project after review . 
In the following of the paper , we will have more detail discussions on these five 
modules individually . 
90 C . -H . Leung et al . 
4 System Functionalities and Implementation 
4 . 1 Project Allocation Module 
Group formation and project selection are the first two steps the system helps the 
students as shown in Figure 1 . These processes are done manually before by submitting paper forms to the PO . Students can use their accounts on the system to submit 
invitation to peers to form a group , as shown in Figure 2a . When the invited partners 
confirmed the group formation , the system will automatically recognize the members 
as a group and allow the group to select their preferred project themes . In Figure 2b , a 
group can choose three favorite projects from the list of available themes as shown in 
the interface in Figure 2c . These project themes are prepared and input beforehand by 
the supervisors to the systems as in Figure 2d . As a result , PO is not necessary to collect all the project themes from supervisors and announce them to the students as 
before . The system leverages the workload to PO and significantly reduces the paper 
works involved . 
An important feature provided by the project allocation module is the automatic assignment of projects according to the academic records of students and the preferences 
from students and supervisors . The mechanism of assigning project theme to a certain 
project group is illustrated in Figure 3 . Project group with a higher average academic 
record in the past years , only GPA is considered in our current implementation , will 
have a higher priority in selecting a project theme . As a result , by looping through all 
the available groups from the highest to lowest GPA , then assign project theme to the 
group based on their preference list will solve the problem of assignment .  
( a )  ( b )  
( c )  
( d ) 
Fig . 2 . User interface for ( a ) group formation ,  ( b ) project selection ,  ( c ) listing of projects available for selection , and ( d ) project theme creation by supervisor 
The Development of a Final Year Project Management System 91 
Fig . 3 . Mechanism in processing the group assignment 
However , when a group has all three preferred projects occupied by other groups 
already , this creates a problem in deciding which project should be assigned to this 
group . Our current implementation will try not to resolve this problem and leave these 
groups unassigned with a project theme in this stage . Groups without any project 
assigned in the first stage will have a chance for project selection in the second stage 
of assignment . 
There may appear groups with the same GPA , and compete on the same project 
theme . This kind of conflict is problematic , as a random assignment to a specific 
group may create cascading effects to the assignments afterwards . For example , 
we have 3 groups A , B and C with their preferred projects P1 to P4 as shown in 
Figure 4a . 
We see that as Group A and B have higher GPA than Group C , they can match for 
favorite projects first . However , as both Group A and B have chosen P1 as their first 
preference , and they have same GPA 3 . 5 . This will cause a conflict between them . A 
simple random assignment of P1 to either one of them can cause very different overall 
assignment result due to the cascading effect as shown in Figure 4b and 4c . It is because each assignment is not always independent . 
As in our example , if P1 is assigned to Group A , Group B surely has to match with 
its second preference P3 , Group C is left unaffected in this case , and can be assigned 
with its first preference P2 . However , the result can be totally different if P1 is assigned to Group B instead . We can see that Group A is now assigned to P2 which is 
the first preference of Group C . In this case , Group C can only match to its second 
preference P3 as shown in Figure 4c . 
To avoid similar unexpected effect on the assignments , our system will prompt PO 
about this kind of tie situations , and stop further processing more assignments . We 
will rely on PO to resolve the conflict first before further processing , but it is rare to 
have groups with same average GPA and it should not cause much workload to PO . 
Our system provides user-friendly interface for the PO to perform the mentioned 
assignment . In Figure 5a , PO can perform the assignment at any time he / she wants by 
just press a single button , and view the result immediately . When conflict occurs , 
the system will raise the problem as shown in Figure 5b to PO and ask for resolution 
from PO . 
92 C . -H . Leung et al . 
Fig . 4 .  ( a ) A sample scenario
projects ( P1 – P4 )  , each group
scenario , conflict occurs becau
conflict by assigning P1 to G
Group B instead . We find that 
Fig . 5 .  ( a ) Administrators can 
Conflicts have to be solved wh
project 
( a )  
( b )  
( c ) 
o of final project assignment with three groups ( A-C ) and f
p have 3 preferences labeled and pointing to the projects . In 
use Group A and B have same GPA .  ( b ) Result of resolving
Group A .  ( c ) Result of resolving the conflict by assigning P
the result of ( b ) and ( c ) are different and even affecting Group 
( a )  
( b ) 
start the allocation process manually through the page above . 
hen two groups are having the same priority in choosing the sa
four 
this 
g the 
1 to 
p C .  
.  ( b ) 
ame 
The Development of a Final Year Project Management System 93 
4 . 2 Communication Module 
Since our final year project is a group based one , communication between members 
and supervisor is an important issue for the success of the project . Our current channel 
of communication between supervisor and students mainly relies on the weekly or 
biweekly regular face-to-face meeting . However , as supervisor usually has limited 
time spending on the meeting , students are usually difficult to learn or discuss problem with their supervisor when working on the project . This can affect both the 
progress of FYP and the efficiency of the students in learning new technologies . 
Fig . 6 . Chat and messaging functions provide to group members and supervisors to communicate online 
As a result , the communication module provides a new and convenient channel for 
meeting and discussion between project members and supervisors . Figure 6 shows the 
chat and messaging functionalities which are provided for students to discuss among 
themselves or ask questions to their supervisor . As message will be left on the system , 
either party can reply at any time or anywhere . It can provide extra time for discussion and reduce the time for finding each other . 
Comparing to e-mail , messages on the system are much clearly organized and will 
not be overwhelmed by their already cluttered mailbox . It is because messages history 
can be referenced easily , and only group members can see the discussion . 
Moreover , the real-time chat allows meeting to be held flexibly at any time that is 
convenient for all members and skip traveling time . Supervisor can also hold meetings at the same time with multiple groups and interleaving to response to questions 
from different groups at the same period of time , this can save time in meeting and 
become more efficient in communication . 
4 . 3 Project Management Module 
Apart from the communication issues , it is essential for all members to have a clear 
target or goal to accomplish during the development of the project . As both students 
and supervisors are always busy on the course works , teaching and learning during 
the semester , in order to keep up the momentum of working on the project , project 
management tool is useful . 
Message / Chat 
history 
Message 
Group List 
94 C . -H . Leung et al . 
Our current project management module includes a task management tool to help 
students in keeping their schedule . Students can create and edit tasks on their scheduler by directly selecting the deadlines as in Figure 7 . Each task in this TODO list can 
be assigned with a priority to help students sorting out the completion order of their 
tasks in hand . It is also very useful in facilitating the discussion and progress checking 
in the regular meeting between supervisor and students . 
Fig . 7 . Student can create tasks on the scheduler and plan for a reasonable completion date of 
project milestones . Therefore , students can keep track of their progress more easily . 
4 . 4 File Sharing and Repository Module 
During the development of a final year project , it is required that group members to 
divide workload among themselves , so that each of them will be responsible to implement only part of the prototype . Therefore , it is very necessary for them to share 
source code , documents and other important resources related to the project . Our current students will rely on some cloud resources in public domain or their own storage 
device to exchange these important data among themselves . 
As a result , our system was designed to provide file sharing function for the project 
groups to share source code or other resources among group mates and their supervisor . This file repository provides a more secure and centralized place for them to keep 
their produced works . Supervisor can easily access students ’ work and keep track of 
the progress by directly viewing the shared deliverable of the project . Figure 8 displayed the web interface when accessing the repository , only member of the project 
will be able to access the files in the repository and share among themselves . 
4 . 5 Submission and Grading Module 
At the end of the semesters , our FYP programme will require students to report their 
results of the project by preparing the system prototypes and reports . They can now 
submit the assessments to the system ( see Figure 9a )  , instead of sending them to PO 
by email before . PO can easily check all the submission status of the groups ( see 
Figure 9b )  , and obtain all the deliverables by simply download from the system . 
Apart from relieving the workload of PO in collecting the assessments , markers 
can easily download the report , review and provide score all through the system via 
interface in Figure 9c .  
The Development of a Final Year Project Management System 95 
Fig . 8 . File sharing and repository module provides a web interface for uploading , storing and 
sharing of project related resources like source code , documents , images and etc 
( a )  ( b )  
( c ) 
Fig . 9 . User interfaces of the Submission and Grading Module .  ( a ) Student can submit assessment .  ( b ) PO can instantly check the submission status of all groups .  ( c ) Markers can grade 
each assessment online . 
96 C . -H . Leung et al . 
5 Preliminary Use
To better understand the st
preliminary study by interv
year ’ s study . They are aske
a questionnaire after the tri
these questions and the resp
Most of the responses ar
system and certain function
convenient and willing to sw
Fig . 10 . The result of a prelim
Results are presented in percen
6 Conclusion 
We presented a specific sys
project in our IT programm
the workload of programm
sessment collection tasks c
our system provides conve
of FYP . First , supervisors a
saging tools in the system . 
students with the project 
supervisors and markers ca
and provide grades on the s
er Study and Evaluation of the System 
trength and weakness of our system , we have performe
viewing thirteen students who are in their third or fou
d to try using all modules of the system , and then comp
ial . The 10 questions are all yes or no questions . Some
ponse are shown in Figure 10 . 
re positive to our system , including the ease-of-use of 
ns . Also , over 70 percent of the users think the system
witch to the system . 
minary user study on our system by interviewing thirteen stude
ntage . 
stem tailor to facilitate the implementation of the final y
me . The FYP management system can significantly red
me organizer . Lots of arrangement , announcement and 
an be done automatically in the system . At the same ti
nience for supervisor and students throughout the proc
and students can better communicate via the chat and m 
. Supervisor can also easily keep track of the progress
management module and file sharing functions . Fina
an quickly manage to obtain the deliverables of the proj
ystem . 
ed a 
urth 
lete 
e of 
the 
m is 
ents . 
year 
duce 
asme , 
cess 
mess of 
ally , 
ject 
The Development of a Final Year Project Management System 97 
References 
1 . Unal , Z .  , Unal , A .  : Evaluating and comparing the usability of web-based course management systems . Journal of Information Technology Education 10 , 19–38 ( 2011 ) 
2 . Bremer , D .  , Bryant , R .  : A Comparison of two learning management Systems : Moodle vs 
Blackboard . In : Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the National Advisory 
Committee on Computing Qualifications , NACCQ , New Zealand , pp . 135–140 ( 2005 ) 
3 . Dougiamas , M .  , Taylor , P . C .  : Moodle : Using learning communities to create an open 
source course management system . In : Proceedings of the EDMEDIA 2003 Conference , 
Honolulu , Hawaii ( 2003 ) 
4 . Blackboard Inc .  : Blackboard ( 2013 )  ,  / 
5 . ClockingIT . com : ClockingIT free time-tracking hosting ( 2008 )  , 

6 . Clement , R .  , Bounds , P .  : Making Connections between Final Year Students and Potential 
Project Supervisors . In : Proceedings of the HEA STEM Learning and Teaching Conference 
( 2013 ) 
7 . Bakar , M . A .  , Jailani , N .  , Shukur , Z .  , Yatim , N . F . M .  : Final Year Supervision Management 
System as a Tool for Monitoring Computer Science Projects . Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 18 , 273–281 ( 2011 ) 
8 . HKU CS : Hong Kong University Project Management System ( 2014 )  , 

K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 98–103 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Design and Implementation of a Teacher-Guided 
Semi-automatic Assessment Feedback Generator 
Wai-Shing Ho1 
, Tak-Lam Wong2 
, Wai-Man Pang1 
, and Jeff K . T . Tang1
1 Caritas Institute of Higher Education , 
18 Chui Ling Road , Hong Kong 2 The Hong Kong Institute of Education 
10 Lo Ping Road , Tai Po , Hong Kong 
{ wsho , wmpang , jtang }  @ cihe . edu . hk 
tlwong @ ied . edu . hk 
Abstract . Detailed feedback to assessments is an integral part of students ’ 
learning experience . Students can learn from their mistakes through the teachers ’ feedback . However , with the increasing workload , teachers may not have 
enough time to write detailed and meaningful comments to every student in 
every assessment . This paper aims to share our experience in designing and implementing a teacher-guided semi-automatic assessment feedback generator . 
We observed that students ’ mistakes are repeating in nature . Instead of writing 
repeated comments for individual students , teachers may use our system to 
manage feedback templates and prepare individualized comments . Our system 
provides the interface for teachers to record common mistakes and comments in 
student assessments , and it lets teacher assign different comments to students 
easily . This approach does not only greatly enhance the consistency in teachers ’ 
marking and comment generation , it also frees the teachers from repeated writing . The challenges faced in the design and implementation in our system are 
discussed in this paper . 
Keywords : automatic feedback generation , case study , teacher support . 
1 Introduction 
Many studies have shown that feedback is one of the most powerful influences on 
learning and achievement [ 1 ]  [ 2 ]  . Assessments help students locate mistakes and misconceptions in the subject matters , and detailed feedback on incorrectly answered assessment items helps students identify where they are actually wrong and how they can 
avoid making the same mistakes again . However , giving detailed feedback on every 
assessment item to every student is a very time consuming task . With the increasing 
workload of teachers in local higher institutions , teachers may not have enough time to 
give assessment feedback and the students ’ learning quality may suffer . 
We observe that many teachers use a large portion of time in managing the courses , 
writing down the feedbacks , and disseminating the feedbacks to the students . With the 
advancement in technology , it is common that educators use e-learning platforms like 
Design and Implementation of a Teacher-Guided 99 
Blackboard1 
or Moodle2 
to manage online courses . Student enrolments and course 
materials can be easily manipulated on the platform . Assessment setup and submission 
can also be managed . However , those platforms do not provide convenient means for 
teachers to record and disseminate detailed feedback to each assessment item . Teachers 
may still need to mark their feedbacks on the assessments and return the feedbacks 
together with the assessments to the students . When the class size is large , marking 
such assessments is time consuming and tedious . 
In order to save teachers time in providing detailed assessment feedback to students , we designed a teacher-guided semi-automatic assessment feedback generation 
system . This system helps teacher in three aspects . First , it communicates with the elearning platform ( Moodle in our case ) to retrieve course , enrolment , and assessment 
information . The system provides a convenient interface for teachers to record detailed feedback on each assessment item . Second , we observed that most of the students ’ mistakes in assessments are repeating in nature . i . e .  , a lot of students share the 
same mistakes . If the feedbacks are written , the teacher needs to write the same detailed feedback to a large number of students ’ work . This is inefficient , and it is prone 
to inconsistency in marking . The system provides a convenient interface for a feedback knowledge base , and teachers may select the most suitable feedback from a list 
instead of typing them from scratch . This saves a large portion of typing time and 
enhance the consistency in marking . Third , the system constructs the detailed feedback to every student and disseminates this individual , personalized feedback to the 
student . With such a personalized feedback , we believe that students will get a sense 
of being cared and their learning experience is much improved . 
This paper is structured as follows . Work related to automatic assessment and 
feedback will be discussed in Section 2 . Section 3 discusses the design of our teacherguided semi-automatic assessment feedback generation system . A discussion on issues in implementing the system and evaluation plan will appear in Section 4 . 
2 Related Work 
Feedback is one of the most powerful influences on learning and achievement [ 1 ]  . 
Timely and detailed feedback is essential in effective delivery of knowledge in classrooms . As shown in many studies [ 2 ]  [ 3 ]  , feedback from teachers ( or peers ) greatly 
enhances the learning process of the students . Higgins , Hartley ,  & Skelton reported 
that formative assessment feedback is essential to encourage the kind of “ deep ” learning desired by teachers [ 4 ]  . Instead of giving grades to the students , teachers ’ highquality written feedback can help students engage with the subject in a deep way . 
Thus , it is important to help teachers to prepare high quality assessment feedbacks to 
the students under the limited time . 
One attempt to helping teachers create timely feedback is to mark the assessments 
automatically . Such research usually focused at identifying whether the students have 

1 / 
2 
100 W . -S . Ho et al . 
found the correct answers or not for the assessment and whether the students have 
mastered the corresponding course content . For example , a framework for making 
different types of automated assessment tools is proposed in a study [ 5 ]  . The system 
proposed can use a wide range of different assessment formats to check whether the 
students can master the module content . Edwards also proposed the use of an automated grading approach to assess students ’ code in a software engineering course [ 6 ]  . 
However , such automated marking systems usually have limited usage because the 
correctness is not well-defined in certain types of assessments ( e . g .  , essay with arguments )  . The correctness cannot be objectively determined by the system and teachers ’ 
intervention is required in generating proper feedbacks . Thus , a semi-automatic 
approach which can incorporate teachers ’ flexible feedbacks is required . 
Learning management systems such as Blackboard and Moodle provide modules 
for managing the courses and setting up assessment items . They can automatically 
mark whether the students answered the assessment items correctly and provide a tool 
for teachers to give comments to the students for each assessment item . However , the 
comments are limited to be textual , and the comments to different student are independent . Thus , teachers have to spend a large amount of time typing in repeating 
comments if many students are having the same mistake . Therefore , a new system 
that can manage the comments and avoid repetition is essential in reducing the teachers ’ workload . 
3 System Design 
Our assessment feedback system is a web-based system . It communicates with 
Moodle to get the course and enrolment information . After getting that information , 
teachers can create assessments in our system , and then use our interfaces to record 
the detailed feedbacks to the students . When the marking finishes , the system combines the feedback to each individual student and sends personalized feedbacks to the 
students . 
3 . 1 Course / Enrolment / Assessment Management 
This module helps teachers in retrieving the course and enrolment information from 
Moodle . Teachers can use their accounts to connect to the institutional Moodle and 
retrieve the courses they teach and the enrolment in each course . When assessments 
are created in a course , the enrolment information can be used in managing the 
students who need the feedback . 
When an assessment is being created , the teacher can choose how much marks are allocated to each assessment item . Later , when the teacher marks the assessment for each 
student , he / she can give the marks and select the comments for each assessment item . 
3 . 2 Assessment Feedba
When a teacher selects an 
shown in Fig . 1 . This is the
students . The teacher can ac
can select the student he / sh
The teacher can input the m
student . If the teacher finds
not applicable , he / she can 
new feedback for that asse
gether with other applicable
Fi
Fig . 2 . Inte
Design and Implementation of a Teacher-Guided 
ack Records 
assessment for marking , he / she gets a list of students
e basis for the teacher to record the detailed feedback to 
ccess the submitted files through the links ; and then he / 
he is marking . A new page similar to Fig . 2 will be sho
marks and select the appropriate comments applicable to 
that there is a new situation where previous comments 
click on the “ add new feedback entry ” button to creat
essment item . Then , he / she can select this new entry , 
e entries , in the selection box . 
g . 1 . List of students in an assessment 
erface for marking an assessment of a student 
101 
s as 
the 
/ she 
wn . 
the 
are 
te a 
to-
102 W . -S . Ho et al . 
3 . 3 Dissemination of Comments 
After marking all the assessments , the teacher can use the system to assemble the 
individual comments to every student . In the enrolment records , e-mail information is 
stored for every student . Fig . 3 shows a sample e-mail to a student with individual 
marks and comments . We believe that the detailed individual comments received by 
the students will improve the learning quality . 
Dear Tai Man , 
Here is a summary of your Assignment 1 in MATH102 Numerical and IT Literacy . 
Should you have any enquiry , please contact XXXX 
Regards ,  
Dr . HO 
Item Mark Comments 
Q1 : Network 10 / 10 Nil 
Q2 : Security 5 / 10 -3 : Description of PKI is not clear 
-2 : Poor presentation 
Q3 : Plasma vs . LED TV 7 / 10 Plasma is active and LCD in LEDTV is 
passive 
Total 22 / 30 
Fig . 3 . A sample e-mail to the student generated by the system 
4 Discussions 
With the help of the system , teachers can easily give detailed individual comments to 
the students on every assessment . The interface helped the teachers to reduce the 
marking time by providing functionality in managing the course , enrolment , assessment , and comment generation . Instead of writing detailed comments as text , teachers 
can use the interface to select common comments . With the high quality individual 
comments received by the students , we believe that the students will appreciate the 
efforts and learn the course materials in a better manner . Thus , the next stage of the 
research is applying this system in courses and evaluate the perceptions of teachers 
and students on the effectiveness of the system .  
Design and Implementation of a Teacher-Guided 103 
References 
1 . Hattie , J .  , Timperley , H .  : The power of feedback . Review of Educational Research 77 ( 1 )  , 
81–112 ( 2007 ) 
2 . Paulus , T . M .  : The effect of peer and teacher feedback on student writing . Journal of 
Second Language Writing 8 ( 3 )  , 265–289 ( 1999 ) 
3 . Weaver , M . R .  : Do students value feedback ? Student perceptions of tutors ’ written responses . Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education 31 ( 3 )  , 379–394 ( 2006 ) 
4 . Higgins , R .  , Hartley , P .  , Skelton , A .  : The concientious consumer : Reconsidering the role 
of assessment feedback in student learning . Studies in Higher Education 27 ( 1 )  , 53–64 
( 2002 ) 
5 . English , J .  , Siviter , P .  : Experience with an automatically assessed course . In : Proceedings 
of the 5th Annual SIGCSE / SIGCUE ITiCSE Conference on Innovation and Technology in 
Computer Science Education , pp . 168–171 . ACM , Helsinki ( 2000 ) 
6 . Edwards , S . H .  : Using test-driven development in the classroom : Providing students with 
automatic , concrete feedback on performance . In : Proceedings of the International Conference on Education and Information Systems : Technologies and Applications , Florida 
( 2003 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 104–115 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
PMS – A Simulation Game for Interactive Learning 
of Software Project Management 
Richard W . C . Lui , Hareton K . N . Leung , Vincent T . Y . Ng , and Philip T . Y . Lee 
Department of Computing , Hong Kong Polytechnic University , Hung Hom , Hong Kong 
richard . lui @ polyu . edu . hk 
{ cshleung , cstyng , cstylee }  @ comp . polyu . edu . hk 
Abstract . Successful management of software projects requires both theoretical 
project management knowledge as well as practical reality-like management experiences . Simulation Based Training provides a hands-on approach to explore 
the complexity of managing projects through rapid and inexpensive experimentation . Most of the existing project simulation game focuses only on the 
management of time , scope , cost , and human resource . There are relatively fewer 
products which focus on project stakeholder management , communication management and quality management . 
In this paper , a project management simulation game , PMS , is introduced to 
support the interactive learning of software project management . The game design , implementation and how it may support the learning of software project 
management concepts in different knowledge areas are discussed . 
Keywords : Software Project Management , Project Management Simulation , 
e-Learning , Simulation Based Teaching . 
1 Introduction 
IT projects are plagued by poor quality and schedule / cost overrun . To improve the 
quality of IT projects , better education of ( future ) project managers is essential . Simulation games have been adopted by many universities throughout the world to support 
the teaching of project management [ 1 ]  . Simulation Based Training provides a handson approach to explore the complexity of managing projects through rapid and inexpensive experimentation . The user will take the role as a project manager and make 
project decisions in some pre-defined project scenarios ( e . g . manufacturing printers , 
building a high-tech large scale shark aquarium )  . Many of the existing project management simulation games only focus on the time , scope , cost , and human resource 
management in Project Management Body of Knowledge ( PMBOK )  [ 2 ]  . Relatively 
fewer existing products focus on project stakeholder management , communication 
management and quality management of software projects . 
In this paper , a project simulation game , PMS , is introduced for supporting the learning of software project management . Students will act as a project manager in a hypothetical software development project scenario . In addition to scope , time , and human 
resources management , the game also focuses on project decisions for communication 
PMS – A Simulation Game for Interactive Learning of Software Project Management 105 
management , stakeholder management , and quality management . Students are required 
to analyze the stakeholders ’ needs and expectation , properly define the project scope , 
and communicate with the stakeholders throughout the project . Students are also expected to conduct quality review activities early and develop prototypes for demonstration so as to improve the software quality and increase the stakeholders ’ satisfaction . 
This paper is organized as follows . In section 2 , related studies will be reviewed . 
The game design will be discussed in section 3 . In section 4 , the implementation will 
be discussed . In section 5 , summary and future studies will be presented . 
2 Related Studies 
Simulation Based Training is recognized as an efficient and effective way for teaching and learning complex , dynamic systems for engineering and business curriculum 
[ 3 ]  . Drappa and Ludewig developed a simulation game for software engineering education named SESAM [ 4 ]  . The game adopts a rather low-level modeling approach . 
For example , bugs multiplication and additional communication effort due to more 
team members are simulated in the game . The game , however , interacts with students 
with plain texts without any graphics . The authors evaluated the educational value of 
the game through controlled experiment and case study , and they showed that the 
simulation software is a powerful tool for project manager training . Dantas et al . developed a simulation game called ‘ The Incredible Manager ’ to assist students to learn 
project management knowledge through experience from simulation [ 5 ]  . The game 
has project members and project phases defined . Distinct models for each scenario 
with uncertain aspects were also developed . 
Harvard project management simulation game1 
is designed for letting the students 
to explore the trade-offs among the three major project management levers : scope , 
resources , and schedule and the effect of team morale on project attributes . The user 
will take the role of a project manager who will make project decisions on some predefined project scenarios ( e . g . manufacturing of printers )  . Project Team Builder is a 
project management simulation game with a scenario editor for creating custom 
project scenarios [ 6 ]  . The game mainly focuses on time , scope , cost , human resources 
and risks management . SimSE is a computer-based environment that facilitates the 
creation and simulation of real-istic game-based software process simulation models 
[ 7 ]  . It supports different software development processes , such as Waterfall , Extreme 
Programming , rapid prototyping , and Rational Unified Process . Lee proposed an 
Excel-based project management simulation game to facilitate the teaching of project 
management in a classroom setting [ 8 ]  .  

1 
Project Management Simulation : Scope , Resources , Schedule V2 . Available at 

106 R . W . C . Lui et al . 
3 Game Design 
3 . 1 Overview 
In the game , the user plays
project . The user should an
oritize the project requirem
of the stakeholders within t
ing project execution , the 
project team to achieve goo
stakeholder satisfaction and
time , quality )  . Figure 1 s
attributes for the different e
Requirements : Functional 
the project . 
Stakeholders : Stakeholders 
( e . g . project sponsors , custo
different expectation on th
Each project stakeholder h
come . 
Activities : An activity is an
members in the project . Th
non-core requirements are i
Team members : Activities a
have different skill levels / ex
Project team : A project tea
team should communicate 
understand the project ’ s ben
Defects : Defects are mistak
ment project when performi
F
s the role as a project manager in a software developm
nalyze the stakeholders ’ expectation and preferences , 
ments , and define the project scope to meet the expectat
the project constraints ( e . g . scope , time , cost , quality )  . D
user should make appropriate decisions to motivate 
od morale , communicate with stakeholders to achieve go
d monitor the project progress in different dimensions ( 
shows the various entities in the simulation game . T
entities in the game is shown in Table 1 . 
and non-functional requirement which form the scope
are people who are involved in or affected by the proj
omers , system users , suppliers , etc )  . Stakeholders may h
he functional / non-functional requirements of the syst
as their own level of satisfaction towards the project o
n abstraction of a unit of work to be performed by te
he effort required to complete activities increases if m
included in the project scope . 
are performed by a team member . Different team memb
xpertise . 
am is composed of one or more team members . The proj
with stakeholders early and regularly so that they fu
nefits and the most updated project status . 
kes or faults that may be generated in a software devel
ing project activities . 
Fig . 1 . Overview of the game model 
ment 
prition 
Durthe 
ood 
e . g . 
The 
e of 
oject 
have 
em . 
outeam 
more 
bers 
oject 
ully 
lop-
PMS – A Simulation Game for Interactive Learning of Software Project Management 107 
3 . 2 Game Decisions and Causal Model 
The user should make a number of management decisions to plan for the project . 
Based on the analysis of the project stakeholders , the user should properly define the 
functional and non-functional requirements to be completed in the project . The user 
should also choose appropriate team members to be included in the project team and 
assign them to complete the project activities . 
The project will start after the project planning is completed . The user should arrange management activities during the project execution to manage the project team 
and stakeholders . Examples of management activities are shown in Table 1 . 
Table 1 . Game Attributes 
Entity Attributes Description 
Stakeholder Project Understanding 
The extent to which stakeholders understand about the 
project ( expected project outcome and benefits , current 
project status , etc )  . 
Satisfaction Stakeholders ’ satisfaction towards the project outcome . 
Importance The power and level of influence of the stakeholder on 
project outcome or decisions . 
Project Interest The stakeholder ’ s level of concern for project outcomes . 
Communication 
Preference 
Communication preference is the way the stakeholder 
wants to be communicated with . This includes face-toface meeting , virtual meeting , detailed status report and 
prototype demonstration . 
Team Member 
Project knowledge 
Team members ’ knowledge about the project objective , 
scope , stakeholders , most updated project status , etc . 
Morale The level of motivation and enthusiasm of the team 
member towards their work . 
Fatigue The level of tiredness of the team member . A team 
member may make more mistakes if he / she is tired . 
Daily Cost Salary of the team member per day 
Project team Teamwork How well the team members can work together as a 
team to achieve the project objectives 
Requirement 
Understanding 
The extent of project team members ’ understanding of 
the stakeholder ’ s true needs and expectation on the 
project or final product . 
108 R . W . C . Lui et al . 
Table 2 . Management activities during project execution 
Category Management activities
Team Management Organize a Project Kickoff Meeting 
Creation of Team Slogan 
Reward and Recognition 
Half-Day Off 
Social Gathering 
Training / Coaching 
Internal Communication Internal Meeting 
Social Interaction / Management Wandering Around 
External Communication Status Review Meeting ( Face to Face / Virtual Meeting ) 
Brief / Detailed Status Reports 
Quality Requirement Review Meeting 
Code Review Meeting 
Prototype Preparation and Demonstration 
Time Management Overtime 
Others Purchase ( e . g . Project Portal ) 
At the end of the game , the user ’ s performance will be evaluated based on Stakeholder Satisfaction , Time , Quality , Cost , Scope and Team Morale ( refer to Table 3 )  . 
In this paper , we will focus on the stakeholder satisfaction and quality dimensions . 
Table 3 . Dimensions for evaluating the game performance
Dimension Description 
Stakeholder 
Satisfaction 
The stakeholders ’ perception towards the project and final product . The 
stakeholder satisfaction is affected by the project scope and the communication with the project team . Important stakeholders ( with high influence over 
the project decisions and outcome ) will have higher weight towards the 
stakeholder satisfaction score . 
Time The time required to complete the project 
Quality The total number of defects in the final product . 
Cost The amount of financial resources spent on the project . 
Scope The requirements that are completed by the project . Users will get higher 
score if more non-core requirements are included in the project scope . 
Team Morale 
The average morale of the team members in the project team . 
Understanding project stakeholder ’ s perception and expectation during project development is essential for improving the chance of project success [ 9 ]  [ 10 ]  . An effective project manager should analyze , evaluate , and deliver messages in different communication channels ( e . g . status meeting , status report ) to ensure the effectiveness of 
the communications . Fig . 2 shows the causal diagram for the stakeholder satisfaction 
dimension in the game . From the stakeholders ’ profile , the user should analyze the 
stakeholders ’ needs and communication preference . Based on the importance of the 
PMS – A Simulation Game for
stakeholders , the student sh
needs of the different stake
such as status review meet
with stakeholders early and
fits and the most updated pr
to the project will require m
nication between the projec
standing will decrease and t
The stakeholders may ha
ent communication style 
communication preference 
status report )  . Appropriate 
stakeholder satisfaction . 
In software projects , stak
what they really need or wa
outcome of IT projects , it 
way which is accessible to
the system or particular fun
stakeholders can better und
ucts . This helps increase th
ers ’ satisfaction . 
Fig . 2 . C
Studies have shown that
ing phase are introduced in 
ated may multiply the defe
the software development li
early stages . The game mod
face defects , and coding d
project may increase the de
fore , the defects should be d
review . During prototype p
r Interactive Learning of Software Project Management 
hould properly define the project scope by prioritizing 
eholders . During project execution , management activi
tings and status report should be adopted to communic
d regularly so that they fully understand the project ’ s be
roject status . In the game , stakeholders with higher inter
more frequent project update . If there is insufficient comm
ct team and stakeholders , the stakeholder ’ s project und
this may decrease the stakeholder satisfaction . 
ave different personality types and they may prefer dif 
[ 11 ]  . In the game , different stakeholders have differ 
( e . g . face-to-face meeting , virtual meeting , and detai
communication channel should be adopted to increase 
keholders often do not have a very clear understanding
ant . Due to the intangible nature of software and uncert
is challenging to represent the key facets of software i
o all stakeholders [ 12 ]  . Prototype is a working replica
nctions . Through prototype preparation and demonstrati
derstand the user interfaces and features of the final pr
he stakeholders ’ understanding and maintain the stakeho
Causal Diagram for Stakeholder Satisfaction
t the majority of the defects identified in the software t
the requirement or design phase [ 13 ]  . Since defects gen
ects in the downstream activities , defects identified late
ifecycle are more expensive to fix than defects identifie
dels three types of defects : requirement defects , user in
defects . In the game , the defects generated earlier in 
efect generation rate of subsequent project activities . The
discovered and fixed early by requirement review and c
reparation and demonstration , team members can also g
109 
the 
ities 
cate 
enerests 
muderfferrent 
iled 
the 
g of 
tain 
in a 
a of 
ion , 
rodoldtestnerer in 
d at 
nterthe 
ereode 
gain 
110 R . W . C . Lui et al . 
a better understanding of r
system design . In the game
during prototype demonstra
tion of prototypes may als
team . As a result , fewer def
4 Implementation
4 . 1 System Component
Fig 3 shows the system com
Project Scenario : A proj
ties ( e . g . team member , sta
sudden events ) and the gam
Scenario Builder : Custom
Game Rule : An XML d
management activities , num
different game attributes ) 
Game Configuration too
format . 
Game Engine : The proje
The game rules and causal m
User interface : Graphica
4 . 2 Game Features 
A hypothetical project scen
user will act as a project m
cation development project
and eight potential team me
requirements , evaluate system feasibility and validate 
, the user interface defects can be discovered and correc
ation to the stakeholders . The development and demons
so increase the requirement understanding of the proj
fects will be generated in subsequent project activities . 
n
ts 
mponents : 
ject scenario is an XML document which defines the e
akeholder , activities , and their dependency , requireme
me attributes ( E . g . initial cash , target completion date )  . 
m project scenarios can be created by scenario builder . 
document defining the rules for the game ( e . g . effects
mber of action points per week , causal relationship of 
ol : Defines the game settings and causal model in XM
ect scenario will be read and executed by the game eng
model are enforced by the game engine . 
al user interface for interacting with the users . 
Fig . 3 . System components 
nario is created to illustrate the features of the game . T
manager in a company and plan for the video contest ap
t ( refer to Fig . 4 )  . In the project , there are five stakehold
embers . 
the 
cted 
straject 
entients , 
s of 
the 
ML 
ine . 
The 
ppliders 
PMS – A Simulation Game for Interactive Learning of Software Project Management 111 
Fig . 4 . Project Schedule for the hypothetical project 
During the planning phase , the user may select a subset of non-core requirements 
to be included in the project scope ( refer to Fig 5 )  . As time and human resources are 
required to complete the selected optional requirements , the user should strike a balance between stakeholders ’ satisfaction , project duration and cost . The user should 
also select appropriate team members to form the project team and assign them to the 
project activities ( refer to Fig . 6 )  . 
Fig . 5 . Selection of non-core requirements 
112 R . W . C . Lui et al . 
Fig . 6 . 
Comprehensive stakehol
game ( refer to Fig . 7 )  . The
the stakeholders ’ needs an
the team member profiles to
different team members . 
Fig .  
Team Selection and Activity Assignment 
lder profiles and team member profiles are created for 
e user may review the stakeholder profiles to underst
nd expectation on the project . The user may also rev
o understand the skill level and the various attributes of
7 . Stakeholder Profile and Team Profile 
the 
tand 
iew 
f the 
PMS – A Simulation Game for
The project will start afte
tions are available for the u
viewing the sudden events 
On every Monday , the user 
( weekly decisions )  ( refer to
management activities in th
prepare and demonstrate a
selected for attending the p
senter . Choosing a presente
increasing the project stakeh
Fig . 8 . O
r Interactive Learning of Software Project Management 
er the project planning phase ( refer to Fig . 8 )  . Different 
user ( e . g . adjusting team member ’ s assignment to activ
that have occurred , reviewing charts / project informatio
r may plan the management activities for the coming w
o Fig . 9 )  . Users will be given action points for planning 
he current week . For instance , suppose the user intend
a prototype in the current week . A stakeholder should
presentation and a team member should be chosen as a p
er with good communication skill has the bonus effec
holder ’ s satisfaction . 
Office Environment during project execution 
Fig . 9 . Weekly Decisions Options 
113 
opvity , 
on )  . 
week 
the 
s to 
d be 
pret of 
114 R . W . C . Lui et al . 
Users may click the nex
will be displayed to summa
management activities in th
and the number of defects g
To monitor the project p
show the progress bars for
Satisfaction and Team perf
view the project performan
faction chart . The stakeho
communication between the
Fig . 1
The game ends when all
to show the project manag
Fig . 11 )  . 
xt day button to proceed to the next day . A daily summ
arize the project progress . The user may review the plan
he current week , current progress of each project activ
generated in the project . 
progress , the user may view the project dashboard ( wh
r Quality , Complete Tasks , Average Morale , Stakehol
formance )  . The game also provides charts for users to 
nce over time . Fig . 10 shows the average stakeholder sa
older satisfaction drops over time because of inadequ
e project team and the stakeholders . 
0 . Average stakeholder satisfaction Chart 
l project activities are completed . A page will be displa
gement performance under the different dimensions ( re
Fig . 11 . Project Completion Page 
mary 
nned 
vity , 
hich 
lder 
reatisuate 
ayed 
efer 
PMS – A Simulation Game for Interactive Learning of Software Project Management 115 
5 Summary and Future Work 
In this paper , the design and implementation details of a project simulation game , 
PMS , is presented . In addition to scope , time , and human resources management , the 
game also focuses on project decisions for communication management , stakeholder 
management , and quality management . Our future work is to extend the game to include more project management decisions and sudden events . Also , the effectiveness 
of the game for the teaching and learning of software project management concepts 
will be evaluated . 
References 
1 . Cohen , I .  , Iluz , M .  , Shtub , A .  : A simulation-based approach in support of project management training for systems engineers . Systems Engineering 17 ( 1 )  , 26–36 ( 2014 ) 
2 . PMI .  : A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge : PMBOK ( R ) Guide . 
Project Management Institute ( 2013 ) 
3 . Salas , E .  , Wildman , J .  , Piccolo , R .  : Using simulation-based training ( SBT ) to enhance 
management education . The Academy of Management Learning and Education 8 ( 4 )  , 
559–573 ( 2009 ) 
4 . Drappa , A .  , Ludewig , J .  : Simulation in software engineering training . In : Proceedings of 
the 22nd International Conference on Software Engineering , pp . 199–208 . ACM ( 2000 ) 
5 . Dantas , A . R .  , de Oliveira Barros , M .  , Werner , C . M . L .  : A Simulation-Based Game for 
Project Management Experiential Learning . SEKE 19 , 24 ( 2004 ) 
6 . Shtub , A .  : Project Management Simulation with PTB Project Team Builder . Springer 
( 2012 ) 
7 . Navarro , E .  , Van Der Hoek , A .  : Multi-site evaluation of SimSE . In : Proceedings of the 
40th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education , pp . 326–330 . ACM 
( 2009 ) 
8 . Lee , W . L .  : Spreadsheet based experiential learning environment for project . In : Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference ( 2011 ) 
9 . Pan , G .  : Information systems project abandonment : a stakeholder analysis . International 
Journal of Information Management 25 ( 2 )  , 173–184 ( 2005 ) 
10 . Boonstra , A .  , De Vries , J .  : Managing stakeholders around inter-organizational systems : A 
diagnostic approach . The Journal of Strategic Information Systems Archive , 190–201 
( 2008 ) 
11 . Morris , R .  , Sember , B .  : Project Management That Works : Real-World Advice on Communicating , Problem-Solving , and Everything Else You Need to Know to Get the Job 
Done . In : AMACOM ( 2008 ) 
12 . RAENG .  : The Challenges of Complex IT Projects . The Royal Academy of Engineering 
( 2004 ) 
13 . Patton , R .  : Software Testing . Sams Publishing ( 2005 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 116–126 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
A Study on Students ’ Attitudes Towards Teacher ’ s 
Intervention in Statistical Computing Laboratory 
Ken W . Li1 
and Merrilyn Goos2
1 
Department of Information and Commmunications Technology , 
Hong Kong Institute of Vocational Education ( Tsing Yi )  , Hong Kong SAR , China 
kenli @ vtc . edu . hk 2 
School of Education , The University of Queensland , Queensland , Australia 
m . goos @ uq . edu . au 
Abstract . Within an IT environment , the teacher ’ s role has changed from 
transmitting knowledge to managing IT resources for learning and facilitating 
student learning . Thus , the teacher planned for improving classroom teaching 
practice by playing these two roles , particularly in computing laboratory sessions . Students within each computing laboratory session were divided into 
small groups so as to enable teacher ’ s intervention to offer assistance or directives within each group more efficiently . A question which arises here is how 
the teacher ’ s intervention promoted learning and statistical thinking of students 
when using IT in a statistics classroom . A questionnaire based survey was then 
conducted to study the attitudes of students towards teacher ’ s intervention 
within IT environment . The results of the survey indicated that the teacher 
played facilitating and supporting roles in their learning to foster a learning atmosphere , restructure learning tasks and provide feedback . 
Keywords : social process of learning , modelling heuristics , statistical thinking . 
1 Introduction 
Within an IT environment , the teacher ’ s role has changed from transmitting knowledge to managing IT resources for learning and facilitating the construction of knowledge . For instance , Knutzen discussed how teachers could develop and manage an 
online learning management system in which they posed the learning content for discussions among students and the teachers monitored their discussion activities [ 1 ]  . 
The teacher planned for improving classroom teaching practice by adopting facilitating as well as managerial roles within an IT environment . Using Taylor ’ s model , IT 
refers to enabling students to have a more intuitive feel for the concepts being studied ; 
serving students to alleviate computational burden ; and implementing computer logic 
by students [ 2 ]  . 
The teacher taught a statistics module ,  “ Regression Modelling ”  , following the pattern of 2-hour lectures and 1-hour computing laboratory sessions in each of fifteen 
weeks . In lectures , the teacher initiated discussions inviting all his students to respond . 
They talked about how they addressed a question of common concern based on their 
A Study on Students ’ Attitudes Towards Teacher ’ s Intervention 117 
own understandings , opinions , judgments or perspectives . The discussion they held 
was a form of interaction where they joined together to evaluate ideas their classmates 
brought forward in order to come up with a joint decision leading to a correct and 
complete answer . In computing laboratory sessions , the teacher used talk to guide the 
construction of students ’ knowledge and orchestrate learning activities . Students within 
each computing laboratory session were divided into 2-person or 3-person groups in 
order to increase students ’ opportunities for peer learning ; and to enable teacher ’ s intervention to offer assistance or directives within each group more efficiently and to 
monitor their learning progress . Each group of students was assigned laboratory exercises demanding the analysis , design or implementation of the solutions in a statistical 
computing laboratory . Apart from apparent uses of IT in teaching and learning , IT has 
an educational role in organising environment to promote interaction among students 
as well as students and teacher . 
2 Literature Review 
In Li and Ng ’ s study , they found that students demanded peer collaboration and student-teacher interaction when learning with IT [ 3 ]  . Learning with IT here refers to the 
way that can organise the learning environment to promote social interaction among 
students as well as between students and a teacher . Thus , Li proposed a model of 
pedagogy in an IT environment aiming at quality teaching and learning of statistics to 
address the significance of teacher guidance and peer collaboration [ 4 ]  . 
Li conducted a questionnaire based survey to study how students perceived the 
learning activities taking place in an IT environment [ 5 ]  . The survey results indicated 
that most students held positive perceptions of learning with IT associated with productive social interactions with their learning partners . They found their interaction 
with their learning partners collaborative and their communication beneficial to learning as it enabled them to verbalise their thoughts to sustain task-centred discussion . 
Fisher argued that teachers played managerial and facilitating roles in classroom 
teaching would be beneficial to student learning [ 6 ]  . Students sought assistance from 
their teacher to overcome learning difficulties or mediate between a student and their 
learning partners . That is why Hoyles and Sutherland found that learning progress is 
associated with teacher ’ s interventions for maintaining control with students ; offering 
teacher-directed tasks ; and being in the form of teaching episodes [ 7 ]  . They also studied the nature of the intervention and further classified the interventions as being 
motivational , reflectional or directional . 
Mercer provided a framework to analyse talk used by teachers assisting students in 
knowledge construction in the following ways [ 8 ]  . The teacher elicited knowledge 
from students ; responded to what students said ; and recapped to re-organise , or call 
attention to the significant ideas students had just presented . The recap so used can be 
reflectional , and may end up offering hints or directives . 
Tharp and Gallimore also developed a framework for categorising ways in which 
teachers ’ talk assists their students to learn , via modelling , questioning , cognitive 
structuring , contingency management , feeding back and instructing [ 9 ]  . Within each 
118 K . W . Li and M . Goos 
of these discourse categories , teachers may elicit , respond , or recap . For instance , 
questioning can be used to elicit what students already know or how their understanding develops or misunderstanding arises . Alternatively , questioning can be used for 
responding to students if the teacher wishes to extend discussions . Questioning can 
also be used to offer directions towards task improvement or accomplishment after 
recapping students ’ useful ideas as hints . The talk analysed by Mercer [ 8 ] and Tharp 
and Gallimore [ 9 ] seems not focusing on student motivation . 
Nevertheless , almost no research has explored how teacher ’ s intervention in statistics classroom is significant , especially in the way that promoting students ’ statistical 
thinking in statistical computing laboratories . As such , an empirical study was conducted to address the research question ,  “ How does the teacher ’ s intervention promote 
learning and statistical thinking of students when using IT in a statistics classroom ?  ”  . 
3 Empirical Study 
A questionnaire based survey is a commonly used tool by education researchers to 
solicit feedback from students and the findings are used for enhancing both teaching 
and learning . A questionnaire consisting of a set of organised and structured questions 
was designed and constructed as a standard format for gaining a more comprehensive 
understanding of student-teacher social interactions when learning with IT . 
It was decided that survey data could best be gathered by means of personal interview . Through a personal interview , it was possible to elaborate difficult and in-depth 
questions ; to achieve a higher response rate ; and to facilitate communications between 
an interviewer and interviewees in order to gather more accurate and genuine responses given by interviewees [ 10 ]  . 
3 . 1 Questionnaire Design 
A questionnaire on learning activities in a statistical computing laboratory was designed and constructed to develop a deeper understanding of how social interaction 
was constructed when students were learning with IT . The questionnaire should include clear instructions , optional wordings and an appropriate flow of questions , and 
must be arranged in proper order and divided into parts and numbered ( Foddy , 1998 )  . 
The first four questions , Q ’ s 1-4 were to gather students ’ general views about the 
teacher ’ s intervention . Q ’ s 5 and 6 enabled students to express the role and significance of the teacher in their learning process . Q ’ s 7-9 wanted to know whether or not 
IT was regarded as a vehicle of education delivery that could replace human teaching . 
The prime purpose of the last two questions , Q ’ s 10 and 11 was to know students ’ 
experience of interacting with their teacher . 
The questionnaire was made of multiple-choice questions ( Q ’ s 1 , 2 , 3 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 
10 )  . All multiple-choice questions were closed-ended and provided proper response 
categories that were mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive . Mutually exclusive response categories provided non-overlapping options so that interviewees found 
no confusion and could provide clear-cut answers to the questions . Collectively 
A Study on Students ’ Attitudes Towards Teacher ’ s Intervention 119 
exhaustive response categories provided interviewees with all possible options to 
select as their answer . Most of these multiple-choice questions used a five point Likert scale for response categories so as to enable interviewees to indicate the extent of 
their agreement with a proposition . Some used a three point Likert scale for response 
categories so as to enable interviewees to indicate whether they agreed or disagreed 
with , or were neutral towards a proposition . All these response categories were also 
balanced , symmetrically about neutral alternatives . 
To understand why interviewees chose their answers for closed-ended questions , 
open-ended questions ( Q ’ s 4 , 5 , 6 and 11 ) were also designed to collect their views 
and enabled them freely to express what aspects of teaching were beneficial to their 
learning and in what they would like the teaching to be changed to help them learn 
better . 
3 . 2 Research Participants 
The research participants for this questionnaire-based survey were all the 58 full-time 
students ( whole class ) enrolling in Year 2 of the Higher Diploma in Applied Statistics 
and Computing ( HDASC ) course in the Hong Kong Institute of Vocational Education . Among the students , 32 were females and 26 were males , ranging in age from 19 
to 22 . 
3 . 3 Pilot Study 
The format and layout of the questionnaire were initially checked with two experienced education researchers . They also scrutinised the wordings in questions to 
ensure the questions were clear , specific , precise and unambiguous and could be understood by most interviewees . Some questions and question wordings were rephrased for ensuring unbiasedness as well as improving clarity and conciseness . 
To ensure that valid and reliable responses would be collected from the students , a 
pilot study was subsequently done by interviewing nine of the students enrolling in 
Year 3 of HDASC students . They were selected for this study because they had experience of learning with IT and learning with their learning partners as well as their 
teacher . They were willing to participate in this pilot study prior to the main study . 
This pilot study did not only provide an estimate of time taken for responding to this 
survey but it could also highlight what aspects in the questionnaire should be improved . 
3 . 4 Main Study 
3 . 4 . 1 Data Collection 
Each of the 58 full-time HDASC Year 2 students ( whole class ) was interviewed by 
the first author . Through the personal interview , it was possible to achieve 100% 
response rate . As all the 58 students is the HDASC Year 2 student population , no 
sampling is required . Thus , the survey conducted has no error due to sampling . 
120 K . W . Li and M . Goos 
3 . 4 . 2 Data Validation 
To ensure data accuracy , three phases of data validation were carried out . The first 
phase of data validation took place in the process of personal interview , since the 
responses given by the interviewees were cross checked with their previous responses 
for data logic and consistency . The interviewer found no questions were missing or 
unanswered and no answers were incomplete or redundant . 
In the second phase of data validation , a double-check system was adopted to allow 
the first author of this paper and a data checker to code and input the data into two 
spreadsheets independently . A computer program was written to detect whether or not 
there was discrepancy between the two spreadsheets of the data codes and input . 
There was no such discrepancy , implying that the data were properly coded and correctly inputted . 
The data validation tasks were basically accomplished at the first two phases . The 
third phase of data validation was to perform an exploratory data analysis subject to 
the scrutiny of data . Its results revealed whether or not there were missing data , meaningless data range , data inconsistency and undefined data codes . 
3 . 4 . 3 Error Handling 
As the response rate was 100% , there was no non-response error . If questions were 
missing or unanswered or answers were incomplete or redundant , the interviewees 
were asked to answer questions or clarify their answers . However , no missing data or 
no redundant information was found . If answers were illegible , the interviewer was 
asked to transcribe his writings . Some validation rules were built in a spreadsheet to 
perform data range and consistency checks according to the content and context of 
data . If any of these checks was failed , no more data would be accepted and the data 
needed to be amended immediately . This could safeguard data to fall into meaningful 
range and be consistent at each time data was being inputted . 
3 . 4 . 4 Data Analysis 
Statistical analysis of students ’ responses was divided into preliminary and in-depth 
levels by using the statistical software SPSS . In preliminary data analysis , gaining 
statistical insights and ideas from data was by means of descriptive statistics and statistical tables that provide valuable clues to what and how an in-depth statistical 
analysis of students ’ responses ought to be carried out subsequently . Contingency 
tables and Chi-square tests were used in the in-depth data analysis for investigating 
factors that might be related to teacher ’ s intervention . 
3 . 4 . 5 Research Findings 
Statistical analyses of these data were performed by examining the general characteristics and patterns of data . The analysis addressed these questions : how did students 
perceive the educational use of IT when learning with the teacher ’ s intervention ? 
How beneficial to their learning process is interacting with their teacher ? How did the 
teacher ’ s intervention prompt student learning ?  
A Study on Students ’ Attitudes Towards Teacher ’ s Intervention 121 
Question 1 asked students “ Do you need or need not teacher ’ s intervention in your 
learning process ?  ” Most students ( 46 , 79 . 3% ) said they needed the teacher ’ s intervention , 12 ( 20 . 7% ) students gave a neutral response but none said “ No need ”  . 
Table 1 gives a summary of students ’ attitudes towards the teacher ’ s intervention . 
A little over two-thirds ( 40 , 68 . 9% ) found the timing of teacher ’ s intervention appropriate and about one-quarter ( 15 , 25 . 9% )  , and 3 students ( 5 . 1% ) gave neutral and 
negative responses respectively ( Q2 )  . Almost all students ( 54 , 93 . 1% ) thought their 
intervention was beneficial and none gave a negative response , while 4 students were 
neutral ( Q3 )  . One student found his teacher ensured he was on the right track of learning but he also felt uncomfortable when his teacher pointed out his mistake . Two 
students found the teacher gave constructive ideas or explained the approach to problem solving but they both found the teacher sometimes gave direction instead of answers to their questions . One student found the teacher provided well-timed feedback , 
as well as direction but she felt under pressure during the teacher ’ s intervention . 
Table 1 . Students ’ attitudes towards teacher ’ s intervention ( Q ’ s 2 and 3 ) 
Questions 
% of students responded to options ( N = 58 ) 
1 2 3 4 5 
Q2 . Do you find the timing of teacher ’ s intervention in your learning process appropriate or inappropriate ? 1
10 . 3 58 . 6 25 . 9 3 . 4 1 . 7 
Q3 . Do you find the teacher ’ s intervention beneficial or unbeneficial to 
learning process ? 2
12 . 1 81 . 0 6 . 9 0 . 0 0 . 0 
Notes . 
Owing to rounding , there may be a slight discrepancy between the sum of individual responses and the total 
as shown in the above table . 
1
Options 1-5 :  “ very appropriate ”  ,  “ appropriate ”  ,  “ neutral ”  ,  “ inappropriate ” and “ very inappropriate ”  . 
2
Options 1-5 :  “ very beneficial ”  ,  “ beneficial ”  ,  “ neutral ”  ,  “ unbeneficial ” and “ very unbeneficial ”  . 
It is of interest to investigate factors that might be related to the needing of 
teacher ’ s intervention by using Contingency tables and Chi-square tests . Most of the 
data were found in factor 1 ( i . e .  , Q1-needing teacher ’ s intervention ) and factor 2 ( i . e .  , 
Q3-teacher ’ s intervention beneficial to learning progress ) cell of the contingency table 
of factor 1 by factor 2 , indicating these two factors might be related . Moreover , Chisquare test ( 2 χ ( 2 , N = 58 )  = 7 . 751 , p = 0 . 021 ) shows statistical evidence to support 
the relationship between factor 1 and factor 2 would exist . Similarly , data concentrated in the common cell of a contingency table , factor 3 ( i . e .  , Q2-appropriate timing 
122 K . W . Li and M . Goos 
of teacher ’ s intervention ) and factor 2 ( i . e .  , Q3-teacher ’ s intervention beneficial to 
learning progress )  , revealing that these two factors might be related , statistical evidence ( 2 χ ( 4 , N = 58 )  = 13 . 739 , p = 0 . 008 ) substantiates the relationship between 
factor 3 and factor 2 would also exist . 
An open-ended question ( Q4 ) was asked to explore under which circumstances 
students found the teacher ’ s intervention beneficial or unbeneficial to their learning 
process . The students who found the teacher ’ s intervention beneficial to their learning 
process , their responses were categorized by using Tharp and Gallimore ’ s means [ 2 ] 
of offering learning assistance ( see Table 2 ) so that their responses could fall in more 
than one of the categories . The teacher provided regular feedback to supplement explanations and clarify their misunderstanding ( 29 students , 50 . 0% )  . He gave them 
cues and restructured learning in order to model thinking ( 25 students , 43 . 1% )  . He 
posed questions to organise students ’ thoughts towards task accomplishment ( 4 students , 6 . 9% )  . He offered students cognitive structuring assistance to formulate goals 
for problem solving ( 3 students , 5 . 1% )  . When students did not respond to the means 
of learning assistance the teacher adopted , he eventually gave them instruction ( 9 
students , 15 . 5% )  . Feeding back and modelling were the two most common means of 
assistance the students found beneficial to their learning process , whereas contingency 
management seemed not to be adopted . Apart from these categories , some students 
mentioned that the teacher maintained an active dialogue with students to encourage 
their participation and involvement , share their views as well as ideas and respond to 
assistance they sought ( 8 students , 13 . 8% )  . Conversely , those few students who found 
the teacher ’ s intervention unbeneficial to their learning process felt uncomfortable 
when their mistakes were pointed out . 
Table 2 . Circumstances under which students found the teacher ’ s intervention beneficial ( Q4 ) 
Circumstances % of students ( N = 58 )  * 
I . Feeding back 50 . 0 ( 29 ) 
II . Modelling 43 . 1 ( 25 ) 
III . Instructing 15 . 5 ( 9 ) 
IV . Questioning 6 . 9 ( 4 ) 
V . Cognitive structuring 5 . 1 ( 3 ) 
Note .  
* 
Frequencies add to more than 58 because students ’ responses could be placed in more than one category . 
The teacher ’ s intervention is a social process within which the teacher and students 
were engaged in various assisting means , feeding back , modelling , instructing , questioning and cognitive structuring .  
A Study on Students ’ Attitudes Towards Teacher ’ s Intervention 123 
In the context of statistics teaching and learning , the teacher found the first four 
means of assisting students ’ learning useful . It was possible to model the acts of translating the strength of data relationship and mapping the direction of data context when 
assisting students in interpreting a regression slope . Questioning was used to assist 
students in achieving specific learning objectives through free and open exchange of 
their ideas , and this was particularly useful as an implicit means of developing 
students ’ thinking and reasoning . Cognitive structuring was adopted to organise students ’ thinking associated with selecting among models and justifying model practicality as being parts of regression heuristics . Contingency management exhibited in 
the form of praise was used to build , maintain or bolster students ’ confidence before 
moving into more difficult learning tasks . 
An open-ended question ( Q5 ) asked students to describe how the teacher orchestrated the learning activities in the computing laboratory . Their responses to the 
question were summarized and could be placed in more than one category in Table 3 . 
The teacher provided good learning materials and organised meaningful learning 
activities , with 52 . 6% ( 30 students )  . He structured learning process by reviewing key 
concepts , clarifying misconceptions , initiating discussions and outlining problem 
background and settings , and context , content and measurement of data , with 36 . 8% 
( 21 students )  . He fostered an amusing climate for learning and told students jokes in 
order to reduce work stress in the computing laboratory , with 33 . 3% ( 19 students )  . He 
monitored learning activities and provided feedback to students , with 26 . 3% ( 15 students )  . He utilised IT resources for teaching and learning , with 14 . 0% ( 8 students )  . He 
organised students to engage with tasks , as well as peers in line with generating feelings of confidence , competence and control , with 8 . 8% ( 5 students )  . The responses 
given by the students suggest they thought that the teacher was conscientious and 
responsive in the ways he organised learning . They considered that he did not merely 
provide knowledge , but also created and maintained a positive and warm classroom 
atmosphere conducive to learning . 
Table 3 . Ways learning activities orchestrated by teacher ( Q5 ) 
Ways learning activities orchestrated by teacher % of students ( N = 57 )  *  
I . Provided good learning materials and activities 52 . 6% ( 30 )  
II . Structured the learning process 36 . 8% ( 21 ) 
III . Fostered learning atmosphere 33 . 3% ( 19 ) 
IV . Monitored learning progress regularly 26 . 3% ( 15 ) 
V . Used IT 14 . 0% ( 8 ) 
VI . Organized students to engage with tasks and peers 8 . 8% ( 5 ) 
Note .  
* 
Frequencies add to more than 57 because students ’ responses could be placed in more than one category . 
124 K . W . Li and M . Goos 
In response to an open-ended question ( Q6 )  , which asked how well students had 
learnt from the teacher , the following positive views were expressed . When approaching students , the teacher monitored students ’ learning progress and regulated their 
learning . To respond to differing student needs , he made effective use of questioning 
to check student understanding and offer directives . He did not provide direct instruction to his students , but encouraged them to construct their own understanding by 
helping them learn how to recognise problems ; and set goals and determine strategies 
for solving regression problems . The teacher demonstrated the use of computer software and provided good command of English language . He was conscientious and 
enthusiastic about teaching and patient to elaborate concepts and explained problems 
clearly . He managed class time and activities and guided effective learning . He used 
effective communication skills and utilised illustrations and examples in the computing laboratory , as well as the lecture theatre . He developed a rapport with students 
and helped students build confidence . He was very statistically competent to provide 
correct knowledge with ease and broadened their views of statistics learning . The 
students held positive perceptions of the teacher ’ s teaching as well as interpersonal 
skills . However , a few students also had negative views about their teacher because 
they felt his presentation was sometimes boring and he did not explain concepts clearly and answer their queries directly . 
It is interesting to examine preferences for interaction with the teacher , learning 
partners and IT . Table 4 shows students ’ responses to Q ’ s 7 , 8 and 9 . Twenty-three 
( 39 . 7% ) students preferred learning with a teacher to IT , only one student preferred 
learning with IT to a teacher and 34 ( 58 . 6% ) students gave a neutral response . When 
asked to choose between learning partner and IT , about half ( 30 , 51 . 7% ) preferred the 
former , while 24 ( 41 . 4% ) students had no preference and very few preferred the latter 
( 4 , 6 . 9% )  . Students were evenly divided in choosing to learn with a partner ( 14 , 
24 . 1% ) or the teacher ( 12 , 20 . 7% )  , and about half ( 32 , 55 . 2% ) gave a neutral response . The results of analysing students ’ responses to these three questions showed 
that students would like to interact with humans rather than IT but it is still worth 
noting that significant numbers of neutral responses given by students . The majority 
of students gave favorable responses to the teacher ’ s intervention , while a significant 
proportion of students ( 25 . 9% ) neutrally responded to one item , concerning the timing 
of the teacher ’ s intervention . Apparently , students who expressed a preference would 
like to interact with humans , the teacher or their partners rather than IT . 
Question 10 asked students “ Do you have a better or a worse learning progress 
when working with your teacher in an IT environment ?  ” Seven ( 12 . 1% ) students had 
much better learning progress when working with their teacher in an IT environment , 
43 ( 74 . 1% ) had better learning progress , and 8 ( 13 . 8% ) gave a neutral response , but 
no students gave a negative response ( i . e .  , neither much worse nor worse learning 
progress ) respectively . One of the eight neutral respondents did not give any specific 
reasons and another elaborated with a positive reason ,  “ Teacher provided clear learning objectives so as to focus better on problem-solving task ”  . The others identified a 
variety of reasons why they sometimes did and sometimes did not experience learning 
progress . The positive reasons were similar to those in Table 2 , while negative reasons included lack of confidence , confusion or lack of direction in exploring problem 
solving approaches suggested by the teacher , and communication with the teacher 
slowing down progress .  
A Study on Students ’ Attitudes Towards Teacher ’ s Intervention 125 
Table 4 . Students ’ preference for learning ( Q ’ s 7 , 8 and 9 ) 
Questions 
% of students selected options ( N = 58 ) 
1 2 3 
Q7 . Would you like to learn with a teacher 
or IT ? 3 39 . 7 58 . 6 1 . 7 
Q8 . Would you like to learn with your 
learning partner ( s ) or IT ? 4 51 . 7 41 . 4 6 . 9 
Q9 . Would you like to learn with your 
learning partner ( s ) or teacher ? 5 24 . 1 55 . 2 20 . 7 
Notes . 3
Options 1-3 :  “ teacher ”  ,  “ neutral ” and “ IT ”  . 
4
Options 1-3 :  “ learning partner ”  ,  “ neutral ” and “ IT ”  . 
5
Options 1-3 :  “ learning partner ”  ,  “ neutral ” and “ teacher ”  . 
To understand why the students had a better or a worse learning progress when 
working with your teacher in an IT environment , an open-ended question ( Q11 ) was 
asked to collect their responses . Their positive responses spelt out the form of teacher ’ s intervention as being motivational , reflectional or directional as in Hoyles and 
Sutherland [ 7 ]  . As being motivational , the teacher was more concerned with student 
participation in learning activities so as to motivate students to learning . In reflectional form , the teacher checked student understanding as identifying their learning difficulty ; and assisting in reasoning and enquiring about what they were doing . For the 
interventions being regarded as directional , their teacher posed directive questions or 
gave cues resulting in escalating their thoughts towards problem solving . Besides , the 
teacher made effective use of information and IT resources to drive student learning 
and demonstrated how to build regression models using IT tools . They found their 
teacher was communicative in learning in the way that they could interact and exchange views . One of the responses was affection , as indicated that the teacher was 
participative and students were accompanied by the teacher in tour of learning . 
Conversely , students had worse learning progress when working with teacher because they were anxious and had less freedom and limited room for problem solving . 
They found wasting time for student-teacher communication that would slow down 
learning progress . The teacher did not provide a clear and directive approach to tackling a problem but posed questions that were demanding and created confusion . 
4 Conclusion 
The research findings from this study outlined the importance of the teacher ’ s intervention in students ’ development of statistical understanding . Students believed that 
the teacher played facilitating and supporting roles in their learning to foster a learning atmosphere , restructure learning tasks and provide feedback . It was important to 
126 K . W . Li and M . Goos 
them that their teacher organised their interaction with tasks and peers in ways that 
facilitated their learning of regression modelling heuristics . 
When the teacher adopted the role as a learning facilitator , he knew when to supplement his students information , knowledge and skills ; when to leave students to 
solve problems on their own ; and when to use questioning to stimulate thinking ; to 
direct thoughts ; or to have intellectual exchanges between the teacher and their students . He encouraged student participation , involvement and autonomy . Under these 
circumstances , IT supported and initiated learning and promoted social interaction . 
Based on the data collected and findings from the survey , how teacher ’ s intervention may facilitate student learning in an IT environment can be understood but the 
survey findings cannot lead to in-depth understanding of how different categories of 
teacher ’ s intervention interplays so as to develop the ownership of learning . Therefore , it would be better to be supplemented by observation study . 
References 
1 . Knutzen , K . B .  : Driving and assessing participatory learning . Paper presented at CITE 
Research Symposium 2013 , Hong Kong ( 2013 ) 
2 . Taylor , R . T .  : The computer in school : tutor , tool , tutee . Teachers College Press , New York 
( 1980 ) 
Li , K .  , Ng , T .  : Enhancing students ’ understanding of regression concepts . In : Kong , S . C .  , 
Ogata , H .  , Arnseth , H . C .  , Chan , C . K . K .  , Hirashima , T .  , Klett , F .  , Lee , J . H . M .  , Liu , C . C .  , 
Looi , C . K .  , Milrad , M .  , Mitrovic , A .  , Nakabayashi , K .  , Wong , S . L .  , Yang , S . J . H .  ( eds .  ) 
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference of on Computers in Education , 
pp . 792–800 . Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education , Hong Kong ( 2009 ) 
3 . Li , K .  : A pedagogy model for an IT Environment . In : Kong , S . C .  , Ogata , H .  , Arnseth , H . C .  , 
Chan , C . K . K .  , Hirashima , T .  , Klett , F .  , Lee , J . H . M .  , Liu , C . C .  , Looi , C . K .  , Milrad , M .  , Mitrovic , A .  , Nakabayashi , K .  , Wong , S . L .  , Yang , S . J . H .  ( eds .  ) Proceedings of the 17th International Conference of on Computers in Education , pp . 890–895 . Asia-Pacific Society for 
Computers in Education , Hong Kong ( 2009 ) 
4 . Li , K .  : A study on computer-supported collaborative learning in statistics classroom . In : 
Lam , P .  ( ed .  ) Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on e-Learning , pp . 259–268 . 
Academic Publishing International Limited , Reading ( 2012 ) 
5 . Fisher , E .  : The teacher ’ s role . In : Scrimshaw , P .  ( ed .  ) Language , Classrooms and Computers , pp . 51–74 . Routledge , London ( 1993 ) 
6 . Hoyles , C .  , Sutherland , R .  : Logo Mathematics in classroom . Routledge , London ( 1989 ) 
7 . Mercer , N .  : The guided construction of knowledge . Multilingual Matters Ltd .  , Clevedon 
( 1995 ) 
8 . Tharp , R . G .  , Gallimore , R .  : Rousing minds to life : teaching , learning and schooling in 
social context . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1988 ) 
9 . Foddy , W . H .  : Constructing questions for interviews and questionnaires : theory and 
practice in social research . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1998 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 127–135 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Applying “ First Principles of Instruction ” In 
a Blended Learning Course
Wing Sum Cheung1 
and Khe Foon Hew2
1 
National Institute of Education , Nanyang Technological University , Singapore 
wingsum . cheung @ nie . edu . sg 2 
The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong SAR , China 
kfhew @ hku . edu . hk 
Abstract . In this paper , we share our experience of using the “ First Principles ” 
of instruction [ 1 ] to design a blended learning course :  ( a ) Learning is promoted 
when learner are engaged in solving real-world problems ,  ( b ) Learning is 
promoted when existing knowledge is activated as a foundation for new 
knowledge ,  ( c ) Learning is promoted when new knowledge is demonstrated to 
the learner ,  ( d ) Learning is promoted when new knowledge is applied by 
learner , and ( e ) Learning is promoted when new knowledge is integrated into 
the learner ’ s world . We describe the five “ First Principles ” of instruction by 
Merrill and identify the specific instructional activities that support each 
principle in either the face-to-face mode or e-learning mode . We conducted a 
survey study to gather students ’ perspectives of the organization of the blended 
course as well as the ability of the blended learning course to engage 
student learning . Eighteen students were involved in the study . The results 
showed that the blended learning course was well organized to provide 
meaningful activities , and that the blended course provided a positive engaging 
learning environment for the students . 
Keywords : online learning , quality assurance , student engagement , student 
satisfaction , first principles of instruction , blended learning . 
1 Introduction
In the recent years , more and more universities are using the blended approach to 
deliver their courses . In the National Institute of Education , Nanyang Technological 
University , we have been using the blended approach to deliver our graduate courses . 
One of the courses in the Master of Arts in Instructional Design and Technologies 
( MAIDT ) program has been using the blended approach supported by Merrill ’ s First 
Principles of instruction for the last decade [ 1 ]  . In this paper , we describe the five 
 “ First Principles ” of instruction by Merrill and identify the specific instructional 
activities that support each principle in either the face-to-face mode or e- learning 
mode . We also conducted a survey study to gather students ’ perspectives of the 
organization of the blended course as well as the ability of the blended learning 
course to engage student learning . 
128 W . S . Cheung and K . F . Hew
1 . 1 Background 
The “ Multimedia Design ” course is currently offered as an elective course in the 
Master of Arts in instructional design and technologies ( MAIDT ) program . It was a 
39 hours face-to-face course in 13 sessions ( ie 13 weeks )  . Each session typically 
includes lectures , discussion , exercises , and feedback of the students ’ projects by their 
classmates and instructor . The purpose of using the blended learning approach in this 
course was to cut down the face-to-face sessions . This was because many students 
were often late for the face-to-face sessions . As a result , they missed the lectures 
and other in class activities . 
We took seven years to convert the face-to-face “ Multimedia Design ” course to a 
blended learning one [ 2 ]  . In 2007 , we decreased the duration of the course from 
13 weeks to 4 days . The 4 days included 32 hours of face-to-face sessions and 
7 hours of asynchronous online discussion . In 2008 , we shortened the face-to-face 
time from 32 hours to 24 hours making it a 3-day course . In addition to the 
asynchronous online discussion activities , we also provided a computer-based 
learning package for students to learn design guidelines for audio and animation . In 
2011 , we further shortened the face-to-face time from 24 hours to 20 hours making it 
a two and a half day course [ 3 ]  . The other 19 hours were e-learning activities that 
included asynchronous online discussion , computer-based learning online sessions , 
and “ Skype ” synchronous online consultations . In 2013 , we added the use of blogs 
as one of our e-learning activities . An overview of the pedagogical approach of the 
course is summarized in Figure 1 . 
The purpose of this paper is to share how we adopted the “ First Principles ” of 
instruction into a blended learning context . The blended learning approach refers to 
using face-to-face tutorial and e-learning activities . E-learning activities include 
asynchronous online discussions , synchronous online discussions and reflection blog 
activities . 
1 . 2 The “ First Principles of Instruction ” 
The “ First Principles of Instruction ” were originally articulated by David Merrill after 
reviewing several instructional design theories . Essentially , the “ First Principles of 
Instruction ” are a set of prescriptive design principles that are common to the various 
instructional design theories regardless of their theoretical or philosophical 
orientation [ 1 ]  . 
The “ First Principles of Instruction ” are founded on three main premises [ 4 ]  . First 
learning will be enhanced in direct proportion to the implementation of the “ First 
Principles ”  . Second , the “ First Principles ” can be implemented in any Instructional 
delivery system . Third , the “ First Principles ” are design oriented instead of learning 
oriented which means that they are used to create learning environments and products 
rather than explaining how learners acquire knowledge and skill . The “ First Principles 
of Instruction ” include the following [ 1 ]  :  ( 1 ) Learning is promoted when learner are 
engaged in solving real-world problems ,  ( 2 ) Learning is promoted when existing 
knowledge is activated as a foundation for new knowledge ,  ( 3 ) Learning is 
Applying “ First Principles of Instruction ” in a Blended Learning Course 129
promoted when new knowledge is demonstrated to the learner ,  ( 4 ) Learning is 
promoted when new knowledge is applied by learner , and ( 5 ) Learning is promoted 
when new knowledge is integrated into the learner ’ s world . Table 1 describes in more 
detail each of the principle . 
Table 1 .  “ First Principles of Instruction ”  ( summarized from [ 1 ]  , pp . 45-50 ) 
Instructional Principles Corollary
• Learning is promoted 
when learner are 
engaged in solving realworld problems . 
• Show task : Learning is promoted when 
learners are shown the task that they will 
be able to do or the problem they will be 
able to solve as a result of completing a 
module or course . 
• Task level : Learning is promoted when 
learners are engaged at the problem or 
task level , not just the operation or action 
level . 
• Problem progression : Learning is 
promoted when learners solve a 
progression of problems that are 
explicitly compared to one another . 
• Learning is promoted 
when existing 
knowledge is activated 
as a foundation for new 
knowledge . 
• Previous experience : Learning is 
promoted when learners are directed to 
recall , relate , describe , or apply 
knowledge from relevant past experience 
that can be used as a foundation for the 
new knowledge . 
• New experience : Learning is promoted 
when learners are provided relevant 
experience that can be used as a 
foundation for the new knowledge . 
• Structure : Learning is promoted when 
learners are provided with a structure or 
encouraged to recall a structure that can be 
used to organize the new knowledge
• Learning is promoted 
when new knowledge or 
skill is demonstrated to 
the learner . 
• Demonstration consistency : Learning is 
promoted when the demonstration is 
consistent with the learning goal :  ( a ) 
examples and nonexamples for concepts ,  
( b ) demonstrations for procedures ,  ( c ) 
visualizations for processes , and ( d ) 
modeling for behavior . 
• Learner guidance : Learning is promoted
130 W . S . Cheung and K . F . Hew
Table 1 .  ( Continued )  
when learners are provided appropriate 
learner guidance including some of the 
following :  ( a ) learners are directed to 
relevant information ,  ( b ) multiple 
representations are used for the 
demonstrations , or ( c ) multiple 
demonstrations are explicitly compared . 
• Relevant media : Learning is promoted 
when media play a relevant instructional 
role and multiple forms of media do not 
compete for the attention of the learner . 
• Learning is promoted 
when new knowledge 
is applied by learner . 
• Practice consistency : Learning is 
promoted when the application ( practice ) 
and the posttest are consistent with the 
stated or implied objectives :  ( a ) 
information-about practice—recall or 
recognize information ,  ( b ) parts-of 
practice—locate , and name or describe 
each part ,  ( c ) kinds-of practice—identify 
new examples of each kind ,  ( d ) how-topractice—do the procedure and ( e ) whathappens practice—predict a consequence 
of a process given conditions , or find 
faulted conditions given an unexpected 
consequence . 
• Diminishing coaching : Learning is 
promoted when learners are guided in 
their problem solving by appropriate 
feedback and coaching , including error 
detection and correction , and when this 
coaching is gradually withdrawn . 
• Varied problems : Learning is promoted 
when learners are required to solve a 
sequence of varied problems . 
• Learning is promoted 
when new knowledge is 
integrated into the 
learner ’ s world . 
• Watch me : Learning is promoted when 
learners are given an opportunity to 
publicly demonstrate their new 
knowledge or skill . 
• Reflection : Learning is promoted when 
learners can reflect on , discuss , and 
defend their new knowledge or skill . 
• Creation : Learning is promoted when 
learners can create , invent , and explore 
new and personal ways to use their new 
knowledge or skill . 
The effectiveness of the “ First Principles of Instruction ” was examined in a study 
undertook by Thompson / Netg , a company that offers learning solutions for 
individuals , businesses and institutions [ 4 ]  . Using a three-group experimental design , 
the investigators found that the group which received instruction developed based on 
Applying “ First Principles of Instruction ” in a Blended Learning Course 131
the “ First Principles ” scored the highest scores than the other two groups . All 
differences were statistically significant beyond the . 001 level . Further , the “ First 
Principles ” group managed to complete three authentic Excel tasks in the shortest time 
( 29 minutes )  , compared to the group that received the existing commercial version of 
the company ’ s Excel course ( 49 minutes )  , while most of the control group ( without 
any prior instruction in Excel ) failed to finish the tasks . These differences are also 
statistically significant beyond the . 001 level . 
In Merrill ’ s book [ 5 ]  , he identified a few other studies [ 6 ]  [ 7 ]  [ 8 ] which suggested 
that the use of ‘ First Principles of Instruction can improve the effectiveness , 
efficiency , and learner engagement when compared with other forms of instruction . 
In Session 2 , we will identify the instructional activities of our blended learning 
course that were derived from the five principles . 
Fig . 1 . An overview of the pedagogical approach of the MAIDT course 
132 W . S . Cheung and K . F . Hew
2 Instructional Activities involved the Blended Learning 
Approach
In the blended learning approach , we identified the instructional activities that 
support each instructional principles suggested by Merrill . Some of them were in 
Table 2 . Instructional activities identified to support the blended learning approach 
Instructional Principles Instructional Activities
• Learning is promoted when 
learner are engaged in 
solving real-world problems
• Instructor uses real-world examples to 
illustrate good and bad multimedia 
design .  ( F2F , CBL ) 
• Previous student projects are shown to 
the learners for them to critique 
according to the visual design principles 
and multimedia design guidelines .  ( F2F , 
AOD ) 
• Students need to get feedback about their 
projects from the instructor and 
classmates ( F2F , AOD , SOD ) 
• Learning is promoted when 
existing knowledge is 
activated as a foundation for 
new knowledge . 
• Instructor / CBL begins with students ’ 
existing knowledge before he presents the 
new knowledge ( F2F , CBL )  . 
• In the AOD environment , students 
usually use their existing knowledge as a 
foundation for the discussion ( AOD )  . 
Through the discussion , they may be 
able to co-construct new visual / 
multimedia design principles . 
• In the blogs , students may show how 
their previous learnings serve as the 
foundation for their new learning ( Blog )  . 
• Learning is promoted when 
new knowledge is 
demonstrated to the learner . 
• Instructor / CBL usually demonstrates 
how to improve “ poor ” multimedia 
projects by applying the design 
guidelines ( ie new knowledge )  ( F2F , 
CBL SOD )  . 
• New knowledge may be demonstrated to 
learners by their peers after having the 
discussion in the AOD environment 
( AOD )  . 
• Clarify learners ’ doubts when they ask 
questions .  ( F2F , AOD , SOD ) 
• Learning is promoted 
when new knowledge is 
applied by learner . 
• Make suggestions to improve others ’ 
project ( F2F , AOD ) 
• Apply new knowledge in designing their 
projects ( P ) 
• Learning is promoted when 
new knowledge is 
integrated into the learner ’ s 
world . 
• Apply new knowledge in designing their 
projects ( F2F , AOD ) 
• In the blogs , students may show how he / 
she apply the new knowledge into their 
design .  ( Blog )  
Applying “ First Principles of Instruction ” in a Blended Learning Course 133
F2F Face-to-Face Environmen
CBL Computer-Based Learning package ( ie interactive multimedia learning software ) 
AOD Asynchronous Online Discussion Activity ( ie It is not a real time activity . 
Individuals can login an online discussion forum anytime and anywhere )  [ 9 ] 
Blog Reflection Blogs
SOD Synchronous Online Discussion Activity ( ie It is a real time activity . Individuals 
can be anywhere but they have to login the online discussion system at the same 
time .  ) 
P Project Activity ( ie Each student has to design a multimedia educational package .  ) 
the face-to-face mode while others were in the e-learning activities . The latter 
included activities such as blog , asynchronous online discussion ( AOD )  , computerbased learning tutorial ( CBL )  , synchronous online discussion ( SOD ) such as Skype , 
project activity . Table 2 summarizes the instructional modes and activities used to 
support each instructional principle . 
2 . 1 Evaluation of the Blended Learning Approach 
The data was collected from an evaluation survey at the end of student course 
evaluation . We identified two relevant closed ended items and one open ended item 
from the survey . The two closed items were students ’ perspectives of the organization 
of the blended course , and the ability of the blended learning course to engage student 
learning . The open ended item was to get general feedback from students . There were 18 
students involved in the study . 
Students seemed to have a positive perspective upon the organization of the 
blended course ( M = 3 . 8 , SD = 0 . 8 )  . The following students made comments 
regarding the blended learning approach ( ie face-to-face activities , and e-learning 
activities )  . 
Student A ,  “ It ’ s blended learning which has provides opportunity for learner to 
be self-directed . … . Also the CBL ( Computer-Based Learning ) package was very 
well done for this module ”  . 
Student F ,  “ The instructor always provides his real life past experiences for us to 
think . He has created a multimedia package for this course for the students to go 
through during the student ' s free time . I find that the multimedia package 
enhances my learning and guides me with my assignment ”  . 
Some students made some positive comments about the face-to-face sessions . For 
example , here are some comments of the face-to-face sessions : 
Student D ,  “ The instructor is passionate and knowledge in the field of his 
expertise . I have learnt a lot from him . I like the way he teaches and he is very 
approachable in terms of learning . Overall , I have a good experience learning 
from him .  ” 
134 W . S . Cheung and K . F . Hew
Student E ,  “ He always relates the session with his experience which is useful . 
Sometimes he tends to repeat . Probably I see this is an important message from 
him ”  . 
Some students also made comments about the e-learning activities . Here are some 
of the comments . 
Student B ,  “ He ( the instructor ) has a multimedia package for this course for 
students to go through during the student ’ s free time . I find that the multimedia 
package enhances my learning and guide me with my assignment ”  . 
Student C ,  “ The exercise of going through peers ’ works allows me to be exposed 
to many various perspectives and the ( asynchronous online ) discussions 
provided important information that are transferable to my own learning ”  . 
Students have a positive perspective about the ability of the blended learning 
course to engage student learning ( M = 3 . 7 , SD = 0 . 7 )  . Student D pointed out that 
 “ The teachings help the learners to think and learn the subject in depth ”  . 
In addition , students also provided some positive comments to show that they 
valued the use of the real life examples in the sessions such as “ linking back of the 
course to real life ”  , and “ sharing of practical life experience ”  . From the above 
comments , we believe students really value the principle ,  “ Learning is promoted 
when learners are engaged in solving real-world problems [ 1 ]  . 
Student A also pointed out that “ the visual aid exercise is a good practice for 
learners to understand the basic multimedia ”  . This indicates that Student A did 
support the principle ,  “ Learning is promoted when new knowledge is applied by the 
learner ”  [ 1 ]  . 
3 Conclusion 
We converted a face-to-face course to a blended learning course . The conversion 
process takes many cycles for us to reach the current blended learning model . It is a 
blended learning model for solving design problems . 
In this paper , we share the organization of the blended learning course and ho w 
we use the “ First Principle ” of Instruction to design instructional activities for the 
course . According to our survey study , it seems students liked the organization of the 
blended learning course . They also tended to agree that the instructional activities 
could engage them in their learning . This implies that the “ First Principle ” of 
instruction may be a good guideline for instructors to design blended learning courses . 
However , we also learned two key points regarding applying “ First Principles of 
Instruction ” in a blended learning course . First , the “ First Principles of Instruction ” 
can be applied in most of the disciplines and / or various learning outcomes . Second , 
the “ First Principles of Instruction ” does not provide any actual guideline for 
instructional designers to decide if the instructional activities should be face-to-face 
sessions or e-learning activities . Hew and Cheung ’ s evidence-based blended learning 
book attempts to bridge this gap by identifying and articulating the specific models 
and instructional strategies to achieve particular learning outcomes [ 10 ]  . In addition ,  
Applying “ First Principles of Instruction ” in a Blended Learning Course 135
Foo ’ s blended learning framework may help instructional designers to make a wise 
decision [ 11 ]  . 
There are several limitations in the current study . First , only a small sample size of 
18 students was used . This limits the transferability of the findings reported in this 
study . Future research should use larger samples of students from various discipline 
areas to examine the validity of the findings . Second , this study relies mainly on 
students ’ perceptual data . It would be useful to examine if students ’ learning 
multimedia concepts improved after the blended learning course is completed . Future 
research could perhaps conduct a randomized experiment using a treatment group 
( Merrill ’ s First Principles ) and a control group to test the effectiveness of the First 
Principles of Instruction . 
References 
1 . Merrill , D . M .  : First Principles of Instruction . Educational Technology Research & 
Development 50 ( 3 )  , 44–59 ( 2002 ) 
2 . Cheung , W . S .  , Hew , K . F .  : Our journey from face-to-face to blended learning approach : 
Important lessons learned . In : Lam , P .  ( ed .  ) Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on e-learning , pp . 27–31 . Hong Kong Academic Publishing International 
Limited , Hong Kong ( 2012 ) 
3 . Cheung , W . S .  , Hew , K . F .  : Design and evaluation of two blended learning approaches : 
Lessons learned . Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 27 ( special issue , 8 )  , 
1319–1337 ( 2011 ) 
4 . Merrill , D . M .  : A Pebble-in-the-Pond model for instructional design . Performance 
Improvement 41 ( 7 )  , 39–44 ( 2002 ) 
5 . Merrill , D . M .  : First Principles of Instruction : identifying and designing effective , efficient 
and engaging instruction . Pfeiffer , San Francisco ( 2013 ) 
6 . Frick , T .  , Chadha , R .  , Watson , C .  , Wang , Y .  , Green , P .  : College student perceptions of 
teaching and learning quality . Educational Technology Research and Development 57 , 
705–720 ( 2009 ) 
7 . Frick , T .  , Chadha , R .  , Watson , C .  , Wang , Y .  : Theory-based evaluation of instruction : 
Implications for improving student learning achievement in postsecondary education . In : 
Orey , M .  , Jones , S . A .  , Branch , R . M .  ( eds .  ) Educational Media and Technology Yearbook , 
vol . 35 , pp . 57–58 . Springer , New York ( 2010 ) 
8 . Frick , T .  , Chadha , R .  , Watson , C .  , Zlatkovska , E .  : Improving course evaluations to 
improve instruction and complex learning in higher education . Educational Technology 
Research & Development 58 , 115–136 ( 2010 ) 
9 . Chan , C . C .  , Hew , K . F .  , Cheung , W . S .  : Asynchronous Online Discussion Thread 
Development : Examining Growth Patterns and Peer-Facilitation Techniques . Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning 25 ( 5 )  , 438–452 ( 2009 ) 
10 . Hew , K . F .  , Cheung , W . S .  : Using blended learning : Evidence-based practices . Springer 
11 . Foo , K . L .  : Exploratory study on blended learning . Unpublished master ’ s thesis , National 
Institute of Education , Nanyang Technological University , Singapore ( 2014 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 136–144 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
The Greater the Online Participation , the Better 
the Learning Achievement ? A Study of Integrating 
Moodle into Learning 
Gary Cheng and Hin Leung Chui 
Department of Mathematics and Information Technology 
The Hong Kong Institute of Education 
10 Lo Ping Road , Tai Po , N . T .  , Hong Kong SAR , China 
{ chengks , mikechui }  @ ied . edu . hk 
Abstract . This study aimed to explore the relationship between students ’ online 
participation in Moodle and their learning achievement . Participants in the 
study were 78 undergraduate full-time students who were enrolled in a general 
education course entitled “ Digital Citizenship ” at a higher education institute in 
Hong Kong . They were required to choose from and participate in different 
types of Moodle activities including information access ( e . g .  , reading online 
supplementary resources )  , interactive learning ( e . g .  , running online simulations )  , networked learning ( e . g .  , discussing in online forums )  , and materials 
development ( e . g .  , writing reflective journals )  . The online participation of a 
student was measured by the number of completed activities , while the learning 
achievement of a student was determined by his / her essay grade . This study applied the Partial Least Squares ( PLS ) method to the collected data in order to 
identify whether there was a link between online participation and learning 
achievement . The results indicate that online participation in networked learning or in materials development , but not in information access nor in interactive 
learning , was positively and significantly related to learning achievement . This 
finding highlights the importance of social interaction and individual constructivism for effective online learning . 
Keywords : online participation , learning achievement , learning management 
system . 
1 Introduction 
Moodle is one of the open source Learning Management Systems ( LMSs ) that provides a wide range of resource and activity modules to support online and blended 
learning [ 1 ]  . The resource modules are designed to support the online delivery of learning materials , while the activity modules are used to evaluate students ’ learning 
achievement ( e . g .  , through the use of assignment and quiz modules ) and facilitate the 
building of online learning communities ( e . g .  , through the use of forum and wiki modules )  . According to the statistics from [ 2 ]  , by late April 2014 , over 85 thousand active 
Moodle sites have been registered from 240 countries . The statistics also show that 
A Study of Integrating Moodle into Learning 137 
there have been over 77 million Moodle users worldwide and over 8 million courses on 
Moodle . Given the huge user base of Moodle and its continued development as a free , 
customisable LMS , Moodle has become popular and competitive in education over 
recent years . It is no surprise that a growing body of blended learning studies has chosen Moodle as a platform for research [ 3 ]  [ 4 ]  . This study is one example . 
LMSs offer tools to support the interactivity between student and content , between 
student and teacher , and among students [ 5 ]  . Such interactivity can promote learning 
in two ways . First , through independent online activities , the interactivity between 
student and content engenders a shift from teacher-centred to student-centred learning 
and also fosters constructivist learning [ 6 ]  . Second , through online learning communities , the interactivity between student and teacher as well as among students encourages students to assume greater learner responsibility and peer collaboration [ 7 ]  [ 8 ]  . 
However , despite recognition of their benefits for student learning , LMSs face 
concerns that may impinge upon their implementation . A major concern relates to the 
effectiveness of online participation in improving learning achievement . Prior research was carried out to explore this issue , but mixed results were produced . For 
example , some studies found that there was no significant difference in course grades 
between students in the face-to-face group and those in the online group , suggesting 
that no apparent link exists between online participation and learning achievement 
[ 9 ]  [ 10 ]  . In contrast , some others showed that online participation ( e . g .  , peer-to-peer 
discussion in online forums ) was significantly correlated with learning achievement 
[ 11 ]  [ 12 ]  . 
Given the mixed results , it remains unclear whether there is a positive impact of 
online participation on learning achievement . Therefore , this study was designed to 
explore their relationship . To address the limitations of some previous studies , this 
study involved a statistically acceptable number of participants , categorised online 
participation into a range of the commonly used online activities , and provided students with a number of online activities to choose from . 
2 Related Work 
In his theory of online learning as online participation , Hrastinski emphasised that 
online learning and online participation are intricately interrelated [ 13 ]  . He also added 
that online participation can take different forms , for example , from resources access 
to knowledge co-construction . Oliver and Herrington identified four common forms 
of online participation [ 14 ]  . The first is called information access , which is characterised by the way that students use technology to gain access to online resources such 
as online video clips . The second is called interactive learning , which means that students are engaged with interactive learning elements such as online self-test tool with 
automatic feedback . The third one , called networked learning , refers to using technology to support communication and collaboration among students and teachers such as 
online discussion forums . The last is known as materials development , which means 
that students use technology as a tool to build and present their own artefacts such as 
online multimedia presentation . 
138 G . Cheng and H . L . Chui 
Prior studies were conducted to investigate the relationship between online participation and learning achievement . Some reported that no significant relationship was 
found between them . Zacharis found in his study that there was no significant difference in course grades between students in the face-to-face group and those in the 
online group [ 10 ]  . This finding was consistent with the results of some other studies 
[ 9 ]  [ 15 ]  . However , a few recent studies have indicated that online participation was 
significantly correlated with learning achievement . Huang et al . developed a method 
to evaluate students ’ online participation by a set of indicators ( e . g .  , the number of 
posts created in forums , the number of files viewed , the time spent on browsing noninteractive pages and the number of pages read )  [ 11 ]  . Their results revealed that online participation was positively related to learning achievement in terms of test 
scores . In a study carried out by Shaw [ 12 ]  , a total of 144 undergraduates enrolled in a 
computer programming course were involved . He measured learning achievement in 
terms of examination scores . Moreover , he evaluated online participation based on the 
number of forum posts created , the number of forum posts viewed and the number of 
questions asked . The results validated that online participation was significantly associated with learning achievement . 
Owing to the inconclusive results obtained in the literature and the multifaceted nature of online participation , more studies are needed to further investigate the connection between online participation and learning achievement . 
3 Research Model and Hypotheses 
3 . 1 Research Model 
Fig . 1 illustrates the research model of this study . It comprises four types of online 
participation and learning achievement . As discussed in the previous section , the four 
types of online participation include information access , interactive learning , networked learning and materials development [ 14 ]  . Due to the potential that students 
would get more access to learning resources and receive more learning support from 
peers in Moodle , it was assumed that online participation would have a positive effect 
on learning achievement . 
3 . 2 Hypotheses 
Previous studies reported mixed results on the relationship between online participation and learning achievement . Morris , Finnegan , and Sz-Shyan argued that the frequency of online participation was important for successful online learning [ 16 ]  . They 
found that the number of forum posts and content pages viewed by students were 
significant predictors for their course grades . By contrast , Palmer , Holt and Bray 
found that the number of forum posts viewed by students contributed very little to 
their course grades , suggesting that the link between passive participation in LMSs 
and learning achievement was weak [ 17 ]  . Davies and Graff showed that more online 
participation on a mandatory basis did not necessarily lead to better learning 
A Study of Integrating Moodle into Learning 139 
achievement [ 18 ]  . To further explore the relationship between online participation and 
learning achievement , four hypotheses were developed as follows : 
Hypothesis 1 . Participation in information access is significantly related to learning 
achievement . 
Hypothesis 2 . Participation in interactive learning is significantly related to learning 
achievement . 
Hypothesis 3 . Participation in networked learning is significantly related to learning 
achievement . 
Hypothesis 4 . Participation in materials development is significantly related to 
learning achievement . 
Fig . 1 . Research model 
4 Research Method 
4 . 1 Context 
Participants in the study were 78 undergraduate full-time students who were enrolled 
in a general education course entitled “ Digital Citizenship ” at a higher education institute in Hong Kong . The participants were all sophomores in the Bachelor of Education ( Chinese Language ) programme . Most of them were female and in the age group 
of 21 to 23 years . The course was delivered via a mix of face-to-face ( f2f ) sessions 
and online instructional activities over a period of eleven weeks in the academic year 
of 2012 / 13 , with each f2f session lasting approximately 2 . 5 hours . Four major parts 
140 G . Cheng and H . L . Chui 
were covered in the course :  ( i ) introduction to digital culture and citizenship ,  ( ii ) nine 
essential elements of digital citizenship ,  ( iii ) appropriate use of technology with respect to elements of digital citizenship , and ( iv ) impact of digital citizenship on the 
society . 
Since the time for each f2f class was limited , online activities was designed to 
strengthen and extend students ’ understanding of several important concepts that were 
not discussed in detail during class . Students could choose and participate in their 
preferred online activities after class . Specifically , four types of online activities were 
developed in Moodle every week :  ( i ) information access - students were asked to 
access online materials and write a summary about the materials ,  ( ii ) interactive learning - students were asked to participate in an interactive quiz or webpage ,  ( iii ) networked learning - students were asked to create a post and give someone a reply in a 
discussion forum or to update a group wiki page twice , and ( iv ) materials development - students were asked to write a reflective journal or prepare a multimedia presentation using MS PowerPoint . 
In the course , there were three assessment items : online participation , group presentation and individual essay . The items constituted 10% , 30% and 60% of the overall 
course grade , respectively . In order to obtain a full score of online participation , students were required to complete a minimum of four activities , each from a different 
topic . Figure 2 illustrates different types of online activities designed for a topic called 
 “ Digital Commerce ”  . Eight other topics featured the same number and type of online 
activities . 
Fig . 2 . Different types of online activities 
4 . 2 Measures for Online Participation and Learning Achievement 
Table 1 summarises a list of indicators used for online participation and learning 
achievement in this study . Online participation was measured by the frequency of 
student participation in online activities . Specifically , the number of summaries written about online study materials was used as an indicator to measure participation in 
information access . To measure participation in interactive learning , the number of 
A Study of Integrating Moodle into Learning 141 
online quizzes taken and the number of interactive webpages accessed were used as 
the indicators . To measure participation in networked learning , the count of forum 
postings ( i . e .  , one post and one response were expected in the same forum for each 
count ) and the count of wikis updated ( i . e .  , a wiki should be updated twice for each 
count ) were used as the indicators . Lastly , to measure participation in materials development , the number of reflective journals created and the number of presentation 
files completed were used as the indicators . 
At the end of the course , students were required to submit an individual essay of 
2 , 000 words on discussing the characteristics of digital citizenship and its impact on 
our society . A marking scheme was developed to cover a number of assessment areas 
including introduction , evidence and analysis , concluding remark , style and use of 
references . Based on the marking scheme , all essays were marked by the course instructor . To ensure consistency of marking , a sample of the marked essays with high , 
medium and low grades were reviewed by another teacher with experience in teaching 
the same course . The essay grade was used as an indicator of learning achievement . 
Table 1 . Indicators for online participation and learning achievement 
Construct Indicator 
Information Access ( IA ) IA1 . Number of summaries written about documents 
IA2 . Number of summaries written about slides 
IA3 . Number of summaries written about static web page
IA4 . Number of summaries written about videos 
Interactive Learning ( IL ) IL1 . Number of quizzes taken 
IL2 . Number of interactive web pages accessed 
Networked Learning ( NL ) NL1 . Number of forum posts and replies created 
NL2 . Number of wikis updated 
Materials Development ( MD ) MD1 . Number of reflective journals created 
MD2 . Number of presentation files completed 
Learning Achievement ( LA ) LA1 . Essay grade 
5 Results and Discussion 
A variance-based structural equation modeling ( SEM ) technique called Partial Least 
Squares ( PLS ) was used to explore the research model illustrated in Fig . 1 [ 19 ]  . PLS 
estimates the path relationships in a model with the objective of minimising the residual variance of all dependent variables rather than explaining the covariation , so it 
was widely used for theory development and prediction of key constructs [ 20 ]  [ 21 ]  . In 
this section , the results of PLS are discussed in terms of the relationship between online participation and learning achievement ( i . e .  , the path coefficient ) and the impact 
of online participation on learning achievement ( i . e .  , the effect size )  . The results are 
shown in Table 2 . 
142 G . Cheng and H . L . Chui 
Table 2 . Results of PLS
Hypothesis Path Path 
coefficient 
f 2 

effect size 
t-value Hypothesis 
supported ? 
H1 IA  LA . 078 . 009 0 . 848 No 
H2 IL  LA . 012 . 000 0 . 106 No 
H3 NL  LA . 408 . 194 3 . 253 *  *  * Yes 
H4 MD  LA . 355 . 159 2 . 907 *  *  * Yes 
* p <  . 10 ,  *  * p <  . 05 ,  *  *  * p <  . 01 
Hypotheses 1 to 4 suggested that students ’ participation in online activities was 
significantly associated with their learning achievement . As shown in Table 2 , hypotheses 3 and 4 were supported by the data while hypotheses 1 and 2 were not . In other 
words , online participation in networked learning was significantly related to learning 
achievement ( H3 , p <  . 01 )  , and online participation in materials development was 
significantly related to learning achievement ( H4 , p <  . 01 )  . An analysis of the effect 
sizes of networked learning ( f2 
=  . 194 ) and materials development ( f2 
=  . 159 ) indicates that their impact on learning achievement was medium [ 22 ]  . The results suggest 
that students ’ learning achievement was influenced by their frequency of online participation in networked learning or in materials development . 
In this study , networked learning ( e . g .  , online discussion and wiki development ) 
required students to interact with peers through comments about and references to 
ideas of each other . This kind of social interaction was recognised as a key factor 
contributing to the cognitive and intellectual growth of individuals [ 23 ] as well as to 
deep learning and understanding [ 24 ]  . Our results are consistent with the finding of 
[ 16 ]  , highlighting the importance of social interaction to learning achievement in 
LMSs . 
Unlike networked learning , materials development focused on individual activities 
such as creating one ’ s own digital artefacts in forms of reflective journal and 
multimedia presentation . It involved students in a learning process to collect , select , 
organise , and present their understanding . Such a process was underpinned by the 
constructivist learning theory , in which learning is perceived as a process of constructing meaning and students learn best when they construct their knowledge in an 
active way [ 23 ]  . In this regard , our results add evidence to support the positive impact 
of individual constructivism on learning achievement in LMSs . 
6 Concluding Remarks 
To recapitulate , this study was designed to explore the relationship between online 
participation in Moodle and learning performance in a blended learning course using 
the Partial Least Squares ( PLS ) method . Participants in the study were 78 undergraduate full-time students who were enrolled in a general education course entitled 
 “ Digital Citizenship ” at a higher education institute in Hong Kong . The participants 
were required to choose from and participate in different types of Moodle activities 
including information access ( e . g .  , reading online resources )  , interactive learning 
A Study of Integrating Moodle into Learning 143 
( e . g .  , running online simulations )  , networked learning ( e . g .  , discussing in online forums )  , and materials development ( e . g .  , writing reflective journals )  . The online participation of a student was measured by the number of online activities completed , while 
the learning achievement of a student was determined by his / her essay grade . 
The results of the PLS analysis indicate that online participation in networked 
learning or in materials development , but not in information access nor in interactive 
learning , was positively and significantly related to learning achievement . In the 
study , networked learning required social interaction among students while materials 
development required individual construction of artefacts . With theoretical and empirical support , both social interaction and individual constructivism have an impact on 
fostering deep learning . Our findings further illuminate the importance of social interaction and individual constructivism for effective online learning . 
Several limitations of this study can be identified . First , the sample was taken from 
a general education course only . In order to generalise the findings , more research 
should be conducted in various courses . Second , the results of this study were derived 
from the frequency of online participation and the essay grade , but the quality of online participation was not taken into account . In future research , both the quantity and 
quality of online activities should be evaluated to gain a fuller understanding of online 
participation . 
Acknowledgement . This research was financially supported by the departmental 
small research grant from the Hong Kong Institute of Education ( Ref : MIT / SRG02 / 
12-13 )  . 
References 
1 . Moodle : What is Moodle ?  ( 2014 )  ,  ( retrieved 
April 25 , 2014 ) 
2 . Moodle : Moodle Statistics ( 2014 )  ,  ( retrieved April 25 , 
2014 ) 
3 . Escobar-Rodriguez , T .  , Monge-Lozano , P .  : The acceptance of Moodle technology by 
business administration students . Computers & Education 58 ( 4 )  , 1085–1093 ( 2012 ) 
4 . Lambropoulos , N .  , Faulkner , X .  , Culwin , F .  : Supporting Social Awareness in Collaborative E-learning . British Journal of Educational Technology 43 ( 2 )  , 295–306 ( 2012 ) 
5 . Lonn , S .  , Teasley , S . D .  , Krumm , A . E .  : Who needs to do what where ?  : Using learning 
management systems on residential vs . commuter campuses . Computers & Education 56 ( 3 )  , 642–649 ( 2011 ) 
6 . Lonn , S .  , Teasley , S . D .  : Saving time or innovating practice : Investigating perceptions and 
uses of Learning Management Systems . Computers & Education 53 ( 3 )  , 686–694 ( 2009 ) 
7 . Garrison , D . R .  , Kanuka , H .  : Blended learning : Uncovering its transformative potential in 
higher education . The Internet and Higher Education 7 ( 2 )  , 95–105 ( 2004 ) 
8 . Naveh , G .  , Tubin , D .  , Pliskin , N .  : Student satisfaction with learning management systems : 
a lens of critical success factors . Technology , Pedagogy and Education 21 ( 3 )  , 337–350 
( 2012 ) 
144 G . Cheng and H . L . Chui 
9 . Brittan-Powell , C .  , Legum , H .  , Taylor , E .  : The relationship between student learning style , 
selection of course delivery format , and academic performance . International Journal of 
Instructional Technology and Distance Learning 5 ( 5 )  , 41–46 ( 2008 ) 
10 . Zacharis , N . Z .  : The effect of learning style on preference for web-based courses and learning outcomes . British Journal of Educational Technology 42 ( 5 )  , 790–800 ( 2011 ) 
11 . Huang , E . Y .  , Lin , S . W .  , Huang , T . K .  : What type of learning style leads to online participation in the mixed-mode e-learning environment ? A study of software usage instruction . 
Computers & Education 58 ( 1 )  , 338–348 ( 2012 ) 
12 . Shaw , R . -S .  : A study of the relationships among learning styles , participation types , and 
performance in programming language learning supported by online forums . Computers & 
Education 58 ( 1 )  , 111–120 ( 2012 ) 
13 . Hrastinski , S .  : A theory of online learning as online participation . Computers & Education 52 ( 1 )  , 78–82 ( 2009 ) 
14 . Oliver , R .  , Herrington , J .  : Teaching and learning online : A beginner ’ s guide to e-learning 
and e-teaching in higher education . Edith Cowan University , Western Australia ( 2001 ) 
15 . Buerck , J . P .  , Malmstrom , T .  , Peppers , E .  : Learning environments and learning styles : nontraditional student enrollment and success in an Internet-based versus a lecture-based computer science course . Learning Environments Research 6 ( 2 )  , 137–155 ( 2003 ) 
16 . Morris , K . V .  , Finnegan , C .  , Sz-Shyan , W .  : Tracking student behavior , persistence , and 
achievement in online courses . Internet and Higher Education 8 ( 3 )  , 221–231 ( 2005 ) 
17 . Palmer , S .  , Holt , D .  , Bray , S .  : Does the discussion help ? The impact of a formally assessed 
online discussion on final student results . British Journal of Educational Technology 39 ( 5 )  , 
847–858 ( 2008 ) 
18 . Davies , J .  , Graff , M .  : Performance in e-learning : online participation and student grades . 
British Journal of Educational Technology 36 ( 4 )  , 657–663 ( 2005 ) 
19 . Wold , H .  : Systems analysis by partial least squares . In : Nijkamp , P .  , Leitner , H .  , Wrigley , 
N .  ( eds .  ) Measuring the Unmeasurable , pp . 221–252 . Martinus Nijhoff , Dordrecht ( 1985 ) 
20 . Chin , W . W .  : The partial least squares approach to structural equation modeling . In : Marcoulides , G . A .  ( ed .  ) Modern Methods for Business Research , pp . 295–336 . Erlbaum , 
Mahwah ( 1998 ) 
21 . Hair , J . F .  , Hult , G . T . M .  , Ringle , C . M .  , Sarstedt , M .  : A Primer on Partial Least Squares 
Structural Equation Modeling ( PLS-SEM )  . Sage , Thousand Oaks ( 2013 ) 
22 . Cohen , J .  : Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . Lawrence Erlbaum , 
Mahwah ( 1988 ) 
23 . Vygotsky , L .  : Mind in Society . Harvard University Press , Cambridge ( 1978 ) 
24 . Donnelly , R .  : Online learning in teacher education : Enhanced with a problem-based learning approach . AACE Journal 12 ( 2 )  , 236–247 ( 2004 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 145–155 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Reconceptualizing a Creative and Specific Learning 
Environment by Using Web-Based Automated E-Quizzes 
as a Guiding Tools for Accountable Study Behaviour 
Alice M . L Li 
Programme Director , College of Life Sciences and Technology , The HKU SPACE 
alice . mla . li @ hkuspace . hku . hk 
Abstract . Web-based automated e-quizzes provides the better ways to transform a creative learning environment to ensure students can manage learning by 
reinforcing their practices through e-learning and guiding their study behaviour 
towards the demand for improving quality education . This paper proposed a 
specific focus on using Web-based automated e-quizzes exercises system ( WE 
system ) as an enabling automated learning environment to monitor and guide 
students ’ self-study and revision , with an approach of ‘ Assessment For Learning ’ as a learning process , and the design of using this WE system will be in 
line with the four required aspects under the paradigm of our HK Government ’ s 
Qualifications Framework in Education . This pragmatic approach is used to cultivate and reinforce students ’ accountable study behaviour . Whether this approach of using WE system as compulsory or supplementary in the practical 
sense of operation or as a catalyst for cultivating student ’ s study behaviour in 
the process of learning are further discussed , together with different integrated 
conceptual frameworks of learning and study behaviours are being empirically 
reviewed . 
Keywords : study behavior , web-based e-quizzes , accountable learning . 
1 Introduction 
As the advancement of technology becomes more mature , the utilization of educational technology to optimize teaching and learning activities is now a worldwide 
phenomena for using such creative and specific learning environments . Many studies 
have been conducted with research efforts to determine the impacts of web-based 
automated learning tools for supporting various functions in education . 
There is a need for ongoing guidance and support to monitor students ’ learning activities in a more effective means for tracking outcome of their study behaviour . 
Moreover , the utilization of this proposed Web-based automated e-quizzes exercise 
system (  “ this WE system ”  ) can also facilitate our role and function in programme 
monitoring into a more effective means in enhancing and shaping students ’ way of 
learning and the subsequent trends of their resultant learning outcomes are also being 
easily identified . This proposed WE system can also serve as the measures for guiding 
146 A . M . L Li 
students ’ study behaviour in the process of doing revision in an ongoing and regular 
basis , as in accordance with the expected quality criteria of estimated and required 
self-studying time , which was generated in compliance with the HK Government ’ s 
Qualifications Framework System in Hong Kong Education Bureau . 
Nowadays , the students are becoming increasingly exposed to Web-based environments for automated learning , and how willing did students interact with 
Web-based environments in their automated learning practices , and what are the determinants of students ’ study behaviour in web-based practices for learning will be 
discussed from the perspectives of different theoretical models of empirical reviews 
and literature studies . 
Smith pointed out that most behaviorists also reckon the students ’ learning process 
can be viewed as a change in behavior and the learning environment should be arranged to elicit the desired responses through such educational devices or tools as 
behavioural objectives for competency-based learning , and training for skill development [ 1 ]  . Kim and Axelrod agreed that the educational approaches such as applied 
behaviour analysis and curriculum-based measurement should be embraced with a 
direct instruction of learning criteria served as the accountable task that students could 
be engaged in during their studying , including the use of this proposed WE system for 
automated learning , as an integral part of students ’ commitment to be involved into 
this guided episodes of learning [ 2 ]  . 
A good quality education should be and is one that enables all learners to realize 
the capabilities they require , and therefore the infrastructure of the inter-related environment must be sophisticated enough to blend our educational practices and needs 
from both perspectives of pedagogical effects and technologically capable environment , in order to enable an accountable interventions for the students ’ learning 
process . And therefore , this paper proposed a WE system and employed strategy to 
re-engage students for such an accountable learning , under this WE system as a 
homework approach of ‘ Assessment For Learning ’ with built-in conceptual directions 
as expected and required from the 4 aspects :  ( i ) Knowledge and Intellectual Skills ;  ( ii ) 
Processes ;  ( iii ) Application , Autonomy and Accountability and ( iv ) Communications , 
IT and Numeracy , under the paradigm of the HK Government ’ s Qualifications 
Framework in Education ( HKGQF )  . The enabling factors will be discussed in order to 
cultivate an accountable learning by shaping students ’ study behaviours with this 
proposed WE system . 
In another word , this outcome-focused learning can also be seen as interactive activities between parties-involved within our educational system , which specifically 
responsible for blending education as accountable learning in practice by making use 
of the technological tools , with the intended purposes of integrating the four required 
aspects under the paradigm in our HK Qualifications Framework in Education , as part 
of my newly constructed concept of “ Knowledge about knowledge ” as an interventional strategies of the automated learning with the approach of ‘ Assessment For 
Learning ’ via this proposed WE system . 
This of my concept of “ Knowledge about knowledge ” is derived from the required 
quality standard of outcome-based / focused learning , together with policy implications 
of the explicit and implicit conditions from the rule-based and principle-based opera- 
Reconceptualizing a Creative and Specific Learning Environment 147 
tional system , which also in line with the paradigm of HKQF , through the embracement of technological educational tools as the platform to equip the pedagogy needs 
and quality expectations of the Intended Learning Outcomes ( ILO ) for blending accountable learning in practice , as in this concept of interventional strategies . One of 
these efforts in this paper is to discuss different theoretical frameworks that permit a 
more systematic accumulation and evident-based research studies to support and 
guide the design of effective educational practices by using this proposed WE system , 
to produce efficient efficacious and effective quality learning for the ultimate educational goal at large . 
In support of this ultimate educational goal , the basic and balanced flows from different levels and aspects of knowledge learning is an important determinants in 
mounting my constructed concept of “ Knowledge about knowledge ” as an interventional strategies . Through this transformative automated learning activities that specifically designed to encourage an accountable study behaviours in learning , as in line 
with the ILO that generated in the fulfillment of the four required aspects under the 
paradigm of the HK Qualifications Framework in Education , which in turn , should be 
incorporating with different levels and aspects of knowledge learning , namely with 
the following components and focuses on : 
• Declarative knowledge ( knowledge-zero ) 
• Cognitive knowledge ( know what ) 
• Procedure knowledge or Applied skill ( know-how ) 
• Reason knowledge or Systematic understanding ( know-why ) 
• Condition-knowledge ( know-when ) 
• Relation-knowledge ( know-with ) 
• Affective-knowledge ( ways to learn knowledge ) 
As a result of such advances in information technology in education , this proposed 
WE system , should become an integral part of our educational system , which allows 
and optimizes the desirable functions to serve the vital role in the areas of reconceptualizing a creative and specific learning environment by using this proposed Webbased automated E-quizzes exercise system to , yet again , encourage an accountable 
study behaviours in learning . 
2 The Effective Use of this WE System – Creating Accountable 
Automated Learning Environments 
This paper proposed the use of this WE system to guide study behaviours and translate such usage into educational practice for encouraging students ’ study behaviours 
in doing e-quizzes exercise as their revision or homework and which is part of the 
integral informal ‘ Assessment for Learning ’ strategies on a continual and regularbasis to promote students ’ accountable learning habits . 
The principal characteristic of utilizing this WE system is embedded with ‘ Assessment For Learning ’ Strategy as an accountable educational practice for their 
148 A . M . L Li 
educative automated learning that blended with pedagogical criteria with built-in 
concepts of an innovative technological tools for : 
a . reinforcing students ’ practices of utilizing the existing e-learning online 
tools ; 
b . doing and performing revision as their homework on regular-basis via the 
Web-based automated e-quizzes exercise system , the WE system ; 
c . facilitating e-based monitoring students ’ pattern of learning activities ; 
d . providing effective means for tracking students ’ learning outcomes and 
their progress ; in which it can provide the monitoring capability of checking who has read , and also automated e-quizzes to determine whether the 
learners have grasped the contents of learning materials ; 
e . integrating the four required aspects as in the paradigm of HKGQF in Education into this WE system . 
A parameter to identify the situation by simply observing the records in data log , in 
which each data log gives an indication related to :  ( i ) overall interaction frequency of 
log activities ;  ( ii ) overall pattern of e-quizzes attempts ;  ( iii ) knowledge ability in the 
overall results of attempted e-quizzes , as the basis for indicating students ’ study behaviours . As Cocea and Weibelzhal pointed out that log activity has been considered as 
a source of information for assessing students ’ motivation [ 3 ]  . Furthermore , many 
educational theorists and researchers consider learning styles as an important factor in 
the learning process , as learning styles can be seen as “ a description of the attitudes 
and behaviours which determine an individual ’ s preferred way of learning ” and agree 
that incorporating them in education has potential to facilitate learning for students 
[ 4 ]  . 
In order to support students ’ e-Learning process , Sfenrianto , Hasibuan and Suhartanto proposed the Triple-Characteristic Model ( TCM ) in e-learning system [ 5 ]  , in 
which the e-Learning process should accommodate students ’ in their ( i ) learning 
style ,  ( ii ) motivation and ( iii ) knowledge ability embraced as their personalized learning activities . 
In this sense , it further sustains the usage of this WE system in an on-going and 
regular-basis for facilitating such blending into educational practice and guiding students ’ study behaviour by providing the stimulation of innovation that embedded with 
the overall benefits of flexible accessibilities that makes catching up and following-up 
possible at an individual student ’ s own pace of learning for supporting their process 
of learning activities , as well as allowing the effective use of time with automatic and 
instant feedback that makes students ’ self-review or self-evaluation possible . 
3 Determinants of Study Behaviour as an Accountable 
Automated Learning in Educational Practices 
In fact , there are many influential factors affecting students ’ attitudes towards any ICTbased or Web-based learning interactions and choices in real pursuit of e-learning literacy , as Eke in her research question also asking “ What is the best group of factors that can 
be used in predicting students ’ intentions to adopt e-learning ?  ”  , in which she found 
Reconceptualizing a Creative and Specific Learning Environment 149 
factors such as ‘ attitudes towards e-learning ’  ;  ‘ intention to adopt e-learning ’  ;  ‘ availability 
of resources ’  ;  ‘ pressure to use e-learning ’  ;  ‘ ease of e-learning use ’ and ‘ usefulness ’ 
would affect the students ’ intention to adopt e-learning practices [ 6 ]  . 
Lu , Stokes and Zhu generated a MUST Model to analyze a Web-based Learning 
Process , in which they propose four key elements that impacted students ’ web-based 
learning practices , which composed of Motivation ; Usage ; Satisfaction and Task 
performance in their MUST model [ 7 ]  . Smith et al describe the learning style theory 
as the individuals learn in different ways that can be categorized into four distinct 
learning styles , namely – feeling , watching , thinking and doing , in which they found 
that knowledge of a learner ’ s preferred learning style , will lead to faster and more 
satisfactory improvement in facilitating their e-learning practices [ 1 ]  . 
As according to Ndubisi , the factors that affect students ’ intention to adopt 
e-learning practices by using the Decomposed version of Theory of Planned Behaviour ( DTPB )  , in which he illustrates specific salient beliefs that may influence 
technology usage in his research framework as shown in Figure 1 [ 8 ]  . 
Fig . 1 . 
Kraft , Rise , Sutton and Roysamb tried to identify whether behaviour was regressed 
on intention by using the theory of planned behaviour ( TPB )  , in which it indicated 
that no interactions between attitude and perceived behavioural control ( PBC ) components in terms of predicting intentions were being identified , and no interaction 
between intentions and PBC components in predicting behaviour were identified 
150 A . M . L Li 
neither [ 9 ]  . Whereas , Siragusa and Dixon highlighted merits of this application of the 
TPB and subsequently anticipated the need to continue trialing of this theory of 
planned behaviour as it pertained to the practice of ICT-based interaction in elearning [ 10 ]  . Siragusa [ 11 ] has adopted Hrubes , Ajzen and Daigle , 2001 ’ s conceptual 
framework of TPB is shown in Figure 2 . 
Fig . 2 . 
Jan , Lu and Chou have explored several models in their research study in order to 
generate the understanding of e-learning ’ s acceptance as environmental factors for 
promoting the beliefs in the adoption of e-learning practices [ 12 ]  . They further illustrated there are two systemic beliefs in Technology Acceptance Model ( TAM ) that 
included ( i ) perceived usefulness and ( ii ) perceived ease of use are the determinants of 
students ’ attitude for the adoption of using e-learning practices . However , those two 
proposed determinants of attitude are only on technical and individual level factors . 
In this study , they [ 12 ] in fact , has also postulated a significant factor of institutional forces is the most important determinants of attitude on the adoption of 
e-learning practices . This Institutional Theory accentuates the significance of the institutional environment as to the students ’ attitudes and their subsequent study behaviours and practices in using e-learning . They have further agreed and cited there are 
two types of coercive pressures that exerted on the students ’ attitudes , behaviours and 
practices , which are regulations and competition . 
According to Ndubisi [ 8 ]  , understanding the factors that influence intention to 
adopt e-learning in general will help to create a more favourable environment for 
greater adoption , as well as helping to design strategies to promote such study behaviour in the usages of e-learning practices . Evidence from [ 13 ] has also organized a 
study with the purpose of identifying factors that can affect learners ’ readiness and 
Reconceptualizing a Creative and Specific Learning Environment 151 
adoption of e-learning practices and subsequently suggested certain criteria for making the successful implementation of e-learning practices in an educational system . 
He further proposed the focus of those criteria including ( i ) the acquisition of adequate technological infrastructure ( ii ) an adequate educational content of learning , and 
( iii ) a developed culture for such learning activities , including sharing of knowledge 
and skills . 
In the study by Phillips , McNaught and Kennedy [ 14 ]  , they reckoned that learning 
processes are the ways in which students engage with the learning environment and 
the learning activities embedded in it may also include interaction between students 
and technology , in which they have produced the LEPO framework to describe the 
characteristics of the learning process , as shown in Figure 3 : 
Fig . 3 . 
In this Figure 3 , the LEPO framework is showing the interrelationships between 
learning environments , learning processes and learning outcomes . It “ conceptualizes 
learning as having three components : the environment which facilitates learning 
( Learning Environment )  , the activities which are part of learning ( Learning Processes ) 
and the knowledge , behaviours , skills or understanding which can be demonstrated 
( Learning Outcomes )  [ 14 ]  . 
4 Accountable Demand and Obligated Study Behaviour – 
 ‘ Assessment for Learning ’ Approach 
Assessment is a process of gathering a variety of evidence to identify a student ’ s performance of attainment of the intended learning outcomes , and the purpose of assessment is mainly to promote learning based on a philosophy of using ‘ assessment for 
learning ’ as a strategy to further transform and optimize the functionalities for 
152 A . M . L Li 
reconceptualizing a creative and specific learning environment for a good quality of 
education arises from the correct mix of enabling inputs and processes that allow a 
proper , relevant and educative interactions to produce desired learning outcomes . 
Watson and Angus described that “ Assessment is the most powerful lever teachers 
have to influence the way students respond to courses and behave as learners .  ( Gibbs , 
1999 p . 41 )  ”  , and also found the regular usage of online learning tools significantly 
and positively contribute to students ’ performance of learning and also act as a possible identifier for ‘ at-risk ’ students as well [ 15 ]  . 
As insofar the confirmatory factor analysis revealed that there are so many variables could be empirically distinguished on the effects of perceived behavioural 
control and self-efficacy on behavioural intentions and actual behaviour differed in 
the e-learning practices . However , the quality of learning with the support of this 
technological educational tools in e-learning will not just depend on students ’ intention to adoption e-learning practices , but most importantly is the learning and study 
behaviours through this practices of e-learning can , in turn , produce or optimize the 
best results for educative and accountable learning for knowledge and intellectual 
skills development . 
As learning aims for its quality , Biggs identified that students have intention 
processed the text for meaning and focus on themes and main ideas became the prototypes for the “ deep ” approach to learning ; rather than just focused on words and sentences as the “ surface ” approach to learning [ 16 ]  . In fact , there are many further steps 
for using the appropriate technological educational tools in a way to facilitate our 
educational practice and guide students ’ study behaviour of such quality approach of 
learning . He has also postulated that “ the highest form of understanding , and the motivation driving it , creates a personal commitment to learn , with consequent feelings 
of ‘ ownership ’  . Such a commitment involves processes of a higher cognitive level 
than rote learning ”  [ 16 ]  . 
This WE system is in a position to reconceptualize this kind of commitment of 
processes , to become more foremost ‘ Assessment Literate ’ through the embracement 
of an integrative conceptual frameworks for supporting the development of accountable educational practices , which blended with pedagogical criteria and together with 
an innovative technological educational tools , in creating this WE system to guide 
students ’ study behaviours towards the quality education of accountable learning . 
Nacheva-Skopalik and Green supported that such a system responds to the need of 
providing inclusive learning for a learners and is an important agenda item for higher 
education institutions [ 17 ]  . 
5 Recommendations for the Need to Transform Educational 
Practices in More Accountable Learning -Mandatory or 
Optional 
The main strategic considerations and implications for establishing an engaging learning environment which support for effective and accountable automated learning 
practices by using this proposed WE system , involve both intrinsic and extrinsic 
Reconceptualizing a Creative and Specific Learning Environment 153 
factors of monitoring changes in Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) 
strategy and its use in higher education , which in turn requires a significant change in 
pedagogy and a related shift in use technology platform of this proposed WE system 
for positively enhancing students ’ learning outcomes by enabling a Web-based environment to monitor and guide students ’ self-study and revision as an accountable 
study behaviours in learning . 
In fact , accountability for learning can be seen as a personal virtue and this property of virtue will function as a positive quality in learning and intrinsic factor or determinant for self-motivated and accountable study behaviour . The existence of such 
personal virtue also serves as a synonym for a student or learner to self-initiated for 
taking ‘ responsibility ’  ,  ‘ involvement ’ and ‘ participation ’ in their accountable learning , which is construed as the broader sense in the concept of ‘ accountability ’ with the 
presence of such genuine virtue . And therefore , one of the ways of unpacking the 
overall problems in recommending whether this WE system should be used mandatory or as supplementary for helping students to focus on an outcome-based learning for 
blending this strategic concept of using technological tools in educational practices as 
accountable study behaviour will be very much responding to the situation of the 
students ’ entry behaviour in this regard . Whereas a mandatory approach for students 
to make use of this proposed WE system on a compulsory basis could be the solution 
towards those students with a much narrower concept in exercising their sense of 
 ‘ accountability ’  . And therefore , a mandatory approach can only be viewed as a forcible mechanism , another alternative to induce and shape the students for cultivating 
accountable study behaviour in learning as preconditions to this educational intervention . 
Without compromising the expected learning quality , and for the avoidance of 
misnomer of the intended purposes of the four required aspects under our HK Government ’ s Qualifications Framework in Education , this proposed WE system should 
be used mandatory as the integral part of homework under the philosophy of ‘ Assessment For Learning ’ strategy , in an attempt to optimize the beneficial effects of an 
accountable educational learning practices for the students ’ study behaviours . 
6 Conclusion 
Viewed separately or perhaps more importantly , is to rethink the fundamental 
processes of learning is not just a simple matter of using a technological educational 
tools , but more significantly is to support and facilitate students by cultivating their 
personal learning habits and accountable styles in practicing and managing their 
learning in accountable manner . What exactly these web-based technologies mean for 
blending learning and educational practices , in fact , have to be broadened by reconceptualizing a creative and specific learning environments ’ driving vehicle – that is 
students ’ accountable study behaviour in utilizing this inclusive e-learning tools integrating into the processes of learning as a blending educational practices . 
The empirical review of those combinations of determinants of study behaviour 
that contributed to our overall understandings on the implications in formulating the 
154 A . M . L Li 
subsequent remediate educational and beneficial approaches for strengthening up 
areas of weakness for students to adopt this proposed WE system as part of accountable study behaviour for their automated learning . Interventional strategies for enabling 
and facilitating this outcome-based or outcome-focused learning can be considered as 
interactions between students ’ study behaviours and the professional obligations in 
support of this quality delivery from the role of academics and / or the affirmative initiations from the higher educational institutions as part of the quality assured mechanism through web-based learning technologies . 
Despite the proliferation of web-based technologies in the educational sector have 
produced and projected wide-spread changes in our blended learning and educational 
practices for more than a decade , however the vast impact of these educational technologies on education need to be further strengthening up by references to the already 
reviewed studies and / or models that generated the pursuits of considerations with the 
in-depth understandings into the determinants of students ’ study behaviours from 
different perspectives of the reviewed conceptual frameworks , together with theoretical basis for determining how to have a proliferation of rule-based and principlebased system that embedded with factors arising from the studies and literatures such 
as TCM ; DTPB ; TPB ; TAM ; MUST model ; Institutional Theory and LEPO frameworks that provided theoretical preconditions and justifications in enhancing students ’ 
ways of learning by optimizing and shaping a creative and specific learning environment to cultivate and reconceptualize accountable study behaviour as blending educational practices in learning . 
References 
1 . Smith , M . K .  : Learning Theory , the encyclopedia of informal education . The encyclopedia 
of informal education ( 2011 ) 
2 . Kim , T .  , Axelrod , S .  : Direct Instruction : An Educators ’ Guide and a Plea for Action . The 
Behavior Analyst Today 6 ( 2 )  , 111 ( 2005 ) 
3 . Cocea , M .  , Weibelzhal , S .  : Can log files analysis estimate learners ’ level of motivation ? 
In : Proceeding of the 14th Workshop on Adaptivity and User Modeling in Interactive 
Systems , University of Hildesheim , Germany , pp . 32–35 ( 2006 ) 
4 . Graf , S .  , Kinshuk , Liu , T . C .  : Supporting Teachers in Identifying Students ’ Learning Styles 
in Learning Management Systems : An Automatic Student Modelling Approach . Educational Technology and Society 12 ( 4 )  , 3–14 ( 2009 ) 
5 . Sfenrianto , H . Z . A .  , Suhartanto , H .  : An Automatic Approach for Identifying Triple-Factor 
in e-Learning Process . International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering 5 ( 2 )  , 
371–376 ( 2013 ) 
6 . Eke , H . N .  : Modeling LIS Students ’ Intention to Adopt E-learning : A case from University 
of Nigeria , Nsukka . Library Philosophy and Practice ( 2011 ) 
7 . Lu , A .  , Stokes , M .  , Zhu , J . J . H .  : Motivation , Usage Behaviour , Satisfaction , and Task 
Performance : A MUST Model of a Web-based Learning Process . A project study was 
supported by UGC teaching development grant and quality enhancement fund ( 1999 ) 
8 . Ndubisi , N . O .  : Factors influencing e-learning adoption intention : Examining the determinant structure of the decomposed theory of planned behaviour constructs ( 2014 )  
Reconceptualizing a Creative and Specific Learning Environment 155 
9 . Kraft , P .  , Rise , J .  , Sutton , S .  , Roysamb , E .  : Perceived difficulty in the theory of planned 
behaviour : Perceived behavioural control or affective attitude ? British Journal of Social 
Psychology 44 , 479–496 ( 2005 ) 
10 . Siragusa , L .  , Dixon , K . C .  : Theory of planned behaviour : Higher Education students ’ 
attitudes towards ICT-based learning interactions . In : Proceedings Ascilite Auckland , 
pp . 969–980 ( 2009 ) 
11 . Siragusa , L .  : Theory of Planned behaviour : Higher Education students ’ attitudes towards 
ICT-based learning interactions . Presentation at Ascilite ( 2011 ) 
12 . Jan , P . T .  , Lu , H . P .  , Chou , T . C .  : The Adoption of E-Learning : An Institutional Theory 
Perspective . The Turkish Online Journal of Edcational Technology 11 ( 3 )  , 326–343 ( 2012 ) 
13 . Psycharis , S .  : Presumptions and actions affecting an e-learning adoption by the educational 
system complementation using virtual private networks ( 2005 )  ,  . 
org / materials / contrib / 2005 / sarantos_psycharis . htm
14 . Phillips , R . A .  , McNaught , C .  , Kennedy , G .  : Towards a generalized conceptual 
framework for learning : the Learning Environment , Learning Processes and Learning 
Outcomes ( LEPO ) framework . In : Herrington , J .  , Hunter , W .  ( eds .  ) ED-MEDIA 2010 , 
pp . 2495–2504 ( 2010 ) 
15 . Watson , J .  , Angus , S . D .  : Does regular online testing enhance student learning ? Evidence 
from a large first-year quantitative methods course . University of New South Wales ( 2014 ) 
16 . Biggs , J .  : The psychology of educational assessment and the Hong Kong scene . Bulletin of 
the Hong Kong Psychological Society 28 / 29 , 5–26 ( 1992 ) 
17 . Nacheva-Skopalik , L .  , Green , S .  : Adaptable Personal E-Assessment . International Journal 
of Web-Based Learning and Teaching Technologies 7 ( 4 )  , 29–39 ( 2012 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 156–162 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Reflective Practice with Digital Portfolio for Teacher 
Readiness and Maturation of Prospective Teacher 
within the TPACK Framework 
Hin Leung Chui , Ho Kong Christopher Au-Yeung , and Gary Cheng 
The Hong Kong Institute of Education 
{ mikechui , cauyeung , chengks }  @ ied . edu . hk 
Abstract . This study explores the influence of digital portfolio on reflective 
practice of prospective teachers ( PTs ) with the Technological Pedagogical 
Content Knowledge framework ( TPACK )  . A total of 36 PTs studying in a 
teacher education course ( one-year full-time ) at a tertiary education institute in 
Hong Kong took part in the study . Blended learning approach was adopted to 
facilitate the completion of digital portfolio with various applications of Web 
services as a pedagogical tool . At the end of the course , the PTs completed the 
same questionnaire again as a post-test . Results showed that engaging PTs in 
digital portfolio integrated with different levels of Web services can increase 
their degree of readiness and maturation in different dimensions under the 
TPACK framework . The findings shed light on the development of teacher 
readiness for their entering of teaching profession in terms of technical , pedagogical and content knowledge individually and holistically , and further cultivated a higher degree of sustainability in reflective practice for the prospective 
teachers . 
Keywords : reflective practice , digital portfolio , teacher readiness , TPACK . 
1 Introduction 
This study focuses on knowledge construction of prospective teachers ( PTs ) in a oneyear teacher education programme leading to become qualified teachers . The PTs 
enrolled in the programme were to equip themselves as professional subject specialists . In particular , they would be taking a course and to prepare themselves as teachers , who would be able to integrate technologies into content or subject knowledge 
and pedagogies , based on their learning and teaching experiences . Reflective practice 
is one of key processes on skill development for prospective teachers in teacher education programme [ 1 ] and it has been suggested in recent years that PTs are ready to 
use digital portfolios to capture learning experiences [ 2 ]  [ 3 ]  . However , not many PTs 
have developed competent technical skills to store teaching artefacts systematically 
that may lead to the loss of invaluable materials during their trainings and resulted in 
discrepancies while receiving teacher education [ 4 ]  . 
A search on journal databases online by the authors had yielded few articles either 
related to “ teacher maturation ” or “ teacher maturation with technologies ”  . Of those 
Reflective Practice with Digital Portfolio for Teacher Readiness 157 
found , the term “ teacher readiness ” was not precisely defined . Thus , the idea of enhancing “ teacher readiness ” became the objective of the present study , i . e . to explore 
ways for the professional development of prospective teachers , through the cyclic 
process of reflective practice with technologies related to digital portfolio with Web 
services . Such skill would be essential for them to become confident and be ready to 
become professional teacher in the future . 
2 Literature Review 
2 . 1 TPACK and Teacher Readiness through Reflective Practice 
In consideration of an integration of subject knowledge , pedagogies , and technologies , the TPACK framework was adopted to conceptualise our proposition of using 
Web services and blog . TPACK was built upon Shulman ’ s notion of pedagogical 
content knowledge ( PCK )  [ 5 ]  ,  [ 6 ]  [ 7 ] suggesting prospective teachers ( in our context ) 
to plan learning and teaching activities by 1 ) blending technologies ( TK )  , 2 ) learning 
content ( CK )  , and 3 ) teaching strategies for the appropriate audience in the suitable 
learning contexts ( PK )  . 
Reflective practice is another crucial factor in the personal aspect of a teaching 
professional . PTs are academically trained to be effective reflective practitioners by 
evaluating their own teaching performance through different opportunities such as 
field experience [ 8 ]  . Among the digital tools on the Web , blogs provide an easy platform for effective reflection on their own or with each other [ 9 ]  . Whenever there is 
Internet access , blog content can be created conveniently with the help of varies 
online resources and widgets such as speaking avatar and games for learning , and be 
allocated clearly in an anti-chronological order for the readers [ 10 ]  . 
The idea of teacher readiness and teacher maturation are about the ability of a 
trained teacher to master the content knowledge ( CK )  , pedagogical knowledge ( PK )  , 
and technological knowledge ( TK ) in terms of the TPACK framework . This study 
aimed at articulating how the integration of various Web services into one ’ s blog 
could contribute to increase teacher readiness and to help the PTs facilitate their reflective practices . 
3 Methodology 
3 . 1 Participants and Setting 
This is a questionnaire-based study design aiming at investigating teacher readiness 
and maturation by using blog and other Web services . The participants are one group 
of Postgraduate Diploma in Education ( PGDE ) PTs ( 19 male and 17 female ) specialised in various subjects of secondary education ( i . e . Business Studies , Chinese Language , Information Technologies , Mathematics , Music , Physical Education , Science , 
and Visual Art ) at the Hong Kong Institute of Education . 
158 H . L . Chui , H . K . C . Au-Yeung , and G . Cheng 
3 . 2 Validity of the Questionnaire 
Before disseminating the questionnaire to the prospective teachers , face validity was 
measured by inviting four volunteers ( Table 1 ) to evaluate and give individual feedback to reduce bandwagon effect and halo effect for the clarity of wordings and the 
logical sequence of the questions . This was followed by the undertaking of content 
validity by two independent scholars who are familiar with research in linguistics 
( English ) and quantitative research in physical education respectively . This was to 
further ascertain the content of the questionnaire was appropriate and relevant to the 
study . 
Table 1 . Profile of four volunteers testing the validity of the questionnaire 
Volunteer Level Major Mother language 
1 Postgraduate Diploma 
( Primary Education ) 
Information Technology Chinese 
2 Postgraduate Diploma 
( Primary Education ) 
Chinese Language Chinese 
3 Postgraduate Diploma 
( Primary Education ) 
English Language English 
4 Postgraduate Diploma 
( Primary Education ) 
Mathematics English
The selected volunteers were full-time students of the institute comparable to our 
target students ( e . g . similar educational background by institutional entrance requirements )  . They were admitted into a different full-time one-year programme that was 
independent to our target students ’ course . This reduced the interference or measurement error such as the disclosure and discussion of the questionnaire content outside 
the study . 
3 . 3 Blended Learning Course Design 
The one-year teacher preparation programme for teaching in secondary schools ( aka 
Sec . Ed ) admitted 48 PTs in the 2011-12 academic year . One PT withdrew from the 
programme while another 11 PTs in English major were excluded in this study due to 
conflict of interest with another study [ 11 ]  . Thus , a total of 36 full-time PTs were 
included in this study . They completed a questionnaire early in the course and confirmed that they had little experience using blogs for teaching or learning . The course 
adopted a blended-learning approach for training the PTs in ten topics related to blogmediated teaching and learning ( Table 2 )  . Topics one and five were conducted faceto-face while the other eight topics were delivered through the instructor ’ s self-hosted 
Moodle and blog content with TPACK framework for PTs ’ self-directed learning .  
Reflective Practice with Digital Portfolio for Teacher Readiness 159 
Table 2 . Blended learning scheme of work 
Semester Topic Content covered 
1 1  register and create a basic blog for teaching and learning 
1 2  add a single image and a YouTube video in one ’ s blog for a 
meaningful lesson 
1 3  register an account from an online slide host 
 upload and share slides by embedding codes into one ’ s blog 
or a learning Web site 
1 4  upload and share a photo album by embedding codes into 
one ’ s blog or a learning Web site 
1 5  identify and embed royalty free music in the blog 
 understand the pros and cons of using Flash games in the 
classroom 
 create and embed Flash games that could be constructive in 
your classroom 
2 6  upload MS Word document in Google Drive 
 embed Google Drive document in one ’ s blog 
2 7  create and embed one ’ s voice as a speaking avatar in blog 
 develop one ’ s listening comprehension learning materials 
with the speaking avatar 
 search and embed Google Calendar for collaborative learning schedules 
 create and download brainstorming diagrams with an online 
application 
2 8  create and embed a quick poll widget in blog for feedback 
collection 
 create an online questionnaire with theme effectively with 
Google Drive 
 co-edit an online questionnaire ( by using Google Drive ) with 
group members 
2 9  enable synchronous communication with instant messaging 
tool in your blog 
2 10  record one ’ s voice for audio reflection 
 edit sound with proper effects and background music 
 create a photo story with sound files and images 
 upload the finalised photo story to YouTube 
3 . 4 Data Collection 
Quantitative data collected included pre-test ( at the beginning of semester one )  , posttest ( at the end of semester two )  . On the other hand , selected blog posts ( at the end of 
semester two ) served as another set of quantitative data to triangulate the first set of 
quantitative data ( i . e . pre- / post-test )  . A total of 180 blog posts ( five representative 
posts from each PT about reflective practice of teaching and learning ) were extracted 
160 H . L . Chui , H . K . C . Au-Yeung , and G . Cheng 
and evaluated for the teacher readiness throughout the one-year teacher training programme . For research ethics , all PTs were informed either with verbal or written disclaimer to reach consensus that all their responses and profiles would not be disclosed 
( or by using pseudonyms in particular data presentations )  . 
3 . 5 Data Analysis 
The response rate for the pre-test and post-test was 100% . For quantitative data analysis , a table of rubric by integrating the seven dimensions of TPACK framework and 
literatures related to teacher readiness was created ( Table 3 )  . Content analysis was 
carried out by counting the number of blog posts that matched each dimensions of the 
TPACK framework ( Figure 1 )  . Two coders with common understanding of the rubric 
integrated with seven dimensions of TPACK and teacher readiness ( Table 3 ) coded the 
blog posts independently followed by discussions to further reach consensus . The second part of quantitative data collected from pre-test ( at the beginning of semester one )  , 
post-test ( at the end of semester two ) were also analysed by paired t-test ( Table 4 )  . 
Table 3 . The rubric integrated with seven dimensions of TPACK and teacher readiness ( tr ) 
Dimension Indicators 
Content Knowledge teacher 
readiness ( CK-tr ) 
Develop awareness with actions as a teacher who 
masters subject matter through teaching and learning 
theories and practices . 
Pedagogical Knowledge teacher 
readiness ( PK-tr ) 
Develop awareness with actions as a teacher who 
masters various methods / strategies in teaching . 
Technology Knowledge teacher 
readiness ( TK-tr ) 
Develop awareness with actions as a teacher who 
adapts changes of technologies and masters various 
technologies for one ’ s learning and teaching productivity . 
Pedagogical Content Knowledge 
teacher readiness ( PCK-tr ) 
Develop awareness with actions as a teacher who 
internalises methods / strategies of teaching and able to 
present subject matter in multiple ways . 
Technological Content Knowledge teacher readiness ( TCK-tr ) 
Develop awareness with actions as a teacher who 
applies right technologies for specific subject-matter 
learning . 
Technological Pedagogical 
Knowledge teacher readiness 
( TPK-tr ) 
Develop awareness with actions as a teacher who 
applies right technologies for specific subject-matter 
teaching and presentation . 
Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge teacher readiness 
( TPACK-tr ) 
Develop awareness with actions as a teacher who 
learns and teaches / presents subject matter with right 
technologies in consideration of pedagogical affordances so to strengthen and transcend the existing 
knowledge .  
Reflective Practice with Digital Portfolio for Teacher Readiness 161 
Fig . 1 . Results from blog posts related to teacher readiness under TPACK 
We further looked at the TPACK-tr dimension and found that 60 out of 63 blog 
posts were generated in semester two in the one-year programme . In other words , the 
PTs developed better understanding the TPACK framework through educational theories and practices while the instructor did not emphasise on the mandatory use of the 
TPACK framework throughout the blended learning course . 
Table 4 . The Results of ST readiness before and after using blog ( N = 36 )  
Pre-test Post-test 
t mean ( SD ) mean ( SD ) 
Q1 : Your perception of effectiveness by using 
blog as a platform for knowledge construction . 
2 . 89 ( 0 . 78 ) 5 . 22 ( 1 . 24 ) -12 . 21 *  * 
Q2 : Your perception of effectiveness by using 
blog as a platform for teaching and learning . 
3 . 11 ( 0 . 62 ) 5 . 94 ( 1 . 29 ) -11 . 61 *  * 
Q3 : The recognition of yourself as a professional 
teacher by using blog . 
3 . 50 ( 0 . 56 ) 6 . 11 ( 1 . 14 ) -13 . 58 *  * 
Q4 : The extent you developed your own teaching and learning framework blended with content knowledge , pedagogical knowledge , and 
technology knowledge after using blog . 
2 . 86 ( 0 . 54 ) 5 . 08 ( 0 . 81 ) -14 . 85 *  * 
Q5 : The extent you are confident to enter the 
teaching profession after using blog . 
3 . 69 ( 0 . 62 ) 6 . 17 ( 1 . 25 ) -11 . 63 *  *  
*  * p <  . 01 Paired t-tests were used for analysing the survey data . The results indicated that readiness of 
the PTs had significantly improved through the blended learning course design ( p <  . 01 )  . 
0 0
23
0
75
19
63
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
No . of blog post ( s ) 
No . of blog 
post ( s ) 
162 H . L . Chui , H . K . C . Au-Yeung , and G . Cheng 
4 Discussion and Conclusion 
The first set of quantitative data analysis showed that engaging PTs in blogging integrated with Web services increased their degree of teacher readiness to become professional teachers . The second set of data also attained a positive result by showing 
the PTs had developed gradually from single element of TPACK ( e . g . TK-tr ) to an 
integrative intrinsic understanding of TPACK ( i . e . TPACK-tr )  . We perceive that most 
of the PTs had become more mature in terms of teaching and learning perspectives . 
The PTs actually developed awareness including attitude of being a teacher with sustainable learning from reflective teaching practice in consideration of technologies . 
However , our study was limited to a technology-mediated teaching and learning environment , therefore three of TPACK dimensions ( i . e . CK-tr , PK-tr , PCK-tr ) were not 
observed . This warrens further studies on the semantic analysis and in-depth analysis 
of blog content in the seven areas of TPACK . 
References 
1 . Schön , D . A .  : The reflective practitioner : How professionals think in action . Basic Books , 
New York ( 1983 ) 
2 . Killeavy , M .  , Moloney , A .  : Reflection in a social space : Can blogging support reflective 
practice for beginning teachers ? Teaching and Teacher Education 26 ( 4 )  , 1070–1076 
( 2010 ) 
3 . Wopereis , I . G .  , Sloep , P . B .  , Poortman , S . H .  : Weblogs as instruments for reflection on 
action in teacher education . Interactive Learning Environments 18 ( 3 )  , 245–261 ( 2010 ) 
4 . Chui , H . L .  : Educational blogfolio - exploring student teacher ’ s concepts and competency 
of integrating Web applications and blog features for knowledge construction . Unpublished paper presented at CITE Research Symposium 2010 , Hong Kong ( 2010 ) 
5 . Shulman , L . S .  : Those who understand : Knowledge growth in teaching . Educational Researcher 15 ( 2 )  , 4–31 ( 1986 ) 
6 . Koehler , M . J .  : What is TPACK ( 2011 )  ,  ( retrieved May 26 , 
2014 ) 
7 . Mishra , P .  , Koehler , M . J .  : Technological pedagogical content knowledge : A framework 
for teacher knowledge . Teachers College Record 108 ( 6 )  , 1017–1054 ( 2006 ) 
8 . Cochran-Smith , M .  , Lytle , S . L .  : Relationships of Knowledge and Practice : Teacher Learning in Communities . Review of Research in Education 24 , 249–305 ( 1999 ) 
9 . Huffaker , D .  : The educated blogger : Using weblogs to promote literacy in the classroom . 
AACE Journal 13 ( 2 )  , 91–98 ( 2005 ) 
10 . Absalom , M .  , Leger , D . D . S .  : Reflecting on reflection : Learner perceptions of diaries and 
blogs in tertiary language study . Arts and Humanities in Higher Education 10 ( 2 )  , 189–211 
( 2011 ) 
11 . Chui , H . L .  , Mak , B . C . N .  , Li , C . X .  : Reflective inquiry practice of English language 
teacher : Blogging as e-portfolios within the TPACK framework . In : Proceedings of the 
13th Global Chinese Conference on Computers in Education ( GCCCE )  ( 2013 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 163–174 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
If You Comes * to Guangzhou : Pedagogical Implications 
of Typical Errors Committed by Students with Mainland 
Chinese Background as Revealed on an e-learning 
Platform 
Sui Chi Kwan , Hoi Man Dorothy Chow , and Sin Ying Sharon Wong 
Caritas Institute of Higher Education 
Hong Kong SAR , China 
{ sckwan , dchow , sywong }  @ cihe . edu . hk 
Abstract . This article aims at revealing the inadequacy of an e-learning platform by examining a number of language errors found among a batch of freshmen ( the participants ) studying in a self-financing higher education institute in 
Hong Kong . The participants were selected since they share a common Mainland Chinese background . Meta-linguistic analysis of the errors compiled indicates that the students have both inter-language and intra-language errors , i . e . 
having difficulties in shaking off the interference from L1 as well as being unable to acquire a number of grammatical rules pertaining to forming syntactically 
legitimate sentences in L2 . Given the dramatic increase of students with such 
background over the last few years within the tertiary realm , this article may 
help shed light on how future pedagogical preparations for more effective 
teaching can be enhanced with regards to such a platform . This article advocates that , it should better be equipped with the capability to issue automatic 
responses for students to engage themselves in self-studying . 
Keywords : E-learning platform , students with Mainland Chinese background , 
L1 interference , automatic electronic responses . 
1 Introduction 
Tertiary education in many respects is a paradigmatic shift from secondary and primary education for students . One of its salient features is that students are no longer 
pampered throughout their learning process with teachers escorting them each step of 
the way . It is natural therefore that students have to be capable of studying on their 
own . And as a matter of fact , this is the manner in which education is conducted 
across the entire spectrum at this level . Language , among others , holds the key to such 
mode of independent learning . As the majority of learning resources accessible to 
students both in the forms of traditional printed materials and electronically across the 
Internet is written in English , it follows that being able to master this language is a 
necessary condition for students to be successful in their studies . As English is not the 
mother tongue of most students here in Hong Kong , anyone who commands a high 
164 S . C . Kwan , H . M . D . Chow , and S . Y . Sharon Wong 
proficiency of it would definitely have a comparative advantage over those who do 
not . For the less competent , they would probably become the unprivileged struggling 
their way with double efforts . 
For one to be an effective leaner of English , grammar plays a role so vital that few 
other factors can compare with . Yet , it is precisely in this area that many studies have 
yielded a pessimistic picture . Many students in Hong Kong , even at the level of tertiary education , are at the relentless mercy of grammar and syntax , backbones and 
framework out of which a legitimate English sentence is constructed . The predicament becomes even more serious when what is at center of the issue concerns students having a Mainland background ( henceforward , SMBs ) where English is not 
even a second tongue and their exposure to it has been kept to a minimum . Most students brought up in the Mainland have little chance to learn the 26 alphabets before 
they reach Primary Four , as they claimed , and even after they have started receiving 
English education , their pace in learning the language is still painstakingly slow . As a 
result , with the exception of a few , most of these students are badly in need of a platform for learning on which they can endeavor to rectify and redress the discrepancy . 
This article reports the implementation of such platform for SMBs as employed at 
Caritas Institute of Higher Education , a self-financing higher education institute in 
Hong Kong which offers both degree and sub-degree programmes . 
Background 
This article focuses on a group of SMBs with respect to their English competency . As 
such , it is perhaps in place to give an account of why there is this group of students in 
the first place . 
Currently there are more than 60 students with such background enrolled in degree 
programmes and it is expected to be numbered at 100 next years . CIHE is certainly 
not alone in admitting SMBs . In an article , dated 11 Nov , 2013 , on the South China 
Morning Post , it was reported that ‘ places on graduate programmes at universities in 
Hong Kong are increasingly being filled by mainlanders , who are flooding popular 
courses with applications .  ’  [ 1 ] With local enrollment being on a decline , more and 
more SMBs are taking courses that to some extent they can safely claim their own ; for 
instance , 99% of students taking the Master of Science in Finance programme at the 
Chinese University of Hong Kong are SMBs . 
Like graduate programmes , those at the undergraduate levels are also filled up with 
SMBs . A similar report on a local Chinese newspaper had a cover story for two consecutive years which claimed that the trend of SMB intake has sped up recently 
[ 2 ]  [ 3 ]  . The following figures are taken from these coverage : 
Table 1 . Number of intake of students with Mainland background at UGC-funded universities ;  
* undergraduates and postgraduates inclusive 
Academic years Numbers of SMBs 
2008 - 2009 4 , 348
2009-2010 4 , 562
2010-2011 4 , 638
2011-2012 4 , 583
2012-2013 6 , 315
2013-2014 11 , 374 * 
Typical Errors Committed by Students with Mainland Chinese Background 165 
From the table , it is clear that there has been an upward trend of SMBs coming to 
study at local tertiary institutes and the speed seems to be accelerating with 6 , 315 in 
the 2012-13 academic year , a rise by 38% over the previous year . This trend continues to rocket by a great leap forward to a total of 11 , 374 , undergraduates and postgraduates inclusive . 
While this has raised some eyebrows among the legislators and commentators , it 
represents a very clear wake-up call for tertiary educators . What concerns them primarily is certainly administrative . But equally pressing is how to provide adequate 
support for this group of students who have specific needs in their studies , especially 
that which is concerned with their English competency . 
Methodology 
The Electronic Writing Platform 
Funded by Quality Education Grant Scheme ( QEGS )  , Education Bureau of the SAR 
Government , the e-platform under review ( fig 1 ) operates under a system known as 
OASISS 2 . 0 , itself also funded by QEGS , with a purpose to cater for the specific 
needs of all SMBs as regards their English competency . 
Participants 
15 undergraduates from Mainland China at CIHE participated in this study . All of 
them had their secondary education in Mainland , in which Chinese was the medium 
of instruction . English was taught as an additional subject in the curriculum . 
Context and Data Collection 
All participants in this study took a non-credit bearing course in the first semester in 
the academic year 13-14 for 3 hours each week . During meetings with the instructor , 
they were given a 90 minute lecture on a great variety of topics , including among 
others : 
• cities they have traveled , 
• movies they liked , 
• personal hobbies , 
• formal letter & email writing , 
• describing architectural sites , 
• describing your life , 
• holiday pastimes , 
• student life , 
• studying habit , 
• life aspiration . 
Immediately following the lecture was writing practice in a computer laboratory , 
taking another 90 minutes , in which they were required to produce write-ups on a 
corresponding topic related to the lecture that day and post their writings on the 
e-platform . The data gathered for analysis in this study was collected from this 
platform written by the participants . 
166 S . C . Kwan , H . M . D . Chow , and S . Y . Sharon Wong 
Fig . 1 . the electronic writing platform for students with Mainland Chinese background at CIHE 
Research Question
This article is guided by three questions : 
1 . What are the typical errors recurrent in the writings of the SMBs ? 
2 . How far is the set of errors a product of L1 transfers ? 
3 . What areas are there in the platform that needs enhancement ? 
Literature Review 
The Value of Error Analysis 
The pedagogical value for the study of error analysis ( EA ) has been widely documented in the literature . Errors made by students in their compositions and assignments can be useful indicators of the effectiveness of teaching [ 4 ]  , which provide 
teachers with valuable evidence to determine which level of language proficiency the 
language learner has reached [ 5 ]  , which areas of focus should be reinforced in lessons 
that follow ( Richards 1971 )  , whether the scope and difficulty levels of the learning 
materials need to be further modified and what kind of remedial learning support 
should be provided to individual students [ 6 ]  . In other words , student errors , if studied systematically , can be used for dual purposes , both diagnostic and prognostic [ 4 ]  . 
It is diagnostic because EA is a valuable device to help identify learning problems and 
difficulties encountered by students ; and it is prognostic in in the sense that EA can 
provide teachers with not only guided insights on how to modify their teaching and 
learning materials , but also how to design a remedial teaching plan for students with 
specific learning problems [ 4 ]  [ 5 ]  [ 6 ]  [ 7 ]  . 
Sources of Errors 
As regards the source of ESL errors , three types of writing errors were identified in 
the extant literature , namely , Inter-language errors , Intra-language errors and Developmental errors . 
Errors that are caused by the interference from L1 are called “ inter-language errors ”  , a term introduced by Selinker [ 8 ] deriving from the interlanguage hypothesis 
she proposed referring to a linguistic system that has structurally intermediate status 
between the learner ’ s L1 and Target language . It is also interchangeable with the concept of Approximate System proposed by Nemser [ 9 ] and the terms such as Idiosyncratic Dialect and Transitional Competence employed by Corder [ 4 ]  . There is a 
general agreement among the researchers mentioned above that errors produced by L2 
learners are closely related to the transfer effects of their L1 system . Such transfer 
Typical Errors Committed by Students with Mainland Chinese Background 167 
effects can be either positive or negative , depending on the level of similarity between 
the two language systems in terms of phonological , lexical and structural patterns . 
Intra-language errors specifically refer to those errors produced by learners mainly 
due to their misunderstanding of the grammatical rules of the target language . According to Richards ( 1971 )  , these errors are caused by “ faulty generalization , incomplete application of rules and failure to learn conditions for rule application , the learner attempting to build up hypothesis about English from his limited experience of it in 
the classroom or textbook ”  . Past researches reported that L2 learners were more 
likely to make inter-lingual errors at the early stages of second language acquisition 
but they would have a larger tendency to produce more intra-lingual errors once they 
have got more familiar with the new language system . Unlike inter-language and 
intra-language errors , developmental errors occur as a result of a learner ’ s less than 
satisfactory language competence at a particular stage compared with the learning 
pace of their peers ( Richards 1971 )  . It has nothing to do with any transfer effect 
from another language system . 
Related Hong Kong Literature on Error Analysis involving Chinese ESL Writers 
There have been a number of empirical studies on common ESL errors made by Chinese writers in the past decades . In these studies , different syntactic , lexical and 
structural patterns were under investigation , ranging from the use of transitive verb 
and the passive construction , through spelling and choice of words , to the acquisition 
of subject-predicate structures and topicalization . Below are some examples : 
In a study conducted by Bunton [ 10 ] on a comparison of English errors made by 
Hong Kong Cantonese-speaking students and those made by non-native learners of 
English internationally , it was found that a group of Hong Kong errors were not in the 
international sample that can probably be attributed to LI transfer . These include 
pluralisation of uncountable nouns ( e . g .  ‘ a camping ’ and ‘ transports ’  )  , use of double 
connectives ( e . g . although / but and because / so are used together )  , incorrect choice of 
lexical items ( e . g busy time from 繁忙時間 ( faan mong si gann ) for rush hour )  , use 
of wrong word class ( e . g .  * China is a communism country ) and inappropriate use of 
voice ( e . g .  * A strange person was appeared and That company situates in Hong 
Hom )  . 
Webster and Lam ( 1991 ) in another study of similar nature found that a considerable proportion of English errors Hong Kong Chinese students made in their essays 
were due to their first language interference . Several types of recurring writing errors were identified . For example , some Hong Kong students were used to putting an 
unnecessary ‘ to ’ after a number of verbs which are followed by infinitive without ‘ to ’  
( e . g .  ‘ suggest ’  ,  ‘ see ’  ,  ‘ hear ’  ,  ‘ feel ’  ,  ‘ watch ’ and ‘ notice ’  )  . It is also evident that they 
demonstrated difficulty in the use of causative ‘ have ” as such expression does not 
appear in Cantonese . This seems to lead to few common errors such as ‘  * I cut my 
hair at the barber ’ s shop ’ and ‘  * I made my clothes at the tailor ’ s ’ in which simple 
verbs were incorrectly selected by students . In addition , the problem of redundancy in 
English expression seemed to be influenced by transfer from L1 Cantonese :  ‘ according to my opinion ’  ,  ‘ the reason is because… ’  . The use of intrusive preposition ‘  * I 
went to shopping ’ and ‘  * we need to discuss about our future plan ’ also can be seen as 
first-language induced errors produced by local Chinese students in English writing . 
168 S . C . Kwan , H . M . D . Chow , and S . Y . Sharon Wong 
Chan was interested in examining the effect of mother tongue Chinese on English 
writing of Hong Kong students , particularly those erroneous sentences involving transitive verbs and passive construction [ 11 ]  . Form six students from five secondary 
schools in Hong Kong were invited to take part in her study and 156 compositions 
were collected . In terms of the transitive verbs , it was shown that students failed to 
use them with an appropriate object or even forgot to put any object after some transitive verbs in a complete sentence . One of the examples Chan cited was :  ‘  * There 
are many facilities , but people don ’ t use ’  , where in English ‘ them ’ is required after 
use , but in spoken Cantonese , the pronoun for facilities is omitted . Apart from demonstrating confusion in verb transitivity , students in Chan ’ s study also encountered 
difficulty in the use of the English passive sentences . Negative transfer from L1 
Chinese was ascribed to some of the errors made . Two types of common errors arising from language transfer impact with regard to the concept of passivity were identified . They included ‘ inappropriate use of the passive ’  ( e . g .  * some problems are not 
happened )  , and ‘ failure to use the passive where appropriate ’  ( e . g * The problem cannot solve )  . The latter error type was called as “ pseudo passives ” or “ putative passives ” 
in the previous literature ( Li 1976 ; Schacher and Rutherford 1979 , cited in Chan 
( 1991 )  , pp . 49 )  . 
In a study based on data collected from 710 Hong Kong Chinese ESL learners at 
different proficiency levels , Chan reported that the surface structure of many English 
sentences produced by participating students , whether collected through translation 
task or grammaticality judgment test , were largely similar to the normative sentence 
structures of Cantonese ( that is , their first language )  [ 12 ]  . The influence of syntactic 
transfer is remarkably apparent among learners of lower proficiency levels 
particularly when they dealt with complex target structures . Evidence of error types 
relating to syntactic transfer generated from this study include :  ( 1 )  . Omission of 
English copula in sentences with modal verbs ( e . g .  * If I fail the examination , my 
mother will very angry )  ;  ( 2 )  . Placement of the intensifying adverb before a verb ( e . g .  
* he very like dancing )  ;  ( 3 )  . Use of ‘ there have ’ instead of ‘ there be ’ in existential 
constructions ( e . g .  * There have many Japanese tourists on the ship )  ;  ( 4 )  . Confusion 
in the transitivity patterns of high-frequency verbs listen and care ( e . g .  * we should 
care the old people )  ;  ( 5 )  . Inability to use relative clause ( e . g . she is the person which 
came to see me yesterday )  . 
Data Analysis and Discussion
The study started with collecting written works by a group of SMBs from the writing 
platform for text analysis . Bunton pointed out that “ there are many different ways 
errors can be categorized and some errors could come under two or more categories ”  
[ 10 ]  . Error types customized by Bunton were adapted in this study and causation 
should still be open to any interpretation and not restricted by the categorization . 
Example of errors from students ’ works under seven categories are presented in the 
following table : 
Typical Errors Committed by Students with Mainland Chinese Background 169 
Table 2 . Samples of Common Language Errors 
Error Categorization Identification of Errors Correct Sentences 
1 . Noun Countability 
( Singular / Plural ) 
1 . The soup inside make it 
tasted good . 
2 . The winter are cold and 
the summer are hot . 
1 . The soup inside 
makes it taste good . 
2 . The winter is cold and 
the summer is hot . 
2 . Verb- Tense
Simple present instead 
of simple past 
1 . I do the economic assignment at the weekend . 
1 . I did the economic 
assignment at the 
weekend . 
Missing of verb after 
model 
1 . Today I would to introduce my classmate , 
Hei . 
1 . Today I would like to
introduce my classmate , Hei . 
Simple present instead of infinitive / 
misuse of infinitive 
1 . Today I would like 
introduce my classmate Stephanie . 
2 . She likes to goes the 
library to study alone . 
3 . She likes to makes
some notes . 
4 . Who can teach me how 
to sent photos ? 
1 . Today I would like to 
introduce my classmate Stephanie . 
2 . She likes to go the 
library to study alone . 
3 . She likes to make
some notes . 
4 . Who can teach me 
how to send photos ? 
3 . VerbActive / passive 
1 . The dish ‘ fishskin ’ can 
make after we dry the 
fishskin under the sun . 
1 . The dish of ‘ fshskin ’ 
can be made after we 
dry them under the 
sun . 
4 . Verb- Subject-verb 
Agreement ( wrong 
combination of subject and verb ) 
1 . If you comes to Guangzhou , … 
2 . Sometimes she study in 
the school library . 
3 . She come from Zhong 
Shan . 
4 . She study hard , I 
should learn from her . 
1 . If you come to 
Guangzhou… . 
2 . Sometimes she studies in the school library . 
3 . She comes from 
Zhong Shan . 
4 . She studies hard , I 
should learn from her . 
5 . Lexical Choice 1 . I am very like to 
eat this porridge . 
2 . At the beginning of 
every week she makes 
a study plan . 
1 . I like to eat this porridge very much . 
2 . At the beginning of 
each week she makes 
a study plan . 
170 S . C . Kwan , H . M . D . Chow , and S . Y . Sharon Wong 
Table 2 .  ( Continued ) 
6 . Word Class 1 . The assignment is very 
difficulty for me . 
2 . In my city , football is 
the more important 
culture than others . 
1 . The assignment is 
very difficult for me . 
2 . In my city , football is 
the most important 
culture . 
7 . Preposition 
( a preposition is 
misused , omitted 
or added ) 
1 . She likes to study in
home by herself . 
2 . We shared our experience how to solve 
our problems from our 
life . 
3 . He is the member in
International Practical 
Shooting Confederation . 
1 . She likes to study at
home by herself . 
2 . We shared our experience how to solve 
our problems in our 
life . 
3 . He is the member of
International Practical Shooting Confederation . 
Noun Countability ( Singular / Plural ) 
One of the most common errors found in participants ’ writings is ‘ Noun countability ’  . 
Students failed to recognize that there are plural and singular forms for English nouns 
or they were not sure when they should apply the plural form . When the subject was 
in the singular form they applied the plural form to the noun as shown in the examples 
below . A possible reason for the failure to use plural noun forms can probably be 
accounted for by the absence of plural markers for a noun in Chinese . 
Example 1 : The soup inside make it tasted good . 
Example 2 : The winter are cold and the summer are hot . 
Verbs -Tense 
Errors in verb tense is another type of common errors found in students ’ writings . For 
instance , in example 3 below , the simple present tense was used instead of the simple 
past when the student was talking about something in the past . This result is not surprising and it is very likely affected by L1 . English notion of tense is confusing to 
participants , a group of L2 learner , since Chinese verb itself does not indicate time 
while tenses , as expressions of time , is predominant in English . 
Example 3 : I do the economic assignment at the weekend . 
In addition , some students did not seem to fully understand or master the rules of 
verb . For example , errors were found in students ’ writings on the use of verb after 
modals and the use of the infinitive . These types of errors are illustrated by examples 
4-8 below : 
Example 4 : Today I would to introduce my classmate , Hei . 
Example 5 : Today I would like introduce my classmate Stephanie . 
Example 6 : She likes to goes the library to study alone . 
Example 7 : She likes to makes some notes . 
Example 8 : Who can teach me how to sent photos ? 
Typical Errors Committed by Students with Mainland Chinese Background 171 
Verbs – Active / Passive 
Another common error found in participants ’ writing is that of verbs in use of ‘ active / passive ’ form . For instance , example 9 below shows that the student put the 
active form of verb ‘ can make ’ for the subject ‘ the dish ’  , in which a passive form of 
verb ‘ can be made ’ should be used in the sentence . 
Example 9 : The dish ‘ fishskin ’ can make after we dry the fishskin under the 
sun . 
Verb- Subject-verb Agreement ( wrong combination of subject and verb ) 
Errors in Subject-verb Agreement can be seen in students ’ writings in the study . 
Participants failed to apply appropriate verb form to the noun in a sentence . This can 
be a result from the absence of agreement between subjects and verbs in L1 as there is 
no change on verb according to the subjects in Chinese . Examples in this category 
are shown below : - 
Example 10 : If you comes to Guangzhou , … 
Example 11 : Sometimes she study in the school library . 
Example 12 : She come from Zhong Shan . 
Example 13 : She study hard , I should learn from her . 
Lexical Choice 
Students had problem with correct choice of word in their writings . Some samples of 
errors seem to be a direct translation of Chinese expression . For instance , in example 
14 , the student wrote ‘ I am very like ’ to express the idea of ‘ I like .  .  .  .  .  .  . very much ’  . L1 
transfer can be seen from this example as the sentence pattern in example 14 is indeed 
a common sentence pattern used in Chinese ‘ 我是很愛吃… ’  . 
Example 14 : I am very like to eat this porridge . 
Example 15 : At the beginning of every week she makes a study plan . 
Word Class 
Errors on ‘ Word class ’ are also commonly found in data gathered in this study . Example 16 below shows the wrong word class of the word ‘ difficulty ’ was used instead 
of putting an adjective form of word ‘ difficult ’ in the sentence . Example 17 is another 
sample error on word class , in which ‘ each ’ should be used instead of ‘ every ’ in the 
sentence . 
Example 16 : The assignment is very difficulty for me . 
Example 17 : At the beginning of every week she makes a study plan . 
Bunton explained the presence of this type of error because ‘ Chinese characters do 
not change ’  [ 10 ]  . Particles may be used before or after the Chinese characters , but if a 
Chinese word is to be used as a noun instead of a verb , it will not change its form . 
Preposition
Most of the prepositional errors found in the study included omissions , additions and 
wrong selection . The cause of prepositional errors is interference from students ’ L1 , 
i . e . Chinese . Darus pointed out that ‘ some of the Chinese prepositions are similar in 
meanings and functions with the English prepositions ’  [ 13 ]  . Darus also mentioned 
that sometimes , a single Chinese preposition can be translated into various English 
172 S . C . Kwan , H . M . D . Chow , and S . Y . Sharon Wong 
prepositions . For instance , Chinese preposition ‘ 在 ’ and ‘ 的 ’ can refer to English 
prepositions ‘ in ’  ,  ‘ at ’ and ‘ on ’ for ‘ 在 ’  , and ‘ of ’ and ‘ in ’ for ‘ 的 ’  . Therefore , students 
were incapable of choosing the appropriate prepositions when more than one English 
preposition corresponds to a single Chinese preposition and created errors as the following in examples 18-20- 
Example 18 : She likes to study in home by herself . 
Example 19 : We shared our experience how to solve our problems from our 
life . 
Example 20 : He is the member in International Practical Shooting Confederation . 
Conclusion : Limitations and Recommendations 
Students ’ writings on the platform are continuously being recorded and errors traced 
for evaluative purposes . However , given the fact that the platform has only been running for two semesters and that admittedly the total student population contributing 
their works for the present research may not be considered large enough , it may be 
premature at this stage for the present research to be taken to have reached , both qualitatively and quantitatively , a high level of significance . Apparently more researches 
at an empirical level have to be conducted in future so that the tentative conclusions 
that this paper has reached can be verified , revised or , if necessary , falsified . That 
said , at this stage , we have already observed that some lights have been shed on the 
routine operation of the platform that can presumably guide us in modifying and redesigning it in such a way as to provide more substantial support for students in their 
learning . In what follows , we would like to sketch out some lines of thought along 
which the platform can be further developed . 
As mentioned , whenever the students commit any mistakes , it is the duty of the instructor to point them out and discuss them with the students concerned . This job can 
be very tedious if we take into account the following facts : 
1 . It is very difficult sometimes to explain to students the mistakes they make 
in terms that they can understand and to such an extent that they know how to 
avoid committing it again on the one hand and to form grammatically correct 
sentences on the other . This is partly due to the complexity of the mistakes 
involved and partly to the limited grammatical knowledge database that students have . And do not forget that most mistakes they commit are of the interlanguage type , i . e . those that clearly are the results of the interference of L1 
negative transfers , in which cases it is doubly difficult to make them see it by 
inviting them to migrate to a linguistic paradigm with different sets of rules . 
2 . Workload would become increasingly heavy if the number of intake of 
mainland students keeps growing in future . And ‘ fortunate ’ enough , this 
seems to be the trend . In view of the ongoing demand on the part of the instructor , something must be done to alleviate her burden . 
But on top of it , there is a third consideration as well . Many language teachers have 
the experience ( frustrating at times ) that despite repeated explanations of the same 
grammatical point , students keep coming back with it . That can partly be accounted 
for in terms of the fact that we learn not by being taught in the sense in which one is 
bombarded with a set of knowledge previously alien to him but by experiencing what 
Typical Errors Committed by Students with Mainland Chinese Background 173 
is right on our own . In other words , we learn by mistakes ; but this has to be done with 
sufficient awareness of such needs . Being lectured seems to accomplish little in this . 
Thus , if the students are exposed to a setting in which they are encouraged to study 
their mistakes on their own , the pedagogical outcome should presumably be more 
fruitful . 
It is with this in mind that we are proposing here that an I . T . assisted automatic error-checker be installed onto the platform , which is precisely what is lacking currently . This checker will be automatic in two senses . First , once an error is committed by 
any student writing on the platform , it will be detected instantly . To facilitate this , the 
system will have to be constantly on guard against any grammatical and / or syntactical 
errors , which in turn demands that installed in it is a vast reservoir of grammatical 
rules that forms a huge database ( let us call this D1 ) against which every sentence 
students make is checked . Second , not only will a student making mistakes be alerted , 
but he or she will also be directed to another database ( let us call this D2 ) that has 
pooled up all the teaching resources and materials that all faculty responsible for language courses have compiled during their lectures . And if D2 proves to be insufficient 
in anticipating the great variety of the mistakes to be made , materials capable of being 
found on the Internet can be provided as well in the form of hyperlinks . 
Such features can serve dual purposes . One , the burden the instructor is currently 
shouldering up will be much reduced , which in turn keeps her less inclined to make 
mistakes herself when supervising students . Two , and more significantly , students 
would be given immediate responses as to what mistakes they are supposed to be 
making , thus keeping them in a state of constant alert of the important consideration 
of grammaticality . And by prompting them to D1 and D2 , they will be directed to a 
big repertoire of resources from which they can tap as much as needed for self-study 
purposes . As we have observed through interacting with students on the platform , we 
believe that they will find these enhanced features effective and efficient in their 
studies . 
References 
1 . South China Morning Post : Chinese students flood Hong Kong universities ’ graduate programmes ( 2013 )  ,  
1352943 / chinese-students-flood-hong-kong-universitiesgraduate-programmes ? page = all ( retrieved ) 
2 . Apple Daily : 八大本學年6 , 315內地生 急增38% ( 2013 )  , 
3 .  ( retrieved ) 
4 . Apple Daily : 港研究院 68%內地生 (  ( 2014 )  )  ,  
 
( retrieved ) 
5 . Corder , S . P .  : The significance of learners ’ errors . International Review of Applied Linguistics 5 ( 4 )  , 161–169 ( 1967 ) 
6 . Sercombe , P . G .  : Learner language and the consideration of idiosyncrasies by students of 
English as a second or foreign language in the context of Brunei Darulsalam . In : Proceedings of the International Conference on Teaching and Learning ( 2000 ) 
7 . Weireesch , S .  : How to analyze interlanguage . Journal of Psychology & Education 9 , 
113–122 ( 1991 ) 
174 S . C . Kwan , H . M . D . Chow , and S . Y . Sharon Wong 
8 . Vahdatinejad , S .  : Students ’ error analysis and attitude towards teacher feedback using a 
selected software : a case study , Unpublished Masters thesis , UniveristyKebangsann 
Malaysia , Bangi ( 2008 ) 
9 . Selinker , L .  : Interlanguage . International Review of Applied Linguistics 10 , 209–231 
( 1972 ) 
10 . Nermser , W .  : Approximate systems of foreign language learners . In : Richards , J .  ( ed .  ) 
Error Analysis : Perspectives on Second Language Acquisition , pp . 55–63 . Longman , 
Essex ( 1974 ) 
11 . Bunton , D .  : A comparison of English errors made by Hong Kong students and those made 
by non-native speakers internationally , Institute of Language in Education Journal ( special 
issue no . 2 )  , 9–22 ( 1991 ) 
12 . Chan , B .  : A study of errors made by F6 students in their written English with special reference to structures involving the transitive verb and the passive construction . Institute of 
Language Education Journal 2 , 43–51 ( 1991 ) 
13 . Chan , Y . W .  : Syntactic Transfer : Evidence from the Interlanguge of Hong Kong Chinese 
ESL Learner . The Modern Language Journal 88 , 56–74 ( 2004 ) 
14 . Darus , S .  , Ching , K .  : Common Errors in Written English Essays of Form One Chinese 
Students : A Case Study . European Journal of Social Science 10 ( 2 )  , 242–253 ( 2009 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 175–186 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
A Framework for Effectiveness of Institutional 
Policies on Technology-Enhanced Learning 
Beryl Yuen-Yee Wong , Billy Tak-Ming Wong , and Sam Pang 
The Open University of Hong Kong 
30 Good Shepherd Street , Homantin , Kowloon , Hong Kong SAR , China 
{ byywong , tamiwong , scpang }  @ ouhk . edu . hk 
Abstract . For institutional policies associated with technology-enhanced learning ( TEL ) instruments , such as blended learning , mobile learning , massive open 
online courses , and open educational resources , their policy effectiveness is to a 
large extent affected by how ‘ effectiveness ’ is conceptualized . Studies on effectiveness of institutional policies reveal that a diverse conceptualization has been 
employed . 
This paper proposes a framework based on the instrumental perspective 
summarizing different approaches of assessing institutional policy effectiveness 
and the variables involved in each approach . A systematic literature survey of 
institutional policies on TEL is conducted , showing that the framework is highly comprehensive in terms of capturing different dimensions of policy effectiveness . This study will provide a point of reference not only on assessing the 
effectiveness of relevant polices but also for formulating relevant policies by 
educational administrators . 
Keywords : technology-enhanced learning , effectiveness of institutional policies , instrumental perspective . 
1 Introduction 
The use of technology in education , i . e .  , technology-enhanced learning ( TEL )  , has 
been commonplace in the education world as shown in relevant institutional policies . 
Examples include blended learning [ 1 ]  , mobile learning [ 2 ]  , massive open online 
courses ( MOOCs )  [ 3 ]  , open educational resources ( OER )  [ 4 ]  , social media [ 5 ] and 
other e-learning modes [ 6 ]  [ 7 ]  . Such wide application of technologies , in a sense , can 
be attributed to the purpose of enhancing efficiency and cost-effectiveness of delivery 
of education [ 8 ]  . For institutions which have spent tremendous amount of resources in 
providing TEL , it is critical for them to evaluate the effectiveness of their relevant 
institutional policies [ 9 ]  . 
Contemporary studies on effectiveness of institutional policies employ a diverse 
conceptualization of effectiveness , resulting in a wide variety of foci of analysis for 
understanding the concept . To illustrate a few , a focus of analysis lies in the effect of 
TEL on learning outcomes in terms of student performance . Comparative methods are 
commonly used in this kind of analysis , e . g . effectiveness of online versus traditional 
176 B . Y . -Y . Wong , B . Tak-Ming Wong , and S . Pang 
classroom training [ 6 ]  . Another focus is on the design of a TEL device and how the 
design suits a particular teaching and learning context . Zhang et al , for example , observe that integrating interactive instructional videos into an e-learning system can 
enhance learning effectiveness [ 7 ]  . Analysis can also be focused on perceptions and 
attitudes of TEL stakeholders in general and learners and teachers in particular , with 
an assumption that institutional policies would not be effective without taking into 
considerations stakeholders ’ needs and wishes . For the case of OER , Gruszczynska 
emphasizes that “ it is important to spend time exploring student perceptions and attitudes on OER ”  , in order to “ explore ways in which personalization can be achieved 
when lecturers use OER created outside their institutions ”  [ 10 ]  ( p . 2 )  . The different 
foci of analysis reveal the dynamic nature of policy effectiveness , which presents a 
need of systematic summarization of its diverse conceptualization to facilitate evaluation of TEL-related institutional policies . 
This paper presents a preliminary conceptual framework , based on the perspective 
of instrumentalism , for analyzing effectiveness of institutional policies on TEL . It first 
depicts the core of instrumentalism , and then reports the findings of a literature survey 
illustrating the comprehensiveness of instrumental perspective in terms of capturing 
the diverse conceptualization of policy effectiveness . Accordingly the components 
and variables of the framework are outlined and the values of the framework for TEL 
research and formulation of relevant institutional policies are discussed . 
2 Effectiveness of Institutional Policies on TEL : 
An Instrumental Perspective 
Institutional policies refer to methods or means used by institutions to achieve desired 
effects in line with their own visions and / or missions . This section introduces four 
different approaches to assessing effectiveness of institutional policies with reference 
to instrumentalism [ 11 ]  [ 12 ]  [ 13 ]  . 
2 . 1 Classical Approach : Character of Instruments 
This approach stems from the ‘ classical ’ theory of instruments , focusing on analysis 
of character of instruments . It assumes that an instrument has its own nature , characteristics and logics of operations and functions , and hence own line of effectiveness and 
limitations . Each instrument brings distinctive effects on different institutional policies , such as the choice of instrument and implementation design . In line with this 
school of thought , the key questions of evaluating policy effectiveness regarding an 
instrument , i . e .  , a TEL device , may include : 
 What is the nature of the TEL device ? 
 How does the nature of the TEL device determine the implementation of policy ? 
 What is the impact of the TEL device on teaching and learning ? 
 What are the expected effects of the TEL device on learning outcomes ?  
A Framework for Effectiveness of Institutional Policies 177 
2 . 2 Contextual Approach : Implementation Process 
This approach is rooted in the ‘ contextual ’ theory of instruments that places its emphasis on the influence of the implementation process of a policy . It holds that there 
may be differences between instruments and no policy is universally applicable . Factors to address are contextual ones such as decision-making arena and policy network , 
with particular attention to the implementation process . The point of departure in 
examining policy effectiveness , according to this approach , is not so much about the 
TEL device per se , but how the implementation of the TEL device shapes the intended effects of the device . In this line of thinking , the key questions of evaluating 
policy effectiveness may include : 
 What is the nature of the TEL implementation setting ? 
 What barriers and / or enablers are there in the TEL implementation process ? 
 How do the barriers and / or enablers shape the TEL device in the implementation 
process ? 
 How does the implementation process affect the expected effects of the TEL 
device ? 
2 . 3 Instrument-Context Approach : Requirements of a Problem Setting 
This approach is rooted in the ‘ instrument-context ’ theory of instruments . Its focus of 
analysis is on the matching or ‘ good fit ’ between instrument and context . The choice 
of instruments depends on the requirements of a problem setting in the context . Once 
the requirements are identified , instruments that are considered most appropriate in 
satisfying the requirements can be chosen . Hence there are two tasks in this approach , 
i . e .  , to figure out the requirements of a particular problem setting , and to choose the 
instruments in accordance with the requirements . In line with this approach , questions 
of evaluating policy effectiveness may include : 
 What is / are the problem ( s ) of teaching and learning in a particular setting ? 
 What are the requirements of the problem setting ? That is , how can the problem ( s ) 
be solved ? 
 What are the options ( solutions ) available for solving the problem ( s )  ? 
 Is TEL the way out ? If so , which kind of TEL device ? 
2 . 4 Constitutive Approach : Subjective Meaning of Instruments 
This approach is vested upon the ‘ constitutive ’ theory of instruments which holds 
that effectiveness of policy instruments may be hampered or supported by subjective factors . It is interpretive and constructive in nature , with a starting point lying 
in the ‘ meaning ’ of instrument which can only be understood subjectively and 
therefore differently . The subjective meaning of instruments can be socially constructed and reconstructed over time and changes with value systems . Therefore , to 
study TEL policy effectiveness in this line of thinking , the following key questions 
can be raised : 
178 B . Y . -Y . Wong , B . Tak-Ming Wong , and S . Pang 
 What do institutional leaders think about TEL ? 
 What do teachers think about TEL ? 
 What do learners think about TEL ? 
 To what extent is TEL accepted by institutional leaders , teachers and learners ? 
In sum , the four approaches of policy instruments , as elaborated above , constitute 
the core of instrumentalism , which offers the basis of developing a conceptual framework for evaluating policy effectiveness . 
3 Comprehensiveness of the Instrumental Perspective 
To examine the power of the instrumental perspective in offering a comprehensive 
framework for analyzing TEL policy effectiveness , a survey of relevant studies was 
conducted to investigate the extent to which the instrumental perspective is able to 
capture various conceptualizations of effectiveness in evaluating institutional policies 
on TEL . 
3 . 1 Data Collection and Analysis 
This study adopts Price and Kirkwood ’ s approach to collecting data for analysis [ 14 ]  . 
Google Scholar was used to dig out relevant papers published in 2000–2014 . The 
keywords used were :  ‘ institutional policy ’  ,  ‘ technology enhanced learning ’  ,  ‘ mobile 
learning ’  ,  ‘ blended learning ’  ,  ‘ massive open online courses ’  ,  ‘ open educational resources ’  , and ‘ social media ’  . Abstracts of the retrieved papers were examined to ensure that they satisfy the following inclusion criteria : 
1 . The paper involves an institutional policy in one or more of the following areas 
associated with applications of technology in higher education institutions : 
- Mobile learning 
- Blended learning 
- Massive open online courses 
- Open educational resources 
- Social media 
2 . The paper presents a study that was implemented and evaluated to inform institutional policy on applications of technology in education . 
3 . The paper involves some forms of evaluation of institutional policy . 
4 . The paper provides a literature review of existing studies that fulfill the criteria in 
this list . 
In addition , the following exclusion criteria were applied : 
1 . Technology applications in schools ; 
2 . An institutional policy on TEL in schools ; 
3 . An institutional policy on TEL that was proposed but had not been implemented . 
Given the above criteria , a total of 101 papers were collected and reviewed . The 
following aspects were considered in the process of reviewing the papers using a simplified thematic analysis : 
 Which dimension of the effectiveness of the TEL was / were investigated ? 
 Which instrumental approach ( es ) did the dimension belong to , if any ?  
A Framework for Effectiveness of Institutional Policies 179 
3 . 2 Findings 
Table 1 shows the frequency of the dimensions of policy effectiveness applied in the 
papers . The results show that all the dimensions can be captured by one or more of the 
four instrumental approaches . A few papers adopt more than one dimension within 
the purview of the instrumental perspective , thus the accumulated total number of 
dimension ( i . e .  , 114 ) is larger than the total number of papers reviewed ( i . e .  , 101 )  . 
Table 1 . Frequency of the dimensions of policy effectiveness applied in the collected papers 
TEL device Instrumental perspective 
Classical Contextual Instrument-context Constitutive 
Blended learning 3 6 0 11 
Mobile learning 4 2 0 2 
MOOCs 4 6 0 4 
OER 6 20 1 6 
Social media 14 4 0 2 
General * 13 0 0 6 
Total 44 38 1 31 
Accumulated total 114 
* This TEL device refers to studies on e-learning or online learning . 
As shown in the data , the instrumental perspective is able to penetrate all of the 
TEL devices collected in this study , suggesting that the instrumental perspective is by 
and large not hindered by any type of TEL device . 
There is only one paper falling in the instrument-context dimension . It does not , 
however , imply that this dimension is not useful given the small sample of papers 
reviewed . A possible reason for the lack of attention to this dimension which focuses 
on requirements of the teaching and learning setting is that TEL has largely been 
commonplace in the educational world [ 8 ]  . This seems to have discouraged further 
exploration into whether there is a need for TEL in an institutional setting . On the 
other hand , it is observable that most papers fall into the other dimensions of effectiveness , i . e .  , what TEL device can produce effective learning outcomes , what barriers 
and enablers are in the implementation process , and what people think about TEL . 
4 Towards a Framework for Analyzing the Effectiveness of 
Institutional Policy on TEL 
Table 2 outlines a framework for evaluating TEL policy effectiveness based on the 
four dimensions in institutional perspective . The following discusses the variables 
related to each dimension of effectiveness . 
4 . 1 Character of TEL Devices 
The purpose of institutional policies on TEL should not be about the technology involved , but teaching and learning . However , as the classical approach would suggest , 
180 B . Y . -Y . Wong , B . Tak-Ming Wong , and S . Pang 
Table 2 . A framework for evaluating TEL policy effectiveness 
Dimension of 
effectiveness 
Variables of TEL policy effectiveness 
Character of TEL 
devices 
Effects on institutions , learners and teachers 
 Efficiency and cost-effectiveness 
 Learning outcomes ( e . g . students ’ performance ) 
 Impacts on teachers ( e . g . teachers ’ freedom , identity and credibility ) 
Technological , pedagogical and content designs 
 Technological and pedagogical ‘ good fit ’ 
 Interoperability and compatibility of TEL devices 
 Culture issues and ‘ localization ’ 
 Language barriers 
Implementation 
process 
Institutional and structural settings 
 Internal institutional policy and structure ; knowledge of senior management 
 Government regulatory framework 
 Availability of resources ( financial , time , staff with relevant 
expertise ) 
 Technology infrastructure ; quality and stability of technology 
service provider 
 Intellectual property right and licensing 
Quality assurance 
 Content and pedagogical quality assessment / assurance 
Role of learners and teachers 
 Students ' understanding and knowledge , techniques or experience of TEL described , students ’ age 
 Students ' self-confidence in mastery of technology in learning 
 Level of teacher and student engagement in the development 
of TEL described 
Assessment and evaluation 
 Student assessment and teacher evaluation 
Requirements of a 
teaching and 
learning problem 
setting 
Relevant requirements of a teaching and learning problem setting 
 Demand for supply of teachers or educational services 
Acceptability of 
TEL 
Institutions 
 Institutional norms and values 
Stakeholders 
 Institutional leaders , teachers and students ’ perceptions , attitudes and preferences 
 Teachers ’ field of teaching or students ’ field of learning 
the TEL device definitely matters in shaping the effectiveness of TEL in practice . Effects of TEL devices on institutions such as cost-effectiveness and efficiency [ 15 ] and 
teaching and learning outcomes have been central foci . Positive effects of TEL on 
learning outcomes such as understanding of complex concepts have been reported [ 16 ]  ,  
A Framework for Effectiveness of Institutional Policies 181 
although they did not always do positively [ 17 ]  . Effects of TEL on teachers have also 
been an important aspect of concern . In applications of social media such as Facebook 
in education , for example , the requirement of teacher participation in the use of this 
social media to enhance communication and interaction between students and teachers 
has raised concerns about teachers ’ freedom , identity and credibility [ 18 ]  [ 19 ]  . 
There have been tremendous efforts in technological , pedagogical and content design in order to procure positive effects of TEL devices on learning outcomes . Technically , interoperability and compatibility have been identified as critical variables that 
affect the effectiveness of communication in virtual TEL environments [ 20 ]  . Another 
key aspect is how TEL can be designed to suit pedagogical needs and to ensure a technological and pedagogical ‘ good fit ’  [ 21 ]  . For example , the nature of Facebook makes 
it a popular platform for social networking but it is also this nature that often makes it 
not always suitable pedagogically to be used for academic purpose [ 22 ]  . 
Culture issues and ‘ localization ’ embedded in TEL device ( the extent in which the 
understanding of educational materials is not hampered by cultural difference ) and 
language barriers have appeared to be an important variable swaying whether or not 
there could be proper communication between learners and TEL materials ( e . g .  
[ 23 ]  [ 24 ]  )  . A possible way to overcome cultural effects , as Kanuka and Gauthier have 
suggested in the case of OER , is to employ strategic use of surveys , interviews and 
evaluation frameworks to ensure that OER are culturally relevant to local learners [ 25 ]  . 
4 . 2 Implementation Process 
Studies in TEL have also looked at variables under the purview of the contextual 
dimension of effectiveness . Variables may be on institutional and structural settings , 
i . e .  , whether or not internal institutional policies and structures are in conflict with a 
policy on TEL and the friendliness of government regulatory framework [ 21 ]  [ 26 ] as 
well as knowledge of senior management [ 27 ]  . Following closely , the availability of 
resources and technology infrastructure is an aspect of concern in the implementation 
process [ 3 ]  . Al-Fahad has found that while students perceived mobile learning as a 
useful means to enhance learning experiences , the process of implementing this mode 
of learning was hindered by various contextual factors such as poor networking in the 
city [ 28 ]  . Closely associated with resources and infrastructure is the quality and stability of technologies by service providers . Phillips has observed , for instance , that 
 “ there is the monitoring of hyperlinks , as after a period of time some of them become 
 ‘ broken ’ for various reasons , such as the movement of web servers . Hence , it is 
the task of the subject-matter expert to promptly replace these ‘ dead ’ links with 
equivalent alternative links ”  [ 29 ]  ( p . 184 )  , and therefore , informal and just-in-time 
support for users [ 30 ] was considered imperative and necessary in the process . Another resources related variable is about intellectual property right and licensing issues , 
which is an immensely imperative issue especially for OER ( e . g .  [ 31 ]  )  . van Wyk has 
pinpointed that “ OER alone cannot increase access and quality in higher education ”  , 
and that governments should play a role in supporting “ the principle that products of 
publicly funded work should carry such licenses ”  [ 32 ]  ( p . 13 )  . 
182 B . Y . -Y . Wong , B . Tak-Ming Wong , and S . Pang 
Content and pedagogical quality assessment and assurance issues have proved to 
be a critical concern in the TEL implementation process [ 33 ]  [ 34 ]  . A primary concern 
is about who are involved in the development of online contents and who are to ensure that those contents are relevant and pedagogically sound . Misra has noted that 
many TEL enthusiasts who worked with some support from institutions to design and 
develop OER-based courseware were in many cases without any related training , and 
proper quality control is needed to prompt the production of TEL materials with reasonable quality [ 33 ]  . 
The role of learners and teachers are key variables in the implementation process . 
Students ’ understanding , knowledge , techniques and experience of TEL [ 35 ] and selfconfidence in mastery of technology in learning [ 36 ] are important aspects of concern 
in the learning process . White and Manton have observed that students are often not 
sure about their ability to choose appropriately the abundance of materials available 
online and “ recognise how easy it is to become ‘ lost ’ in the web and to risk wasting 
significant amounts of time engaging with resources that prove later to be irrelevant 
or unreliable ”  [ 35 ]  ( p . 26 )  . On the other hand , level of teacher and student engagement and empowerment in the development of TEL described has also played an 
important part in the process of teaching and learning [ 37 ]  [ 38 ]  , while student assessment [ 34 ]  [ 39 ] and teacher evaluation [ 40 ] have also imposed great challenges to the 
effectiveness of TEL . 
4 . 3 Requirements of a Teaching and Learning Problem Setting 
For the connection between this theory of instrument and TEL , it is helpful to restate 
that TEL is a means to an end , not an end in or by itself . For an educational goal , 
there can be various means to achieve it , and TEL may be only one of them . One 
should ask , therefore , before adopting TEL as a means : Why should TEL be the 
means in the first place , and , if TEL is deemed necessary , which TEL mode is more 
suitable ? Wolfenden ’ s study on OER in Sub-Saharan Africa , as one of the few relevant studies , focuses on the teaching and learning problem setting that there was tremendous demand for new teachers to provide school services , and OER was used as a 
means to solve the problem [ 26 ]  . It is found that the creation and use of OER provided ample opportunities for teacher education and helped alleviate the pressure of 
the huge demand for school teachers . 
4 . 4 Acceptability of TEL 
The extent to which TEL in general is accepted as a mode of learning is a critical 
variable swaying the degree in which a TEL policy is effective . Ezer has distinguished two thoughts about technology – “ what [ technology ] can do , what forms of 
interaction it invites , what properties it has ” and “ the idea of technology , what people 
think of it , how they see it helping their situation , how they shape its meaning ”  [ 41 ]  . 
In mobile learning , for instance , Corbeil and Valdés-Corbeil have noted that “ frequent 
use of mobile devices does not mean that students or instructors are ready for mobile 
learning and teaching ”  [ 42 ]  ( p . 51 )  . In Beddall-Hill and Raper ’ s terminology [ 43 ]  ,  
A Framework for Effectiveness of Institutional Policies 183 
mobile devices can be considered as ‘ boundary objects ’  , the meaning of which is 
influenced by discourse and practices . 
A variable of this dimension of effectiveness stems not from people but institutions 
per se . Wallace and Young have observed that taken-for-granted institutional values 
and norms hinder the implementation of blended courses , and in some case blended 
delivery was bounded to serve existing values and norms and long accepted protocols 
are often ill-fitted to make the most potential use of blended delivery within the new 
learning context [ 44 ]  . 
Institutional leaders ’  , teachers ’ and students ’ perceptions , attitudes and preferences 
towards TEL have often been observed as critical variables shaping or determining the 
extent to which TEL devices are accepted [ 45 ]  [ 46 ]  , which is often reflected in terms of 
degree of participation in the learning process and course dropout rates . Al-Fahad studies students ’ attitudes towards mobile learning and found that the primary advantage 
of this technology is that “ it can be used anywhere , anytime and adopt their mobile 
learning systems with the aim of improving communication and enriching students ' 
learning experiences in their open and distance learning ”  [ 28 ]  ( p . 111 )  . In the context 
of OER , however , White and Manton have observed that one of the challenges of implementing OER is that “ there is still a sense among students that non-textual online 
sources have less academic legitimacy than books or journals ”  [ 35 ]  ( p . 26 )  . 
5 Conclusion 
Existing studies of institutional policies associated with TEL have provided a broad 
range of variables for analyzing TEL policy effectiveness . Through a literature survey , this study has examined the extent to which the instrumental approach to policy 
effectiveness is able to capture those variables for developing an encompassing conceptual framework for analyzing the effectiveness of TEL policy . Findings of the 
survey have demonstrated that the dimensions in instrumental perspective are comprehensive enough for this purpose , that all literature reviewed can be categorized into 
one of the four dimensions . 
The conceptual framework presented in this paper thus potentially serves as a useful lens for analyzing the effectiveness of institutional policies on TEL and a point of 
reference for formulating relevant institutional policies . Nevertheless , we do not deny 
the possibility that a good number of relevant studies which have looked at TEL policy effectiveness beyond the four dimensions have not been covered in this survey . 
The proposed framework remains extensible to encompass more dimensions and variables for further improving its usefulness . 
References 
1 . Singh , H .  : Building effective blended learning programs . Educational Technology 43 ( 6 )  , 
51–54 ( 2003 ) 
2 . Kneill-Boxley , S .  : Towards a mobile learning strategy to support Higher Education . 
Innovative Practice in Higher Education 1 ( 2 )  , 1–19 ( 2012 ) 
184 B . Y . -Y . Wong , B . Tak-Ming Wong , and S . Pang 
3 . Yuan , L .  , Powell , S .  : MOOCs and open education : Implications for higher education . Cetis 
White Paper ( 2013 ) 
4 . Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  )  : Open Educational Resources and 
Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice . Commonwealth of Learning , 
Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
5 . Fagerstrom , A .  , Ghinea , G .  : Co-creation of value in higher education : Using social network marketing in the recruitment of students . Journal of Higher Education Policy and 
Management 35 ( 1 )  , 45–53 ( 2013 ) 
6 . Jeannette , K . J .  , Meyer , M . H .  : Online learning equals traditional classroom training for 
master gardeners . HortTechnology 12 ( 1 )  , 148–156 ( 2002 ) 
7 . Zhang , D . S .  , Zhou , L .  , Briggs , R . O .  , Nunamaker Jr , J . F .  : Instructional video in e-learning : 
assessing the impact of interactive video on learning effectiveness . Information & Management 43 ( 1 )  , 15–27 ( 2006 ) 
8 . Mars , M . M .  , Ginter , M . B .  : Connecting organizational environments with the instructional 
technology practices of community college faculty . Community College Review 34 ( 4 )  , 
324–343 ( 2007 ) 
9 . Wiley , D .  : On the Sustainability of Open Educational Resource Initiatives in Higher Education ( 2007 )  ,  ( retrieved ) 
10 . Gruszczynska , A .  : HEA / JISC Open Educational Resources Case Study : Pedagogical 
Development from OER Practice . Higher Education Academy , York ( 2012 ) 
11 . Bennear , L . S .  , Stavins , R . N .  : Second-best theory and the use of multiple policy instruments . Environmental and Resource Economics 37 , 111–129 ( 2007 ) 
12 . Lascoumes , P .  , LeGales , P .  : Introduction : Understanding public policy through its instruments—from the nature of instruments to the sociology of public policy instrumentation . Governance 20 ( 1 )  , 1–21 ( 2007 ) 
13 . Peters , B . G .  , van Nispen , F . K . M .  ( eds .  )  : Public Policy Instruments : Evaluating the Tools 
of Public Administration . Edward Elgar Publishing , Northampton ( 1998 ) 
14 . Price , L .  , Kirkwood , A .  : Technology enhanced learning—where ’ s the evidence ? In Curriculum , Technology & Transformation for an Unknown Future . In : Proceedings ASCILITE 
Sydney 2010 , Sydney , Australia ( 2010 ) 
15 . Dean , P .  , Stahl , M .  , Sylwester , D .  , Peat , J .  : Effectiveness of combined delivery modalities 
for distance learning and resident learning . Quarterly Review of Distance Education 2 ( 3 )  , 
247–254 ( 2001 ) 
16 . Omollo , K . L .  , Rahman , A .  , Yebuah , C . A .  : Producing OER from Scratch : The case of 
health sciences at the University of Ghana and the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science 
and Technology . In : Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources and Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice , Commonwealth of Learning , Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
17 . Vamosi , A . R .  , Pierce , B . G .  , Slotkin , M . H .  : Distance learning in an accounting principles 
course – student satisfaction and perceptions of efficacy . Journal of Education for Business 
79 ( 6 )  , 360–366 ( 2010 ) 
18 . Li , L .  , Pitts , J . P .  : Does it really matter ? Using virtual office hours to enhance student–
faculty interaction . Journal of Information Systems Education 20 ( 1 )  , 175–185 ( 2009 ) 
19 . Mazer , J . P .  , Murphy , R . E .  , Simonds , C . J .  : The effects of teacher self-disclosure via Facebook on teacher credibility . Learning , Media and Technology 34 ( 2 )  , 175–183 ( 2009 ) 
20 . Feliz , T .  , Ricoy , C .  , Feliz , S .  : Analysis of the use of Twitter as a learning strategy in 
master ’ s studies . Open Learning : The Journal of Open , Distance and e-Learning 28 ( 3 )  , 
201–215 ( 2013 )  
A Framework for Effectiveness of Institutional Policies 185 
21 . Harishankar , B . V .  : Tracing the trajectory of OER in India : Reflections on three initiatives . 
In : Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources 
and Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice , Commonwealth of Learning , 
Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
22 . Mendez , J . P .  , Le , K .  , De La Cruz , J .  : Integrating Facebook in the classroom : Pedagogical 
dilemmas . Journal of Instructional Pedagogies 13 , 1–10 ( 2014 ) 
23 . Badarch , D .  , Knyazeva , S .  , Lane , A .  : Introducing the opportunities and challenges of 
OER : The case of the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Baltic States . In : 
Glen-nie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources and 
Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice . Commonwealth of Learning , 
Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
24 . Yuan , L .  , MacNeill , S .  , Kraan , W .  : Open Educational Resources – Opportunities and Challenges for Higher Education ( 2008 )  ,  
Student_Reading_Resource / oer_briefing_paper . pdf ( retrieved ) 
25 . Kanuka , H .  , Gauthier , G .  : Pedagogical content knowledge in higher education and 
open educational resources : A case study on course design . In : Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , 
Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources and Change in Higher 
Education : Reflections from Practice . Commonwealth of Learning , Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
26 . Wolfenden , F .  : OER production and adaptation through networking across Sub-Saharan 
Africa : Learning from TESSA . In : Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) 
Open Educational Resources and Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice . 
Commonwealth of Learning , Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
27 . Armstrong , J .  , Franklin , T .  : A Review of Current and Developing International Practice in 
the Use of Social Networking ( Web 2 . 0 ) in Higher Education ( 2008 )  ,  

the%20use% 20of%20social%20networking%20in%20HE . pdf ( retrieved ) 
28 . Al-Fahad , F . N .  : Students ’ attitudes and perceptions towards the effectiveness of mobile 
learning in King Saud University , Saudi Arabia . The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology 8 ( 2 )  , 111–119 ( 2009 ) 
29 . Phillips , J . A .  : Experiences in finding and using OER in teacher education programmes : 
Pedagogical approach and challenges . In : Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  
( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources and Change in Higher Education : Reflections from 
Practice . Commonwealth of Learning , Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
30 . Olney , I .  , Lefoe , G .  : Introducing mobile technologies : Preparatory staff development issues . In : ICT : Providing choices for learners and learning , Proceedings Ascilite Singapore 
2007 ( 2007 ) 
31 . Mawoyo , M .  , Butcher , N .  : Sharing existing teaching materials as OER : Key considerations from practice . In : Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) Open 
Educational Resources and Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice . Commonwealth of Learning , Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
32 . van Wyk , T .  : Taking OER beyond the OER community : Policy issues and priorities . In : 
Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources and 
Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice . Commonwealth of Learning , 
Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
33 . Misra , P . K .  : Pedagogical quality enrichment in OER based courseware : Guiding principles . Open Praxis 5 ( 2 )  , 123–134 ( 2013 ) 
34 . Voss , B . D .  : Massive open online courses ( MOOCs )  : A primer for university and 
college board members . In : An AGB White Paper . Association of Governing Boards , 
Washington , D . C ( 2013 ) 
186 B . Y . -Y . Wong , B . Tak-Ming Wong , and S . Pang 
35 . White , D .  , Manton , M .  : Open Educational Resources : The Value of Reuse in Higher Education . JISC funded OER Impact Study , University of Oxford ( 2011 )  , 

er / OERTheValueOfReuseInHigherEducation . pdf ( retrieved ) 
36 . Miligan , C .  , Littlejohn , A .  , Margaryan , A .  : Patterns of engagement in connectivist 
MOOCs . Journal of Online Learning & Teaching 9 ( 2 )  , 149–159 ( 2013 ) 
37 . Afnan-Manns , S .  , Medrano , R .  , Mickelsen , K . F .  : OneClick Digital and the Medrano 
Project : OER as Content , OER as Pedagogy ( 2013 )  ,  
ero / article / oneclick-digital-and-medrano-project-oercontent-oer-pedagogy
38 . Petrides , L .  , Jimes , C .  , Middleton-Detzner , C .  , Howell , H .  : OER as a model for enhanced 
teaching and learning . In : Open ED 2010 Proceedings . UOC , OU , BYU , Barcelona ( 2010 ) 
39 . Chen , Y .  : Investigating MOOCs through blog mining . The International Review of 
Research in Open and Distance Learning 15 ( 2 )  , 85–106 ( 2014 ) 
40 . McClure , M . W .  : MOOCs : Hope and hype in viral technologies and policies . Excellence in 
Higher Education 4 , 7–24 ( 2013 ) 
41 . Ezer , J . F .  : The Interplay of Institutional Forces behind Higher ICT Education in India . 
Doctoral dissertation , London School of Economics and Political Science ( 2005 ) 
42 . Corbeil , J . R .  , Valdés-Corbeil , M . E .  : Are you ready for mobile learning ? EDUCAUSE 
Quarterly 30 ( 2 )  , 51–58 ( 2007 ) 
43 . Beddall-Hill , N . L .  , Raper , J .  : Mobile devices as ‘ Boundary Objects ’ on field trips . Journal 
of the Research Center for Educational Technology 6 ( 1 )  , 28–46 ( 2010 ) 
44 . Wallace , L .  , Young , J .  : Implementing blended learning : Policy implications for universities . Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration 13 ( 8 )  ( 2010 )  , 

g134 . html ( retrieved ) 
45 . Cross , S .  : Evaluation of the OLDS MOOC Curriculum Design Course : Participant Perspectives , Expectations and Experiences . OLDS MOOC Project , Milton Keynes ( 2013 ) 
46 . Lane , A .  : Design and development of OER : A student perspective . In : Glennie , J .  , Harley , 
K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources and Change in Higher 
Education : Reflections from Practice . Common-wealth of Learning , Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 187–198 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Effectiveness of Technology Enhancement in Blended 
Learning : An Instrumental Perspective 
Kam Cheong Li , Helen Lam , and Terry Lee 
The Open University of Hong Kong 
30 Good Shepherd Street , Homantin , Kowloon , Hong Kong SAR , China 
kcli @ ouhk . edu . hk 
Abstract . Studies on institutional policies on the use of technology in blended 
learning reveal that technology choices and policy implementation are largely 
governed by three common perceptions :  ( 1 ) technology per se has its own logic 
of effectiveness and operation ,  ( 2 ) the choice of technology is based on its utilities across contexts , and ( 3 ) the application of technology is pre-determined . 
However , this commonality overlooks the existence of various factors that 
shape the effectiveness of technology at different stages of application . 
This paper examines , via the perspective of policy instrument , various factors that may hinder or facilitate the effectiveness of technology in blended 
learning . The use of technology is conceptualized as a policy instrument in the 
process of formulating and implementing institutional policies on blended 
learning . Its effectiveness is analyzed using four theories of policy instrument , 
namely the ‘ classical ’  ,  ‘ contextual ’  ,  ‘ instrument-context ’ and ‘ constitutive ’ approaches to instrument . Results of the analysis show the dynamic nature of effectiveness which should be considered when formulating institutional policies 
on technology-enhanced learning . 
Keywords : Institutional policies , technology as policy instrument , effectiveness 
of policy instruments , blended learning . 
1 Introduction 
In virtually all aspects of education , application of technology has become commonplace in educational institutions . Mars and Ginter summarize a variety of reasons for 
the increasing use of technology in education [ 1 ]  . First , technology-based models of 
learning are adopted by educational institutions to make operations more efficient and 
cost-effective . Second , these models are used as alternative methods of coursedelivery to expand student markets and reach those students who would otherwise not 
be able to attend conventional face-to-face on-campus classes due to geographical or 
other difficulties . Third , their use enables programmes and courses to be regularly 
updated to enhance student enrolment capacities and in many cases to bring course 
content more in line with the increasingly high-tech economy . 
The notion that ‘ technology can do ’ stems in part from the vast number of studies that 
have reported relatively positive effects of the use of technology on learning outcomes , 
188 K . C . Li , H . Lam , and T . Lee 
e . g .  [ 2 ]  [ 3 ]  [ 4 ]  [ 5 ]  . In particular , Ali and Elfessi investigated the performance of two groups 
of student by offering virtual and conventional settings respectively , where no significant 
difference was observed in performance between the two groups , implying that the virtual 
setting could serve as an alternative to the conventional one [ 6 ]  . 
However , an increasing number of studies have also reported that technology does 
not necessarily bring about positive effects on teaching and learning [ 7 ]  [ 8 ]  [ 9 ]  . Sometimes there are even negative experiences and outcomes [ 10 ]  [ 11 ]  [ 12 ]  [ 13 ]  . Therefore , 
there is a need to understand the factors that influence the effectiveness of technology-enhanced learning in order to properly utilize technology in education . 
This paper examines various factors that may hinder or facilitate the effectiveness 
of technology in the context of blended learning as a ‘ critical case ’  . Arguably , compared to full e-learning models such as ‘ massive open online courses ’  , the proportion 
of technology used in blended learning is smaller as it normally consists of both traditional face-to-face classroom setting and some form of e-learning . The strategic importance of a ‘ critical case ’ is that “ if this is valid for this case , then it applies to all 
cases ”  [ 14 ]  . Thus , if the factors examined in this study impact on the effectiveness of 
blended learning ,  ( to deduct logically ) it is then likely that the same factors would 
also influence the effectiveness of other learning models that embrace full e-learning 
settings . An analysis of the case of blended learning is , therefore , strategically imperative for understanding the effectiveness of learning models based entirely on elearning environments . 
To understand different factors that influence the effectiveness of blended learning , 
this study as a preliminary endeavour borrows the concept of ‘ policy instrument ’ from 
the field of social sciences and conceptualizes this mode of learning as a means to 
accomplish the policy objectives of an educational institution . This conceptualization 
allows an analysis of the effectiveness of technology use in blended learning as a 
policy instrument by using theories in the social sciences field which , as will be 
shown , produce distinctive factors that shape its effectiveness . 
2 Blended Learning as an Institutional Policy Instrument of 
Technology-Enhanced Learning 
The concept of ‘ policy instrument ’ is commonly used in studies of government and 
public policy [ 15 ]  [ 16 ]  , referring to a method or means used by governments to 
achieve a desired effect . For example ,  ‘ assessment ’ has been used by educational 
authorities to accomplish educational success in terms of reportable rising levels of 
attainment [ 17 ]  . 
However , the use of ‘ policy ’ and ‘ policy instrument ’ is not limited to governmental 
institutions . Educational institutions have their own visions and / or missions , and will 
formulate various institutional policies to achieve them . In Utah Valley University 
( UVU )  , for instance ,  ‘ policy ’ is defined as “ a set of principles intended to govern 
actions ” which “ can represent the strategic direction or operating philosophy of an 
organization ”  , and an ‘ institutional policy ’ is defined using the following criteria :  
Effectiveness of Technology Enhancement in Blended Learning 189 
• It is a governing principle that mandates or constrains actions . 
• It has institution-wide application . 
• It will change infrequently and sets a course for the foreseeable future . 
• It helps ensure compliance , enhances the University ' s mission or reduces institutional risk . 
• It is approved at senior levels of the institution [ 18 ]  . 
Technology is in many ways a policy instrument used by institutions to achieve a 
variety of institutional policy goals . For example , information technology was introduced as a policy instrument by the UK Department of Health and Social Security in 
1959 for modernizing the nation ’ s social security system . The goal was to improve 
operational efficiency and flexibility , reduce administrative costs , replace repetitive 
and routine tasks , allow a greater degree of information disclosure , and enhance the 
quality of public services [ 19 ]  . Cohen has observed that information technology such 
as the Internet might decrease the cost of information dissemination and enable information to reach a large population of targeted beneficiaries [ 20 ]  . 
Technology-enhanced learning tools or materials , such as open educational resources ( OER )  , have been seen as policy instruments which help to achieve various 
educational purposes at an institutional level . Ferran et al regard OER as a policy 
instrument of higher education institutions to facilitate flexible learning experiences , 
enhance transparency in learning paths , and enable greater accessibility to the learning materials in order to reinforce the concept of lifelong learning [ 21 ]  . 
Blended learning as a technology-enhanced learning model can , therefore , be 
viewed as a policy instrument to achieve institutional policy goals . Colis and Moonen 
refer blended learning to the instruction taking place both in the classroom and online 
environment [ 22 ]  . Harding , Jaczynski and Wood have observed that blended learning 
is “ a mixture of online and face-to-face learning using a variety of learning resources 
and communications options available to students and lecturers ”  [ 23 ]  ( p . 56 )  . This 
mode of learning as an institutional policy instrument thus offers institutions an alternative to pursue their intended policy objectives . 
3 Effectiveness of Blended Learning : Four Instrumental Factors 
By conceptualizing blended learning as a policy instrument , its effectiveness could be 
analyzed through various theories of policy instrument in policy studies . Peters and 
Van Nispen classify these theories into four types :  ‘ classical ’  ,  ‘ contextual ’  ,  ‘ instrument-context ’ and ‘ constitutive ’  [ 15 ]  . Table 1 summarizes their foci of analysis . 
Table 1 . Overview of focus of analysis by type of instrumental factor 
Instrumental factor Focus of analysis 
Classical Nature and character of educational technology 
Contextual Implementation process 
Instrument-context Requirements of a teaching and learning problem setting 
Constitutive ‘ Subjective meaning ’ of educational technology 
190 K . C . Li , H . Lam , and T . Lee 
The ‘ classical ’ theory of instruments [ 24 ]  [ 25 ] values the importance of the nature 
and character of policy instruments in determining the course of the policy process . In 
the context of technology enhancing learning , this theory explores the nature of the 
learning mode—how its characteristics or features determine the teaching and learning setting , its impact and expected effects on teaching and learning experiences and 
outcomes . The underlying assumption of this theory is that instruments possess distinctive characteristics and nature attached to their logics of operations and functions . 
Each instrument by its very nature determines the design of the implementation activities with distinctive effects on teaching and learning as well as outcomes . The 
nature and character of instruments can be applied across contexts . Institutional policy 
makers can be informed about the application and choice of instruments based on 
their utility across contexts which in reality are predetermined in most cases . 
The analysis of the ‘ contextual ’ theory focuses on factors relevant to the situation 
in which the policy is applied , especially those within the complex process of making 
instruments operate [ 25 ]  [ 26 ]  . Substantial emphasis is placed on examining the role of 
the implementation process , identifying various contextual factors such as the quality 
of technology infrastructure and level of support for technology users . This theory 
argues that while instrumental differences may exist , it is questionable whether instruments of any kind can be applied universally as contextual factors are powerful in 
swaying the way they operate and their intended level of effectiveness . 
The focus of analysis of the ‘ instrument-context ’ theory locates somewhere between the above two . This school of thought places a lot more attention on bridging 
over contextual problem settings and instruments as solutions , i . e .  , to understand relevant teaching and learning problems and identify suitable solutions to them . Technologies may provide options from which institutional policy makers may choose , but it 
is not , as this theory may argue , the only option . In line with this theory , the first and 
foremost task is to identify relevant requirements of a teaching and learning setting , 
and to make instrumental choices based on the extent to which the instrument is able 
to fulfill the requirements . 
For the ‘ constitutive ’ theory , it is argued that understanding instrumental effectiveness should go beyond all objective evidence and consider subjective meanings of 
instruments .  “ What do people think ” is the central question of this theory . It is sociocultural and normative , and is therefore subject to social construction and reconstruction . The focus of this theory is in many ways about the extent to which people accept 
the use of technology in education . 
4 Institutional Policies on Blended Learning 
The four types of instrumental theory , in essence , shape or determine the effectiveness of blended learning as a policy instrument of technology-enhanced learning . This 
section reviews relevant studies on institutional policies on blended learning in order 
to examine how the various instrumental forces sway differently the effectiveness of 
this mode of learning .  
Effectiveness of Technology Enhancement in Blended Learning 191 
4 . 1 Character of Blended Learning 
In line with the classical theory of instruments , the character of blended learning 
renders a critical factor that determines its effectiveness . An integration of traditional 
face-to-face classroom setting and some form of e-learning has been considered as the 
primary characteristics of blended learning [ 27 ]  [ 28 ]  . Mitchell and Honore define 
blended instruction as “ learning involving multiple methods and approaches , commonly a mixture of classroom and e-learning ”  [ 29 ]  ( p . 149 )  . Delialioglu and Yildirim 
suggest that blended instruction refers to the mix of classroom instruction and online 
instruction with which benefits of both instructional modes could be achieved [ 30 ]  . 
Relevant studies have attempted to explore explicit and observable benefits of 
blended learning . For example , Garrison and Kanuka claim that blended learning 
provides large numbers of learners with interactive learning experience in an accessible and cost-effective way through the Internet [ 31 ]  . Dowling , Godfred and Gyles 
consider blended learning a teaching model allowing flexibility by delivering learning 
contents electronically while keeping regular face-to-face classes [ 32 ]  . To maintain 
their economic competitiveness , many countries have developed policies to increase 
the participation of adults in higher education . Broek and Hake have observed that 
distance and blended learning has been one of the policy instruments that governments employ to increase the participation of adults in higher education by reducing 
the costs of learning and making higher education more accessible [ 33 ]  . 
Studies have also examined the cost-effectiveness and direct impact of blended 
learning on learning outcomes . Dean et al . show that blended learning programmes 
 “ can be completed in approximately one-half of the time , at less than half the cost , 
using a rich mix of live e-learning , self-paced instruction , and physical classroom delivery ”  , and that this programme design was also able to contribute to “ an overall 10% 
better learning outcome than the traditional classroom learning format ”  [ 34 ]  ( p . 247 )  . 
The character of blended learning , therefore , justifies its utility as an alternative 
learning mode in the teaching and learning process and its existence as a key component of educational administrators ’  ‘ toolkit ’  . 
4 . 2 Implementation Process 
The implementation of blended learning involves a set of contextual factors determining the effectiveness of this policy instrument . A contextual factor of this kind is 
availability of resources . Wallace and Young ’ s case study shows that blended courses 
at the early stage were delivered with existing resources or given ‘ special project ’ 
status , and they in general lacked an implementation plan to cover institutional resources , reward structures , and priorities [ 35 ]  . 
The ability of students to learn independently has been identified as a crucial factor 
that shapes the effects of blended learning on learning outcomes . Snodin assessed the 
effectiveness of blended learning by involving learners to autonomously organized resources in a course management system , and found that such effectiveness depends on 
how well learners ’ autonomy is inspired [ 36 ]  . Kemmer finds that learners need to take 
responsibility for their learning in order to fully benefit from blended learning [ 37 ]  . 
192 K . C . Li , H . Lam , and T . Lee 
A suggestion is thus made to enhance students ’ understanding of the demands of online 
learning and its contribution to their learning . Napier , Dekhane and Smith collected 
qualitative feedback from students after trying a computing course in the blended mode 
[ 38 ]  . Participating students responded that being responsible for their own learning 
and managing time properly are key factors to the success of blended learning . 
Learners ’ understanding of the use of technology and ability to master the online 
technology component of blended learning play an important role in determining the 
success of blended learning in the implementation process . Kemmer observed that 
learners ’ understanding of the use of technology to facilitate their independent learning is one major factor towards the success of blended learning [ 37 ]  . Carter and Salyers highlight the significance of technological readiness in the blended mode [ 39 ]  . As 
they reviewed , learners who are self-confident in mastery of technology tend to “ perform better in and be more satisfied with blended and online learning environment 
than those with lesser skill with technology ”  ( p . 444 )  . Ratz observes the correlation 
between readiness in technology and learners ’ interest in blended learning [ 40 ]  . According to her findings , higher confidence level is shown in younger and male participants , who are also more interested in adoption of blended learning . Kim , Bonk and 
Oh find that , among the various obstacles to adopting blended learning , fast-changing 
technology is rated as the most significant one [ 41 ]  . They suggest that both learners 
and practitioners have to keep themselves updated about the latest technologies for 
teaching and learning . 
Another critical concern lies in the extent to which pedagogical design of a course 
fits a learning setting that consists of both traditional classroom and online setting , as 
well as teachers ’ ability to master both platforms . Precel , Eshet-Alkalai and Alberton 
highlighted that the importance of completing the pedagogical design of online learning component of blended learning in advance was acknowledged by students [ 42 ]  . 
Werth , Werth and Kellerer ’ s study on the impact of blended learning on students and 
teachers has shown that the ability of teacher to be innovative was positively correlated with ( 1 ) his or her ability to provide one-to-one instruction ;  ( 2 ) selfefficacy / confidence ;  ( 3 ) ability to monitor student learning ; and ( 4 ) enjoyment of 
teaching [ 43 ]  . Their study also pinpointed the importance of identifying and incorporating pedagogical strategies particularly pertinent to blended and online teaching into 
teacher preparation for new modes of education . 
Planning and monitoring of staff workload has also been a key to effective blended 
learning . Mclntyre , Watson and Larsen pointed out that the balance of workload together with time management was , among others , a problematic issue relevant to any 
large-scale implementation of blended learning [ 44 ]  . Tynan et al . observed that workload planning for staff is an essential part of the process of designing blended learning , and that most universities did not have at the early stage centralized procedures or 
guidelines for allocating academic workload on blended learning [ 45 ]  . Russell argues 
that the move from traditional campus university teaching to blended learning can be 
hampered by lack of planning and monitoring of staff workload [ 46 ]  . 
The interplay of barriers and enablers in the implementation process , therefore , 
bring about a great challenge to the effectiveness of blended learning in practice .  
Effectiveness of Technology Enhancement in Blended Learning 193 
4 . 3 Requirements of a Teaching and Learning Problem Setting 
According to the instrument-context theory , central questions may involve whether 
relevant requirements of a teaching and learning problem setting allow technologyenhanced learning to play a role in that setting , and if so , whether it necessarily means 
blended learning . Blended learning , as mentioned earlier , is primarily characterized 
by a combination of some degree of traditional face-to-face classroom-based and 
some form of off-campus online-based settings . Programmes or courses that are considered better delivered by either one of the two settings may not provide the necessary institutional incentive for a policy on blended learning . 
Rolfe et al . documented that science staff conceived their academic subjects as 
suitable for the use of e-learning and were more aware of the potential benefits of elearning , whereas staff in the arts subjects tended to hold that their academic subjects 
were based on more in-depth analysis and discussion that could hardly be supported 
by e-learning activities [ 47 ]  . Given such difference in staff ’ s perception , Rolfe et al 
conclude that application of e-learning in arts subjects does not bring as much benefit 
as that in science subjects in terms of learning the subject matter [ 47 ]  . 
The increasing transformation of course-delivery from conventional in-class to elearning setting through the use of technology-enhanced learning device may mean 
that using blended learning for a full delivery of relevant courses would be hindered 
by this instrument ’ s nature to request for some elements of conventional in-class environment . To take an example , international partnerships such as ‘ OpenupEd ’  [ 48 ] 
were established to deliver educational services for lifelong learning by providing 
programmes or courses that are fully delivered online ( and can be completed for free 
for an informal credit )  . Lifelong learners may well opt for this kind of online and 
conditionally free learning mode rather than blended learning for which they often 
have to settle a payment at least for the usage of classroom equipment and facilities . 
Thus , while blended learning may be found in education administrators ’  ‘ toolkit ’  , 
it may be just a tool ‘ ready for use only ’ and may not be used at all . Its application , in 
accordance with the instrument-context argument , depends on what a teaching and 
learning problem setting would call for in the first place . 
4 . 4 Acceptability of Blended Learning 
The extent to which blended learning is accepted by educational stakeholders ( especially learners ) has been a critical factor for the effectiveness of blended learning in 
terms of participation and course dropout . Learners ’ and teachers ’ perceptions , attitudes and preferences have therefore been crucial variables in examining the acceptability of blended learning , which provides the necessary legitimacy for an institutional 
policy on blended learning . 
For instance , in a comparative study that Chen and Jones reported on business students ’ assessments of course effectiveness and their overall satisfaction with an accounting class , one group of students were offered a traditional face-to-face classroom 
setting and another group a blended-learning setting in which online method was 
supplemented by a few occasions of in-class meeting [ 49 ]  . They summarized the following relatively encouraging results : 
194 K . C . Li , H . Lam , and T . Lee 
 “ Overall perceptions of the course , instructor and learning outcomes were 
positive for both groups . …However , some interesting differences were 
noted . Specifically , students in the traditional setting were more satisfied 
with the clarity of instruction . On the other hand , students in the blendedlearning section felt more strongly that they gained an appreciation of the 
concepts in the field . Blended-learning students also indicated more 
strongly that their analytical skills improved as a result of the course . The 
results suggest that the two delivery methods were similar in terms of final learning outcomes , but that both may be improved by incorporating 
aspects of the other .  ”  ( p . 1 ) 
However , as the constitutive theory of instruments would argue , the subjective 
meaning of blended learning can be constructed and reconstructed from time to time 
and across contexts , resulting in various levels of effectiveness of this instrument 
accordingly . Learning style preferences have been an important variable of acceptability of blended learning . Akkoyunlu and Soylu find that students ’ perceptions on 
blended learning are affected by their learning styles [ 50 ]  . Following Kolb ’ s Learning 
Style Inventory [ 51 ]  , Akkoyunlu and Soylu categorized students into four learning 
styles , namely divergers , assimilators , covergers and accommodators [ 50 ]  . Their findings reveal that , for example , divergers who prefer concrete experience in learning 
tend to be in favor of more interactions with peers and teachers . In contrast , assimilators who prefer abstract conceptualization in learning prefer a lecture setting . Tempelaar , Rienties and Giesbers also observed the difference of students ’ learning styles in 
relation to learning effectiveness [ 52 ]  . According to their findings , less academicallyinclined students , such as those taking a “ surface ” approach to learning , benefit most 
from learning statistics in a blended environment . Banerjee surveyed students ’ perception on blended learning [ 53 ]  . It is found that students who are visual learners 
prefer seeing things done as an example rather than figuring them out on their own . 
Banerjee also finds that only certain disciplines are preferred in blended mode [ 53 ]  . 
Computer science , for example , is a discipline involving complicated concepts and 
students prefer learning it with face-to-face interactions with a teacher . 
Teachers ’ orientations and preferences are equally , if not more , imperative considerations in making technological choices and putting it into practice . Benson , Anderson 
and Ooms documented that academic staff ’ s perceptions , attitudes and practices in 
blended learning can be varied [ 54 ]  . In the case of business and management education , they developed a typology of three distinct approaches to blended learning from 
the staff ’ s perspective , namely “ technology is all ”  ,  “ Bolt-ons ” and “ purely pedagogic ”  , 
each of which represents a different degree of participation in blended learning . 
Cultural variances as a result of geographical differences may render an explanation for various views of teachers about the integration of online collaborative learning in blended learning [ 55 ]  , but the existence of pluralistic perspectives on the concept of blended learning is also not surprising even in monistic cultural context . This 
highlights the importance of introducing proper mechanisms to sustain the solidarity 
of a teaching team for effective blended learning . Salmon , Jones and Armellini ’ s 
study has demonstrated that effective capacity building for staff teams is critical in 
enhancing outcomes of blended learning or other e-learning modes [ 56 ]  .  
Effectiveness of Technology Enhancement in Blended Learning 195 
Thus , even though blended learning as a tool is preferred by education administrators , its applicability is still affected by other educational stakeholders ’ acceptability . 
5 Conclusion 
This paper has attempted to argue that some common assumptions underlying institutional policies on technology-enhanced learning ( i . e .  , technology per se has its own 
logic of effectiveness and operation ; the choice of technology is based on its utilities 
across contexts ; and the application of technology is predetermined ) overlook the 
existence of various factors that shape the effectiveness of technology at different 
stages of its application from technological choice to implementation . 
Through the instrumental perspective , this study has examined various instrumental factors that may hinder or facilitate the effectiveness of the use of technology in 
blended learning as an institutional policy instrument of technology-enhanced learning . A review of relevant studies has revealed that such effectiveness is influenced not 
only by the character of blended learning , but also the implementation process , requirements of a teaching and learning problem setting and teachers ’ and learners ’ 
acceptability of this particular form of technology-enhanced learning . 
The integration of technology-enhanced learning in education has been an ongoing 
trend and formulation of relevant policies remains a top item in the agenda of institutional policy making . Deliberation of educational administrators in making technological choices should focus on , in addition to the character of educational technologies , 
whether there is a need for such a technology in education , and if so , which form and 
type of the technology , what possible barriers and enablers are likely to happen in the 
implementation process and the extent to which applications of technology in educational services are accepted by learners and staff members as well as other relevant 
stakeholders . 
References 
1 . Mars , M . M .  , Ginter , M . B .  : Connecting organizational environments with the instructional 
technology practices of community college faculty . Community College Review 34 ( 4 )  , 
324–343 ( 2007 ) 
2 . Omollo , K . L .  , Rahman , A .  , Yebuah , C . A .  : Producing OER from scratch : The case of 
health sciences at the University of Ghana and the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science 
and Technology . In : Glennie , J .  , Harley , K .  , Butcher , N .  , van Wyk , T .  ( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources and Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice . Commonwealth of Learning , Vancouver ( 2012 ) 
3 . Garrison , D . R .  : Elearning in the 21st Century , 2nd edn . Routledge Falmer , New York 
( 2011 ) 
4 . McLoughlin , C .  , Loch , B .  : Scaffolding conceptual learning in mathematics with technology enhanced pedagogy—a preliminary evaluation of student engagement with screencasts . 
In : Proceedings of World Conference on Educational Multimedia , Hypermedia and Telecommunications 2013 , pp . 259–265 ( 2013 ) 
196 K . C . Li , H . Lam , and T . Lee 
5 . Glance , D . G .  , Forsey , M .  , Riley , M .  : The pedagogical foundations of massive open online 
courses . First Monday 18 ( 5 )  ( 2013 ) 
6 . Ali , A .  , Elfessi , A .  : Examining students performance and attitudes towards the use of information technology in a virtual and conventional setting . Journal of Interactive Online 
Learning 2 ( 3 )  , 1–9 ( 2004 ) 
7 . Merino , D . N .  , Abel , K . D .  : Evaluating the effectiveness of computer tutorials versus traditional 
lecturing in accounting topics . Journal of Engineering Education 92 ( 2 )  , 189–194 ( 2003 ) 
8 . Minocha , S .  : Role of social software tools in education : A literature review . Education 
and Training 51 ( 5 / 6 )  , 353–369 ( 2009 ) 
9 . Vamosi , A . R .  , Pierce , B . G .  , Slotkin , M . H .  : Distance learning in an accounting principles 
course – student satisfaction and perceptions of efficacy . Journal of Education for Business 
79 ( 6 )  , 360–366 ( 2004 ) 
10 . Connell , R . S .  : Academic libraries , Facebook and MySpace , and student outreach : A survey of student opinion . Libraries and the Academy 9 ( 1 )  , 25–36 ( 2009 ) 
11 . Hewitt , A .  , Forte , A .  : Crossing boundaries : Identity management and student / faculty relationships on the Facebook . Poster presented at the Annual Meeting of Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work . Banff , Alberta , Canada ( 2006 ) 
12 . Li , L .  , Pitts , J . P .  : Does it really matter ? Using virtual office hours to enhance studentfaculty interaction . Journal of Information Systems Education 20 ( 1 )  , 175–185 ( 2009 ) 
13 . Mazer , J . P .  , Murphy , R . E .  , Simonds , C . J .  : The effects of teacher self-disclosure via Facebook on teacher credibility . Learning , Media and Technology 34 ( 2 )  , 175–183 ( 2009 ) 
14 . Flyvbjerg , B .  : Five misunderstandings about case-study research . Qualitative Inquiry 
12 ( 2 )  , 209–245 ( 2006 ) 
15 . Peters , B . G .  , van Nispen , F . K . M .  ( eds .  )  : Public Policy Instruments : Evaluating the Tools 
of Public Administration . Edward Elgar Publishing , Northampton ( 1998 ) 
16 . Salamon , L . M .  ( ed .  )  : The Tools of Government : A Guide to the New Governance . Oxford 
University Press , New York ( 2002 ) 
17 . Leung , C .  , Rea-Dickins , P .  : Teacher assessment as policy instrument : Contradictions and 
capacities . Language Assessment Quarterly 4 ( 1 )  , 6–36 ( 2007 ) 
18 . UVU Policy Office . Glossary of terms for campuswide policies . Retrieved from the Utah 
Valley University ( UVU ) website ( 2014 )  ,  
procedures / terms . html ( accessed April 25 , 2014 ) 
19 . Margetts , H .  , Willcocks , L .  : Information technology as policy instrument in the UK social 
security system : Delivering an operational strategy . International Review of Administrative Sciences 58 ( 3 )  , 329–347 ( 1992 ) 
20 . Cohen , M . A .  : Information as a policy instrument in protecting the environment : what have 
we learned ? The Environmental Law Reporter 31 ( 1 )  , 10425–10431 ( 2001 ) 
21 . Ferran , N .  , Minguillon , J .  , Pascual , M .  , Barragan , C .  , Canals , A .  , Geser , G .  , Gruber , A .  , 
Hornung-Prähauser , V .  , Schaffert , S .  , Baumgartner , P .  , Naust-Schulz , V .  , Pullich , L .  , 
Lamminnen , S .  , Koivisto , A .  , Väliharju , T .  : The concept of open educational resources as 
instrument for implementing lifelong learning strategies at higher and further education institutions . In : Proceedings of EDEN Conference , Vienna , pp . 591–597 ( 2006 ) 
22 . Colis , B .  , Moonen , J .  : Flexible learning in a digital world : Experiences and expectations . 
Kogan-Page , London ( 2001 ) 
23 . Harding , A .  , Kaczynski , D .  , Wood , L . N .  : Evaluation of blended learning : analysis of quantitative data . In : UniServe Science Blended Learning Symposium Proceedings , pp . 56–72 ( 2005 ) 
24 . Lascoumes , P .  , LeGales , P .  : Introduction : Understanding public policy through its instruments – from the nature of instruments to the sociology of public policy instrumentation . 
Governance 20 ( 1 )  , 1–21 ( 2007 )  
Effectiveness of Technology Enhancement in Blended Learning 197 
25 . Linder , S . H .  , Peters , B . G .  : The study of policy instruments : Four schools of thought . In : 
Peters , B . G .  , Van Nispen , F . K . M .  ( eds .  ) Public Policy Instruments : Evaluating the Tools of 
Public Administration . Edward Elgar , Cheltenham ( 1998 ) 
26 . Howlett , M .  : Governance modes , policy regimes and operational plans : A multi-level 
nested model of policy instrument choice and policy design . Policy Sciences 42 ( 1 )  , 73–89 
( 2009 ) 
27 . Riggs , J .  : MOOCs , flips , and blends . Huffington Post ( 2013 )  , 
blends_b_2593733 . html ( retrieved ) 
28 . Whitelock , D .  , Jelfs , A .  : Editorial : Journal of educational media special issue on blended 
learning . Journal of Educational Media 28 ( 2-3 )  , 99–100 ( 2003 ) 
29 . Mitchell , A .  , Honore , S .  : Criteria for successful blended learning . Industrial and Commercial Training 39 ( 3 )  , 143–149 ( 2007 ) 
30 . Delialioglu , O .  , Yildirim , Z .  : Design and development of a technology enhanced hybrid instruction based on MOLTA model : Its effectiveness in comparison to traditional instruction . Computers & Education 51 ( 1 )  , 474–483 ( 2008 ) 
31 . Garrison , D . R .  , Kanuka , H .  : Blended learning : Uncovering its transformative potential in 
higher education . The Internet and Higher Education 7 ( 2 )  , 95–105 ( 2004 ) 
32 . Dowling , C .  , Godfrey , J . M .  , Gyles , N .  : Do hybrid flexible delivery teaching methods improve accounting students ’ learning outcomes ? Accounting Education : An International 
Journal 12 ( 4 )  , 373–391 ( 2003 ) 
33 . Broek , S .  , Hake , B . J .  : Increasing participation of adults in higher education : Factors for 
successful policies . International Journal of Lifelong Education 31 ( 4 )  , 397–417 ( 2012 ) 
34 . Dean , P .  , Stahl , M .  , Sylwester , D .  , Peat , J .  : Effectiveness of combined delivery modalities 
for distance learning and resident learning . Quarterly Review of Distance Education 2 ( 3 )  , 
247–254 ( 2001 ) 
35 . Wallace , L .  , Young , J .  : Implementing blended learning : Policy implications for universities . 
Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration 13 ( 8 )  ( 2010 )  ,  . 
edu / ~distance / ojdla / winter134 / _young134 . html
36 . Snodin , N . S .  : The effects of blended learning with a CMS on the development of autonomous learning : A case study of different degrees of autonomy achieved by individual 
learners . Computers & Education 61 , 209–216 ( 2013 ) 
37 . Kemmer , D .  : Blended learning and the development of student responsibility for learning : 
A case study of a ‘ widening access ’ university . Widening Participation & Lifelong Learning 13 ( 3 )  , 60–74 ( 2011 ) 
38 . Napier , N . P .  , Dekhane , S .  , Smith , S .  : Transitioning to blended learning : Understanding 
student and faculty perceptions . Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 15 ( 1 )  , 20–33 
( 2011 ) 
39 . Carter , L .  , Salyers , V .  : E-learning as educational innovation in universities . In : Shavinina , 
L . V .  ( ed .  ) The Routledge International Handbook of Innovation Education , pp . 442–455 . 
Routledge ( 2013 ) 
40 . Ratz , S .  : Community language classes : How ready are students for more technology ? 
Journal of Perspectives in Applied Academic Practice 1 ( 1 )  , 3–10 ( 2013 ) 
41 . Kim , K . -J .  , Bonk , C . J .  , Oh , E .  : The present and future state of blended learning in 
workplace learning settings in the United States . Performance Improvement 47 ( 8 )  , 5–17 
( 2008 ) 
42 . Precel , K .  , Eshet-Alkalai , Y .  , Alberton , Y .  : Pedagogical and design aspects of a blended 
learning course . International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning 10 ( 2 )  , 
1–16 ( 2009 ) 
198 K . C . Li , H . Lam , and T . Lee 
43 . Werth , E .  , Werth , L .  , Kellerer , E .  : Transforming K-21 Rural Education through Blended 
Learning : Barriers and Promising Practices ( 2013 )  ,  
cms / wp-content / uploads / 2013 / 10 / iNACOL-Transforming-K-12-
Rural-Education-through-Blended-Learning . pdf ( accessed April 29 , 
2014 )  ( retrieved ) 
44 . McIntyre , S .  , Watson , K .  , Larsen , S .  : Strategies for large scale blended learning initiatives : 
Training , teaching and management Paper presented at the 4th International Blended 
Learning Conference , University of Hetfordshire , Hatfield , UK ( 2009 )  , 

dlDisplay . do ? docId = unsworks_7750 & vid = UNSWORKS ( accessed April 29 , 
2014 )  ( retrieved ) 
45 . Tynan , B .  , Ryan , Y .  , Hinton , L .  , Mills , A . L .  : Out of Hours , Final report of the project ‘ eteaching leadership : planning and implementing a benefits-oriented costs model for technology enhanced learning . Australian Learning & Teaching Council ( 2012 )  ,  
 
.  .  ( accessed April 29 , 2014 )  ( retrieved ) 
46 . Russell , C .  : Naming and measuring the elephants : Sustainable change for blended learning . In : Proceedings Ascilite Wellington 2012 , pp . 809–813 ( 2012 ) 
47 . Rolfe , V . E .  , Alcocer , M .  , Bentley , E .  , Milne , D .  , Meyer-Sahling , J .  : Academic staff attitudes towards electronic learning in Arts and Sciences . European Journal of Distance 
Learning ( EURODL )  ( 2008 )  ,  
2008 & halfyear = 1 & article = 313 ( accessed April 29 , 2014 )  ( retrieved ) 
48 . European Association of Distance Teaching Universities , OpenupEd .  ( 2014 )  ,  
 ( assessed May 30 , 2014 )  ( retrieved ) 
49 . Chen , C . C .  , Jones , K . T .  : Blended learning vs . traditional classroom settings : Assessing effectiveness and student perceptions in an MBA accounting course . Journal of Educators 
Online 4 ( 1 )  , 1–15 ( 2007 ) 
50 . Akkoyunlu , B .  , Soylu , M . Y .  : A study of student ’ s perceptions in a blended learning 
environment based on different learning styles . Educational Technology & Society 11 ( 1 )  , 
183–193 ( 2008 ) 
51 . Kolb , D . A .  : Experiential Learning : Experience as the Source of Learning and Development . Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River ( 1984 ) 
52 . Tempelaar , D . T .  , Rienties , B .  , Giesbers , B .  : Who profits most from blended learning ? 
Industry and Higher Education 23 ( 4 )  , 285–293 ( 2009 ) 
53 . Banerjee , G .  : Blended environments : Learning effectiveness and student satisfaction at a 
small college in transition . Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks 15 ( 1 )  , 8–20 
( 2011 ) 
54 . Benson , V .  , Anderson , D .  , Ooms , A .  : Educators ’ perceptions , attitudes and practices : 
Blended learning in business and management education . Research in Learning Technology 19 ( 2 )  , 143–154 ( 2011 ) 
55 . Zhu , C .  , Valcke , M .  , Schellens , T .  : A cross-cultural study of teacher perspectives on teacher roles and adoption of online collaborative learning in higher education . European Journal of Teacher Education 33 ( 2 )  , 147–165 ( 2010 ) 
56 . Salmon , G .  , Jones , S .  , Armellini , A .  : Building institutional capability in e-learning design . 
ALT-J Research in Learning Technology 16 ( 2 )  , 15–95 ( 2008 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 199–205 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Social Media Education : Barriers and Critical Issues 
Melani Au , Jeanne Lam , and Radar Chan 
Centre for Cyber Learning , HKU SPACE 
The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong SAR , China 
melani . au @ hkuspace . hku . hk 
Abstract . As one of the highest smartphone penetration regions in the globe , 
Hong Kong has more than 12 million mobile users are capable to access mobile 
data services . People spend time on their mobile devices for information , entertainment as well as communication . With the advancement of information , 
communication and technology ( ICT ) especially in mobile technology , various 
online social media tools , e . g . Facebook , WhatsApp , rapidly developed in the 
past decade . The use of these tools is so overwhelming which transformed 
people ’ s way of communication . Discussions on using social media in education are getting keen . However , regardless of the popularity of social media in 
Hong Kong , the effectiveness of using existing social media tools to facilitate 
teaching and learning is not noticeable . This paper illustrates the barriers behind 
this phenomenon in Hong Kong . Factors from technological perspective , institutional perspective and users ’ perspective are critically discussed . It is believed 
that with optimal monitoring , motivation and planning , social media can be 
beneficial to both institutions , teachers and students in the long run . 
Keywords : social media , social network , social media learning , mobile technology . 
1 Introduction 
In the past decades , the continuous development of information , communication and 
technology ( ICT ) brought tremendous changes to human ’ s way of living . With a few 
clicks on the computers , billion-pieces of information are transmitted through the 
World Wide Web . People can manage their livings from shopping grocery online , 
reserving medical appointment to managing bank accounts . As mobile technology is 
getting mature , use of smartphone becomes very popular . Once the mobile device is 
connected to mobile data services , people can access to numerous information 
through mobile apps with only several touches on the screen . The introduction of 
various social media tools , e . g . Facebook , WhatsApp and WeChat , significantly 
evolves people ’ s way of communication . Regardless of geographical boundaries and 
timezone , people can share , comment and acquire information anywhere and anytime . 
The flow of electronic information has never been that rapid before . As one of the 
highest smartphone penetration regions with more than 12 . 1 million mobile data service users [ 1 ]  , accessing to social media tools becomes an integral part of Hong Kong 
users . Such advancement of ICT and mobile technology also brought impacts on education . Though face-to-face classroom teaching is still popular , integration of online 
200 M . Au , J . Lam , and R . Chan 
learning components enhances the flexibility and effectiveness of learning and teaching [ 2 ]  . With the high responsiveness and popularity of social media tools , discussion 
of adopting social media in education becomes keen . Higher education institutions 
( HEI ) in Hong Kong are aware of the strong influence of social media , yet , HEIs are 
concerned of the originality of materials shared and adopted from these tools [ 3 ]  . 
Although the costs of using existing social media tools are low , technological support , 
security and privacy issues may arise . Moreover , the strong emphasis of academic 
results in Hong Kong education system cultivates an “ examination-oriented ” culture 
across the industry . As long as the tools are not related to examinations , both teachers 
and students are not motivated to participate . Hence , in spite of the wide use of social 
media in Hong Kong , its adoption to Hong Kong education is challenging and argumentative . This paper illustrates the issues that barrier the use of social media tools in 
Hong Kong education . Factors from technological perspective , institutional perspective and users ’ perspective are critically discussed . Suggestions for optimal adoption 
of social media tools are made at the end . 
2 Literature Review 
Over the past decades , when people refer to the term “ social media ”  , they immediately think of various social media tools , such as Facebook , WhatsApp , LinkedIn and 
MySpace , etc . However ,  “ Social media ” is more than just communication tools . As 
defined by Ahlqvist et al .  [ 4 ]  , social media is built on three elements : content , communities and Web 2 . 0 which users can make use of web technologies to create and 
share different forms of contents in social nature . Kietzmann et al . later refined “ Social media employs mobile and web-based technologies to create highly interactive 
platforms via which individuals and communities share , co-create , discuss , and modify user-generated content ”  [ 5 ]  . With the emphasis on “ interaction ”  ,  “ creation ” and 
 “ technology ”  , social media evolves the traditional way of people ' s communication . 
Everyone is more willing to share and interact in virtual communities which blur geographical boundaries and timezone . Such interactions and collaborations are highly 
valued in learning and teaching . With the integration of ICT in education since the 
mid-1990s , its benefits are recognizable in terms of flexibility , dynamic learning environment and student-centred learning [ 6 ]  . A European study conducted by Redecker 
et al . stated adoption of social media in European education makes study process 
more personalized and collaborative [ 7 ]  . It offers specific opportunities including : 
enhancement of innovation and creativity , improving the quality of learning outcomes 
and fostering learner mobility . However , researchers argued that lack of supervision 
and improper use of social media brought risks of privacy invasion and online harassment [ 8 ]  . The freedom and openness provided by such social media tools also 
lead to excessive sharing of information , yet , it is hard to prove if all the information 
shared is correct . 
According to the latest figure from the OGCIO [ 1 ]  , Hong Kong ’ s broadband and 
mobile penetrations are at 85% and 237% respectively , among the highest around the 
globe . Regardless of a mature ICT infrastructure , studies conducted on the current use 
of social media in Hong Kong education industry are limited . A research performed 
Social Media Education : Barriers and Critical Issues 201 
by a group of Hong Kong researchers discussed that online social networks influenced students ’ social-academic integration and learning outcomes . Findings 
indicated that online social networking had a more direct impact on student social 
learning , while the impact on academic learning outcomes was more steady [ 9 ]  . Some 
experimental studies were also performed to provide teachers and students with a 
designated e-Writing blog for learning and teaching English languages [ 10 ]  . Though 
responses from students were somehow positive , results shown that they tended to 
pay more attentions on personalizing their blogs instead of collaborating with peers 
for learning purposes . Besides , the sample size was too small to generalize the phenomenon over the region . 
3 Barriers and Issues for Hong Kong Education Industry 
Hong Kong ’ s ICT infrastructure is one of the best among the world with a high 
household broadband penetration , it is easy for learners to get access to numerous 
online resources for learning purposes . The use of ICT in learning and teaching has 
been widely discussed which both teachers and students recognized its effectiveness 
in different aspects . Yet , as the trend moves toward learning through collaborations 
and interactions with Web 2 . 0 technology , the effectiveness seems gradual . The 
popularity of social media tools in Hong Kong has no doubt encouraged peer communications and exchange of information , nevertheless , students did not perceive a connection between online social activities and classroom learning [ 11 ]  . While education 
institutions in Hong Kong are making efforts to engage social media in learning and 
teaching , a few factors are needed to be considered before implementation . 
3 . 1 Technological Difficulties 
Large Variations of Mobile Devices . The advancement of mobile technology and 
mobile data services make online access more flexible and efficient . Different social 
media tools can be accessed solely via mobile devices ( e . g . WhatsApp or LINE ) or in 
both desktop and mobile format ( e . g . Facebook , Youtube ) which fosters rapid communication and collaboration between learners . Though the number of mobile device 
users is increasing , the configurations , from hardware ( e . g . differences in screen sizes ) 
to software ( e . g . operation systems )  , of different mobile devices vary significantly . 
Compared to desktop version , mobile apps of social media tools are simplified which 
may not fit into the configurations of all devices . Some of the functions may be 
disabled and frequent update of software is required . When social media is used as 
learning and teaching channel , teachers have to ensure the features of the tool are 
functional so that every student is able to use . Yet , it is difficult and time-consuming 
to standardize them . 
Risk of Security and Privacy Issues . Like all other information technology tools , 
security and privacy are always the concerns when using social media for learning . When 
current social media tools are designed for easy communication and sharing of multimedia contents , such " convenience " may put security and privacy at risk . Nowadays , 
202 M . Au , J . Lam , and R . Chan 
advanced technology is able to keep tracking of people ' s online activities . O ’ Keeffe and 
Clarke-Pearson mentioned that once Internet users access to the Web , they will leave 
records called the " digital footprints "  , from the websites we visited to the last click that 
we pressed on the Internet , all these actions leave evidence for webmasters to trace for 
our online habits [ 8 ]  . Social media developers might make use of those private information for their own benefits without users ' consents . As we can see from our own social 
network sites , the developers are able to access for our peers ' contact list which hundreds 
of spam invitations of online games and promotions were sent to us per month , even 
without the senders ' notice . 
3 . 2 Rapid Changing Environment 
Loss of Control and Monitoring . Though education institutions encourage collaborations among students and teachers to facilitate positive learning outcomes , they still 
emphasize on control and monitoring on quality of learning and teaching . As there are 
many kinds of external open social media sources available in current society , it is 
hard for institutions to monitor each tool to ensure learners are using them properly . 
Greenhow and Robelia stated that institutions need to have adequate capacity to 
monitor various the activities took place on social media at the same time , e . g . instant 
messaging , wall posts , comments , etc .  [ 11 ]  . Institutions face a dilemma between their 
 " openness to communications " and " control over content posted in social media "  . If 
institutions are afraid of these negativities , why bother to use them ?  [ 12 ]  . A survey 
conducted by Seaman and Tinti-Kane on faculty indicated that over 70% of faculty 
member concerns the lack of integrity of student submissions [ 13 ]  . Since sharing of 
information is too easy , the originality of work piece is difficult to be identified . This 
can also explain why faculty is not confident to use social media tools . In order to the 
monitoring issue , some of the HEIs in Hong Kong developed social media tools for 
their internal use , e . g . learning through blogging in an English course [ 10 ]  . But the 
time and money invested in developing the tool are long and huge , compared to the 
benefits bring to the institutions , such massive investment makes institutions hesitate 
to proceed for their own development . 
Changes in Educational Approach . When embedding social media in learning and 
teaching , it requires institutions to deploy new pedagogical approach . They may need 
to re-evaluate their position as a knowledge provider in the community and define 
new strategies , methodologies and tools . Moreover , in order to deliver promising 
learning experiences , training and support have to be provided to teachers , students as 
well as administrative staff [ 7 ]  . Education institutions need to put huge efforts , in 
terms of money and manpower , to educate users for the appropriate use of social media , especially issues of intellectual property and rules of conduct . Such changes bring 
impacts to users in all levels which resistance to changes may arise . 
3 . 3 Individual Concerns 
Teachers ’ Perspective . The format of teaching in Hong Kong education relies mainly on 
face-to-face classroom teaching with certain integration of online learning . The extent of 
Social Media Education : Barriers and Critical Issues 203 
ICT usage may be limited to disseminating teaching materials through online learning 
platforms . Even if social media is used , teachers usually select some multimedia contents , such as videos from Youtube and Podcasts , to be shown during lecture [ 3 ]  . All 
teaching approaches are " one-way information transmission " but not really reflecting the 
value of using social media . When embedding social media into teaching process , the 
role of teachers no long act as an instructor but a facilitator and a mentor , to guide and 
encourage students ' discussions . As abovementioned , without certain trainings and supports given by the institutions , teachers may not be able to adapt to this new transition 
[ 7 ]  . Yan et al . also mentioned that teachers get used to the traditional way of teaching and 
would not be easy to change [ 14 ]  . Besides , when the teaching schedule in Hong Kong 
education system is usually very tight , especially for primary and secondary schools 
which must follow the syllabus assigned by Education Bureau , teacher would treat " social media teaching " as extra tasks that increase their workload , they would be unwilling 
to do unless sufficient incentives are given . 
Students ' Perspective . Teenage students are sensitive to technology changes . Learning to use new IT tools is an easy task for them . However , in students ' perceptions , 
there is a lack of linkage between using social media to their academic learning . 
Researchers found that students have high activity level in social media for social 
purpose but are less motivated when it is connected to learning . Some students reflected that social media should not be used as a tool for academic work [ 15 ]  . Wong 
also discussed that " the assessment system for Asian higher education institutions is 
generally examination based while the style of teaching and learning is aimed at helping students to pass the examination "  [ 16 ]  . As Hong Kong students were brought up 
by a strictly designed education system which public examinations have significant 
influences on their futures . This " examination-oriented " concept is strongly implanted 
to Hong Kong students ' minds . Thus , Hong Kong students will not have any interest 
to use social media in their study if it does not benefit to students in their academic 
assessment . 
4 Conclusions 
Regardless of the overwhelming use of social media in social context in Hong Kong , 
integration of social media in learning and teaching encounters a number of barriers and 
issues . Due to the rigidity of systems for primary and secondary education , there is little 
room for primary and secondary schools for adopting such tools in education . Relatively , 
the flexibility is larger for higher education , however , concerns on security and control , 
changes involved in institutional educational approach discourage such use . Besides , 
teachers ’ eagerness on facilitating communication and students ’ perception of lack of 
connect between social media and academic learning also raise the hurdle . 
In view of the potential benefits which social media can bring to learning and teaching , institutions are suggested to take a step-by-step methodology for integration of 
these tools . First , use of social media should be positioned as a supplementary tool to 
propose gradual change in pedagogical approach . Institutions should have a guideline 
clearly stated the extent of social media usage and institutional monitoring . Over-control 
204 M . Au , J . Lam , and R . Chan 
on the use of social media is definitely not recommended as this would violate the 
meaning of its use . Social media can be used as a medium for creating question-andanswer ( Q & A ) communities for course content . Both teachers and students can contribute to the Q & A which everyone can see all the contents . This also helps to lessen 
teachers ’ burden for answering the same questions during class and reduce their resistance for the change . Intrinsic incentive such as awards or prizes can be given to the 
most contributed teachers to motivate them . Second , once teachers are more engaged in 
social media learning , they can act as facilitators to encourage students sharing and 
communicating course content via these tools . A study indicated that when teachers are 
more involved and self-disclosed in social media , students would be more motivated in 
social media learning [ 17 ]  . However , institutions and teachers have to set appropriate 
regulations to avoid abuse usage and stated those regulations explicitly to every user . 
Again , intrinsic incentive would be a good way for encouraging students to contribute . 
Furthermore , if students ’ participations in social media will be taken into account for 
academic outcomes , the effectiveness will be definitely enhanced . This kind of specific 
value added to the use these tools stimulate users ' interests and motivations [ 18 ]  . Finally , when acceptance of all teachers and students are high , institutions can re-define the 
pedagogical approach to embed the use of social media to a larger extent . Rather than 
focusing on formal academic learning , institutions should be aware of the positive influence from informal learning which can complement , emphasize creativity and interaction [ 11 ]  . There is no doubt that academic knowledge is important , yet , the interpersonal 
skills that students acquired for searching , sharing and commenting on relevant information are valuable . Such skills would be certainly beneficial to students in their learning . 
In the inevitably change of ICT and emphasis on lifelong learning in Hong Kong , 
institutions , teachers and students should make the most from the use of latest ICT 
tools in learning and teaching , so that they can maximize the benefits and enhance the 
competencies in this ever-changing society . 
Reference 
1 . Office of the Government Chief Information Officer ( OGCIO )  : Hong Kong- A premier location as an ICT hub . Hong Kong , China : HKSAR Government ( 2014 ) 
2 . Wagner , D .  , Day , B .  , James , T .  , Kozma , R .  , Miller , J .  , Unwin , T .  : Monitoring and evaluation of ICT in education projects- A handbook for developing countries . The World Bank , 
Washington , DC ( 2005 )  ,  
modulo_2 / sesion_7 / Monitoring%20and%20Evaluation%20of%20ICT% 
20in%20Education%20Projects . pdf # page = 31
3 . Moran , M .  , Seaman , J .  , Tinti-Kane , H .  : Teaching , learning , and sharing : How today ’ s 
higher education faculty use social media . Pearson , Boston ( 2011 )  ,  
 ( retrieved ) 
4 . Ahlqvist , T .  , Bäck , A .  , Halonen , M .  , Heinonen , S .  : Social media roadmaps : exploring the 
futures triggered by social media . VTT Research Notes , 2454 ( 2008 )  ,  
 ( retrieved ) 
5 . Kietzmann , J .  , Hemkens , K .  , McCarthy , I .  , Silvestre , B .  : Social Media ? Get serious ! 
Understanding the functional building blocks of social media . Business Horizon 54 ( 3 )  , 
241–251 ( 2011 )  
Social Media Education : Barriers and Critical Issues 205 
6 . Oliver , R .  : The role of ICT in higher education for the 21st century : ICT as a change agent 
for education . In : the Proceedings of the Higher Education for the 21st Century Conference ( 2002 )  ,  ( retrieved ) 
7 . Redecker , C .  , Ala-Mutka , K .  , Punie , Y .  : Learning 2 . 0- The impact of social media on 
learning in Europe . European Commission , Luxembourg ( 2010 )  , 21 . ch / com-ict / IMG / pdf / learning-2 . 0-EU-17pages-JRC56958 . pdf ( retrieved ) 
8 . O ’ Keeffe , G .  , Clarke-Pearson , K .  : Clinical report the impact of social media on chil-dren , 
adolescents , and families . Pediatrics 127 ( 4 )  , 800–804 ( 2011 ) 
9 . Tian , S .  , Yu , A .  , Vogel , D .  , Kwok , R .  : The impact on online social networking on learning : a social integration perspective . International Journal of Networking and Virtual 
Organisations 8 ( 3 / 4 )  , 264–280 ( 2011 ) 
10 . Ying , K . -K .  , Cheung , M .  , Leung , K .  , Kwan , R .  , Lee , R .  , Wong , K .  : Learning through 
Blogging : Understanding Teacher and Student Perceptions towards English Writing Blogs . 
In : Lam , J .  , Li , K . C .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  , Wang , F . L .  ( eds .  ) ICT 2013 . CCIS , vol . 407 , 
pp . 200–211 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2013 ) 
11 . Greenhow , C .  , Robelia , B .  : Informal learning and identity formation in online social 
networks . Learning Media and Technology 34 ( 2 )  , 119–140 ( 2009 ) 
12 . Reuben , R .  : The use of social media in higher education for marketing and communications : a guide for professional in higher education . In : Seminario Académico Tendencias 
En La Formacion online documento ( 2008 )  ,  seminarioformanciononline / DocumentoSeminarioII . pdf ( retrieved ) 
13 . Seaman , J .  , Tinti-Kane , H .  : Social media for teaching and learning . Pearson , Boston 
( 2013 ) 
14 . Yan , K .  , Au , M .  , Chan , R .  , Tsang , C .  : Open Education : Challenges in Hong Kong . 
In : Lam , J .  , Li , K . C .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  , Wang , F . L .  ( eds .  ) ICT 2013 . CCIS , vol . 407 , 
pp . 212–226 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2013 ) 
15 . Madge , C .  , Meek , J .  , Wellens , J .  , Hooley , T .  : Facebook , social integration and informal 
learning at university : It is more for socialising and talking to friends about work than for 
actually doing work . Learning Media and Technology . Routledge , London ( 2009 ) 
16 . Wong , J .  : Are the learning styles of Asian international students culturally or contextually 
based ? International Education Journal 4 ( 4 )  ( 2004 ) 
17 . Mazer , J .  , Murphy , R .  , Simonds , C .  : I ’ ll see you on “ Facebook ”  : The effects of computermediated teacher self-disclosure on student motivation , affective learning , and classroom 
climate . Communication Education 56 ( 1 )  , 1–17 ( 2007 ) 
18 . Silius , K .  , Miilumaki , T .  , Huhtamaki , J .  , Tebest , T .  , Merilainen , J .  , Pohjolainen , S .  : 
Students ’ motivations for social media enhanced studying and learning . Knowledge Management & E-Learning : An International Journal 2 ( 1 )  ( 2010 )  , 
publication / article / viewFile / 55 / 39 ( retrieved ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 206–214 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
Computer Literacy and Use of Open Educational 
Resources : A Study of University Students in Hong Kong 
Kam Cheong Li and Billy Tak-Ming Wong 
University Research Centre , The Open University of Hong Kong . 
Good Shepherd Street , Ho Man Tin , Kowloon , Hong Kong SAR , China 
{ kcli , tamiwong }  @ ouhk . edu . hk 
Abstract . This paper reports a preliminary study on the relationship between 
computer literacy and use of open educational resources ( OER ) of university 
students in Hong Kong . It reviews the technology infrastructure and Government support for enhancement of students ’ computer literacy , and development 
of resources in the city , showing that Hong Kong has laid a foundation for OER 
to grow and bloom . However , by reporting the results of a survey conducted 
with university students , it highlights that most students , despite their high 
computer literacy , have a low level of awareness and limited experience of 
OER , and have been exposed to only a few popular types of resources . The observations call for further institutional and instructional support to enhance students ’ awareness of available resources and understanding of their proper use . 
Keywords : open educational resources , computer literacy , student awareness . 
1 Introduction 
The open educational resources ( OER ) movement in the past decade has had significant implications for teaching and learning . An observable trend , for example , is the 
vast quantity of available OER on the Web which allow users to freely retain , reuse , 
revise , remix and redistribute resources according to the openness of their license [ 1 ]  . 
It is suggested that such engagement of OER enhances teaching and learning effectiveness in terms of getting teachers and learners involved in the use and contribution 
of resources [ 2 ]  [ 3 ]  [ 4 ]  . 
Despite the increasing quantity of OER and benefits of using OER proposed so far , 
existing studies reveal that the use of OER is not as common as expected in different 
regions ( e . g .  [ 5 ]  [ 6 ]  )  . Various barriers to the adoption of OER in teaching and concerns about the usefulness of resources have been discovered in these studies . For 
example , lack of network infrastructure has been found to be a common barrier in 
developing regions ( e . g .  [ 7 ]  [ 8 ]  )  . 
Computer literacy has been conceived as another critical factor for wide adoption of 
OER [ 9 ]  [ 10 ]  [ 11 ]  [ 12 ]  . Its significance is to effectively search and use suitable resources 
by utilizing one ’ s knowledge and ability in computer technology . Santos claims that 
underlying the OER movement is an assumption that “ everyone can benefit from the 
perceived free access to knowledge on the web ”  [ 13 ]  ( p . 8 )  . It entails resources and 
Computer Literacy and Use of Open Educational Resources 207 
skills such as computers with Internet connection and a certain level of computer literacy , which are however not available to many regions . 
Hong Kong , on the other hand , is one of the regions with well-established infrastructure on information and communication technology ( ICT ) and substantial government support for ICT in education . The computer literacy of students in Hong 
Kong is comparable to European students [ 14 ]  . However , the use of OER remains 
unpopular in the tertiary education sector . A survey conducted in 2011 on the use of 
OER among a cross-section sample of university teachers [ 15 ]  [ 16 ]  [ 17 ]  [ 18 ] shows that 
less than half ( 43 . 6% ) of them use the resources in class and only 21 . 1% have ever 
produced OER as teaching or learning resource . 
This paper reports the results of a recent survey as a preliminary study on the relationship between computer literacy of students of the Open University of Hong Kong 
( OUHK ) and their use of OER . It first provides a brief review of the technology infrastructure and government support for enhancing students ’ technological readiness , 
and development of OER for their learning . It then describes the study design , following which the survey results are presented and some notable findings are discussed . 
2 Technology Infrastructure and Government Support for 
Enhancement of Students ’ Computer Literacy 
Hong Kong is a highly developed city in terms of technology infrastructure . According to government data [ 19 ]  [ 20 ]  , there were as many as 203 internet service providers 
and 28 , 256 public Wi-Fi access points by May 2014 . Its household broadband penetration rate has reached 83 . 2% and mobile penetration rate 236 . 8% ( as at March 
2014 )  , both are among the highest in the world . There are 73 . 2% of mobile users capable of gaining access to data network ( 2 . 5G / 3G / 4G )  , while enjoying the lowest 
level of telecommunication charges in the world . In addition , a recent report by Akamai Technologies shows that Hong Kong has attained the fastest average peak internet connection speed at 66 Mbps among 185 regions in the world , nearly three times 
higher than the global average of 21 . 2 Mbps [ 21 ]  . 
The Government has been providing substantial support for ICT in education . As 
reviewed by the Education Bureau [ 14 ]  , all schools had been supported to set up their 
ICT infrastructure on computer facilities and broadband internet connection . There 
was high extent of ICT use , including the emerging Web 2 . 0 technology such as Blog , 
Wiki and Podcast , in different subjects . Needy students are helped to apply for recycled computers from non-government organizations or ICT industries . The Government has also launched the Internet Learning Support Programme to help these 
students to acquire affordable computers , Internet access services and essential internet skills [ 22 ]  . 
With the substantial government support , students ’ awareness and competency in use 
of ICT have shown a significant growth over the years . Above 90% of secondary students 
have computer and internet access at home , a proportion comparable to other leading 
countries . Their competency in information search is comparable to European students , 
and in computer operation skills they even exceed that of European students [ 14 ]  . 
208 K . C . Li and B . Tak-Ming Wong 
3 Development of OER in Hong Kong 
Different parties in Hong Kong have been actively involved in the development and 
provision of various kinds of OER . Examples of the major resources include those on 
the portals developed by the Education Bureau ( e . g . Resource Banks , 1 
Interactive Activities DIY2 
and the Resources Depository in the Hong Kong Education City website3 
)  , and by education institutions ( e . g . language learning resources4 
provided by 
universities in Hong Kong )  . In recent years , open courseware is being provided by 
tertiary institutions such as OUHK and the University of Hong Kong . Notably , OUHK 
has been engaged in an open textbook project and has set up a platform for delivering 
resources [ 18 ]  [ 23 ]  [ 24 ]  [ 25 ]  . Massive open online courses ( MOOC ) are also being offered by several local universities , e . g . the Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology and the Chinese University of Hong Kong , though much of their course 
content are not open for reuse or revision , not to mention remix or redistribution . 
As reviewed by Li et al .  [ 16 ]  [ 17 ]  , most of these educational resources , despite being freely accessible online , do not entirely fulfill the required openness of OER . 
Their copyright licenses mostly do not allow revision of content , remixing or redistribution . Many do not even allow users to retain a backup copy . Students may need to 
search for other sources of OER on Internet to suit their learning needs . 
It is thus reasonable to review these highly techno-ready students in Hong Kong 
for the search and use of OER for learning purpose . 
4 Study Design 
This study revolves around the use of OER by OUHK students . It aims to ( 1 ) examine 
their computer literacy ;  ( 2 ) figure out their familiarity and experience with OER ; and 
( 3 ) identify the relationship , if any , between their computer literacy and use of OER . 
The study adopts the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology ( UTAUT ) 
model [ 26 ]  ( Fig . 1 ) as theoretical framework to examine students ’ use of OER . This 
model has been widely adopted as theoretical ground in studies on the acceptance of 
OER ( e . g .  [ 7 ]  [ 27 ]  [ 28 ]  )  . It combines eight dominant theories or models of technology 
acceptance , including theory of reasoned action ( TRA )  , technology acceptance model 
( TAM )  , motivation model ( MM )  , theory of planned behaviour ( TPB )  , a combined 

1 
support / about-resource-support / resource-banks-of-goodeducational-practices . html 2 
3 
4 
Some of these resources include English for Professional Communication of the English Centre , 
University of Hong Kong (  )  , Learning Resources of 
the Independent Learning Centre , Chinese University of Hong Kong (  . 
cuhk . edu . hk / EN / LearningRes . aspx )  , and Online Resources of the English Language Centre , City University of Hong Kong ( 
language_resources . html )  .  
Computer Literacy and Use of Open Educational Resources 209 
theory of TPB and TAM ( C-TPB-TAM )  , model of PC utilization ( MPCU )  , innovation 
diffusion theory ( IDT )  , and social cognitive theory ( SCT )  , and is proven to have a 
better robustness and validity in predicting the acceptance of new technologies than 
any of its eight component models [ 26 ]  . 
According to the UTAUT model , the use of OER ( actual behaviour ) is determined 
by facilitating conditions and behavioural intention . Facilitating conditions refer to the 
degree to which an individual believes that organizational support or technical infrastructure exists for the use of OER . Behavioural intention is determined by three 
factors , i . e .  , performance expectancy , effort expectancy and social influence . Performance expectancy refers to the degree to which an individual believes that using OER 
will help him or her obtain gains in some sort of performance in learning . Effort expectancy represents the degree of ease associated with locating , adapting , and using 
OER . Social influence is the degree to which an individual perceives as important and 
others believe he or she should use OER . The strength of effect for three constructs , 
i . e .  , effort expectancy , social influence and facilitating conditions , are moderated by 
an experience variable which refers to users ’ computer literacy in this study . 
The questionnaire is adopted from [ 26 ] which is developed on the UTAUT model . 
Modification is made by rewording items to suit the context of the study , and adding 
items to cover students ’ familiarity and knowledge of ICT , and their awareness of OER . 
5 Results and Discussion 
The questionnaire was administered to 42 OUHK full-time undergraduate students 
from a broad range of disciplines . Table 1 shows the results of students ’ computer 
literacy on a number of common computer skills . Most students indicated that they 
have excellent or good familiarity with social media such as Facebook and Whatsapp . 
This is followed by email and search engine , which are both Internet-related computer 
skills . Students are relatively less familiar with PC operation , and use of word 
processing , presentation and spreadsheet programs , but still a large proportion of them 
Fig . 1 . Adapted UTAUT model for this study 
Performance 
Expectancy 
Effort Expectancy 
Social Influence 
Facilitating 
Conditions 
Behavioural 
Intention 
Actual Behaviour 
Experience 
210 K . C . Li and B . Tak-Ming Wong 
Table 1 . Students ’ familiarity of computer skills ( percentage )  
Excellent Good Average Fair Poor 
PC operation 7 . 1 35 . 7 35 . 7 14 . 3 7 . 1 
Web search 16 . 7 38 . 1 28 . 6 16 . 7 0 
Email 16 . 7 47 . 6 21 . 4 11 . 9 2 . 4 
Word processing 14 . 3 38 . 1 26 . 2 21 . 4 0 
Spreadsheet 11 . 9 28 . 6 40 . 5 11 . 9 7 . 1 
Presentation 14 . 3 31 . 0 40 . 5 14 . 3 0 
Social media 38 . 1 40 . 5 9 . 5 9 . 5 2 . 4 
( 40–50% ) rated themselves as good or excellent on each item . These results demonstrate students ’ high computer literacy especially for skills related to the Internet . 
However , students showed a limited degree of awareness of OER , where 21 . 4% of 
them indicated that they had no idea about OER , 26 . 2% know of it , and 45 . 2% know 
how to use it . Only three students ( 7 . 1% ) stated that they knew how to revise , remix 
and redistribute OER . The limited awareness is also reflected in their frequency of use 
of OER . As shown in Table 2 , among common types of OER , most students only 
used Wikipedia ( 40 . 5% ) more frequently ( above 15 times in past three months )  . A 
majority of them never used the others , i . e .  , Wikibook ( 42 . 9% )  , YouTube EDU 
( 42 . 9% )  , free courseware ( 57 . 1% ) and MOOC ( 76 . 2% )  . Students had virtually no 
knowledge of open license at all . These results revealed a sharp contrast between 
students ’ high computer literacy and low usage of OER , which suggests that there 
may be no direct relationship between the two . 
Table 2 . Students ’ frequency of use of OER in the past three months ( percentage )  
16 + 11 – 15 6 – 10 1 – 5 0 
Wikipedia 40 . 5 9 . 5 26 . 2 19 . 0 4 . 8 
Wikibook 4 . 8 0 23 . 8 28 . 6 42 . 9 
YouTube EDU 7 . 1 4 . 8 11 . 9 33 . 3 42 . 9 
Online dictionary 21 . 4 9 . 5 31 . 0 26 . 2 11 . 9 
Free Courseware of OUHK 2 . 4 4 . 8 11 . 9 23 . 8 57 . 1 
Massive Open Online Course ( MOOC ) 2 . 4 4 . 8 2 . 4 14 . 3 76 . 2 
Table 3 presents the values of Pearson correlation among the constructs of UTAUT 
model . For the two constructs affecting actual behaviour , only facilitating conditions 
shows a significant correlation ( 0 . 391 )  . For the three constructs affecting behavioural 
intention , both performance expectancy and effort expectancy show a significant correlation , i . e .  , 0 . 592 and 0 . 433 respectively . Social influence does not appear to have 
had any effect on students ’ intention to use OER . For the three constructs moderated 
by experience , only facilitating conditions shows a significant correlation ( 0 . 425 ) with 
experience . 
The findings of this study echo and support the observation that students in Hong 
Kong have overall a high computer literacy , contrasting sharply with the low level of 
OER use . Such a seemingly lack of relationship between computer literacy and use of 
Computer Literacy and Use of Open Educational Resources 211 
Table 3 . Correlation among UTAUT model constructs 
Performance 
expectancy 
Effort 
expectancy
Social 
influence 
Facilitating 
conditions 
Behavioural 
intention 
Behavioural intention . 592 *  . 433 *  . 058 
Experience . 259 - . 013 . 425 * 
Actual behaviour . 391 *  . 028 
*  . Correlation is significant at the 0 . 05 level ( 2-tailed ) 
OER is also observed in [ 29 ]  , who finds that confidence in Internet skills does not 
have a substantial impact on confidence in finding and using OER . 
This finding presents another perspective different from some other studies which 
focus on significance of basic level of computer literacy to use of OER . For example , 
Richter and McPherson state that “ for learners to make effective use of OER , they 
need to learn basic IT skills ”  [ 30 ]  ( p . 207 )  , and Birzina identifies computer literacy as 
one of the key skills necessary for use of OER [ 31 ]  . Perspectives of different studies 
may as a whole suggest a unidirectional relationship between computer literacy and 
use of OER—effective use of OER requires a certain level of computer literacy , but 
high computer literacy itself does not necessarily lead to use of OER . 
The correlation results among UTAUT model constructs show that performance 
expectancy and effort expectancy exert significant influence on students ’ intention to 
use OER . This is consistent with the findings of [ 28 ]  . Effort expectancy is also found 
to be a significant factor in [ 7 ]  . This suggests some general considerations for design 
and development of OER , that the resources should be able to improve students ’ 
learning performance and be easy to use . 
Facilitating conditions is a factor showing statistically significant correlation with 
use of OER in this study , but not in the above two which focus on use of OER in 
Africa . This reveals the positive impact of well-established technology infrastructure 
in Hong Kong , a feature which facilitates students to efficiently search and access 
OER and is not yet available in less-developed regions such as Africa . 
Students ’ poor familiarity and experience with OER highlight their low awareness of 
OER , which appears to be a major barrier for the use . Without adequate familiarity of 
available resources , students may not easily locate suitable OER for their learning needs . 
Quite a number of students raised the concern about credibility of OER , mostly because of the open nature of resources which allows free modification by the public . 
They were also concerned about whether OER can be used or cited in assignments , a 
consistent finding with related studies [ 3 ]  [ 32 ] that open online sources such as Wikipedia are deemed to be less academically reliable than books or journals . Students are 
thus reluctant to cite these sources in their coursework . 
Students also commented on the lack of instructional and institutional support for 
OER , that such resources are never suggested nor used by instructors in their teaching . This is a possible reason that social influence does not have any correlation with 
behavioural intention in UTAUT model in this study . Students tended to disagree with 
the items of social influence “ The lecturers and other staff in OUHK are helpful in the 
use of OER for my learning ” and “ In general , OUHK supports the use of OER in my 
learning ” in the questionnaire . 
212 K . C . Li and B . Tak-Ming Wong 
As perceived from the suggestions of the students , further promotion and support 
should be high priority to enhance their understanding of OER , especially on the 
copyright issue and credibility of resources . Recommendations are made that the University can involve in the development of OER , or help select high quality resources 
and host them for student access so as to resolve the credibility issue . 
6 Conclusion 
This study reveals that comptuer literacy is not a driving factor for use of OER in 
Hong Kong . The technology infrastructure and Government support for ICT in 
education in Hong Kong , despite substantially enhancing students ’ computer literacy , 
has not demonstrated much impact on students ’ use of OER . Most students are still 
unaware of the resources available , not to mention the search and use of suitable 
resources for their learning purpose . 
The findings suggest that the lack of institutional and instructional support appears 
to be the main reason for students ’ limited use of OER . Compared with the survey 
findings a couple of years ago on the use of OER in Hong Kong tertiary education 
sector [ 16 ]  [ 17 ]  , the situation nowadays does not show an observable improvement in 
terms of the support from instutitions and teachers to facilitate students to benefit 
from OER . It is high time for a review on the extent to which efforts and investments 
on development and promotion of OER have taken effect , and to identify and provide 
suitable support for students towards the goal of improving their engagement with the 
resources . 
References 
1 . Wiley , D .  , Green , C .  : Why openness in education ? In : Oblinger , D . G .  ( ed .  ) Game Changers : Education and Information Technologies , pp . 81–89 . Educause ( 2012 ) 
2 . Afnan-Manns , S .  , Medrano , R .  , Mickelsen , K . F .  : OneClick Digital and the Medrano 
project : OER as content , OER as pedagogy . EDUCAUSE Review Online ( 2013 )  , 
ero / article / oneclick-digital-andmedrano-project-oer-content-oer-pedagogy ( retrieved May 5 , 2014 ) 
3 . White , D .  , Manton , M .  : Open Educational Resources : The value of reuse in higher education . JISC funded OER Impact Study , University of Oxford ( 2011 )  , 

er / OERTheValueOfReuseInHigherEducation . pdf ( retrieved ) 
4 . Wild , J .  : OER Engagement Study : Promoting OER reuse among academics . Research report from the SCORE funded project ( 2012 )  ,  
files / score / file / Joanna%20Wild%20SCORE%20Fellowship%20Final%
20Report%20-%20web%20version . pdf ( retrieved ) 
5 . Badarch , D .  , Knyazeva , S .  , Lane , A .  : Introducing the opportunities and challenges of 
OER : The case of the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Baltic States . In : 
Open Educational Resources and Change in Higher Education : Reflections from Practice , 
pp . 27–39 . COL and UNESCO ( 2012 )  
Computer Literacy and Use of Open Educational Resources 213 
6 . Harishankar , V . B .  : Establishing OER practice in India : The University of Madras . In : 
Dhanarajan , G .  , Porter , D .  ( eds .  ) Open Education Resources : An Asian Perspective , 
pp . 207–220 . COL and OER Asia , Vancouver ( 2013 ) 
7 . Mtebe , J . S .  , Raisamo , R .  : Challenges and instructors ’ intention to adopt and use open educational resources in higher education in Tanzania . The International Review of Research 
in Open and Distance Learning , 15 ( 1 )  ( 2014 )  ,  . 
php / irrodl / article / view / 1687 / 2771 ( retrieved ) 
8 . Wang , C .  , Zhao , G .  : Open Educational Resources in the People ’ s Republic of China : 
Achievements , Challenges and Prospects for Development . UNESCO institute for information Technologies in Education , Russia ( 2011 ) 
9 . Knyazeva , S .  : IITE OER project : New dimensions . In : Proceedings of the International 
Conference “ ICT in Teacher Education : Policy , Open Educational Resources and Partnership ”  , St . Petersburg , Russia , pp . 137–141 ( 2010 ) 
10 . Mortera-Gutierrez , F . J .  , Burgos-Aguilar , J . V .  : Innovative applications using new technology : The case of the knowledge hub search engine and open educational resources building communities of practice . In : Education and Research Technology ( ERT ) Forum , 
California , USA ( 2010 ) 
11 . Sharehu , A . L .  : A survey of the level of digital literacy and open educational resources 
( OER ) awareness among teacher educators in Nigeria . In : Proceedings of the 5th 
Conference on e-Learning Excellence in the Middle East , Dubai , United Arab Emirates , 
pp . 22–32 ( 2012 ) 
12 . Umar , A .  , Kodhandaraman , B .  , Kanwar , A .  : Can open educational resources thrive in 
closed educational systems ? Some reflections on OER in developing countries . In : 
McGreal , R .  , Kinuthia , W .  , Marshall , S .  ( eds .  ) Open Educational Resources : Innovation , 
Research and Practice , pp . 193–206 . Commonwealth of Learning and Athabasca University ( 2013 ) 
13 . Santos , A . I .  : The Discourses of OERs : how flat is this world ? Journal of Interactive Media 
in Education . Special Issue : Researching open content in education , 1–10 ( 2008 ) 
14 . Education Bureau .  : Report on the Review Surveys of the Third Strategy on Information 
Technology in Education ( 2012 )  ,  
edu-system / primary-secondary / applicable-to-primarysecondary / it-in-edu / rs2_final%20report_public_eng_clean 
%2021012013 . pdf ( retrieved May 5 , 2014 ) 
15 . Li , K . C .  , Yuen , K . S .  : Development of open educational resources in Hong Kong : A status 
analysis . In : Proceedings of the Regional Symposium on Open Educational Resources : An 
Asian Perspective on Policy and Practices , Penang , Malaysia ( 2012 ) 
16 . Li , K . C .  , Yuen , K . S .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  : Open Educational Resources in Hong Kong . In : 
Lam , J .  , Li , K . C .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  , Wang , F . L .  ( eds .  ) ICT 2013 . CCIS , vol . 407 , pp . 16–25 . 
Springer , Heidelberg ( 2013 ) 
17 . Li , K . C .  , Yuen , K . S .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  : Open educational resources in Hong Kong : Status 
and future challenges . In : Proceedings of 2013 International Conference on ICT in Teaching and Learning . HKU SPACE , Hong Kong ( 2013 ) 
18 . Yuen , K . S .  , Wong , A . J . W .  : Open educational resources in Hong Kong . In : Dhanarajan , G .  , 
Porter , D .  ( eds .  ) Open Education Resources : An Asian Perspective , pp . 41–51 . COL and 
OER Asia , Vancouver ( 2013 ) 
19 . Office of the Communication Authority .  : Key Communications Statistics ( 2014 )  ,  
/ mobile / en / media_focus / data_statistics 
/ key_stat / index . html ( retrieved June 1 , 2014 ) 
214 K . C . Li and B . Tak-Ming Wong 
20 . Office of the Government Chief Information Officer .  : Hong Kong – A Premier Location as 
an ICT Hub ( 2014 )  ,  
Sheet-HK_as_ICT_Hub-EN . pdf ( retrieved June 1 , 2014 ) 
21 . Akamai Technologies .  : The State of the Internet : 1st Quarter , 2014 Report ( 2014 ) 
22 . GovHK .  : Internet Learning Support Programme ( 2012 )  ,  
theme / ilearnathome / news /  ( retrieved June 2 , 2014 ) 
23 . Li , Y .  : Constructing and Sharing Open Educational Resources : Policy and Capacity . In : 
Lam , J .  , Li , K . C .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  , Wang , F . L .  ( eds .  ) ICT 2013 . CCIS , vol . 407 , pp . 35–42 . 
Springer , Heidelberg ( 2013 ) 
24 . Tsang , E . Y . M .  , Yuen , K . S .  , Li , K . C .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  : Designing open textbooks for effective teaching and learning . In : Lam , J .  , Li , K . C .  , Cheung , S . K . S .  , Wang , F . L .  ( eds .  ) ICT 
2013 . CCIS , vol . 407 , pp . 43–55 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2013 ) 
25 . Yuen , K . S .  , Li , K . C .  : An open textbook system to tackle Hong Kong ’ s textbook problems . 
In : Proceedings of the Regional Symposium on Open Educational Resources : An Asian 
Perspective on Policy and Practices . Wawasan Open University , Penang ( 2012 ) 
26 . Venkatesh , V .  , Morris , M . G .  , Hall , M .  , Davis , G . B .  , Davis , F . D .  , Walton , S . M .  : User 
acceptance of information technology : Toward a unified view . MIS Quarterly 27 ( 3 )  , 
425–478 ( 2003 ) 
27 . Dulle , F . W .  , Minishi-Majanja , M . K .  : The suitability of the Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and Use of Technology ( UTAUT ) model in open access adoption studies . Information 
Development 27 ( 1 )  , 32–45 ( 2011 ) 
28 . Percy , T .  , Van Belle , J . -P .  : Exploring the Barriers and Enablers to the Use of Open 
Educational Resources by University Academics in Africa . In : Hammouda , I .  , Lundell , B .  , 
Mikkonen , T .  , Scacchi , W .  ( eds .  ) Open Source Systems : Long-Term Sustainability . IFIP 
AICT , vol . 378 , pp . 112–128 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2012 ) 
29 . Kelly , H .  : A path analysis of educator perceptions of open educational resources using the 
technology acceptance model . The International Review of Research in Open and Distance 
Learning 15 ( 2 )  ( 2014 )  ,  . php / irrodl / 
article / view / 1715 / 2836 ( retrieved ) 
30 . Richter , T .  , McPherson , M .  : Open educational resources : Education for the world ? Distance Education 33 ( 2 )  , 201–219 ( 2012 ) 
31 . Birzina , R .  : Open educational resources ( OER ) as a means for students ’ self-directed 
learning . In : ECER 2014 : The Past , the Present and Future of Educational Research in 
Europe , Porto , Portugal ( 2014 ) 
32 . Śliwowski , K .  : Myths and obstacles Open Educational Resources are facing ( 2014 )  , 
resources-are-facing /  ( retrieved May 23 , 2014 ) 
K . C . Li et al .  ( Eds .  )  : ICTE 2014 , CCIS 494 , pp . 215–224 , 2015 . 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015 
A Thematic Analysis of the Blended Learning 
Experiences of Undergraduate Students in Hong Kong 
Jeanne Lam 
School of Professional And Continuing Edcuation , 
The University of Hong Kong , Pokfulam Road , Hong Kong SAR , China 
jeanne . lam @ hkuspace . hku . hk 
Abstract . The development of blended learning in Hong Kong has been shifted 
to using pedagogical driven approach and the adoption of learning theories in 
blended learning course development became significant . In the past years , 
HKU SPACE adopted cognitive alignment in outcome-based learning theory 
for designing and developing blended learning course to the students . This research aims at understanding learning experiences of undergraduate students in 
blended learning . In this study , qualitative approach was adopted for obtaining 
in-depth understanding of learning experiences of the students in the blended 
learning environment . Focus group interviews for students were conducted in 
an accounting course . The interviews were analyzed by thematic analysis while 
thematic maps were used for coding and themes identification . The themes in 
learn via learning activities , learn via collaboration , learn for good assessment 
result , learning activities helps study and enjoyed most , perceived advantages of 
online learning , need more learning support , need mobile learning , preference 
in integrated and non-integrated blended learning , and difficulties in blended 
learning were identified . With the themes identified , issues on learning engagement , importance of aligning assessment with learning activity , online collaboration and enhancing blended learning experiences were discussed . Finally , 
pedagogy designs to enhance students learning were recommended . The study 
contributes to fill the research gap in understanding blended learning experiences of undergraduate students in Hong Kong . 
Keywords : blended learning , outcome-based , undergraduate , sub-degree . 
1 Introduction 
The use of ICT in higher education in Hong Kong has been increased rapidly . The 
development of blended learning in Hong Kong has been shifted from using technological driven approach to pedagogical driven approach . The adoption of learning 
theories in blended learning course development became significant . In recent years , 
the Hong Kong Government has promoted outcome-based learning and a number of 
learning institutes have implemented it accordingly . 
The School of Professional and Continuing Education of The University of Hong 
Kong ( HKU SPACE ) employed the constructive alignment theory to design a blended 
216 J . Lam 
learning sub-degree accounting course , Management Accounting ( MA )  . Biggs and 
Tang ’ s constructive alignment theory was adopted in course and lesson design for 
aligning intended learning outcomes , teaching and learning activities and assessment 
tasks [ 1 ]  . A number of learning outcomes were set and in-class and online activities 
were designed . A research study was conducted with this blended learning course . 
This paper aims at understanding learning experiences of undergraduate students in 
the sub-degree blended learning MA course . In this study , qualitative approach was 
adopted for obtaining in-depth data collection and analysis . 
2 Literature Review 
Outcome-based learning has been widely adopted in Hong Kong . With the endorsement of outcome-based learning by the University Grants Committee in Hong Kong , 
higher education institutes have been encouraged to adopt this learning method . The 
University of Hong Kong decided to adopt the outcome-based approach in the design 
of the new 4-Year Curriculum after analyzing the surveys of students ’ experiences of 
studying at the University [ 2 ]  . The aim of the decision was to establish an environment which allowed for deeper engagement of students in their studies . The City University of Hong Kong designed a learning outcome tracking system to support the 
development of outcome-based teaching and learning [ 3 ]  . 
In the sub-degree sector , the Federation for Self-financing Tertiary Education suggested using Biggs and Tang ’ s constructive alignment theory to align intended learning outcomes , teaching and learning activities and assessment tasks as good practice 
in designing sub-degree courses [ 4 ]  . Education Bureau , Hong Kong Council for Accreditation of Academic and Vocational Qualifications and Joint Quality Review 
Committee issued a handbook for the sub-degree sector on good practices in quality 
assurance . This sector was where the outcome-based teaching and learning had been 
being emphasized for the provision of quality teaching , learning and learners ’ support . 
The effectiveness of implementing outcome-based learning has not always been 
positive . In Au and Kwan ’ s study , over 90% of university instructors who participated 
in the survey reported that the performance of students did not improve after the implementation of the outcome-based learning [ 5 ]  . Despite of the results of survey on 
the effectiveness of outcome-based learning , the method is widely accepted in the 
field of education in Hong Kong . 
Nevertheless , outcome-based learning is one of the most popular methods adopted 
in the field of education . Under this approach , goals and objectives to be achieved are 
defined and learning outcomes are measured against the preset objectives . Biggs proposed the constructive alignment and solo taxonomy for constructivism in learning 
and alignment in teaching in which activities were designed according to the objectives and that assessments were carried out to measure the degree of fulfillment of 
objectives [ 6 ]  . Upon completion of the study and achievement of a certain standard , 
the learning institutes would issue a certificate as proof of educational attainment . 
Biggs and Tang further differentiated the level of engagement of academic students 
and non-academic students under the learning environment with different teaching 
A Thematic Analysis of the Blended Learning Experiences of Undergraduate Students 217 
methods [ 1 ]  . Only academic students could achieve high-level engagement under 
passive student activities required environment but both types of students could 
achieve it under active student activities required environment . Biggs advocated the 
use of activities as to lead all students to high-level engagement in learning . Both 
academic students and non-academic students ’ level of engagement could be aligned 
with active student activities in learning . Based on the twin principles of constructivism in learning and alignment in teaching , Biggs ’ constructive alignment theory states 
a good teaching system aligns teaching method and assessment to learning activities 
stated in the objectives so that all aspects of the system act in accord to support appropriate learning . Constructive alignment leads a design of teaching to encourage 
deep engagement . 
3 Methodology 
Case study derived from research can be of great value in teaching and learning [ 7 ]  . 
In this research , a case study about the learning experiences of the Hong Kong subdegree Accounting students in the blended learning environment was conducted . This 
qualitative study was conducted based on Yin ’ s method of case study [ 8 ]  [ 9 ]  . 
The purpose of this study was to explore the learning experiences of the sub-degree 
students in blended learning environment . Stake suggested a number of ways , including observation , description of contexts and interview , to conduct case study research 
[ 10 ]  . In this study , the primary data sources were from in-depth focus group interviews of students . The field work was conducted after examination of the MA course 
in 2013 . The following research questions were asked as a guide to address the issues 
into research statement . 
1 . How do students study in a blended learning environment ? 
2 . What form does engagement take within blended study ? 
3 . What factors influence the form of student engagement in blended learning ? 
The students ’ focus group interviews were conducted in a semi-structured way . An 
interview guide was drafted and issued in outline form . The interview guide contains 
purposes , arrangement , introduction and questions in the categories of learning activities , factors affecting students ’ engagement in online learning , difficulties in online 
learning , integrated and non-integrated blended learning , collaborative learning , 
teachers ’ role and other issues . In each category , standardized open-ended questions 
were asked as basic questions . There were totally 38 questions in these 7 categories . 
Besides the standardized questions , the interviewer asked further questions based on 
students ’ responses with self-decided sequence and wordings to increase the comprehensiveness of the data collected . 
The interviews were tape-recorded and the transcript were then prepared . To let the 
students express their views with accurate wordings and expression , they were asked 
to use mother tongue , Cantonese , to answer the questions . The transcripts were then 
translated into English for analysis . Recurring ideas and themes were identified and 
218 J . Lam 
illustrative quotations were selected . Qualitative analysis software , Nvivo 10 . 0 , for 
labeling and sorting segments of text into categories was used for data analysis . 
Consents were obtained from the School and from the students for ethical consideration . To ensure the validity and reliability of the study , the interview guide was 
reviewed by a local expert and 2 overseas experts in blended learning . Besides , the 
transcription and translation of each of the interviews were verified by a student who 
was in the interview . 
4 Results and Findings 
The transcribed and translated interviews were analysed by thematic analysis [ 11 ]  . 
Coding was performed using Nvivo 10 . 0 and 15 themes and 160 sub-themes were 
identified . Then the initial thematic map , developed thematic map and final thematic 
map were created [ 12 ]  . The final thematic map with 9 themes and 45 sub-themes is 
shown in Fig . 1 . 
Fig . 1 . Final Thematic Map with 9 Themes 
A Thematic Analysis of the Blended Learning Experiences of Undergraduate Students 219 
The 9 themes are 1 ) Learn via learning activities ; 2 ) Learn via collaboration ; 3 ) 
Learn for good assessment result ; 4 ) Learning activities helps study and enjoyed 
most ; 5 ) Perceived advantages of online learning ; 6 ) Need more learning support ; 7 ) 
Need mobile learning ; 8 ) Preference in integrated and non-integrated blended learning ; and 9 ) Difficulties in blended learning . 
4 . 1 Learn via Learning Activities 
Students learnt by participating in in-class activities , self-learning activities and online 
activities . All the students learnt by attending classes which were compulsory for 
taking the course . After class , most of the students learnt via doing exercises , including exercises in textbook and in online system . Some students preferred doing online 
exercise as instant feedback would be provided after answer submission . 
Some students learnt by reading notes and textbook . Others learnt by searching on 
the Internet . Students would study and search for additional information in the Internet 
but not in the library as more resources were available . Students also mentioned they 
learnt by talking to teacher . Students learnt using combination of learning activities . 
4 . 2 Learn via Collaboration 
There were no group projects in the MA course . Sometimes students did exercises 
and had group discussions in class . Some students mentioned they liked collaborative 
learning because it helped them learn . They could learn from each other and understand their strengths and weaknesses when working together . However , some students 
did not like collaborative learning as they liked learning independently which learning 
time and pace were more flexible . Some did not like trouble-makers in the group . A 
student worried about being laughed at if his comments were nonsense . 
For online communication , they used WhatsApp , Skype , Facebook and WeChat . 
Normally , they used text to communicate and upload photos for sharing in WhatsApp . 
For Skype , they used audio and video communication in group of 4 to 10 students . 
They uploaded and shared files , for example , answers of exercises , onto Facebook . 
4 . 3 Learn for Good Assessment Result 
Students attended classes and did online learning with the main reason for obtaining 
good assessment results . Most students explicitly stated their reasons for learning 
were passing the examination and obtaining online participation marks which contributed to overall assessment results . Students found calculation important in the MA 
course for passing the examination and understanding the steps in calculation was 
crucial . The purposes of getting good assessment results were to graduate , to get a 
certificate , to further study and to get into university . Two students mentioned that 
they learnt because they wanted to acquire knowledge . 
Some students did online learning because they found online activities were useful for 
examination preparation . A student mentioned it was important for students as the online 
activities were related to examination . If online exercises were similar to questions in 
220 J . Lam 
examination , they would do them more often . A student said that she would do online 
learning before examination only if online participation was not for assessment . It implied students did online learning and looked for learning resources in online environment which could help obtain good results in examination . 
4 . 4 Learning Activities Helps Study and Enjoyed Most 
Students in general found doing online exercise , doing textbook exercise and attending class were most helpful . Some students found reading notes , talking to students , 
talking to teachers , searching online and reading textbook were helpful . 
Students found doing online exercise and doing textbook exercise were the activities 
they enjoyed most . Some students found they enjoyed attending class , reading notes , 
talking to students , talking to teachers and searching online . They mentioned that they 
enjoyed these activities because they were helpful to their study for examination . 
4 . 5 Perceived Advantages of Online Learning 
The major perceived advantage of online learning was flexibility . They said online 
learning was convenient and they could learn anytime online . They could download 
learning resources from online system . 
Students found online learning useful for them to learn and prepare for examination . One student found the materials on online platform were more precise . Another 
student said self-assessment was available as instant feedback was provided in online 
activities . When a student had question to ask , he could read online materials to find 
the solution instead of sending email to teacher and wait for reply . Besides , additional 
resources were available on the online platform and they could assess them during 
self-learning . 
4 . 6 Need More Learning Support 
Students needed more learning support . For online resources , they needed to have 
audio and video of lectures , and video clips in Chinese , to help them learning before 
examination . A student needed more learning contents on application of MA in real 
life and a student needed more practical contents with real-life case studies . Some 
students needed more online questions and more detailed explanation in the suggested 
answers . 
Students found teacher support important and they needed to have more support 
from teachers . They needed to have online classes and online discussions facilitated 
by the teachers to answer their questions . A student needed the teacher to prepare 
videos to explain the answers of online exercises . Two students showed their needs 
linking with teacher online and face-to-face teaching . They mentioned that teachers 
could post questions in the online platform for them to discuss and then extend the 
discussion into the next class .  
A Thematic Analysis of the Blended Learning Experiences of Undergraduate Students 221 
4 . 7 Need Mobile Learning 
Students mentioned their needs on having mobile learning to support their learning . 
Many students said that using mobile devices to learn was convenient . If there was a 
mobile app for the MA course , they will use it to learn more frequently . They would 
like use it in class , during self-learning and when travelling to school . A student 
showed preference on using mobile devices than using computers to learn . 
The students had some ideas on how the mobile app could be designed . They 
wanted the app to contain review materials and exercises . Besides , reminders for 
doing exercises and reading notes should be sent via mobile phone and links of the 
learning materials should be provided in the reminders so that they could access the 
contents conveniently . 
However , some students showed concerns on mobile learning as some students did 
not have smart phones . Moreover , student might be easily distracted by other apps or 
function of the phone which might affect student ’ s concentration in learning . 
4 . 8 Preference in Integrated and Non-integrated Blended Learning 
Nearly all students preferred learning in blended learning mode . Most of these these 
students preferred the blend with face-to-face learning , online leaning using computer 
and mobile learning . 
About half of the students preferred integrated blended learning because they could 
learn with differenct ways . They realized that self-displine was important if online 
learning was complementary to face-to-face learning . One student felt that school fee 
had to be reduced if physical contact hour with teachers was reduced . The other half 
of the students preferred non-integrated blended learning as they wanted online 
learning as supplementary to face-to-face learning . They wanted a teacher to guide 
their learning all the time and they could ask questions immediately in class . One 
student found that she could not concentrate when using computer to learn . Two 
students showed indifference in learning mode as long as marks were obtained . 
4 . 9 Difficulties in Blended Learning 
Students found technical problems in using the online platform . The platform was 
revamped in their year 2 study and they found the change affected their experience . 
Some students reckoned the online platform as not user-friendly and difficult to use . 
The system performance was slow especially in examination period and some online 
activities could not function in different browsers . Some of the contents were found to 
have errors and not up-to-date . Also the instructions for doing online activities were 
unclear and some online exercises could not be loaded when using mobile phones . 
They also found the courses , learning materials and learning activities were difficult 
to locate . 
Medium of instruction was a problem for some of the students . Student found it difficult to learn in English and they could understand more when learning in Chinese . 
However , they needed to answer in English in examination and so they needed to learn 
222 J . Lam 
in English . A student suggested the course providing video clips with Chinese narration 
for them to learn the topics again after class . A few students mentioned the English 
proficiency of their teacher was not good enough . 
Some students had problems in self-learning environment , for example , too busy , 
no time , not self-disciplined and lazy . A student felt isolation in online learning and 
needed to talk to teacher and students during learning . Some other students found 
immediate support from teacher was insufficient during online learning . 
5 Discussion 
From the results and findings , the following issues are identified regarding learning 
experiences of sub-degree students in blended learning environment . 
5 . 1 Learning Engagement 
Students learnt by participating in in-class activities , self-learning activities and online 
activities . Students mentioned 8 types of learning activities in blended learning were 
helpful . These included doing online exercise and doing textbook exercises , attending 
class , reading notes , talking to students , talking to teachers , searching online and reading textbooks . Student enjoyed 7 types of learning activities and all these activities 
were considered as helpful activities except reading textbook which they found boring 
and time-consuming . It was found that students enjoyed helpful learning activities and 
they engaged in learning via activities they enjoyed . 
5 . 2 Importance of Aligning Assessment with Learning Activity 
Students learnt because they wanted to acquire knowledge and to obtain good assessment results . Their engagement in learning related to how the learning activities 
helped them to achieve their intended learning outcome . They engaged in learning 
activities which they found useful for examination preparation or for assessment . 
Therefore , it is important to align assessment with learning activities so that students 
would like to learn through the activities and could learn through the activities . Students ’ engagement should be considered during the assessment ’ s design process . 
5 . 3 Online Collaboration 
Some students like collaborative learning but some dislike it . Although many students 
like face-to-face communication more , they also used online communication to learn . 
They did not use the online platform provided by the School for communication . Instead , they used popular software or apps in the market , including WhatsApp , Skype , 
Facebook and Wechat , to ask questions , upload photos with learning contents and 
share answers to others . They can learn from peers via online collaboration . However , 
students showed their isolation problems and needs on teaching support via online 
communication . They needed teacher ’ s immediate support when learning online and 
needed online communication with teachers .  
A Thematic Analysis of the Blended Learning Experiences of Undergraduate Students 223 
5 . 4 Enhancing Blended Learning Experiences 
It is important to understand students ’ difficulties and needs for enhancing their learning experiences in blended learning environment . The degree of integration of online 
components and face-to-face components should be appropriate . Updated learning 
contents , bi-lingual contents and more questions with detailed feedback should be 
provided . To help students ’ learning online , immediate online teaching and technical 
support should be provided . For technical support , user-friendly system and mobile 
app should be developed to facilitate students ’ learning . 
6 Conclusion 
A thematic analysis was performed to understand learning experiences of the subdegree students in blended learning environment . The themes in learn via learning 
activities , learn via collaboration , learn for good assessment result , learning activities 
helps study and students enjoyed most , perceived advantages of online learning , the 
need of more learning support , the need of mobile learning , preference in integrated 
and non-integrated blended learning , and difficulties were discussed . 
It is recommended to enhance students learning experiences through the following 
ways . Firstly , the design of blended learning course should align with assessment . The 
learning activities should be designed both to help students achieving learning outcomes with assessment and help students study for examination . Larger question pool , 
detailed instant feedback and practical learning should be provided for them to study . 
Secondly , continuous improvement should be provided for online learning . The online materials should be maintained with updated contents . Besides , new trends in 
educational technology , for instance , mobile learning , should be considered for providing needed support to students . Thirdly , more online collaboration should be considered for blended learning design . Online classes and discussion forums should be 
used for collaborative learning in online environment . This can provide an alternative 
for students to learn from teachers and peers and minimize isolation problem in online 
learning . Fourthly , more support should be provided to students so that they can get 
help during online learning . Teachers should respond to students regularly and more 
frequently in online environment . Technical support on using online platforms should 
be easy to contact and responsive . Instructions of using learning activities should be 
more comprehensive . 
This paper documented interim results of a doctoral programme research . Further 
research such us individual interviews for more in-depth analysis will be conducted . 
The study contributes to fill the research gap in understanding blended learning experiences of undergraduate students in Hong Kong . 
Acknowledgments . This paper documented interim results of a doctoral programme 
research . This is to acknowledge the University of Nottingham , United Kingdom and 
the supervisors , Dr . Gordon Joyes and Prof . Charles Crook , of the Doctor of Education ( Lifelong Education ) programme . Their dedication in supporting and guiding the 
research is much appreciated . 
