How to remotivate kids for more distance learning
By Elissa Strauss , CNN

Updated 1155 GMT ( 1955 HKT ) January 5 , 2021
How 2020 changed the classroom for students


How 2020 changed the classroom for students 06 : 12 
( CNN ) Motivating kids to do schoolwork was hard enough in pre-pandemic times . 

No matter how skilled the teacher , and how clever the lesson plans , most kids would find at least some academic work utter drudgery . 
Many families are experiencing this drudgery compounded by distance learning compounded by two-plus weeks of sweet , winter break freedom during which nobody asked anyone to answer a math problem on Zoom . 
Kids , we need you to motivate . For your own sake , so you can resume your schoolwork without too much struggle or pain . And for your parents ' sake , so we can work , cook , clean , grocery shop and whatever else we need to do during our precious daytime hours instead of making sure you ' re paying attention to Zoom school . 
If only it were as easy as bribing them with the Halloween candy leftovers . Motivation is a complex mechanism , one that depends on a mix of biological and social factors . Punishments and rewards can help nudge it in the right direction . To really unlock a child ' s drive , however , parents need to think beyond simply getting things done . 
How motivation works
Fourth grader Miriam Amacker does schoolwork in her room at her family &  # 39 ; s home in San Francisco . 
Fourth grader Miriam Amacker does schoolwork in her room at her family ' s home in San Francisco . 
The brain systems behind motivation are shaped over time , and begin in the early years . Young children need a supportive caregiver to encourage them to take chances and explore , and cheer them on when they find an activity rewarding . Over time , the pleasure a child experiences from overcoming a challenge or indulging a curiosity will reinforce his or her desire to do it over and over again . 
A 2018 paper from the Center on the Developing Child at Harvard University explains the brain mechanisms behind this process . It advises parents to start this early , and remember to challenge kids -- not too little , and not too much . 
5 families struggle with distance learning
5 families struggle with distance learning 
 " From infancy onward , effort is required to sustain motivation , but success must be possible . They lose motivation when a task is too easy , but also when it is so difficult as to be insurmountable ,  " the authors wrote . 
To get kids more motivated , they recommend giving kids as much agency as possible , keep the rewards to a minimum while fostering intrinsic motivation , and remember that conditions -- including resources , time and support -- matter .  " It is incorrect to say that if anyone wants something badly enough , he or she will find a way to do it .  " 
Doing more by doing less
This post-holiday period during a pandemic hasn ' t created the ideal conditions for parents to help kids get motivated . Who has the time ? The resources ? The ability to support ? But even frazzled , exhausted parents , which is to say nearly all parents , can do it . 
Like so much else in life , when it comes to motivating your kids less really can be more . 
Wendy Ostroff , associate professor of cognitive and developmental science at Sonoma State University in California , found that her sixth grade son was having a hard time with distance learning this fall . 
How parents shape their children &  # 39 ; s mental health
How parents shape their children ' s mental health 
 " He was having a lot of anxiety , and not getting his work in ,  " said Ostroff , who is also the author of " Cultivating Curiosity in K-12 Classrooms : How to Promote and Sustain Deep Learning .  "  " It was too many moving parts for him , and it was derailing our whole family .  " 
Reluctant to be " that mom ,  " the one " asking for special treatment ,  " at first she held off on requesting a lighter load from his teachers . But after two months , enough was enough , and she requested they cut back on the art and music classes that were hard for her son .  
 " He was a different kid ,  " she said . 
Ostroff considers this an important lesson , and one that she hopes other parents receive . Sometimes with kids , the trick to motivation is as simple as cutting back on your child ' s workload . If your kid feels overwhelmed , it ' s hard for them to see the potential in himself , or his work . 
Make sure they have time to play
Third grader Elena recites multiplication tables as her brother Wyatt reviews his kindergarten work on a tablet with their mom , Christi Brouder , in Haverhill , Massachusetts . 
Third grader Elena recites multiplication tables as her brother Wyatt reviews his kindergarten work on a tablet with their mom , Christi Brouder , in Haverhill , Massachusetts . 
Children are not designed to learn virtually , Ostroff said , no matter how good their teacher is and how long they can sit still . Instead , kids learn best through play , social interactions and collaboration , all difficult to achieve on a screen .  
 " We have to put the joy back in learning because a lot of the joy is gone ,  " she said , explaining that surprise and silliness are what activate kids ' brains . 
In order to inject more of this in their lives , Ostroff recommends carving out time in the day when kids can learn in a more playful manner , whether it ' s during school or not . Listen to kids , help them follow their own curiosities , and worry less whether they are putting their all into every online assignment . 
How to sleep better — kids and grown-ups alike
How to sleep better — kids and grown-ups alike
Sometimes this learning might be easy to identify -- maybe they ' ve taken up astronomy or skateboarding -- and sometimes it will be more subtle . Learning how to fight through boredom and stay resilient in tough times are important skills that many kids are refining right now , Ostroff said . 
Also , kids who feel they have some control and time to play are likely to be happier , and happier kids are more likely to grin and bear those parts of the day about which they are less than enthusiastic .  
 " We need more dialogue with kids , and a loosening from teachers and parents , but unfortunately all the news is about tightening in on them , and being afraid ,  " she said . 
Help kids think big
For those moments when there is an essay that your daughter really doesn ' t want to write or a math problem that your son just doesn ' t want to figure out , it can be helpful to redirect their attention to how learning today will impact their future . 
It ' s not about how successful they will be , since that may not sound inspiring , said David Yeager , associate professor of psychology at the University of Texas at Austin . Try motivating them in the context of how they will be better able to help others .  
 " Reframe any frustration or difficulty a student is having as part of their contribution to the world ,  " he said .  " Tell them the stronger their brain is , the more they will be able to contribute to something bigger than themselves .  " 
This taps into our instinct to help others , and the wash of feel-good hormones we tend to get from acts of empathy and altruism , Yeager said . 
The human brain is wired to get satisfaction from these acts before we see their results . That makes this a more useful motivation trick than focusing on getting a good grade or making lots of money when they grow up . With those , the good feeling tends to come much later , if at all . 
It &  # 39 ; s time to give up perfectionist parenting — forever . Here &  # 39 ; s how
It ' s time to give up perfectionist parenting — forever . Here ' s how 
 " When you donate to the homeless you immediately feel like a good person , even though they aren ' t getting money for days or weeks ,  " Yeager explained . 
For teens , it can be particularly useful to help them see how the things they learn in school can help them change the world when they grow up . Teenagers make better life choices when they see these choices as an act of defiance , a 2016 study found . 
Teens can also be motivated by their hunger for meaning .  
 " The new neuroscience of adolescence is actually showing that teen brains are ready to learn if they see how it gives their life significance ,  " he said . 
For younger kids , Yeager suggests parents encourage kids to try hard for the sake of their teacher . This tends to be someone they care for , and doing right by their teacher will help provide that emotional immediacy that is a key component for motivation . 
Reward the process , not the action
Rewards and punishments can be used for all ages , he said , but not to reward results or productivity . We should reward the routines and habits that make productivity possible .  
 " Don ' t use a reward for completing a Zoom call with perfect attention , use the reward for something smaller like being seated at 8 : 15 with your laptop open ,  " he said .  " You are rewarding the habit , or the step that will make it easy , almost automatic , for them to be in class .  "  
 " Get them to do smaller steps and they will be more likely to do bigger steps on their own .  " 
Overall , taking small steps is always good advice when trying to change a behavior or attitude . 
Get CNN Health ' s weekly newsletter
Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr . Sanjay Gupta every Tuesday from the CNN Health team . 

Parents might want to try these motivational tricks on ourselves when trying to get motivated to motivate our children . 
Whether you ' re reimaging your children ' s schedules , making more space for them to play , or having conversations about how today ' s work impacts their ability to contribute in the future , slow down and see what works to motivate your kid in these difficult times . 
Elissa Strauss is a regular contributor to CNN , where she writes about the politics and culture of parenthood . 