MY THANKS TO Starling Lawrence, my editor at W.W. Norton, for his initial 
interest in this project, and to my agent, Rich Henshaw, for his able guidance and generous advice. 
The staff at Peace Hill Press helped to organize my other work so that I 
could complete this book, and also gave much-appreciated help. Sara Buffington worked on the thankless task of clearing permissions and kept our 
own publishing efforts running seamlessly along. Justin Moore made endless library trips for me (including the ones in which he returned overdue 
books I was too embarrassed to show up with), checked facts, entered souldestroying columns of ISBN numbers, introduced me to the music of The 
Proclaimers, compounded all this with intelligent readings (of the history 
chapter in particular), and helped me keep my in-box clear. Justin, I can't 
imagine why you don't want to stay in downtown Charles City for the rest 
of your life. (Reconsider?) 
Lauren Winner, scholar and writer, read the history chapter and offered 
invaluable help; thanks, Lauren. Thanks especially to John Wilson, editor of 
Books & Culture, better known as The Man Who's Read Everything, for the 
gift of his time and for the gracious criticisms he extended. The book is the 
stronger for his help; the flaws remaining and anything I say about postmodernism are mine alone. 
I owe an intellectual debt to Maureen Fitzgerald, the sanest academic I 
know; she introduced me to entirely new categories of thought. 
My parents, Jay and Jessie Wise, gave me every moral and practical support imaginable, from pep talks and inteUigent feedback to baby-sitting and 
extra groceries whenever I forgot to go to the store. Without their help (and 
open pantry), our lives would be chaos. 
Finally, my husband, Peter, has taken seriously his equal role in child-rearing 
and housekeeping, which makes my existence as writer/wife/mother/person 
possible. No thanks are adequate. Sumus exules, vivendi quam auditores. 

PAR T 
PREPARING 
FOR 
CLASSICAL 
EDUCATION 

Training Your Own Mind: 
The Classical Education You Never Had 
All civilization comes through literature now, especially in our country. 
A Greek got his civilization by talking and looking, and in some measure a Parisian may still do it. But we, who live remote from history and 
monuments, we must read or we must barbarise. 
—WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS, 
The Rise of Silas Lapham 
HE YEAR I turned thirty, I decided to go back to graduate school. 
I'd taken years off from school to write, teach literature as an adjunct lecturer, have four children. Now I was back in the classroom, on the wrong 
side of the teacher's desk. All the graduate students looked like teenagers. 
And graduate programs aren't designed for grownups; I was expected to 
stuff my family into the schedule designed for me by American Studies, live 
off a stipend of six thousand dollars per year while forgoing all other gainful employment, and content myself with university-sponsored health 
insurance, which supplied bare-bones coverage and classified anesthesia 
during childbirth as a frill. And I found myself dreading the coming year of 
classes. I'd been teaching and directing discussions for five years. I didn't 
think I could bear to be transformed back into a passive student, sitting and 
taking notes while a professor told me what I ought to know. 
But to my relief, graduate seminars weren't lectures during which I 
meekly received someone else's wisdom. Instead, the three-hour weekly 
sessions turned out to be the springboard of a self-education process. Over 
the next year and a half, I was directed toward lists of books and given 
advice about how to read them. But I was expected to teach myself. I read 
book after book, summarized the content of each, and tried to see whether 
the arguments were flawed. Were the conclusions overstated? Drawn from 
skimpy evidence? Did the writers ignore facts, or distort them to support a 
C^fi4frfoée& 
i 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
point? Where did their theories break down? It was great fun; trashing the 
arguments of senior scholars who are making eighty times your annual 
stipend is one of the few compensations of grad-student serfdom. 
All of this reading was preparation for my seminars, in which graduate 
students sat around long tables and argued loudly about the book of the 
week. The professor in charge pointed out our sloppy reasoning, corrected 
our misuses of language, and threw water on the occasional flames. These 
(more or less) Socratic dialogues built on the foundation of the reading I 
was doing at home. On evenings when I would normally have been watching The X-Files or scrubbing the toilet, I read my way through lists of 
required books with concentrated attention. The housework suffered and I 
missed Mulder's departure from spook hunting; but I found myself creating 
whole new structures of meaning in my mind, making connections 
between theories and building new theories of my own on top of the links. 
I wrote better, thought more clearly, read more. 
I also drove myself into work-induced psychosis. I stayed up late at night 
to finish my papers and got up early with the baby; I wrote my dissertation 
proposal on the living room floor, with a Thomas the Tank Engine track in 
construction all around me; I spent the night before my required French 
exam washing my four-year-old's sheets and pillows after he caught the 
stomach flu; I sat through numerous required workshops in which nothing 
of value was said. 
But you don't have to suffer through the graduate school wringer in 
order to train your mind—unless you plan to get a job in university teaching (not a particularly strong employment prospect anyway). For centuries, 
women and men undertook this sort of learning—reading, taking notes, 
discussing books and ideas with friends—without subjecting themselves to 
graduate-school stipends and university health-insurance policies. 
Indeed, university lectures were seen by Thomas Jefferson as unnecessary 
for the serious pursuit of historical reading. In 1786, Jefferson wrote to his 
college-age nephew Thomas Mann Randolph, Jr., advising him to pursue 
the larger part of his education independently. Go ahead and attend a course 
of lectures in science, Jefferson recommended. But he then added, "While 
you are attending these courses, you can proceed by yourself in a regular 
series of historical reading. It would be a waste of time to attend a professor 
of this. It is to be acquired from books, and if you pursue it by yourself, you 
can accommodate it to your other reading so as to fill up those chasms of 
time not otherwise appropriated."1 
Thomas Jefferson, in a letter to Thomas Mann Randolph, Jr., in Paris, dated August 27,1786. 
This letter is in the University ofVirginia Library, where it is tided "Education of a Future Sonin-Law," and is archived on line at http://etext.virginia.edu/toc/modeng/public/JefLett.htrnl. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 5 
Professional historians might take umbrage at their apparent superfluity, 
but Jefferson's letter reflects a common understanding of the times: Any literate man (or woman, we would add) can rely on self-education to train 
and fill the mind. All you need are a shelf full of books, a congenial friend 
or two who can talk to you about your reading, and a few "chasms of time 
not otherwise appropriated." (Contemporary critics of university education 
might add that a Ph.D. doesn't necessarily train and fill the mind in any case; 
this, sniffs Harold Bloom, is a "largely forgotten function of a university 
education," since universities now "disdain to fulfill" our yearning for the 
classics.)2 
Young Randolph was able to build on the foundation of a privileged 
education. But his home course in self-improvement was followed by many 
Americans who were less well schooled—including thousands of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century women, who were usually given much less 
classroom education than their male counterparts. Limited to the learning 
they could acquire for themselves once a brief period of formal education 
had ended, American women of the last two centuries kept journals and 
commonplace books chronicling their reading, met with each other, and 
took responsibility for developing their own minds. The etiquette author 
Eliza Farrar advised her young female readers not only on manners and 
dress, but also on intellectual cultivation: "Self-education begins where 
school education ends," she wrote sternly.3 
Many, many women took this advice seriously. Mary Wilson Gilchrist, a 
Civil War-era Ohioan who lived at home until her sudden death at the age 
of 24, could boast only of a single year at Ohio Female College, where she 
briefly studied trigonometry, English literature, French, music, logic, rhetoric, and theology—hardly time enough to gain even an elementary understanding of this laundry list of subjects, let alone mastery of their principles. 
But Gilchrist's education didn't cease when she returned home. She kept in 
her diary a list of the books she read: Charlotte Brontë, William Makepeace 
Thackeray, Henry Fielding, William Wordsworth, Virgil, Sophocles, and 
David Hume ("Difficult," she wrote of Hume, hoping that she would 
"retain some of it.") To keep herself motivated, she set up a reading club 
with a neighbor. "Mary Carpenter called," one diary entry reads, "and we 
made arrangements for reading Shakespeare together."4
 Southern teenager 
2Harold Bloom, How to Read and Why (New York: Scribner, 2000), p. 24. 
3Eliza W. R. Farrar, The Young Lady's Friend, by a Lady (Boston: American Stationer's Company, 1836), p. 4. 
4Mary Gilchrist's diary is quoted in Claudia Lynn Lady, "Five Tri-State Women During the 
Civil War: Day-to-Day Life," West Virginia History, vol. 43, no. 3 (Spring 1982): 189-226. 
Gilchrist's diary is excerpted on pp. 212-14. 
î 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Hope Summerell Chamberlain wrote in her own journal of reading Humboldt's Kosmos, Milton's Paradise Lost, Madame De Staël's Corinne, and 
Guizot's History of Civilization, among other difficult books; the reading 
club she helped to organize was, in her own words, "a peace offering to a 
hungry mind."5 
What if your mind is hungry, but not particularly literate? 
"Acquaint yourself with your own ignorance," Isaac Watts advised his 
readers, in his self-education treatise Improvement of the Mind (originally 
published in 1741). "Impress your mind with a deep and painful sense of the 
low and imperfect degrees of your present knowledge."This cheerful admonition was intended as a reassurance, not a condemnation: A well-trained 
mind is the result of application, not inborn genius. Deep thinkers, Watts 
assures us, are not those born with "bright genius, a ready wit, and good 
parts" (a relief for most of us). No matter how ignorant and "low" a mind 
might be, "studious thought . . . the exercise of your own reason and judgment upon all you read . . . gives good sense . . . and affords your understanding the truest improvement." 
Today, as in Watts s own time, intelligent and ambitious adults feel that 
they're unprepared to tackle any course of serious reading. They struggle to 
overcome an indifferent education that didn't teach the basic skills needed 
for mature reading and writing. But Watts's admonition is still true: No matter how incomplete your education, you can learn how to read intelligently, 
think about your reading, and talk to a friend about what you've discovered. 
Sustained, serious reading is at the center of the self-education project. 
Observation, reading, conversation, and attendance at lectures are all educational pursuits, as Isaac Watts goes on to tell us. But he concludes that reading is the most important method of self-improvement. Observation limits 
our learning to our immediate surroundings; conversation and attendance 
at lectures are valuable, but expose us only to the views of a few nearby persons. Reading alone allows us to reach out beyond the restrictions of time 
and space, to take part in what Mortimer AcUer has called the "Great Conversation" of ideas that began in ancient times and has continued unbroken 
to the present. Reading makes us part of this Great Conversation, no matter where and when we pursue it. 
But sustained and serious reading has always been a difficult project— 
even before the advent of television. Much has been written about our 
present move away from texts, toward an image-based, visual culture: 
Schools no longer teach reading and writing properly. Television, movies 
5
"What's Done and Past," unpublished autobiography, William R. Perkins Library, Duke 
University. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 J 
and now the Web have decreased the importance of the written word. We 
are moving into a postliterate age. Print culture is doomed. Alas. 
I dislike these sorts of apocalyptic reflections. Television may be pernicious, but reading is no harder (or easier) than it has ever been. "Our postrevolutionary youth," complained Thomas Jefferson in an 1814 letter to John 
Adams, "are born under happier stars than you and I were.They acquire all 
learning in their mother's womb, and bring it into the world ready made. 
The information of books is no longer necessary; and all knowledge which 
is not innate, is in contempt, or neglect at least." Jefferson's moan over the 
stage of modern intellectual culture laments the rise of a philosophy that 
exalts self-expression over reading. Even before the advent of television, reading that required concentration was a difficult and neglected activity. 
In fact, reading is a discipline: like running regularly, or meditating, or 
taking voice lessons. Any able adult can run across the backyard, but this 
ability to put one foot in front of another shouldn't make him think that he 
can tackle a marathon without serious, time-consuming training. Most of us 
can manage to sing "Happy Birthday" or the Doxology when called for, but 
this doesn't incline us to march down to the local performing arts center 
and try out for the lead in Aida. 
Yet because we can read the newspaper or Time or Stephen King without difficulty, we tend to think that we should be able to go directly into 
Homer or Henry James without any further preparation. And when we 
stumble, grow confused or weary, we take this as proof of our mental inadequacy: We'll never be able to read the Great Books. 
The truth is that the study of literature requires different skills than reading for pleasure. The inability to tackle, unaided, a list of Great Books and 
stick to the project doesn't demonstrate mental inadequacy—just a lack of 
preparation. As Richard J. Foster eloquently argues in Celebration of Discipline, we tend to think (erroneously) that anyone who can read ought to be 
able to study ideas. "To convince people that they must learn to study is the 
major obstacle," Foster writes. "Most people assume that because they know 
how to read words they know how to study" But the opposite is true: 
Studying a book is an extremely complex matter, especially for the novice. As 
with tennis or typing, when we are first learning it seems that there are a 
thousand details to master and we wonder how on earth we will keep everything in mind at the same time. Once we reach proficiency, however, the 
mechanics become second nature, and we are able to concentrate on our tennis game or the material to be typed. The same is true with studying a book. 
Study is an exacting art involving a labyrinth of details.6 
Richard J. Foster, Celebration of Discipline (San Francisco: Harper, 1978), p. 67. 
l 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Secondary schools don't typically train us how to read seriously, how to 
study. Their task is to produce students who are reading at the so-called 
tenth-grade level, a fluency that allows readers to absorb newspapers and 
Stephen King with ease. A university education ought to follow up on this 
basic literacy by teaching its freshmen how to read seriously, but many college seniors aren't much further along than their high school counterparts. 
Often, they graduate with a nagging sense of their own deficiencies; as 
adults, they come back to the task of serious reading and discover that it has 
not magically become simpler. Homer is still long-winded, Plato still 
impenetrable, Stoppard still bewilderingly random. Too often, these readers 
give up, convinced that serious books are beyond them. 
But all that's missing is training in the art of reading. If you didn't learn 
how to read properly in school, you can do it now. The methods of classical 
education are at your disposal. 
The world is full of self-improvement methods. What's distinctive about 
classical education? 
"Some books are to be tasted," wrote the sixteenth-century philosopher 
Francis Bacon, "others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and 
digested." Bacon, who had a knack for the quotable (he is also responsible 
for "The remedy is worse than the disease" and "Knowledge is power"), was 
suggesting that not every book is worthy of serious attention. But the three 
levels of understanding he describes—tasting, swallowing, and digesting— 
reflect his familiarity with classical education. In the classical school, learning is a three-part process. First, taste: Gain basic knowledge of your subject. 
Second, swallow: Take the knowledge into your own understanding by 
evaluating it. Is it valid? Is it true? Why? Third, digest: Fold the subject into 
your own understanding. Let it change the way you think—or reject it as 
unworthy. Taste, swallow, digest; find out the facts, evaluate them, form your 
own opinion. 
Like Bacon, the classical schoolmaster divides learning into three stages, 
generally known as the trivium.The first stage of education is called the grammar stage (in this case, "grammar" means the building blocks, the foundational knowledge of each academic subject). In elementary school, children 
are asked to absorb information—not to evaluate it, but simply to learn it. 
Memorization and repetition are the primary methods of teaching; children 
are expected to become familiar with a certain body of knowledge, but they 
aren't yet asked to analyze it. Critical thinking comes into play during the 
second stage of education, the logic stage. Once a foundation of information 
is laid, students begin to exercise their analytical skills; they decide whether 
information is correct or incorrect, and make connections between cause 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 Ç 
and effect, historical events, scientific phenomena, words, and their meanings. In the final stage of secondary education, the rhetoric stage, students 
learn to express their own opinions about the facts they have accumulated 
and evaluated. So the final years of education focus on elegant, articulate 
expression of opinion in speech and writing—the study of rhetoric.7 
Classically educated students know that this pattern (learn facts; analyze 
them; express your opinions about them) applies to all later learning. But if 
you haven't been classically educated, you may not recognize that these 
three separate steps also apply to reading. It is impossible to analyze on a first 
reading; you have to grasp a book's central ideas before you can evaluate 
them. And after you've evaluated—asking, "Are the ideas presented accurately? Are the conclusions valid?"—you can ask the final set of questions: 
What do you think about these ideas? Do you agree or disagree? Why? 
Classrooms too often skip the first two steps and progress directly to the 
third, which is why so many elementary texts insist on asking six-year-olds 
how they feel about what they're learning, long before they've properly had 
a chance to learn it. This mental short cut has become a habit for many 
adults, who are ready to give their opinions long before they've had a 
chance to understand the topic under study. (Listen to any call-in radio 
show.) And the habit of leaping directly to the rhetoric stage can prevent 
even mature minds from learning how to read properly.The density of ideas 
in Plato or Shakespeare or Thomas Hardy frustrates the mind that comes to 
them ready to draw conclusions. To tackle a course of reading successfully, 
we have to retrain our minds to grasp new ideas by first understanding 
them, then evaluating them, and finally forming our own opinions. 
Like badly taught six-year-olds, we are too quick to go straight to opinion making without the intermediate steps^ of understanding and evaluation. The British mystery writer Dorothy L. Sayers, proposing a return to 
classical education for the twentieth century, lamented the loss of the classical "tools of learning" in a speech at Oxford: 
Has it ever struck you as odd, or unfortunate, that today, when the proportion 
of literacy is higher than it has ever been, people should have become susceptible to the influence of advertisement and mass propaganda to an extent hitherto unheard of and unimagined? . . . Have you ever, in listening to a debate 
among adult and presumably responsible people, been fretted by the extraordinary inability of the average debater to speak to the question, or to meet and 
7
 A proposal for K—12 education following this pattern is described in detail in Jessie Wise 
and Susan Wise Bauer, The Well-Trained Mind: A Guide to Classical Education at Home (New 
York:W. W Norton, 1999). 
2 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
refute the arguments of speakers on the other side? .. .And when you think of 
this, and think that most of our public affairs are settled by debates and committees, have you ever felt a certain sinking of the heart? ... Is not the great 
defect of our education today—a defect traceable through all the disquieting 
symptoms of trouble that I have mentioned—that although we often succeed 
in teaching our pupils "subjects," we fail lamentably on the whole in teaching 
them how to think: they learn everything, except the art of learning?8 
The pattern of grammar, logic, and rhetoric trains the mind in the art of 
learning. But if you never learned how to grasp knowledge quickly and 
well, to evaluate the validity of arguments, and to present your own opinions with grace and clarity, it isn't too late.You can still learn how to understand, evaluate, and argue with ideas. Like a medieval tutor with a single 
promising pupil, this book will walk you through each stage of classical education, so that you will have the tools to find the serious contemplation of 
books a delight rather than a frustration. 
How to begin? 
Self-educated men and women of the past offer us a few general principles as we start on the project of training our own minds. "Engage not the 
mind in the intense pursuit of too many things at once," Isaac Watts advises, 
"especially such as have no relation to one another.This will be ready to distract the understanding, and hinder it from attaining perfection in any one 
subject of study." It may seem slow, but study one subject at a time. Begin 
with this book, which will guide you through the necessary skills of reading and analysis; make this study your sole subject until you've completed it. 
Once you have learned how to progress through the steps of understanding 
(grammar), evaluating (logic), and expressing an opinion (rhetoric), then 
turn to the reading lists in Part II.These lists are organized by subject; if you 
read the books in order, limiting yourself to one field of inquiry (fiction, 
autobiography, history) at a time, you will find that your earlier reading will 
set a framework for the books that come later, while your later reading will 
reinforce and clarify what has come before. 
Stick to one list at a time. During this self-study time, avoid the kind of 
reading that German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher indulged in his 
early years: a wide-ranging and impressive, but unsystematic, devouring of 
books that left his mind, as he put it in later years, "like Chaos, before the 
world was created." 
8Dorothy L. Sayers,"The Lost Tools of Learning," a speech presented at Oxford University 
in 1947, reprinted by the National Review, 215 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10016. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 1 
Jefferson (always full of advice on every subject) counseled his young 
nephew to organize this systematic reading around chronology: "Having 
laid down your plan [of reading]," he tells young Randolph, "the order of 
time will be your sufficient guide."9
 In other words, read books in the order 
in which they were written. The nineteenth-century educator Lydia 
Sigourney agreed; in her Letters to Young Ladies, she recommended that reading always be done with the help of a "table of chronology .. . It is a good 
practice to fix in the memory some important eras—the subversion of an 
empire, for instance—and then ascertain what events were taking place in 
all other nations, at the same period of time. A few of these parallels, running through the History of the World, will collect rich clusters of knowledge, and arrange them in the conservatory of the mind."10
 The book lists I 
include are arranged in chronological order for this very reason; it is easier 
to understand a subject if you begin with its foundational works, and then 
read systematically through those books that build, one layer at a time, on 
this foundation. 
When to read? 
Lydia Sigourney warned her "young ladies" that systematic reading is 
"peculiarly necessary" to women "because, dwelling much on the contemplation of little things, [we] are in danger of losing the intellectual 
appetite."11
 Let's be egalitarian: This is equally true of men. We all juggle 
multiple jobs, housework, bill paying, paperwork, children and family, and 
dozens of smaller distractions: meals, groceries, e-mail, the ever-present lure 
of late-night television. The struggle to keep to a self-imposed schedule of 
reading is often lost in those moments after dinner when the children are in 
bed, the dishes done, and we think: I've been working all day. I just need to vegetate for a few minutes before I try to use my brain. And three hours later we've 
watched an hour of TV, signed on to check what e-mails might have come 
in since lunch, glanced at a couple of favorite Web sites, put in a load of 
laundry, and wiped off the kitchen sink. 
While avoiding apocalyptic pronouncements on the decadence of modern society, I still suggest that the biggest difference between modern media 
and the long-enduring book is the way in which TV and the Internet manage to infiltrate themselves into spare moments and prompdy swallow up 
those "chasms of time." I can't say that I've ever lost myself in Plato and 
looked up an hour and half later to find that the time I intended to devote 
9
Jefferson, "Education of a Future Son-in-Law." 
I0Lydia Sigourney, Letters toYoung Ladies, 5th ed. (NewYork: Harper & Brothers, 1839),p. 138. 
"Ibid., p. 133. 
2 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
to answering my e-mail has suddenly disappeared, but I have often spent the 
time that I meant to dedicate to reading sorting through e-mail spam, 
checking out links, and and (even worse) playing Spider Solitaire on my 
computer. ("Just one game," I'll think, "to warm up my brain.") 
High language about the life of the mind has to yield, at some point, to 
practical plans for self-cultivation. The mastery of grammar, writing, logic, 
analysis, and argumentation—all of which I'll cover in chapters to come— 
depends on the single uncomplicated act of carving out a space within 
which they can exist. The first task of self-education is not the reading of 
Plato, but the finding of twenty minutes in which you can devote yourself 
to thought, rather than to activity. 
THE FIRST STEP: SCHEDULE REGULAR READING 
AND SELF-STUDY TIME 
Your first task in self-education is simple: Set a time for self-education. 
Remember these principles: 
Morning is better than evening."There are portions of the day too when the 
mind should be eased," Thomas Jefferson wrote to his nephew Thomas 
Mann Randolph, Jr. "Particularly after dinner it should be applied to lighter 
occupations." Late evening is far from ideal for the project of reading seriously. It is usually far better to spend forty-five minutes in reading before 
breakfast (and before the children erupt from their bedrooms) than to 
devote two hours to it in the evening. As the autodidact Benjamin Franklin 
famously suggested, early to bed and early to rise is the most effective path 
to wisdom. (The jury remains out on health and wealth.) 
Start short. The brain is an organ, and mental exercise, like physical exercise, has to be introduced gradually. Don't leap ambitiously into a schedule 
that has you rising at five to spend two hours in reading; you're likely to 
skip it altogether. Start with half an hour of reading first thing in the morning, and develop the habit of sticking to this shorter time of concentration 
and thought before extending it. And even if you never extend it, you're 
still doing more reading than you were before you began the project of 
self-cultivation. 
Don't schedule yourself for study every day of the week. The body begins to 
drag if exercised every day without a break. Aim for four days per week; this 
makes it possible to establish a habit of reading while giving yourself the 
weekend "off" and a "flex morning" for the days when you're still catching 
up with the previous week's paperwork, the plumber arrives at daybreak, 
and the toddler develops stomach flu. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 3 
Never check your e-mail right before you start reading. I thought this was a personal problem until I ran across several essays in a row—from the Chronicle 
of Higher Education, our local newspaper, and several other equally varied 
publications—about the distracting qualities of e-mail. There is something 
in the format of e-mail (its terseness? the sheer volume of messages? its tendency to reward skimming over deep reading?) that pulls the mind away 
from the contemplative, relaxed frame so important for good reading. If you 
get good news, you're distracted by it; if someone writes you a nasty note, 
you'll spend the next forty-five minutes mentally formulating blistering 
replies rather than concentrating on your book. If no one writes at all, you'll 
be depressed because you've suddenly become invisible in cyberspace. 
Guard your reading time.We do those things which are rewarding to us, and 
immediate gratification always seems more rewarding than slow progress 
toward a long-term goal. Resist other satisfactions or duties that encroach 
on your reading time. 
Take the first step now. On your calendar or day timer, schedule four 
weekly reading periods of half an hour each now. Next week, use this time 
period to read Chapter 2 and complete the Second Step assignment. 
2 
Wrestling with Books: 
The Act of Reading 
And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the 
breaking of the day. 
—GENESIS 32:24 
«—^-H E FUTURISTS HAVE long been declaring it:We are a postliterate 
culture. Books are outdated forms of communication. Soon the flood of 
information that is now contained in books, magazines, and newspapers will 
be sorted by artificial intelligences and presented in multimedia formats. No 
more boring print. 
These predictions are only tangentially related to serious reading. Gathering data, which is what you do when you skim the newspaper, read People 
at the doctor's office, or use a book on plumbing techniques to fix your 
sink, may indeed shift away from print toward other media: videos, compact 
discs, Web sites with animation, sound effects, and interactive features 
(although most Web sites are still print intensive as I write this). 
But gathering data and reading—understanding ideas and how people act 
when they try to five by those ideas—are not the same occupation. When 
you gather data from a newspaper or book, you use the same mechanical 
skill as when you engage in serious reading. Your eyes move; the words convey meaning to your mind. Yet your mind itself functions in a different way. 
When you gather data, you become informed. When you read, you develop 
wisdom—or, in Mortimer Adler s words, "become enlightened." "To be 
informed," Adler writes in How to Read a Book, "is to know simply that 
something is the case. To be enlightened is to know, in addition, what it is 
all about." To be informed is to collect facts; to be enlightened is to understand an idea (justice, or charity, or human freedom) and use it to make 
sense of the facts you've gathered. 
When you read the morning news, you may find out that a suicide 
G^^ée^ 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 $ 
bomber has just devastated a restaurant on the West Bank. This is information—a collection of facts. Whether you gather those facts from a newspaper story, Time magazine, CNN's Headline News morning show, or a Web 
site does not significantly change the information, although the medium 
may slightly alter your experience of it; a skillful television montage of shots 
or a streaming Web site with pictures of bloody survivors may arouse your 
emotions or associate this particular bombing with others that have happened recently. 
But in order to be enlightened about the suicide bomber on the West 
Bank, you must read seriously: history, theology, politics, propaganda, editorials. The ideas that impel suicide bombers cannot be gleaned from Web sites 
or interactive media. The causes of such desperate actions cannot be made 
clear to you through a picture and a moving headline while you eat your 
toast. These things must be expressed with precise and evocative words, 
assembled into complex, difficult sentences. To be enlightened—to be 
wise—you must wrestle with these sentences. Technology can do a great 
deal to make information gathering easier, but it can do little to simplify the 
gathering of wisdom. Information washes over us like a sea, and recedes 
without leaving its traces behind. Wrestling with truth, as the story of Jacob 
warns us, is a time-consuming process that marks us forever.1 
If you have difficulty with the actual act of reading, you may need to do 
some remedial skill work before tackling the Iliad. But before you embark 
on a speed-reading course, ask yourself whether your frustration with reading comes from a true mechanical difficulty, or whether you are (erroneously) expecting enlightenment to be as easy as information gathering. 
Before reading the following passage, glance at your watch's second hand 
and note the time. 
Books which we have first read in odd places always retain their charm, 
whether read or neglected.Thus Hazlitt always remembered that it was on the 
ioth of April, 1798, that he "sat down to a volume of the New Eloise at the Inn 
of Llangollen over a bottle of sherry and a cold chicken." In the same way I 
1
 Genesis 32: Jacob, wandering along the banks of the Jabbok river in the dark and dreading 
the prospect of meeting on the next morning his estranged brother Esau (not to mention all 
of Esau's well-armed followers), meets a man and wrestles with him there until morning. 
When day breaks, the man touches Jacob s hip and throws it out of joint, leaving him with a 
limp. Although the mysterious stranger is never unambiguously identified, he gives Jacob a 
new name—Israel—-just as God renamed Abram, earlier in the book; and Jacob himself says, 
"I saw God face to face, and yet my life was spared." (As with all great literature, it's best to 
read the original rather than depend on my summary.) 
2 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
remember how Professor Longfellow in college recommended to us, for 
forming a good French style, to read Balzac's Peau de Chagrin; and yet it was a 
dozen years later before I found it in a country inn, on a lecture trip and sat 
up half the night to read it. It may be, on the other hand, that such haphazard 
meetings with books sometimes present them under conditions hopelessly 
unfavorable, as when I encountered Whitman's Leaves of Grass for the first 
time on my first voyage in an Azorian barque; and it inspires to this day a 
slight sense of nausea, which it might, after all, have inspired equally on land.2 
Look again at your watch. How long did it take you to read this passage? 
Count the unfamiliar words in this passage. How many did you find? 
If you don't know what a barque is, can you figure it out from context? 
What is Higginson's point? 
If it took you a minute or less to read this passage, you are already reading at an appropriate speed for serious prose. If you found no more than ten 
unfamiliar words in this passage, your vocabulary is already at the so-called 
tenth-grade literacy level, which means that you are technically capable of 
reading anything that's written for an intelligent layperson. If you guessed 
that a barque is a kind of boat, you know how to gather clues for unfamiliar vocabulary words from context. And if you managed to figure out (unfamiliar proper names notwithstanding) that Higginson thinks that the 
conditions under which you first read a book are likely to affect the way 
you remember that book thereafter, you know how to grasp the main idea 
of a paragraph. 
If it took you more than a minute to read this brief passage, and you 
found more than ten unfamiliar words, you would do well to review your 
actual mechanical reading skills (see the Second Step at the end of this chapter) . Otherwise, you don't need to do any remedial work. 
But I read so slowly; it will take me forever to get through those lists of Great 
Books! Reading is a life-long process. There's no hurry, no semester schedule, no end-of-term panic, no final exam. The idea that fast reading is good 
reading is a twentieth-century weed, springing out of the stony farmland 
cultivated by the computer manufacturers. As Kirkpatrick Sale has eloquently pointed out, every technology has its own internal ethical system. 
Steam technology made size a virtue. In the computerized world, faster is 
better, and speed is the highest virtue of all.3
 When there is a flood of 
knowledge to be assimilated, the conduits had better flow fast. 
2
Thomas Wentworth Higginson, "Books Unread," Atlantic Monthly, March 1904. 
3Kirkpatrick Sale, Rebels Against the Future:The Luddites and Their War on the Industrial Revolution: Lessons for the ComputerAge (New York: Perseus, 1996). 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 7 
But the pursuit of knowledge is centered around a different ethic. The 
serious reader is not attempting to assimilate a huge quantity of information 
as quickly as possible, but to understand a few many-sided and elusive ideas. 
The speed ethic shouldn't be transplanted into an endeavor that is governed 
by very different ideals. 
Speed-reading techniques center around two primary skills: proper eye 
movement (keep your eyes moving forward, and learn how to sweep them 
across the page diagonally rather than reading each line individually) and 
recognition of important words (look for concrete nouns and verbs, and 
allow your eye to move more quickly over "filler" words in a sentence). 
Peter Kump, the one-time director of education for the grandmama of all 
speed-reading courses, Evelyn Wood Reading Dynamics, offers would-be 
speed-readers the following principles: 
Rule One:The more abstract words a passage contains, the harder it is to read 
quickly. 
Rule Two: The fewer ideas a passage contains, the easier it is to read fast. 
RuleThree:The more prior knowledge of the subject of a written passage the 
reader has, the easier it is to read fast.4 
How does Aristotle (here, in the Nicomachean Ethics, grading the severity 
of human misconduct) do on this scale? 
[T]here are three kinds of injury. Those that are done in ignorance are Mistakes—when the patient or the act or the instrument or the effect was different from what the agent supposed, because he either did not mean to hit 
anyone, or not with that missile, or not that person, or not with that effect; but 
the result was different from what he expected (e.g. he only meant to give the 
other a prick, not a wound), or the person or the missile was different.When 
the injury occurs contrary to reasonable expectation it is a Misadventure; but 
when it occurs not contrary to reasonable expectation but without malicious 
intent it is a mistake (for the agent makes a mistake when the origin of the 
responsibility lies in himself; when it lies outside him his act is a misadventure) . When the agent acts knowingly but without premeditation it is an 
Injury; such are all acts due to temper or any other of the unavoidable and 
natural feelings to which human beings are liable. For those who commit 
these injuries and mistakes are doing wrong, and their acts are injuries; but this 
does not of itself make them unjust or wicked men, because the harm that 
4
Peter Kump, Break-Through Rapid Reading (Paramus, N.J.: Prentice Hall Press, 1998), pp. 
212-13. 
2 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
they did was not due to malice; it is when a man does a wrong on purpose 
that he is unjust and wicked.5 
This is not a difficult passage to understand (although, granted, it lacks a certain snappy appeal; this particular classic is not on your reading list). Aristotle is defining the limits of what we might today call "misdemeanors" or 
"minor crimes" (he cautions the reader that he is not here discussing deliberate evil or purposeful wrongdoing). Perhaps you've broken your neighbor's nose. Assuming you didn't carefully plan the breaking and lie in wait 
for him, there are three possibilities. You made a Mistake: You took a light 
swing at your neighbor, just to scare him, but misjudged your own strength 
and hit him harder than intended (this is a Mistake because the problem lay 
inside you, in your poor understanding of your own strength). Or perhaps 
the nose got broken through Misadventure:You intended to hit your neighbor lightly, but he unfortunately tripped just as you were swinging and fell 
into your fist. (Alas.) Now the real cause of the broken nose is something 
outside you (the neighbor's stumble). Or you might have committed an 
Injury: Your neighbor infuriated you, you hauled off and broke his nose in 
a fit of temper, but once you cooled down you were heartily ashamed of 
yourself, were embarrassed by your act, made amends, and swore never to 
do such a thing again. 
This is an interesting sort of puzzle: If we take it out of the testosteronecharged nose-punching realm and apply it to something academic, like 
plagiarism, how do we evaluate the student who copies deliberately? unintentionally? out of desperation? And it is also the foundation of much 
Western law governing the severity of various offenses. Our distinction 
between murder and manslaughter, for example, hinges on whether the 
death can be classified as Mistake, Misadventure, or Injury (in which case it 
may be manslaughter), or whether it lies in the realm of deliberate, purposeful wrongdoing. 
But could you speed-read this passage? It has at least four separate ideas 
in it, not to mention a whole slew of abstract words (reasonable expectation, malicious intent, premeditation, unavoidable and natural feelings, 
wicked, wrong). And unless you're a lawyer, you probably have no prior 
familiarity with the classification of injuries. 
Generally, fiction is easier to read quickly than nonaction. Even so, speedreading fiction works just fine when the plot is the thing (Jeffrey Archer, say, 
or Tom Clancy) but can cheat you out of understanding character-based fic5Aristotle, Ethics, trans. J. A. K.Thomson, rev. Hugh Tredennick (NewYork: Penguin, 1976), 
pp. 192-93-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 g 
tion. In Pride and Prejudice, Jane Austen introduces two of her male romantic leads like this: 
Mr Bingley was good looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women, with an air 
of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr Hurst, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, 
tall person, handsome features, noble mien; and the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the 
ladies declared he was much handsomer than Mr Bingley, and he was looked 
at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be 
proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his large 
estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his friend.6 
Austen's prose isn't as loaded with abstractions as Aristotle's, but nevertheless Austen introduces two quite separate ideas in this single paragraph: 
that a man's fortune makes him handsomer to the onlooker, and that manners (themselves a separate idea, defined elsewhere) are even more important than money. 
Speed-reading techniques are most useful when pure information is 
offered, as in (for example) People magazine, marveling over Jenna Elfman's 
deceptive youthfulness at the advanced age of twenty-nine: 
As she approaches 30, Elfrnan has found her comfort zone. Her show Dharma 
& Greg is a hit. She and husband Bodhi, 32, have been happily married for six 
years. And the 5'10" Elfinan likes what she sees when she looks in the mirror. 
"If you're feeling good about your marriage and career, you're going to look 
okay," she has said. Elfinan definitely does. "She enjoys her life," says her 
makeup artist Ann Masterson. "She's very secure with who she is." .. .To keep 
her body toned, Elfinan takes ballet lessons at her home three times a week, 
studies yoga, drinks about 100 oz. of water a day, gets plenty of sleep, and tries 
to avoid sugar. And if she's sweating getting older, she isn't showing it. "I don't 
think it matters to her," says ... director Peter Chesholm. "She still has such a 
great child within her."7 
6
Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice, chapter 4 
7
Susan Horsburgh, Sonja Steptoe, and Julie Dam, "Staying Sexy at 30,40, 50,60," People, vol. 
56, no. 6 (August 6, 2001): 61. 
3 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
There might (debatably) be an idea (sort of) in that last line, but apart from 
this the passage is loaded with concrete nouns and verbs (and measurements). It certainly isn't necessary for you to read every line from beginning 
to end, and if you glance over it and identify the main words—30, comfort 
zone, Dharma and Greg, hit, husband, happily married, mirror, body toned— 
you can grasp the passage's import without bothering with the little words. 
But in Aristotle and Austen, the little words are important. "This does not 
of itself make them unjust or wicked men, because the harm that they did 
was not due to malice":Without "of itself" and "due to," the sentence loses 
its exact meaning. 
Three insights offered by the speed-reading experts may be of some use 
to you. First: The average reader doesn't simple move her eyes from left to 
right across the page. She continually glances back at what she's already 
read, and then skips her eyes forward again to find her place. Sometimes this 
is an important part of understanding; in reading the passage from Aristotle's 
Ethics, you might find yourself glancing back at the definition of Mistake as 
you read about Misadventure, in order to keep the difference clear in your 
mind. But often this compulsive backtracking becomes a bad habit that 
slows you down unnecessarily. Putting your finger on the page and moving 
it as you read can help you become conscious of whether you've formed 
this habit; try it first with simple prose, and see whether your eyes tend to 
leap backward and forward away from the point marked by your finger. 
Second: When reading a difficult passage, you may find it helpful to sweep 
your eyes over a paragraph, looking for concrete nouns, action verbs, and 
capitalized letters, before settling down to read it from beginning to end. 
When scanning a paragraph in this way, try to follow a Z-shaped pattern 
down and across the page. A scan of the passage from the Ethics would give 
you the words Mistake, Misadventure, and Injury (which, in the Penguin 
edition, are capitalized); the words ignorance, malicious, premeditation, and feelings might also stand out to your eye. Even before reading, then, you know 
that Aristotle will be distinguishing three kinds of errors, and that human 
intention will have something to do with the classification. Now your "slow 
reading" of the passage will probably progress a little more quickly. 
Third: Peter Kump's Rule Three ("The more prior knowledge of the 
subject of a written passage the reader has, the easier it is to read fast") 
should encourage you: serious reading, difficult at the beginning, gets easier 
and easier. The lists in this book are organized chronologically and by subject, so that whether you choose History or Poetry, you'll begin with the 
earliest works on the subject. These are likely to be the most difficult 
because you're not familiar with the conventions of the field, with its peculiar vocabulary, the structure of its arguments, the information it takes for 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 1 
granted. (And neither was anyone else, when those foundational works were 
written.) But as you continue to read books in the same field, you'll find the 
same arguments, the same vocabulary, the same preoccupations, again and 
again. Each time you'll move through them more quickly and with more 
assurance. You will read faster and with greater retention—not because of a 
mechanical trick, but because you are educating your mind. 
THE SECOND STEP: 
PRACTICE THE MECHANICS OF READING 
Did it take you more than one minute to read the diagnostic passage on pages 23—26? 
Extremely slow readers may be victims of poor early teaching. If you were 
taught to read by pure word-recognition methods (in which children learn 
each individual word by sight, rather than being taught how to "sound out" 
the word by pronouncing each letter or combination of letters), you may be 
recognizing the shape of each word as you read. Although many readers are 
able to do this fairly quickly, others can't. And since "sight reading" depends 
on repeated exposure to a word before you can reliably recognize and 
remember it, "sight readers" can have great difficulty with more complex 
reading that contains a number of unfamiliar words. If you are both a slow 
reader and a poor speller, you're probably guessing at the meanings of words 
from their shapes, rather than truly recognizing and understanding them; 
you're unable to spell because you have no memory of the letters in each 
word (instead you're just guessing at the word's meaning because of its 
shape) .You may be able to improve your reading speed by working through 
a remedial phonics text such as Phonics Pathways, which will retrain you to 
read words from left to right, decoding them by sounding them out. This 
will allow you to recognize unfamiliar words more quickly (and will probably improve your spelling as well). Use the first fifteen minutes of your 
8
I have no wish to reopen the phonics versus whole-language debate here; Jessie Wise and I 
treat this at greater length in our book The Well-Trained Mind:A Guide to Classical Education 
at Home. Briefly, though: The best reading programs combine phonetic "decoding"skills (in 
which children are taught the sounds of letters and letter combinations as the first step in reading) with plenty of reading and oral language work ("whole language"techniques). However, 
if you learned to read sometime between 1930 and 1970, you were most likely taught pure 
"sight recognition"with no phonetic decoding at all (and although phonics began to return 
to favor in the late 1960s, plenty of classrooms from 1970 to the present have eliminated phonetic skills completely from their reading programs). If you learned to read through "sight 
methods" and are having trouble reading, the method obviously didn't work for you; you will 
benefit by learning the phonetic decoding skills that you missed back in first grade. 
3 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
scheduled reading time each day to work on remedial phonics skills until 
you finish the book. 
Did you find the vocabulary of the passage overwhelming? A vocabulary-building course will increase your mental store of words and will speed up your 
reading, since you won't have to pause as often to puzzle over unfamiliar 
words. Wordly Wise 3000 (published by the respected educational press Educators Publishing Service) covers three thousand frequently occurring words, 
chosen to bring your vocabulary up to twelfth-grade level. Each lesson 
contains fifteen words, along with exercises aimed to help you use words 
correctly in context. The series begins at primary level and goes through 
high school. Most adult readers should probably start with Book 6 (the ninthgrade book), although you could begin with Book Four (seventh grade) if 
you feel truly ill prepared.There is a shift in difficulty between Books 5 and 
6; the analogies become more difficult, and the reading exercises much more 
complex. 
The Vocabulary from Classical Roots series, also from Educators Publishing 
Service, is a good follow-up to Wordly Wise. As a matter of fact, most readers (not just those doing remedial work) will find this series a wonderful 
help in preparing to read classic literature. Each lesson gives several Greek 
or Latin roots, lists of familiar words using those roots, and lists of unfamiliar words along with exercises in proper use. The five books in the series (A, 
B, C, D, and E) are all on the same level of difficulty, but they progress from 
the most familiar roots to those less frequently used. In Book A, for example, you'll get duo, the Latin root meaning "two," along with duplicity and 
duplicate; in Book E, you'll get umbra, the Latin for "shade, shadow," along 
with the vocabulary words umbrage and adumbrate. 
As with remedial phonics, use the first fifteen minutes of your scheduled 
reading time each day to work on these vocabulary skills. 
Do you want to improve your reading speed? Read the first section of Chapter 3 and practice moving your finger from left to right. Do your eyes tend 
to jump backward from your finger, even when you understand what 
you've already read? If so, you should spend several weeks using your finger 
to read, in order to retrain your eyes to move forward. Remember that it's 
always fine to look back for content—but you don't want your eyes to skip 
backward out of habit. 
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES 
Wordly Wise 3000 (EPS, 2001) can be purchased directly from Educators 
Publishing Service (31 Smith Place, Cambridge, MA 02138-1089; 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J J 
1(800)435-7728; www.epsbooks.com). They run around $9 each, with 
answer keys costing about $2. 
Books Three (sixth grade), Four (seventh grade), and Five (eighth grade) 
Books Six (ninth grade), Seven (tenth grade), Eight (eleventh grade), and 
Nine (twelfth grade) 
Individual answer keys for Books Three—Nine 
Vocabulary from Classical Roots, by Norma Fifer and Nancy Flowers (EPS, 
1990), can be purchased directly from Educators Publishing Service. The 
books are in the same price range as the Wordly Wise series, with answer keys 
slightly more expensive. 
Books A, B, C,D, and E 
Individual answer keys for Books A—E 
J 
Keeping the Journal: 
A Written Record of New Ideas 
Once a day .. . call yourselves to an account what new ideas, what new 
proposition or truth you have gained, what further confirmation of known 
truths, and what advances you have made in any part of knowledge. 
—ISAAC WATTS, 
Improvement of the Mind 
f .^ OR YEARS I'V E read Agatha Christie at bedtime. Christie's prose 
doesn't exactly sing, and by now I know how every single mystery ends. But 
I can read these books over and over again, because I'm using only half my 
brain, while the other half recycles the events of the day and tucks them 
away, one by one. I don't gain much from the book itself, but I sleep well. 
The same half-attentive method of reading dogs me when I turn to serious literature. I read; a door slams; my attention wanders to the door, to the 
window, to undone jobs, to unpaid bills. I am not alone in this; our lives are 
full, and so are our minds. David Denby's lyrical complaint in Great Books is 
true of us all: 
I can no longer submit to fiction ... I read and stop, read and stop, a train halted 
by obstacles on the track, bad weather, power failures. Everyone complains 
that young people, growing up on TV, movies, video games, and rap music, 
lack the patience for long, complex, written narratives, and yet as a child I had 
not watched all that much television, and I had also lost my patience in middle age ... [M]y life had grown much more complex. I was married to a clever 
and formidable woman, and there were two kids running around; I had multiple jobs and a lot more to think about than I had had at eighteen. A much 
larger experience was now casting up its echoes.1 
*David Denby, Great Books: My Adventures with Homer, Rousseau, Woolf, and Other Indestructible 
Writers of the Western World (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996), p. 47. 
(y/i4tifoée& 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 5 
When we sit in front of Plato or Shakespeare or Conrad, "simply reading" isn't enough. We must learn to fix our minds, to organize our reading 
so that we are able to retain the skeleton of the ideas that pass in front of our 
eyes. We must not simply read, Isaac Watts tells us, but "meditate and study," 
an act that "transfers and conveys the notions and sentiments of others to 
ourselves, so as to make them properly our own." 
How is this done? By keeping ajournai to organize your thoughts about 
your reading. What we write, we remember. What we summarize in our 
own words becomes our own. 
For earlier generations, the journal wasn't—as it is in modern times—primarily a tool to reflect on your feelings. Present-day use of the word journal 
tends to imply that you're creating a subjective, intensively inward-focused 
collection of thoughts and musings. Witness, for example, a recent issue of 
the magazine Personal Journaling, which offers ideas and exercises for travel 
journaling ("Which traditions or customs are you comfortable with and 
which make you uneasy? Why?"), dream journaling ("What does this dream 
tell me about the way I treat myself?"), creative journaling ("Focus on a specific topic and write everything you can think of, never lifting your pen."), 
and mind-body journaling ("The wise teacher is within you, and through 
writing you can begin to "hear" her more clearly"). (Personal Journaling also 
tells you how to make decorative handmade paper with newsprint, dryer 
lint, and a blender, should you wish to make your journal an objet d'art as well 
as a diary.) 
But the journal of self-education has a more outward focus. It is modeled 
on the last century's "commonplace book," a looseleaf or bound blank book 
in which readers copied down quotes and snippets that they wanted to 
remember. 
In its simplest form, the commonplace book was a handmade Bartlett's 
Familiar Quotations, a memory aid for the writer. Many commonplace books 
contained nothing but these quotes. They may be instructive for what the 
writer chooses to record; Jefferson's college-days Commonplace Book contains, among other quotations, Euripedes' observation "Alas, no one among 
mortals is free; for either he is the slave of wealth or fortune, or else the populace or legal technicalities compel him to resort to practices that are contrary to his belief." Commonplace books reveal, as Gilbert Chinard remarks 
on Jefferson's own collections, the extent to which "the study of the classics 
was .. . an essential part in the moral foundation of many of the men who 
framed the American institutions."2
 But these traditional commonplace 
2Gilbert Chinard, introduction to The Literary Bible of Thomas Jefferson: His Commonplace Book 
of Philosophers (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1928), p. 4. 
36 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
books contain no musings on the collected quotes, no clue to the writer's 
thoughts as he copied Euripedes or Plato onto the page.The personal aspect 
is missing. 
Occasionally, though, commonplace books took on a more personalized 
form. Their authors carried them around and jotted in them at odd 
moments during the day. The commonplace books gathered reflections, 
scraps of original verse and other creative writing, and summaries of books 
read, as well as the de rigeur bits of copied information. They became artificial memories. 
The journal used for self-education should model itself after this 
expanded type of commonplace book. It is neither an unadorned collection of facts, nor an entirely inward account of what's going on in your 
heart and soul. Rather, the journal is the place where the reader takes 
external information and records it (through the use of quotes, as in the 
commonplace book); appropriates it through a summary, written in the 
reader's own words; and then evaluates it through reflection and personal 
thought. As you read, you should follow this three-part process: jot down 
specific phrases, sentences, and paragraphs as you come across them; when 
you've finished your reading, go back and write a brief summary about 
what you've learned; and then write your own reactions, questions, and 
thoughts. 
In this way, the journal connects objective and subjective learning, an 
ideal described by Bronson Alcott in his own journal of 1834: 
Education is that process by which thought is opened out of the soul, and, 
associated with outward ... things, is reflected back upon itself, and thus made 
conscious of its reality and shape. It is Self-Realization He who is seeking 
to know himself, should be ever seeking himself in external things, and by so 
doing will he be best able to find, and explore his inmost light.3 
The goal of classical self-education is this: not merely to "stuff" facts into 
your head, but to understand them. Incorporate them into your mental framework. Reflect on their meaning for the internal life.The "external things"— 
be they Platonic philosophy, the actions of an Austen heroine, or a political 
biography—make us more conscious of our own "reality and shape." This, 
not mere accumulation, is the goal of self-education.The journal is the place 
where this learning happens. 
3
 Amos Bronson Alcott, The Journals of Bronson Alcott, ed. Odell Shepard (Boston: Little, Brown 
and Co., 1938), p. 43. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 7 
The first step toward understanding is to grasp exactly what is being said, 
and the oldest and most reliable way of grasping information is to put it into 
your own words. To master the content of what you read, summarize. 
Lydia Sigourney advises her young female readers to summarize their 
reading often: 
At the close of every week, abridge in writing, the subjects that you deem 
most valuable Write them neatly in a book kept for that purpose—but not 
in the language of the author Let this be a repository of condensed knowledge, the pure gold of thought To strengthen the memory, the best course 
is not to commit page after page verbatim [as though most of us would!], but 
to give the substance of the author, correcdy and clearly in your own language.4 
The journal should contain, first, the "substance" of what has been read. 
These summaries often provide a jumping-off point for further reflections; E. M. Forster's Commonplace Book is just such an autodidact's journal. 
"Far more than a dictionary-defined compendium of striking 'quotations, 
poems and remarks,' " writes Philip Gardner, the editor of the version of the 
Commonplace Book published after Forster's death, "[I]t provides a commentary—sharp, wry, and frequently very moving—on the second half of 
Forster's life." Forster records snippets of his own reading: 
Proverbs 
He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it 
shall be counted a curse to him. XXVII 14 
As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man. XXVII 19 
Now all is done, save what shall have no end. 
—Shakespeare, Sonnet uo,Tyrwhitt's emendation.5 
He evaluates his reading, recording his criticisms: 
Hedda Gabier fails because nothing of importance has been changed. . . . 
However Ibsen may have known this as well as me and have desired to stage 
absolute unimportance as his heroine. He certainly wishes to show her as 
cowardly, restless, and weak.6 
4
Sigourney, Letters to Young Ladies, pp. 54-55,145. 
5E. M. Forster, Commonplace Book, ed. Philip Gardner (Stanford, Calif: Stanford University 
Press, 1985), p. 139. 
6
Ibid.,p.36. 
38 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
The personal certainly isn't missing in Forster's Commonplace Book. In 1947 
he jots down, apropos of nothing: 
The evening sky behind Fellows' Building. A cone of cloud .. . mottled with 
pink and gold—both faint, and the word mottled is too strong. Immensely 
large aesthetically speaking. I have no idea of its linear measurement.7 
And in 1953, recovering from a visit to the dentist, he writes: 
Writers ought to write and I take up my pen in the hope it may loosen my 
spirit It is 6.45. Feb. 26th Tony Hyndman has been in I was not very 
friendly to him, I did not want to be bothered, and was not warm-hearted. 
. . . It is 7:30. Cannot writers write quicker? I have been "thinking."8 
This is very close to the "creative journaling" of Personal Journaling. But 
more often than not, the personal is anchored to some phrase or idea that 
has struck Forster in his reading. He muses, for example, on a line from 
Thomas Gray: 
When Thomas Gray writes, "I know what it is to lose a person that one's eyes 
and heart have long been used to ..." I recognize an affinity. Laziness and loyalty have a connection.9 
And Forster's methods of summarizing and evaluating his reading exactly 
demonstrate the purpose of the classical journal. In 1942, Forster has just 
finished reading Thomas Hodgkin's Italy and Her Invaders 376-476. His journal entry reads, in part: 
Why did Rome fall? . . . 
Subsidiary causes were 
i. The foundation of Constantinople, due to fear of Persia: danger from the 
north never realised. "It was the diffusion of her vital force over several 
nerve centers, Carthage, Antioch, Alexandria, but above all Constantinople 
that ruined her. Some of the old tree perished." 
ii. Christianity—despite St. Augustine's view. For it opposed the deification 
of the Emperor which consecrated the state... .
I0 
7
Ibid.,p. 174. 
8
Ibid.,p. 192. 
9
Ibid.,pp. 179-80. 
IOIbid.,p.i39. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 9 
He concludes his summary of the reading, and then adds his own thoughts: 
My original impulse in this excursion was the discovery of parallels, then I 
was diverted into interest in the past, now that too is flagging, and I have 
driven myself with difficulty to finish this analysis. My ignorance and the 
powerlessness of knowledge weigh on me...."" 
This is a model of the summarizing that Sigourney recommends. Here 
Forster restates the main points of his reading in his own words, quotes 
word for word where Hodgkin supplies a succinct sentence of his own, 
connects each of Hodgkin s points to the woes of the present day, and then 
adds a heartfelt commentary on his own emotional reactions to the crumpling of great empires. 
Thomas Merton followed a similar strategy in keeping his own notebooks. In The Asian Journal, collected from the notebooks kept during the 
last part of his life, we find, in the span of three pages, quotes copied from 
T. R.V. Murti's The Central Philosophy of Buddhism ("Reflective consciousness is necessarily the consciousness of the false"), a record of Merton's 
morning walk ("I walked and said Lauds under the croptomeria trees on 
Observatory Hill, and the chanting came up strong and clear from below. A 
man was doing vigorous exercises by the shelter that overlooks the valley .. . 
shimmying in the sun"), and Merton's own summary of his reading, incorporating direct quotes ("Conze comments on the fact that communication 
between East and West has not so far done much for philosophy. 'So far 
European and particularly British philosophers have reacted by becoming 
more provincial than ever before' "). 1 2 
Classical self-education demands that you understand, evaluate, and react 
to ideas. In your journal, you will record your own summaries of your reading; this is your tool for understanding the ideas you read. This—the mastery of facts—is the first stage of classical education. 
THE THIRD STEP: PRACTICE TAKING NOTES 
AS YOU WRITE AND THEN SUMMARIZING 
"If we would fix in the memory the discourses we hear," Watts writes, "or 
what we design to speak, let us abstract them into brief compends, and 
n
Ibid.,p. 141. 
I2Thomas Merton, The Asian Journal of Thomas Merton, ed Naomi Burton, Brother Patrick 
Hart, and James Laughlin (New York: New Directions, 1973), pp. 139-41. 
4 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
review them often." As the next step in your self-education, practice this 
skill with this book. 
i. Invest in ajournai: looseleaf notebook, blank book, or other type of 
journal. 
2. Continue to keep to your schedule of reading four times per week. 
Use this time to read Chapter 4, jotting down notes and then writing brief 
summaries. Follow these guidelines: 
a. Write the title of the chapter on the first page of your notebook. 
Read through the entire chapter once without stopping. If any 
particular ideas, phrases, or sentences strike you, go ahead and jot 
them down. 
b. Chapter 4 is divided into three major sections. Try to summarize 
each section in your own words. Ask yourself: What is the most 
important point that the writer makes in this section? If I could 
remember only one thing from this section, what would it be? 
Now, what else does the writer tell me about this important point 
that I'd like to remember? Make the summary for each section a 
separate paragraph. Leave very wide margins (two to three inches) 
on either side of your paragraphs. 
c. When you have done this for the entire chapter, glance back over 
your summary paragraphs. Now write down your reactions to the 
information in each summary. Use the margins of your paper for 
this (a different pen color is also helpful). 
Starting to Read: 
Final Preparations 
If you are fortunate, you encounter a particular teacher who can help, 
yet finally you are alone, going on without further mediation. 
—HAROLD BLOOM, 
How to Read and Why 
'' / 
# ..*"N THE END, there's not much a book can do for you:You must begin 
to read. 
What a book (like this one) can do is hold your hand up to the point 
where you start reading. Most of all, a how-to-read book can assure you that 
the difficulty you have in reading doesn't necessarily reflect on your mental 
ability. Serious reading is hard work. 
This should comfort you. If successful reading is a matter of innate intelligence, you can do little to improve yourself. But a task that is merely difficult can be broken down into small and manageable steps, and mastered 
through diligent effort. Reading the Great Books is no different. 
The initial small step is simple: Rather than making a sweeping determination to tackle the Great Books (all of them), decide to begin on one of 
the reading lists in Part II. As you read each book, you'll follow the pattern 
of the trivium. First you'll try to understand the book's basic structure and 
argument; next, you'll evaluate the book's assertions; finally, you'll form an 
opinion about the book's ideas. 
You'll have to exercise these three skills of reading—understanding, 
analysis, and evaluation—differently for each kind of book. If you want to 
evaluate a history, you must ask whether the historian's conclusions are supported by the historical facts he or she offers, whether there is enough 
information, and whether this information is trustworthy. If you want to 
judge a novel, you should instead ask whether it leads you along a path 
whose end is different than its beginning, whether its characters have moti-
&&et/ide& 
4 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
vations and ambitions and hang-ups that are recognizably human, and 
whether those motivations and ambitions and hang-ups give rise to the 
novel's crises and situations. 
These two sets of criteria stem from the same general impulse: to ask 
whether the work is accurate. Is it right? (Or, to use Mortimer Adler's more 
loaded word, is it true?) But they are as different in practice as the criteria 
used to judge a Renaissance portrait and those used to evaluate a work of 
twentieth-century art. 
So consider the following as general principles for reading, principles that 
will be expanded and altered in the chapters that follow. 
i. When you first read through a book, don't feel that you have to grasp 
completely every point that the writer is making. If you find yourself puzzled by a certain section, or not completely sure what the author means by 
a particular term, turn down the corner of the page and keep on going. 
You'll have a chance to come back to that confusing section later on. The 
secret to reading a difficult book is simply this: Keep reading.You don't have 
to "get it all" the very first time through. 
In the case of fiction, you may feel overwhelmed by a welter of unfamiliar names, but if you persevere (without feeling that you have to stop and 
sort everything out immediately), you'll find that by the third or fourth 
chapter you have come to know the central characters, almost imperceptibly; those who are not important will have faded offstage. In a work of serious nonfiction, you will become more familiar as the chapters progress with 
the author's favorite term and phrases; you'll begin to gather a broad, vague, 
even inarticulate idea of what he's up to. Don't stop to look up unfamiliar 
words unless you absolutely have to. Don't use scholarly editions, packed 
with critical footnotes that stop you dead every time you hit a little superscript number. Don't fret over missing the nuances. Get the big picture, the 
broad sweep, the beginning, middle, and end. "Understanding half of a really 
tough book," writes Mortimer Adler in his classic How to Read a Book, "is 
much better than not understanding it at all, which will be the case if you 
allow yourself to be stopped by the first difficult passage you come to." In 
truth, it's impossible to fully understand difficult passages until you know 
how they fit into the rest of the writer's schema. 
So the first stage of reading should be a liberating one. Just read, and keep 
reading. 
Your first reading is your handshake with the book; your goal is to finish 
with a surface acquaintance that will deepen into true understanding as you 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 43 
read again to evaluate and analyze. If you don't understand what you're 
reading, don't stop; scribble a question mark in the margin, and keep going. 
You may well find that the earlier chapters of a book, confusing on first 
reading, suddenly make sense to you as you reach the book's middle or end. 
2. Underline in your books, jot notes in the margins, and turn the corners of your pages down. Public education is a beautiful dream, but public 
classrooms too often train students not to mark, write in, disfigure, or in any 
way make books permanently their own. You're a grownup now, so buy 
your own books if you possibly can. The lists recommend affordable paperback editions whenever available. 
If you know that you can turn down the corner of a confusing page and 
keep reading, or write a question in the margin and continue on, you'll find 
it easier to keep going on the first reading. If you have to use library books, 
invest in adhesive-backed notes (such as Post-its) and use them to mark 
pages that you'll want to return to; scribble your notes and questions on 
them. Bits of paper tend to fall out, though, and any good book will soon 
look like a papery porcupine. Defacing your book is much more efficient. 
3. When you first begin to read a book, read the title page, the copy on 
the back cover, and the table of contents. This puts you "in the picture" 
before you begin to read. Do not automatically read the preface. In the case 
of a nonfiction book, the preface may set the book in context for you, summarize the argument, or tell you just why the book is so important—certainly valuable information to have before you begin to read. But the 
preface can also give you an interpretation before you even read the book— 
something to be avoided. For example, E.V. Rieu's preface to his translation 
of the Iliad sums up the plot, tells you about Homer's use of delayed action, 
and explains briefly how the reader should understand Homer's similes and 
epithets. This makes the reading of the Iliad more rewarding, not less. But 
Anita Brookner's introduction to the Scribner edition of Edith Wharton's 
The House of Mirth, excellent though it is in itself, gives you a thumbnail 
sketch of the heroine's character and motivation—something you should do 
yourself before turning to an expert to do it for you. 
Generally, you should read the preface only if it has been written by the 
author (or translator) personally. If the preface or introduction was written 
by someone else, skip it. Read the first chapter of the book instead, and if 
you aren't lost or confused, keep on going; save the reading of the preface 
4 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
until you've finished reading the book itself. If the first chapter befuddles 
you, go back and read the preface before going on. 
4. Don't take extensive notes on a first reading. First-reading notes tend 
to be far too detailed. You'll find yourself writing down many observations 
that seem important but later prove to be irrelevant, and all the note taking 
will slow you down. Instead, stop at the end of each chapter (or substantial 
section) to jot down a sentence—two at the most—in your journal. These 
sentences should summarize the chapter's content, main assertion, or most 
important event. But remember:You're constructing a broad outline, not a 
specific one. You're laying down the strokes of a coloring page, not drawing 
a careful sketch. Leave out details, even the important ones: "Paris and 
Menelaus decide to fight a duel to settle the war, but when Menelaus gets 
the upper hand, Aphrodite whisks Paris back to his own safe bedroom" is a 
good first-reading summary of the third chapter of the Iliad, even though it 
leaves out plenty of important details. (These summaries also make it easier 
to come back to a long and complicated book if your reading schedule has 
been disrupted and you can't remember what happened to Don Quixote in 
Chapter 7 by the time you reach Chapter 43.) 
5. As you read, use your journal to jot down questions that come to 
your mind. Record your disagreements or agreements with the writer. 
Scribble down any reflections or connected thoughts that the book brings 
to your mind. These questions, disagreements, and reflections should be 
visually distinct from your summary of the book's content. You can write 
your summaries in a narrow column down the middle of your journal page 
and jot your remarks on the margins, or use one color pen for summary 
sentences and another for reflections, or keep separate pages for summaries 
and remarks. Try to note page numbers beside your comments, since you 
may want to go back and reread some sections of the book later on. 
6. When you've finished your first reading, go back and assemble your 
summary sentences into an informal outline, an initial "table of contents." 
You don't yet have enough information to make a real outline, with some 
points made subordinate to others; all you need to do is arrange the sentences in order. Now give the book a title (four to seven words) and a subtitle. These won't be like the titles on the jacket, which were selected at 
least in part for eye-friendly euphony. Instead, the title should be a phrase 
that describes the book's main subject, while the subtitle should sum up 
the book's most important points. Aim for a title and subtitle like those of 
the seventeenth century: The pilgrim's progress from this world to that which is 
to come: delivered under the similitude of a dream, wherein is discovered the manner of his setting out, his dangerous journey, and safe arrival at the desired country. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 45 
Seventeenth-century writers knew that a title which told the reader 
exactly what was about to happen was the best way to guarantee understanding. So give your book a short title—three or four words that seem 
to sum up the topic—and then write a subtitle that explains exactly what 
the book does. 
Now you've completed the first and most intimidating task of the reader: 
You've gotten all the way through the book.Your first reading has given you 
a basic understanding of the book's parts and how they fit together. You're 
ready for the second and third stages of inquiry. 
This initial, grammar-stage reading of a book will lead you into the next 
step: evaluation. But although you'll follow the same basic procedure as in 
your grammar-stage reading of each book, the second stage of inquiry—the 
logic-stage evaluation of a book—differs enormously from genre to genre. 
Poetry and history may not be worlds apart, but they're certainly located in 
different hemispheres. 
The reader needs to approach each kind of book—each list in Chapters 5 
through 9—with a distinct set of questions, a unique expectation. But the 
logic-stage procedure doesn't change. No matter what questions you ask, you'll 
always progress into the second stage of inquiry by doing the following: 
1. Go back and reread those sections of the book that you identified as 
difficult. Can you make better sense of them, now that you've arrived at the 
book's end? Look back through your written comments: do they tend to 
cluster around certain parts of the book? If so, glance back through those 
pages as well. Finally, reread your summaries. Can you identify which chapter contains the book's climax, the center of the writer's argument, or the 
author's own summary of his work? Reread that particular section of the 
book as well. 
2. Dig deeper into the book's structure: Answer questions about how 
the writer has put his words together. The chapters that follow suggest questions for each genre. Jot your answers down in your notebook. Cite particular sentences, even paragraphs. These notes can be more detailed than 
those first-reading notes, since by this point you should have a clearer idea 
of which parts of the book are most worthy of your attention. 
3. Ask: Why did the author write this book? What did he or she set out 
to do? Lay out facts, convince you of the truth in a set of deductions, give 
you an emotional experience? (We'll discuss this for each genre separately.) 
4. Now ask: How well did the writer succeed? Did he successfully carry 
out his intention? If not, why? Where did he fall short? Are his facts 
46 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
unproven, his proofs inadequate, or his emotional scenes flat? What parts of 
the book did I find convincing; which ones left me unmoved? 
As you continue to use your journal for this process, the pages will begin to 
reflect not only the content of the books you're reading, but the development of your own thought as you grapple with the books' ideas. Remember that the goal of grammar-stage reading is to know what the author says; 
the goal of logic-stage inquiry is to understand why and how. 
The final stage of reading—your rhetoric-stage pass through the book—has 
a third goal. Now you know what, why and how.The final question is: So what? 
What does this writer want me to do? 
What does this writer want me to believe? 
What does this writer want me to experience? 
Am I convinced that I must do, or believe, what the writer wants me to 
do or believe? 
Have I experienced what the writer wants me to experience? 
If not, why? 
Uninformed opinions are easy to come by. But thinking through someone else's argument, agreeing with it for specific, well-articulated reasons, or 
disagreeing with it because you're able to find holes in the writer's argument, or because the writer left out facts which he should have considered 
and weren't—that's difficult. The rhetoric stage follows the logic stage for 
this very reason. The good reader bases his opinion on intelligent analysis, 
not mere unthinking reaction. 
The journal is an excellent logic-stage tool. But in the rhetoric stage of 
inquiry, you need something more. Rhetoric is the art of clear, persuasive 
communication, and persuasion always involves two people. In your case, 
one of these people is the book's author: The book is communicating an 
idea to you, persuading you of something. But for you to articulate your 
own ideas clearly back to the book, you need to bring someone else into 
the process. 
How can you do this? In her Letters to Young Ladies, Lydia Sigourney 
praises the virtues of "purposeful conversation," talk centered around particular ideas. In the nineteenth century, women often met in "weekly societies" to discuss their reading—the forerunners of today's popular book 
groups. These discussions, Sigourney suggests, are essential to proper selfeducation, since they "serve to fix knowledge firmly in the memory."1 
The problem with book groups (as you know if you've ever been in 
Sigourney, Letters toYoung Ladies,p. 147. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 4 7 
one) is that the readers who attend them don't always read the book carefully (or at all), and unless someone takes a dictatorial hand during discussion, it's apt to wander off fairly quickly into unrelated chat. For the project 
of self-education, it's best to find one other person who will agree to read 
through the Great Books lists with you and then talk with you about what 
both of you have read. 
This reading partner, indispensable in the final stage of reading, can also 
be useful to you in the first two. During the grammar and logic stages, your 
partner provides you with some accountability—if you've agreed to finish 
the first reading of a book by a particular deadline and you know someone 
else will be checking on you, you're much more likely to make good use of 
your own reading time to actually finish the book. 
During your rhetoric-stage inquiry, when you'll be looking back 
through the book for answers to questions about the writer's ideas, your 
reading partner can talk to you about those ideas. Perhaps something you 
found troublesome, or illogical, was entirely clear to your reading partner; 
discuss the differences, and discover which one of you is correct. You may 
discover that the disagreement is only an apparent one, brought about by 
the use of different words for the same concept. Or you may find that an 
apparent agreement between the two of you dissolves during discussion, 
perhaps because you are using the same words to represent very different 
things. A reading partner forces you to use words precisely and define your 
terms. 
Ideally, your reading partner will read at more or less the same speed as 
you do, and can devote the same hours to the project of reading. But it isn't 
necessary for you to come from similar backgrounds, educational or otherwise. As a matter of fact, a reading partner with a very different background 
can help you to think more precisely, as you discover that you need to 
explain, clearly, ideas that you've always taken for granted. 
If you don't have a reading partner who can meet with you face to face, 
you can conduct discussions by letter (or e-mail, as long as you treat these 
dialogues as formal, requiring proper vocabulary, grammar, spelling, and 
punctuation, not resorting to the shorthand of e-communication). In 1841, 
Thomas Jefferson, obviously feeling isolated on his Virginia mountaintop, 
wrote to John Adams that Plato is 
one of the race of genuine sophists, who has escaped the oblivion of his 
brethren, first, by the elegance of his diction, but chiefly, by the adoption and 
incorporation of his whimsies into the body of artificial Christianity. His 
foggy mind is forever presenting the semblances of objects which, half seen 
through a mist, can be defined neither in form nor dimensions. ... But why 
48 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
am I dosing you with these antediluvian topics? Because I am glad to have 
some one to whom they are familiar, and who will not receive them as if 
dropped from the moon.2 
Like-minded neighbors are providential, but there are advantages to conducting rhetoric-stage discussions by letter. You can file your letters and 
their answers as informal essays, and glance back through them to refresh 
your memory about the books you've read (and publish them once you 
become president). 
A NOTE ON EVALUATION 
The chapters that follow will give you guidance in how to read different 
kinds of literature: what structural elements to look for, what techniques to 
keep in mind, and above all, what questions you should ask of each kind of 
book. Your answers to these questions show your final understanding of the 
books you will read. 
So how do you know whether you've gotten the answers right? 
Getting "the answer" isn't exactly the point of the exercise. In classical 
education, the question-and-answer process is used as a teaching method; 
today, we call this "Socratic dialogue." A classical schoolmaster teaches the 
humanities, not through lectures that tell the student exactly what to think 
about each book, but through asking selected questions that direct the student's thoughts in the right way. The purpose of answering the questions 
isn't to provide the "right answer," as you would in a fill-in-the-blank test. 
You answer them as part of your effort to think about books. 
This doesn't mean that you won't ever come up with a completely offbase (or what academics call "perverse") answer. Ideally, you would have a 
classical schoolmaster on hand to listen to your answers and gently steer you 
away from dead ends, toward more productive ways of thinking. In the 
process of self-education, you have two safeguards: your reading partner, 
who will listen to your ideas and tell you whether they're coherent; and the 
practice of quoting. Whenever you begin to answer one of the questions in 
the following chapters (for example, in the chapter on autobiography, "For 
what part of his—or her—life does the writer apologize?"), always quote a 
sentence or two directly from the work that you're examining.This helps to 
anchor your ideas, and forces you to be specific instead of abstract (it's rela2
Thomas Jefferson, Crusade Against Ignorance: Thomas Jefferson on Education, ed. Gordon C. Lee 
(New York: Columbia University Teacher's College Bureau of Publications, io6i),pp. IIO-II. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 4 g 
tively easy to make big, general statements, but specifics require thought) 
and protects you from coming up with "perverse readings." (On the other 
hand, "perverse" is often in the eye of the beholder, as a glance at any recent 
journal of literary criticism will suggest.) 
Although you should always try to form your own ideas about a book before 
reading what others think, you can "check up" on yourself by skimming an 
essay or two of criticism that deals with your reading. Generally, the Internet 
is not a good place to do this; there's much more chaff than wheat online. 
There are, however, several Web sites that offer plot outlines of great books 
along with very brief essays that survey critical issues: try www.pinkmonkey 
.com and www.sparknotes.com.At www.jollyroger.com, a Web site devoted 
to the discussion of Great Books, you can post your ideas on message boards 
and wait for reactions—although, again, you have no way of knowing how 
"expert" other participants in the discussion might be. 
If you live near enough to a college or university to use its library, search 
its holdings (you can do this on line, in most cases, by going to the university Web site and looking for the "Library" link). Look for collections of 
essays on a particular book, rather than book-length critical works, which 
are dense and complex. The "Modern Critical Essays" series, edited by 
Harold Bloom (19^4: Modern Critical Essays; Anna Karenina: Modern Critical 
Essays, and so on) contains essays by a number of well-known critics and 
will give you a good overview of the critical take on a work. 
If you continue to wonder whether your ideas are valid or completely off 
base, you can use a college or university in another way. Call the department 
secretary (the English department for novels, autobiographies, poetry, and 
drama; the history department for history) and ask whether you could make 
an appointment to visit a faculty member during office hours.Tell the secretary which book you want to discuss; she should be able to direct you to 
the right instructor. Have your ideas written out before you go (this doesn't 
need to be a formal "paper," just a string of paragraphs expressing your 
thoughts).Tell the instructor you've been reading Moby-Dick, or the autobiography of Harriet Jacobs, describe your own ideas, and ask what you've 
missed. Don't overuse this resource (you're not paying tuition, after all), but 
in most cases an instructor will respond graciously to one or two requests 
for help. Universities, particularly public ones, do have an obligation to 
"town" as well as to "gown," and asking for an appointment or two is not 
the same as asking for regularly weekly tutorials. 
College instructors are generally overworked; you'll get a better response 
if you call during the summer or over holidays. (And don't ask for appointments right at the beginning, middle, or end of a semester, when new class 
syllabi, midterms, and finals fill every instructor's horizon.) 
5 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
A NOTE ON THE LISTS THAT FOLLOW 
The lists that follow allow you to read chronologically through five different types of literature: fiction; autobiography; history and politics; drama; 
and poetry. 
When you read chronologically, you reunite two fields that should never 
have been separated in the first place: history and literature. To study literature is to study what people thought, did, believed, suffered for, and argued 
about in the past; this is history. And although we do learn from archaeological discoveries, our primary source of information about former times 
has always been the writings of people who lived in the past. History can't 
be detached from the study of the written word. Nor should literature be 
removed from its historical context. A novel can tell you more about a 
writer's times than a history textbook; an autobiography reveals the soul of 
an entire society, not just the interior life of an individual man or woman. 
The sciences suffer when they are treated as a clear lens into "truth," because 
the theory of the biologist or astronomer or physicist has as much to do 
with the scientist's society—and the questions that society is asking—as it 
has to do with pure discovery. 
Writers build on the work of those who have gone before them, and 
chronological reading provides you with a continuous story. What you learn 
from one book will reappear in the next. But more than that: You'll find 
yourself following a story that has to do with the development of civilization itself. When you read through the poetry list, for example, you'll begin 
with the Epic of Gilgamesh, progress on through the Odyssey, the Inferno, 
John Donne, William Blake, Walt Whitman, T. S. Eliot, Robert Frost, and 
Langston Hughes (among others). The structure of the poetry will change 
as each poet moves beyond what former writers have done. But beyond 
these technical differences, the concerns of the poets shift and change as the 
world itself hurtles toward modernity: away from the nature of heroism and 
the quest for eternal life, toward the difficulties of simple existence in a 
chaotic and planless world. When you've finished with this particular list, 
you've done more than read poetry.You have learned something about the 
spiritual evolution of the West. 
Although you can choose any of the lists to begin with, they are arranged 
from the least intimidating form of reading (the novel) on up to the most 
intimidating (poetry, difficult because of its highly stylized language). The 
reading techniques suggested for some of the later chapters also build on 
techniques described earlier. So if you want to skip the fiction list and go 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 5 J 
straight to autobiography and politics, consider reading through my introduction to the fiction list first. 
Do not feel bound to read every book on the list. If you read only two or 
three books on each list, you're likely to miss most of the benefits of reading chronologically. But if you simply cannot wade through a book after a 
good solid try, put it down and go on to the next book on the list. Don't 
jettison the whole project because you can't stand Paradise Lost. Even literary scholars have books that they have never managed to get all the way 
through. My bête noire is Moby-Dick; I know it's one of the great works of 
American literature, but I have made at least eight runs at it during my adult 
life and have never managed to get past midpoint. I even took an entire 
graduate seminar on Melville, did a presentation, and got an A without finishing the book. (Which says something about the state of graduate education, but that's another topic.) 
Some books speak to us at one time of life and are silent at another. If a 
book remains voiceless to you, put it down and read the next book on the 
list. 
You don't have to progress all the way through grammar-stage reading, 
logic-stage inquiry, and rhetoric-stage discussion for every book. If a book 
enthralls you, linger over it. If you just barely make it through the first reading and close it with relief, there's no reason to feel that you must go on to 
the next stage of inquiry. 
Many of the books on these lists are available in multiple editions. The 
"Best Edition" recommendations in the lists identify those editions that 
combine readability (decent-sized fonts that don't offend the eye), affordability (so that you can buy the books and write in them), and, in most cases, 
an absence of critical commentary. (Footnotes and interpretations at best 
distract you from the book's actual content, and at worst give you the wrong 
interpretation of a book's meaning before you've had a chance to think 
about it yourself). 
A final disclaimer: List making is a dangerous occupation. No list of 
"Great Books" is canonical, and all lists are biased; they reflect the interests 
of the person who drew them up. These particular lists are not meant in any 
way to be comprehensive. They do not even include all of the "greatest" 
works in each field. Rather, they are designed to introduce readers to the 
study of a particular area of thought. In some cases, I have included books 
because of their popularity or influence, not because they are the "best"; 
Hitler's autobiography, Mein Kampf, is unsatisfying as autobiography and 
irrational as political philosophy, and Betty Friedan's Feminine Mystique has 
enormous flaws in the way it handles historical data. But Friedan's book 
5 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
started a revolution, and Hitler's started a war. In both cases, these books are 
important because of their cultural influence; they caused readers to look at 
American marriages, or the problem of national identity, with new interest. 
Their popularity is part of the history that you are studying when you read 
chronologically. 
You should feel free to add to the lists or to subtract from them. They are 
intentionally short; expand them. They may not include your favorite 
author; pencil him or her in. They may include works that you think are 
trivial or offensive; cross those off. 
Make the lists your own. Above all, don't feel that you need to write the 
list maker and complain. 
THE FOURTH STEP: PRACTICING 
GRAMMAR-STAGE READING SKILLS 
Six principles govern the "first stage" of reading: 
i. Plan on reading each book more than once. 
2. Underline or mark passages that you find interesting or confusing.Turn 
down the corners of difficult sections; jot your questions in the margin. 
3. Before you begin, read the title page, the copy on the back, and the 
table of contents. 
4. At the end of each chapter or section, write down a sentence or two 
that summarizes the content. Remember not to include details (this will 
come later). 
5. As you read, use your journal to jot down questions that come to 
your mind. 
6. Assemble your summary sentences into an informal outline, and then 
give the book a brief title and an extensive subtitle. 
If you completed The Third Step, you've already practiced some of these 
skills in summarizing and reacting to Chapter 4. Now use all of the principles of grammar-stage reading on the first ten chapters of Don Quixote. This 
massive novel is the first work on the Great Books list in the next chapter. 
Its length may be intimidating, but a first reading of its opening chapters 
will reassure you: the story is engaging, and the style accessible. 
1. Read the title page, back cover, and table of contents. (I recommend 
the clear, affordable Penguin Classics edition, translated by J. M. Cohen, or 
the abridged version done by Walter Starkie.) 
2. In the case of Don Quixote, the preface is written by the translator; 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 5 3 
read through it and note down in your journal, under the heading "Preface," any important points that you'd like to remember. 
3. Read the author's prologue. Summarize its main points in two or 
three sentences. 
4. Read Chapters I-IO. At the end of each chapter, write down two or 
three sentences that will remind you exactly what happened. If you find 
yourself particularly interested in a passage, bracket it and turn the corner of 
your page down. Jot any questions or remarks into the margins of your 
journal. 
5. Now go back and make your own table of contents, using your summary sentences from Chapters 1—10. You'll probably want to boil each 
summary down into a single sentence: what's the central event in each chapter? This should become your chapter title for the table of contents. 
6. If this were the entire story of Don Quixote, what would you title it? 
What would your subtitle be? 

PAR T 
JUMPING 
INTO THE 
GREAT 
CONVERSATION 

s 
The Story of People: 
Reading; through History with the Novel 
In a certain village in La Mancha, which I do not wish to name, there lived 
not long ago a gentleman. 
A throng of bearded men, in sad-colored garments and gray, steeple-crowned 
hats, intermixed with women, some wearing hoods, and others bareheaded, 
was assembled in front of a wooden edifice, the door of which was heavily 
timbered with oak, and studded with iron spikes. 
Call me Ishmael. 
The cold passed reluctantly from the earth, and the retiring fogs revealed an 
army stretched out on the hills, resting. 
Mother died today. Or, maybe, yesterday; I can't be sure. 
Many years later, as he faced the firing squad, Colonel Aureliano Buendia was 
to remember that distant afternoon when his father took him to discover ice. 
EADING THE FIRST words of a novel is like glimpsing the first 
crack of light along the edge of an opening door. What's inside that invisible room? The reader leans forward, waiting for each detail to take its proper 
place in the whole.The puzzling pattern just inside the door turns out to be 
the edge of a screen; the odd dark shape on the floor develops into the 
shadow of an end table. Finally the door swings open. The reader steps over 
the threshold, into another world. 
Some doors open quickly. That soberly clad throng of bearded men and 
hooded women are clustered around a Boston jail, waiting for Hester 
Prynne—the heroine of Nathaniel Hawthorne's 1850 tale of festering guilt, 
(y/i*&foée& 
58 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
The Scarlet Letter—to walk out with her baby in her arms.The summer grass 
is already warm. The bright sunlight falls incongruously over the ironbanded, rust-streaked boards of the prison. A wild rosebush grows at the 
front gate, pink blossoms startling against the weathered wood. 
The resting army of Stephen Crane's The Red Badge of Courage (1895) will 
soon rise and shake itself. Soldiers in blue coats quarrel, wash their shirts, 
huddle over campfires. The roads of liquid mud begin to dry under the 
morning sun. A young private lies on his bed, the smoke from his badly 
tended fire wreathing around him. Sunlight turns the canvas roof of his tent 
a bright, diffuse yellow. 
Both of these scenes are as clear and immediate as a painting: Read the 
first paragraphs of either book, and find yourself already over the threshold. 
But other doors creak open more slowly.The narrator of Albert Camus's 1942 
novel The Stranger doesn't know exactly when his mother died.The telegram 
from the Home for the Aged isn't specific. But the matter doesn't occupy his 
mind for more than a moment or two. His preparations for the funeral are 
sketchy; he almost misses his bus; when he arrives at the Home for the Aged, 
the warden shows him into the room where his mother's body lies—but he 
doesn't bother to look at her face. Why? What's happening? The reader has 
to suspend these questions, accepting each new bit of information as it drops 
carelessly from the narrator's thoughts, waiting for the jagged pieces to assemble themselves—late in the book—into a recognizable scene. And Gabriel 
Garcia Mârquez's One HundredYears of Solitude (1967) is even more leisurely, 
leaping from the colonel's imminent death by firing squad back to the village of Macondo and its unhurried patterns of daily life, back in a distant 
time when the "world was so recent that many things lacked names, and in 
order to indicate them it was necessary to point."When will we get back to 
the colonel's execution? Eventually. (Maybe.) Have patience. 
In earlier novels, the doors swing wide almost at once; as the twenty-first 
century draws nearer, the doors begin to stick, drag open more slowly, a thin 
millimeter at a time. Even so, you might notice an odd resemblance 
between the first line—the famous opening words from Don Quixote, initially published in Spanish in 1604—and the opening lines from a much 
later novel, Italo Calvino's 1972 novel-within-a-novel-within-a-novel, If on 
a winter's night a traveler. 
You are about to begin reading Italo Calvino's new novel, If on a winter's night 
a traveler. Relax. Concentrate. Dispel every other thought. Let the world 
around you fade.I 
I
ltalo Calvino, If on a winter's night a traveler, trans. William weaver (New York: Harcourt Brace 
and Co., I99i),p. 3. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D S 9 
All of the opening lines draw you into a new world. But only Cervantes 
and Calvino remind you, as you step over the threshold, that the other world, 
the one behind you, has never gone away; only Cervantes and Calvino 
remind you as soon as you begin reading, "This is a book. Only makebelieve. Remember?" 
Between 1604 and 1972, we have come full circle.This, in a nutshell, is the 
history of the novel. 
Every novel is governed by conventions—those expectations which the 
reader brings to a book. Some conventions are visual. If you pick up a 
paperback with a pink cover and a half-naked hero on the cover, you expect 
to read something along the lines of "Evangeline paused at the top of the 
stairs, gathering the folds of her cream muslin gown around her slim 
ankles," not "On an exceptionally hot evening early in July a young man 
came out of the garret in which he lodged in S. Place and walked slowly, as 
though in hesitation, toward K. bridge."2 
But novels are also governed by conventions of language. A novel that 
begins "My father had a small estate in Nottinghamshire; I was the third of 
five sons. He sent me to Emanuel College in Cambridge at fourteen years 
old, where I resided three years" is telling you, the reader: This is a serious and 
trustworthy account. See how many careful details I'm giving you? On the other 
hand, a book that starts out, "It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks 
were striking thirteen," is giving you a completely different verbal cue: This 
book is not about the world as we know it. 
The well-trained reader shouldn't assume that writers will always use 
those conventions with a straight face. That serious and trustworthy narrator who tells you that his father "had a small estate in Nottinghamshire" is 
named Gulliver; next, he's going to tell you about his voyages to Lilliput, 
where he's captured by people who are six inches tall, and to Laputa, where 
the natives are so absorbed in thought that visitors have to smack them on 
the head in order to begin a conversation. In Gulliver's Travels, Jonathan Swift 
uses the conventions of an earlier form of literature, the travelogue, to mock 
the conventions of his own society. But you won't be able to appreciate 
Swift's deliberate misuse of careful, verifying detail unless you already know 
what a travelogue is. This brief (and selective) history of the novel will give 
you a basic framework of noveHstic conventions—so that you can spot them 
when writers use and change them. 
2
This is the first line of Fyodor Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment, translated by Constance 
Garnett. 
6 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
A TEN-MINUTE HISTORY OF THE NOVEL 
Cleopatra and Caesar didn't amuse themselves with novels in their spare 
time, because the long story written in prose didn't exist in ancient times. 
The novel as we know it today emerged in the eighteenth century, in the 
hands of Daniel Defoe, Samuel Richardson, and Henry Fielding. Defoe 
borrowed the conventions of the traveler's tale and produced Robinson Crusoe; Richardson used the traditional "epistolary" form (a set of letters written by a character) and turned it into Pamela. Fielding, a playwright, found 
his style cramped by the severe new laws against on-stage obscenity; he 
wrote Joseph Andrews instead. (The "lewd passages" of Joseph Andrews are 
practically invisible to modern eyes, but the story certainly couldn't have 
been staged in eighteenth-century London.) 
These three stories used old conventions but filled them with something 
new: a glance into the internal life of an individual person. Before the eighteenth century, long stories written in prose featured entire chessboards full 
of static characters, shuffled through series of events in order to tell the story 
of a nation, explain an idea, or illustrate a set of virtues (as in Spenser's The 
Faerie Queene). But Defoe, Richardson, and Fielding produced a new kind 
of book: the Book of the Person. 
They weren't the first. Over in Spain, a century and a half before Defoe, 
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra had already written the first Book of the Person: the story of Don Quixote, the gentleman of La Mancha who decided 
to become a knight errant. But Cervantes was a lone genius. Defoe, Fielding, and Richardson together began a literary movement that flowered, fullblown, into a new kind of literature: the prose narrative that explores the 
interior life of a character. 
This new form, the "novel," had to compete with another, less respectable 
literary form, the "romance." The romance was roughly equivalent to the 
modern soap opera. Romances, in the words of one eighteenth-century 
critic, involved "exalted personages" in "improbable or impossible situations." Romances were light and escapist, and were thus reading suitable 
only for women. (Conventional wisdom held that women's brains weren't 
up to grappling with "real life" anyway, so they might as well read fantasies.) 
Romance reading was not a manly and respectable pastime. 
Novelists, on the other hand, wanted to be taken very seriously indeed. 
Novels dealt with real people in familiar situations; as Samuel Johnson wrote 
in 1750, novelists tried to "exhibit life in its true state, diversified only by accidents that daily happen in the world, and influenced by passions and quali-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 6 1 
ties which are really to be found in conversing with mankind."3
 But eighteenthcentury readers were a little confused by this distinction between the tawdry 
"romance" and the noble "novel"—and novelists such as Swift, who insisted 
on trotting his hero through fantastic landscapes, didn't improve matters. For 
decades, novels came in for a large share of the general disdain that educated 
readers felt for romances. Eighteenth-century intellectuals moaned about the 
corrupting influence of novels in much the same way that today's organicfood zealots trumpet the dangers of refined sugar. Clergy warned their flocks 
that novel reading would produce an increase in prostitution, adultery, and 
(according to the bishop of London in 1789) earthquakes. 
Yet the novel prospered. Defoe, Richardson, and Fielding had produced 
their innovations during a time when the individual self, with all its traumas 
and dilemmas, was of great interest to the public at large. Thanks to the 
Protestant Reformation, the soul (at least in England and America, the 
sources of all the eighteenth-century and most of the nineteenth-century 
novels on our list) was imagined as a lone entity, making its solitary way 
through a vast and confusing landscape. John Bunyan's Christian, called by 
Evangelist to forsake his doomed city and find the wicker gate, is called 
alone. He has to put his fingers in his ears and run away from his wife and 
children to find salvation, separating himself from every human tie in order 
to unite himself with God. 
Interest in the private self was on the upswing, impelled not only by 
Protestantism but by capitalism, which encouraged each person to think of 
himself (or herself) as an individual, able to rise up through society's levels 
toward wealth and leisure. The self was no longer part of a rigid, unshifting 
feudal system, with responsibilities beginning at birth and never changing 
thereafter. The self was free. 
Reams have been written on this subject, but for our purposes it's enough 
to know that this sense of an individual self with a private internal life was 
central to all the major developments of modern Western life: Enlightenment 
thought, the Protestant religion, the development of capitalism, and (of 
course) the novel. Novelists celebrated the individual: Charlotte Bronte's tortured and passionate heroes; Jane Austen's heroines, maneuvering through a 
society that both protects and hampers them; Nathaniel Hawthorne's tortured, adulterous clergyman. And the public bought, and read. 
Popularity is always a double-edged sword, though. The intellectual elite 
had already been suspicious of the novel, because of its identification with 
the "romance." Now they were doubly suspicious. After all, books that 
3
Samuel Johnson, "On Fiction," Rambler, no. 4, March 31,1750. 
62 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
everyone reads can't really be worthy of attention by the most educated. 
(Call it the Oprah effect.) To make things worse, this public readership was 
mostly female, since middle-class women had the money to buy novels and 
the leisure to read them, but not the Latin and Greek necessary to appreciate the sterner, more manly "classics." Novels, sniffed the scholar Charles 
Lamb were the "scanty intellectual viands of the whole female reading public." (Lamb is now primarily remembered as a reteller of Shakespeare for 
children, which serves him right.) 
How did novelists fight back? By playing up their connection with real 
life. Fantastic tales were scorned. Stories about reality gained critical acclaim. 
Fantastic tales didn't disappear, but they were relegated to the scorned 
realm of the popular. In the nineteenth century, the soap opera of choice 
was the "Gothic novel," a story of mystery and vague supernatural threat, set 
in fantastic and menacing places (or in central Europe, which, for most 
readers, amounted to the same thing). Gothic heroines languished in ruined 
castles, threatened by ancient spells, insane wives, and mysterious noblemen 
who avoid sunlight and mirrors. Here is Emily of the wildly popular The 
Mysteries of Udolpho: plucky but not too bright, wandering through the 
strange echoing castle of Count Morano. Since she's all alone in the dark, 
she decides that this would be a good time to peer beneath the black veil 
that covers a mysterious picture in a deserted room. "She paused again," the 
narrator tells us breathlessly, "and then, with a timid hand, lifted the veil; but 
instantly let it fall—perceiving that what it had concealed was no picture, 
and, before she could leave the chamber, she dropped senseless on the floor." 
A few brave novelists—notably Hawthorne, who could never resist a touch 
of supernatural horrors, and Emily Brontë, who had a weakness for ghosts 
at windows—borrowed Gothic elements to jazz up their tales of adulterous 
Puritans and unhappy moor residents. But most serious writers rejected the 
fantastic in favor of the real. The novel even developed a social conscience. 
Charles Dickens and his American counterpart, Harriet Beecher Stowe, used 
their stories to kick against the injustices of a market economy that built 
wealth on the backs of the weak; Dickens protested English society's use of 
children for labor, while Stowe s Uncle Tom's Cabin put a human face on the 
slave labor that made the southern economy run. (Stowe, quite by accident, 
turned into an economic dynamo in her own right; Uncle Tom's Cabin, according to the historian Joan D. Hedrick, "generated an industry of Uncle Tom 
plates, spoons, candlesticks, games, wallpapers, songs, and stage spin-offs that 
ran continuously for the next ninety years.")4 
4
Joan D. Hedrick, "Commerce in Souls: Uncle Tom's Cabin and the State of the Nation," in 
Novel History: Historians and Novelists Confront America's Past (and Each Other), ed. Mark C. 
Carnes (Simon & Schuster, 2001), pp. 168-69. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 63 
The earliest writers had seen nothing wrong with pointing out the fictional nature of their stories ("I would wish this book," Cervantes tells the 
reader, "the child of my brain, to be ... the cleverest imaginable"). But later 
novelists avoided this sort of intrusion into the narrative. They wanted 
readers to discover a real world, not an imaginary one. The late-nineteenthcentury novel wasn't supposed to be the child of the writer's brain; it was 
intended to be an accurate record of ordinary life. 
This new philosophy of realism turned the novelist into a sort of scientist. 
Like the scientist, the novelist recorded every detail rather than selectively 
describing scenes—which tended to make most realistic novels very, very 
long. The father of realism, the French novelist Gustave Flaubert, was so 
determined to portray real characters in a real country town that he drew 
maps and diagrams of his imaginary world. (He got a little lost in the details 
occasionally; if you're careful, you can catch his heroine turning the wrong 
direction to go home.) Flaubert's Emma Bovary is the woman eighteenthcentury clergymen fretted about, the female reader whose love for 
romances has blotted out "real life." She is consumed by the desire for 
romance, that "great passion which .. . hovered like a great pink-plumaged 
bird soaring in the splendor of poetic skies," and this absorption in fantasy 
makes her "unable to believe that the tranquility in which she was living 
was the happiness of which she had dreamed." 
Emma Bovary comes to a bad end—she eats arsenic after realizing that 
she'll never be able to live in a romance—but the realistic novel flourished. 
Henry James's characters don't run around with Indians in the woods, like 
the hero of the romantic Leatherstocking tales. Nor do they develop mysterious stigmata and die from guilt, like Hawthorne's anguished clergyman. 
Instead they go to their jobs, live in their dusty, high-ceilinged rooms, battle consumption, and marry men who are presentable but no great shakes— 
like most of the "regular" folk in the world.5 
Which brings us, more or less, up to the present. Realism never really 
goes away. Even today, stories that describe "extraordinary" events (thrillers, 
science fiction, fantasies, and to some extent religious fiction) tend to be 
intellectually exiled, dismissed as "popular" genres unworthy of serious crit5Realism is one of the major movements in English and American fiction. In his 1949 essay 
"Realism: An Essay in Definition"in Modern Language Quarterly (one of the first attempts to 
define "realism"), George J. Becker suggests that the movement involves: (1) detail derived 
from observation and documentation; (2) an effort to portray normal experience, not the 
exceptional; (3) an "objective, so far as an artist can achieve objectivity, rather than a subjective or idealistic view of human nature and experience." For more on this topic, see two other 
foundational critical works on the subject: Lionel Trilling's "Reality in America,"in The Liberal Imagination (New York: Anchor Books, 1957) and Erich Auerbach's Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1953). 
64 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
ical acclaim. But in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, realism developed offshoots. Dostoyevsky and Kafka perfected a "psychological 
realism" that pays less attention to physical details and more to psychological details. Rather than giving loving attention to the exact appearance of 
landscapes or furnishings, psychological realism tries to paint an accurate 
picture of the mind, so that the reader seems to be in direct contact with a 
character's mental processes. William James (Henry's brother) invented the 
term "stream of consciousness" in 1900 to describe the unordered but natural flow of human thought, and noveHsts from Conrad to Virginia Woolf 
seized on this idea. "Stream of consciousness" writing is the psychological 
equivalent of the detailed physical landscape description: We are to think 
that we are seeing, uncensored by the writer's judgment, the "facts" of the 
mind. "The War was over," thinks Woolf s Mrs. Dalloway as she walks out for 
the morning's flowers, 
except for some one like Mrs. Foxcroft at the Embassy last night eating her 
heart out because that nice boy was killed and now the old Manor House 
must go to a cousin And everywhere, though it was still so early, there was 
a beating, a stirring of galloping ponies, tapping of cricket bats; Lords, Ascot, 
Ranelagh and all the rest of it; wrapped in the soft mesh of the grey-blue 
morning air, which, as the day wore on, would unwind them, and set down 
on their lawns and pitches the bouncing ponies ... and the shopkeepers were 
fidgeting in their windows with their paste and diamonds, their lovely old 
sea-green brooches in eighteenth-century settings to tempt Americans (but 
one must economise, not buy things rashly for Elizabeth), and she, too, loving 
it as she did with an absurd and faithful passion, being part of it, since her people were couriers once in the time of the Georges, she, too, was going that 
very night to kindle and illuminate; to give her party. 
Too much of this sort of thing is just as wearying as the protracted details 
of ponds and heaths found in early realism. But early-twentieth-century writers were enthralled by the stream-of-consciousness technique. Faulkner's 
characters rarely come to us by any other means, and James Joyce produced 
(in Ulysses) a famously dense chunk of stream-of-consciousness writing that 
lasts forty-five pages. (Ulysses always ranks at the top of modern Great Books 
lists, but it isn't on the list at the end of this chapter because it's brutal to read.) 
Another form of realism—even more ferociously modern than "psychological realism"—was naturalism. Naturalist writers were convinced that 
they could write "purely scientific" novels. The individual, the subject of all 
novelization since Don Quixote, was no longer free. The "self" was only the 
product of inherited traits plus environmental influence. Naturalist writers— 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 6 5 
most notably Thomas Hardy—gave their characters certain genetic characteristics, plopped them down into a sheer hell of environmental factors, and 
then described the resulting behavior.The naturalist s job (in his or her own 
eyes, at any rate) was just like the scientist's: Put the rat in the maze, watch 
what it does, and record the outcome without elaboration. 
And so we arrive at the twentieth century. The style of realism, with its 
careful cataloguing of detail, is still with us. Don DeLillo begins his 1985 
novel White Noise with his narrator leaning out a window, watching the college kids arrive for the first day of class: "The station wagons arrived at 
noon, a long shining line that coursed through the west campus. In single 
file they eased around the orange I-beam sculpture and moved toward the 
dormitories. The roofs of the station wagons were loaded down with carefully secured suitcases full of light and heavy clothing; with boxes of blankets, boots and shoes, stationery and books, sheets, pillows, quilts; with 
rolled-up rugs and sleeping bags; with bicycles, skis, rucksacks, English and 
Western saddles, inflated rafts "And so on. 
But the ideas behind the novel have changed since realism's heyday. The 
novel is generally considered to have moved through "modernity" to "postmodernity." Defining these two terms is tricky, since no one realized that 
modernity existed until it had been replaced by postmodernity which simply means "following modernity." 
"The dirty secret of higher academics," a colleague told me one day, "is 
that none of us really know exactly what postmodernism is." It would probably help if critics were able to state in English what modernism is, first; the 
critic James Bloom, for example, writes that modernism involves "density, 
the generic ambiguity, and the understanding of... [the novelist's] own status as mediated and mediating," which doesn't move us much forward. 
Most other definitions are just as opaque. 
More simply, then: Modernism is a type of realism. It too strives to portray "real life." But modernists, writing during and after two world wars, saw 
that their Victorian ancestors were deluded. The Victorians thought that 
they could understand what life was all about, but the modernists knew that 
"real life" was actually beyond understanding. "Real life" was chaotic, planless and unguided, and so the "scientific style" of the modernist is chaotic, 
refusing to bring novels neatly into any kind of resolution. To quote 
Dorothy L. Sayers (a good Anglican who responded to modernism by 
asserting her own belief in God and writing mysteries, an exceedingly 
unchaotic form of literature): 
6
James Bloom, Left Letters (New York: Columbia University Press, 1992), p. 7. 
66 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Said a rising young author, "What, what? 
If I think that causation is not, 
No word of my text 
Will bear on the next, 
And what will become of the plot?"7 
Absence of plot made the modernist novel very difficult to read, especially 
for the common reader who hankered for a story. 
But the modernists tended to scorn story. One of modernism's most 
unattractive aspects was its snobbery. Modernist writers distrusted the 
masses and put all their faith in a small, well-educated elite. Several prominent modernists (most notably Ezra Pound) supported fascism and sneered 
at democracy. And the most well known were particularly savage about 
"popular fiction." The novel was an intellectual exercise, not a form of 
entertainment, and readers who wanted entertainment were welcome to go 
buy a dime-store Western. Virginia Woolf moaned that the novelist was a 
"slave" to the necessity of selling books; she longed for a fiction that could 
be free, with "no plot, no comedy, no tragedy, no love interest, or catastrophe in the accepted style." E. M. Forster wrote that "oh dear, yes—the novel 
tells a story," but wished with all his heart that the market wouldn't demand 
"story," that "low atavistic form." (As both Forster and Woolf ended up 
telling quite interesting stories, the market apparently won out in the end.) 
No one likes to be condescended to, so it's hardly surprising that most 
high school students develop a loathing for the modernist novels they're 
forced to read in senior English and go to the movies instead. (Movies have 
plots, after all.) They're being good postmodernists. 
Postmodernism is modernism's teenage child. Postmodernism says to modernism, "Who made you the boss?" (and to E. M. Forster, "Who made you 
an authority on fiction,you dead white male,you?"). Postmodernism rejects 
modernism's claim to know the truth about real life. Postmodernism says: 
There are many ways to portray real life and no single authority can pick 
which one is right. Buffy the Vampire Slayer has just as much intellectual value 
as Heart of Darkness. 
The postmodern novelist considered that all previous attempts to write 
about the individual self were flawed, because those earlier attempts insisted 
on seeing the self as essentially free. No, no, says the postmodernist; the private self that we first met in Don Quixote and Pilgrim's Progress isn't some sort 
of independent, free being that can find its own path through obstacles, tri7Dorothy L. Sayers (with Robert Eustace), The Documents in the Case (NewYork: Harper & 
Row, 1987), p. 55. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 67 
umphing over society's hypocrisies. Nor was that self formed by nature and 
genetics. Instead, that private self was produced by society. Everything that we 
think about ourselves—every "truth" we know about our own existence— 
has been instilled in us, since birth, by our culture.We can't ever get "outside" 
of society's structures in order to see what is really true. And when we examine our own deepest selves, all we'll find is a collection of social conventions. 
Postmodern novelists didn't try to write original stories, since "original" 
implies some sort of creative ability which is free from the influence of society. Instead, they wrote about society, about the flood of information that 
shapes us from birth.Their careful, lengthy cataloguing of the details of daily 
life reminds the reader: This is who you are.You're formed and shaped by 
these details.You can't ever escape them. 
In Don DeLillo's White Noise, the narrator tries to get some sort of control over the chaos of his life by cleaning out his attic (an impulse we've all 
felt). But in the end, the details defeat him: 
I threw away picture-frame wire, metal book ends, cork coasters, plastic key 
tags, dusty bottles of Mercurochrome andVaseline, crusted paintbrushes, caked 
shoe brushes, clotted correction fluid. I threw away candle stubs, laminated 
placemats, frayed pot holders I threw away my battered khaki canteen, my 
ridiculous hip boots. I threw away diplomas, certificates, awards and citations. 
When the girls stopped me, I was working the bathroom, discarding used bars 
of soap, damp towels, shampoo bottles with streaked labels and missing caps. 
Postmodernism can be as heavily didactic as John Bunyan's sermons, and 
White Noise (like DeLillo's later and larger novel Underworld) hammers 
home its point as unrelentingly as any Puritan allegorizer. For folks who 
reject the idea of "one truth," postmodernists are amazingly loud as they 
shout their conclusions: Get it? Get it? You don't have any power.You're pushed 
here and there by your society. It rules you. It is you. 
Literary postmodernism began to lose some of its steam in the late 1970s, 
and no single "movement" has replaced it (these things are easier to see in 
retrospect). But it seems that as the novel reaches its four hundredth birthday, we've come full circle, back around to Don Quixote. "Sit down," Cervantes tells his readers, "and let me tell you a story. It's just pretend, but that's 
fine; you'll enjoy it anyway." "Here is my book," the twentieth-century novelist Italo Calvino announces. "Put your feet up and read it." 
This technique is called metafiction. Rather than creating a fictional world 
that pretends to be real, metafiction admits, right up front, that it's only a 
story; the writer is standing behind you as you walk over the threshold into 
that new world, shouting, "Don't forget where you came from!" Calvino 
6 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
doesn't have to worry about being taken seriously. He can admit that he's 
writing a novel, because the postmodernists have already shown that the 
contrast between "real" and "false" is only a product of the realist's quest for 
a truth that doesn't even exist. 
So that tension created in the first years of the novel's existence—the tension between real and fictional, fantasy and reality, novel and romance—has 
finally begun to ease. Fantastic events are once again possible, and novels that 
make use of them have their own (intellectually respectable) label: magic realism. Plot has even made a minor comeback; Possession, the last novel on the 
list below, is a love story, a wry reflection on the state of literary criticism, a 
mystery with a point of view that shifts from present to past, from omniscient narrator to first person, using letters, dreams, critical articles, biographies, bits of tales, excerpts from poems (all written by the author, A. S. Byatt) 
and old-fashioned storytelling to lead the reader to its center. Possession is 
subtitled "A Romance," and begins with an epigram from Nathaniel 
Hawthorne: "When a writer calls his work a Romance, it need hardly be 
observed that he wishes to claim a certain latitude, both as to its fashion and 
material which he would not have felt himself entitled to assume, had he professed to be writing a Novel." Possession was even bought—as a final acknowledgement of the story at its core—by Hollywood. 
After four hundred years, the occupation of novel writing has grown 
up:The best writers of metafiction are happy to be called storytellers, even 
romancers. Postmodernism, for all its flaws, loosened the stranglehold of 
nineteenth-century realism and its related forms, and gave the imagination 
back some of the power that was usurped in the days of the realists and 
naturalists. 
HOW TO READ A NOVEL 
The First Level of Inquiry: Grammar-Stage Reading 
The first time you read through a novel, you should look for answers to 
three very simple questions: Who are these people? What happens to them? 
And how are they different afterward? As you read, you should also turn 
down (or bookmark) pages where something significant seems to be happening. Don't worry about what that significance is—you'll return to these 
sections later, after you do your initial read-through. 
Look at the title, cover, and table of contents. With your journal and pencil 
close by, read the title page and the copy on the back cover. If the book has 
a biographical sketch of the author and/or translator, read that as well. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 6 Q 
Remember: don't read the preface unless it was written by the author (or 
translator); otherwise you'll get an interpretation of the book before you've 
had a chance to form your own ideas. 
Write the title of the book, the author's name, and the date of composition on the top of a blank page. Underneath, note any facts learned from the 
book's cover or introduction that will help you read the book as the author 
intended. In the case of the Penguin edition of Don Quixote, for example, 
the back-cover copy tells you that Cervantes began his story as a parody on 
traditional songs and romances about chivalry; you should write "Makes fun 
of traditional chivalry" (or something similar) as a note to yourself. 
Now read the table of contents. Don Quixote has many short chapters; the 
chapter titles ("The prophesying ape," "The puppet show," "The braying 
adventure," "Concerning a squire's wages") tell you that the story will unfold 
as a series of separate, brief events.The chapter titles of The Scarlet Letter ("Hester and the Physician," "Hester and Pearl,""The Minister in a Maze") introduce you to the story's main characters. In both cases the chapter titles tell 
you how to approach the book. Don Quixote is an episodic adventure; The 
Scarlet Letter an examination of character. If a novel doesn't have chapter 
titles (1984, Wuthering Heights, The Great Gatsby), that also is important; the 
writer found the various parts of the story too closely related for easy division and labeling. If the chapter titles do give you any clues about the book's 
contents, you can jot down a sentence or two for reference. 
Now start to read Chapter 1. 
Keep a list of characters as you read. Somewhere in your notebook (right 
underneath the title, or perhaps on the open left-hand page), you'll want to 
keep a list of characters: their names, their positions, and their relationships 
to each other. Sometimes (especially in Russian works) characters have two 
(or more) names; your character list can help keep them straight. If the novel 
deals with a family, you should put the characters into a genealogical table 
(otherwise, you'll never keep the relationships in Oliver Twist straight). 
Briefly note the main event of each chapter. As you finish each chapter, write 
one or two sentences describing the chapter's main event in your notebook. 
These should be memory joggers for you, not a detailed précis of the plot. 
Try to limit yourself to one major event per chapter. "Don Quixote decides 
to be a knight, so he chooses Aldonza Lorenzo to be his lady and renames 
her Dulcinea delToboso" is a perfectly good summary of Chapter i of Don 
Quixote. These sentences will help you grasp the book's overall flow—not 
to mention making it easier to pick your reading back up after an interruption. At some point in your reading, at least one crisis will temporarily derail 
7 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
your study time, and you don't want to have to reread four hundred pages 
of plot development because you've forgotten what happened before. 
Make initial notes on passages that seem interesting. During this initial reading, don't stop to write down long reflections on the book's content. But 
if you come across a passage that seems particularly important, bracket it 
with your pencil, turn down the corner of the page, and write a note to 
yourself in your journal ("Page 31: Is it important that books drove Don 
Quixote out of his wits?"). Distinguish these notes in some way from your 
content summaries; write them in the journal margins, on a different page, 
or in a different-color ink. 
Give the book your own title and subtitle. When you finish reading the book, 
go back and reread your chapter summaries. Do they provide you with a 
clear, coherent outline of what happens in the book? If so, you can move on 
to the next step: titling. If not, rewrite your summaries: delete those details 
which now seem inessential, add important events or characters that you 
might have missed. 
Once you're happy with your outline, give the book a brief title and a 
longer subtitle. Before you can do this, though, you'll need to answer two 
questions: 
1. Who is the central character in this book? 
2. What is the book's most important event? 
If you have difficulty answering these questions, ask yourself: Is there some 
point in the book where the characters change? Does something happen 
that makes everyone behave differently? There are plenty of important 
moments in Pilgrims Progress, but the story's hero changes most drastically 
right at the beginning, when he hears Evangelist's words and runs through 
the wicket gate, crying, "Life, life, eternal life!" He is a different man afterward—and although he goes through multiple trials and temptations, his 
new personality does not alter. Glance back through the list of major events 
that you've jotted down for each chapter and try to identify the most central and life-changing of them all. 
Once you find this event, ask yourself: Which character is the most 
affected?This is likely to be the book's hero (or heroine). (And don't fret too 
much about this question; you may change your mind after you've done a 
second, more intensive reading of the book's important sections.) 
Now give your book a title that mentions the main character, and a subtitle that tells how that character is affected by the book's main event. Chris-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 7 1 
tian's Journey to the Celestial City: How an ordinary man responded to Evangelist's 
invitation by leaving his home and beginning a journey in which he meets various 
figures that represent biblical truths, faces Apollyon, triumphs over a number of temptations that try to pull him away from the road to the City, and finally crosses over 
the Jordan to glory: This sums up the story. 
The Second Level of Inquiry: Logic-Stage Reading 
Your first reading of the book should give you a sense of the story as a 
whole—one sweeping tale that you pursue from beginning to end, without 
stopping to ruminate or look up details. Now you'll narrow your gaze to 
individual elements of the book. Ideally, you would reread the whole novel 
at this point, but unless you're independently wealthy and unmarried (like 
the gentlemen-scholars of previous centuries), you probably won't. Instead, 
go back through the bracketed or bookmarked sections that you noted on 
your first read-through. Some will now appear irrelevant; others will suddenly reveal themselves to be central. 
If you were reading nonaction, you would now begin to analyze the 
writer's argument: What idea is she trying to convince you of? What evidence does he give you for believing this argument? 
But fiction has a different end than philosophy, or science, or history The 
novel doesn't present you with an argument; it invites you to enter another 
world. When you evaluate a nonaction work, you will ask: Am I persuaded? 
But when you evaluate a novel, you must instead ask: Am I transported? Do 
I see, feel, hear this other world? Can I sympathize with the people who live 
there? Do I understand their wants and desires and problems? Or am I left 
unmoved? 
Like any other skill, thinking critically about a novel becomes simpler 
with practice. The following brief guide to literary analysis isn't meant as a 
graduate course in literary criticism. Nor is it intended to turn you into a 
critic. Rather, these questions will begin to guide your thinking into a more 
analytical mode. As you practice asking and answering them, other questions (and answers) will come to mind. 
In your journal, write down answers to the following questions. Not all 
of them will apply to every novel, of course; if one of the questions doesn't 
seem to have any good answer, skip it and move on. And remember that 
there are not, necessarily, "right answers" to these questions. (Critics can 
argue unceasingly about whether Moby-Dick is closer to realism or to fantasy.) But whenever you write down an answer, quote directly from the novel 
in order to support your answer. This will keep you focused on the book. 
Using a direct quote prevents you from making general—and thus mean-
7 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
ingless—assertions, such as "Moby-Dick is about man's search for God."That 
sentence must immediately be followed by, "This can be seen in the scene 
where ..." and a description of the scene. 
Is this novel a "fable" or a "chronicle"? Every novelist belongs in one of two 
camps. Some writers want to draw us into a world very like our own; they 
tell us how people behave, moment by moment, in lives governed by the 
same rules that regulate our own lives.These writers convince us that every 
emotion stems from a cause, every action from a reaction. These writers 
produce "chronicles"—stories set in our own universe. 
Other novelists never try to convince us that the world of the book is 
real. These once-upon-a-time fables transport us into a place where different laws apply "I sailed from England," Gulliver remarks, "and was captured 
by men three inches high." "And then I saw that there was a way to hell, 
even from the gates of heaven," Christian tells us.The writer of fables begins 
not with, "At 9 A.M. on a rainy Saturday in June," but rather with "Once 
upon a time ..." Pilgrim's Progress and Gulliver's Travels were written by fabletellers; Pride and Prejudice and The Portrait of a Lady, by chroniclers.8 
This is the first question you must ask of a novel: Is this narrative taking 
place in a world that is governed by the same rules that govern my existence? Or are there fantastic events in the book that don't square with reality as I know it? 
Once you've answered this question, you can then consider one of these 
three questions (again, try to jot down a quote or two from the novel in 
support of each answer): 
1. If this novel is set in our world—a chronicle—how does the writer 
show us reality? Does she try to convince us that her world is real through 
the careful presentation of physical detail—the meals people eat, the cut and 
color of their clothes, the landscape that surrounds them? Or does she focus 
instead on psychological detail: the processes of the mind, the rise and fall of 
emotions, the slow discovery of motivations? 
2. If the writer presents a fantastic world, what is his or her intent? 
In contemporary genre fiction, this distinction is most clearly seen in the world of science 
fiction and fantasy, where science fiction is defined (in the words of Orson Scott Card) as a 
story with "nuts and bolts." In fantasy, Frodo can put on the Ring of Power and turn invisible; in science fiction, he has to disappear by manipulating the quantum waves in the spacetime continuum. Note that the science doesn't have to be real;but it has to be at least compatible 
with present scientific knowledge, with the laws of the universe as we currently understand 
them. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 7 J 
Is she writing allegorkally? In an allegory, the writer establishes a one-toone correspondence between some part of her story (a character, an event, 
a place) and some other, literal reality. In Pilgrim's Progress, Christian carries 
a huge burden on his back; this burden represents sin. In Gulliver's Travels, 
Gullivers characters war about whether eggs should be cracked at the little 
or the big end; the bitter dispute between Little-Endians and Big-Endians 
is an allegorical reference to the controversy over the proper observation of 
the Eucharist that raged during Swift's century. (A writer's choice of allegory is in itself an expression of opinion, and you can take issue with it: Not 
everyone finds the debate over the Real Presence as insignificant as the 
debate over how to crack an egg.)9 
In the absence of allegory, is the writer of fables speculating} In this case, the 
fantastic elements don't have a one-to-one correspondence to our world; 
instead, the oddness of the unfamiliar surroundings represents ideas taken to 
their extreme. George Orwell writes fantastically about a world that doesn't 
exist, but he doesn't want you to pick out a single parallel between Big 
Brother and some contemporary politician. In the strange universe of 1984, 
certain aspects of modern life are stretched, exaggerated, and expanded to an 
unthinkable extreme in order to demonstrate their potential danger. 
3. Is the novel primarily realistic, but with a few fantastic elements? If so, 
you cannot simply classify it as a "fable." The Scarlet Letter chronicles quite 
ordinary events—unfaithfulness, the birth of an illegitimate baby—but its 
climax involves at least one fantastical event. Jane Eyre is the story of realistic people who live (unhappily) in regular English houses, but Jane hears a 
ghostly voice at a climactic moment: Is it a dream? When a writer brings 
fantastical elements into an otherwise realistic tale, he is illustrating a real 
phenomenon that is too powerful to be described in realistic terms. Can 
you identify this phenomenon? 
What does the central character (or characters) want? What is standing in his (or 
her) way? And what strategy does he (or she) pursue in order to overcome this 
block? Almost every novel (even the most modern) is constructed around 
these basic questions.You can ask them for as many characters as you want, 
but begin with the person who seems most prominent. 
What does Elizabeth Bennet want? This most central of questions often 
9
If you suspect allegory but need some cultural or historical details in order to find the parallels, glance through the book's introduction; consult a Norton Anthology, which generally 
footnotes the most important allegorical elements of a classic work; or use the Internet search 
engine Google (www.google.com) and do an online search for "Allegory in [title]"(be sure 
to use the quotation marks). 
7 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
appears to have a straightforward answer. Elizabeth Bennet wants to get 
married. Christian wants to get to the Celestial City. Heathcliff wants 
Cathy. Ahab wants the whale. 
But generally a deeper, more essential need or want lies beneath this surface desire.You can often get at this deeper motivation by asking the second 
question: What's standing in the way? What destroys Elizabeth Bennet's marriageability, complicates her life, threatens to destroy her happiness? Her 
family: her wild younger sister, her ridiculous mother, her passive and cynical father. Elizabeth wants to marry, but her deepest want goes beyond matrimony. She wants to abandon the world she was born into and move into 
another world. She wants to escape. (Asking this question will also keep you 
from settling on too simple an answer: Ahab doesn't just want to catch the 
whale.) 
Now do a little more classification. Is a person keeping the heroine from 
achieving her deepest wants? If so, is that person a "villain" in the classic 
sense, an evildoer who wishes to do another character harm? (Simon 
Legree, in Uncle Tom's Cabin, is a classic villain.) Or is the "villain" simply 
another character with a deep want of his own that happens to be at crosspurposes with the heroine's need? (EUzabeth Bennet's mother, father, and 
sister, all pursuing their own needs, are unmindful of their disastrous effect 
on Elizabeth's struggling romance.) 
The block in the heroine's way doesn't have to be a person. A collection 
of circumstances, a malign force that constantly pushes her in the wrong 
direction, an impersonal set of events that have united to complicate her 
life—these can also keep a character from getting what she wants.The novelist's world may demonstrate that human beings are always at the mercy of 
a flawed, fallen creation—or an uncaring, mechanical universe in which 
they are as insignificant as flies. 
Once you've identified, at least tentatively, a character's wants and the 
"block" that keeps him from fulfilling them, you can begin to answer the 
third question: What strategy does a character follow in order to overcome 
the difficulties that stand in his way? Does he bulldoze his way through the 
opposition, using strength or wealth to overcome his difficulties? Does he 
manipulate, scheme, or plan? Does he exercise intelligence? Grit his teeth 
and keep on going? Buckle under the pressure, wilt and die? This strategy 
produces the plot of the novel. 
These basic questions will take you through even the most modern novels on the fist. Characters have always longed for escape, freedom, an ideal 
existence, control of their lives. Jack Gladney of DeLillo's White Noise wants 
to find the inherent meaning of life, not the meaning imposed on him by the 
corporations that have already constructed the story of his life for him (a 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J 5 
story that involves his constant purchase of all the things they manufacture). 
What keeps him from discovering this meaning? Does he manage to find it 
in the end? (Three guesses.) 
Who is telling you this story? Stories don't just float in the air; they are told 
by a voice. Whose voice is it? Or, in other words, what point of view does the 
writer adopt? 
Point of view, like other aspects of fiction, can be broken into dozens of 
types, each subtlely different. Unless you plan to make a detailed study of 
the art of fiction,10 you only need to be familiar with the five basic points 
of view. Each has its advantages and tradeoffs. 
i. First-person point of view ("I") gives a very immediate, but limited, 
perspective. First person allows you to hear a character's most private 
thoughts—but in exchange, you can only see what happens within the 
character's line of sight, and you can only know those facts that the character is herself aware of. 
2. Second-person ("You walk down the street and open the door ..." ) 
is uncommon, generally used only in experimental works (and adventure 
games). Like first-person point of view, second person keeps the reader intimately involved with the story, and brings a sense of immediacy far beyond 
what first person can produce. But second person also tends to limit the 
writer to the present tense, cutting off any reflection on the past. 
3. Third-person limited (also called "third-person subjective") tells the 
story from the viewpoint of one particular character, delving into that character's mind, but using the third-person pronouns (he or she) rather than the 
first-person pronouns. This perspective allows the writer to gain a little bit 
of distance from the story, but still limits the writer to those events that the 
viewpoint character can actually see and hear. A useful variant on this—and 
perhaps the most common narrative strategy in the novels listed below—is 
"third-person multiple," which allows the writer to use the viewpoints of 
several different characters, jumping from the "inside" of one character to 
the "inside" of another in order to give multiple perspectives. 
4. "Third-person objective" tells the story from a removed, distant perspective. The narrator can see everything that is happening, as though he 
were hovering in space above the scene, but can't look into the heart or 
mind of any character. The writer who uses third-person objective gains a 
I0In this case, you might invest in Wayne Booth's The Rhetoric of Fiction and Thomas 
McCormick's The Fiction Editor, two classic guides to how (and why) novelists manage to 
produce the effects that they do. 
76 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
sort of scientific, dispassionate perspective but loses the ability to tell us what 
the characters are thinking and feeling; we have to deduce this from the 
characters' actions and expressions. Third-person objective is the filmmaker's point of view. 
5. The omniscient point of view—the most popular until the nineteenth century—puts the writer in the place of God. He can see and 
explain everything. He can describe both great events in the universe and 
the thoughts that occupy the most private recesses of a character's soul. The 
omniscient point of view often—although not always—is the author's point 
of view as well; it can allow the writer to moralize, to record his own personal ideas about the events of the book. (In Victorian times, the omniscient 
point of view allowed the writer to address the reader directly: "Gentle 
reader, what depths of guilt such a woman must suffer!") 
Which point of view does the writer choose to use? What does he gain 
and lose through it? Once you've identified the point of view, try an experiment: retell a crucial passage in the novel from a different point of view. 
How does this change the story? 
Where is the story set? Every story happens in a physical place. Is this place 
natural, or human-constructed? If natural, do the woods and fields and skies 
reflect the emotions and problems of the characters? Do clouds cover the 
sky as the heroine weeps; does the wind rise as tempers fray? Or is nature 
unresponsive to the hero's struggles? The answers to these questions will tell 
you how the novelist views the human relationship to the physical world. Is 
humanity so intimately connected to nature that the earth responds to the 
human plight? Or is the universe indifferent? Are we the center of the universe, or simply bugs crawling on its uncaring surface? 
Human-built surroundings—a city, a house, a room—can also reflect the 
inner life of the characters: bare and clean, cluttered and confused. "When I 
was brought back next day," writes the narrator of Camus's The Stranger,"the 
electric fans were still churning up the heavy air, and the jurymen plying their 
gaudy litde fans in a sort of steady rhythm. The speech for the defense seemed 
to me interminable." The thick, unvarying atmosphere reflects the narrator's 
own inability to pierce through the fog of confusion all around him. 
Look for several sections of description and ask yourself: Who is present 
in this scene? What are her surroundings like? How does she sense them? 
What does this say about her state of mind? 
What style does the writer employ? "Style" refers not only to the vocabulary 
a writer uses (simple or multisyllabic?) but also to the general length of sen-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 77 
tences. Are they short and terse? Or complex, containing many clauses and 
subordinate ideas? 
At the beginning of the twentieth century, realistic novelists made a concerted effort to move away from complex, complicated sentences—the 
product of thought and careful pencil work—toward a more colloquial, 
casual style, closer to what "real, plain people" would use in everyday conversation. This shift away from formal language reflected a change in ideas 
of "good style." 
You can identify whether the writer is using formal or informal language 
(or diction) by using a few simple, mechanical devices. In Classical Rhetoric for 
the Modern Student, Edward Corbett suggests the following: 
1. Choose one long paragraph and count the words in each sentence. 
What's the shortest sentence? The longest? What's the average number of 
words in a sentence? 
2. In the same paragraph, count the number of nouns and verbs which 
have three or more syllables. 
3. How many nouns in the paragraph refer to concrete things (people, 
landscape, animals, clothing, food, etc.), and how many refer to abstract ideas? 
4. How many verbs in the passage describe physical activity (run, jump, 
climb, blush) and how many describe mental activity (worry, anticipate, 
rejoice)?11 
These mechanical exercises can help you begin to evaluate whether the 
writer's style is "plain" (short, common words, simple sentences) or more 
complex and ornamental. 
Now take three passages of dialogue from three different characters and 
compare them, using the above exercise. Do all these characters talk alike? 
(This is a very common flaw—even in the work of great writers.) Or do 
their patterns of speech reflect the fact that they have different backgrounds, 
different jobs, different lives? 
Images and metaphors. Is any particular image repeated again and again? Do 
the characters find themselves continually crossing water or walking 
through the woods? Does a particular color (a white dress, a white rose, a 
white sky) occur more than once? In The Great Gatsby, a pair of huge 
wooden eyes, abandoned by the optometrist who intended to use them as 
a billboard, looks mournfully out over an ashy plain. A. S. Byatt's Possession 
"Edward Corbett, Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student, 4th ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), pp. 341-77. 
78 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
makes great use of the colors green and blue and their relationship to water 
and to glacier ice. 
Once you've found a repeated image, ask: Is this a metaphor, and if so, 
what does this represent? A metaphor is a physical object or act that stands 
for something else—an attitude, a situation, a truth. A metaphor is different 
from an allegory. An allegory involves a one-to-one correspondence between 
different story elements and the realities for which they stand; an allegory 
is a set of related metaphors, whereas a metaphor is a single image that may 
bear multiple meanings. The huge wooden eyes in Gatsby reoccur several 
times. Like the eyes of God, they constantly watch the characters, but they 
are blind and uncaring and bring no meaning to the lives under their gaze. 
They also look out over a plain that should have developed into a bustling 
business district but instead turned into a wasteland. So the wooden eyes 
serve as a metaphor for the absence of God, but also draw our attention to 
the essential emptiness in the glittering, prosperous lives of Daisy and her 
circle. 
Beginnings and endings. Now take a moment to examine the opening and 
closing scenes. The beginning of a novel should draw you immediately into 
the story's central problem. Does the writer hint at a mystery, begin to sketch 
out an incomplete scenario you don't immediately understand? If so, perhaps 
the intent of the book is to show how human beings can triumph over partial knowledge, using their wits and determination to bring meaning to confusion. Does the book begin with violence and color, drawing you in through 
sheer action? If so, perhaps the intent is to portray humans as busy and effective in their world. Does it begin with passivity and stagnation? Perhaps the 
intent is the opposite: to show humanity's essential helplessness. "It is a truth 
universally acknowledged," begins Jane Austen in Pride and Prejudice, "that a 
single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife." That 
single sentence contains all of the novel's major themes: the necessity of marriage, the desire for independent prosperity, and the shifting nature of "universally acknowledged truths," since the characters find their deepest 
convictions overturned, one by one, as the story unfolds. Henry James begins 
The Portrait of a Lady with a tea party on the front lawn of an English house: 
"Real dusk would not arrive for many hours," he writes, "but the flood of 
summer light had begun to ebb, the air had grown mellow, the shadows were 
long upon the smooth, dense turf'The tranquility and languor of the European scene is soon shattered by the arrival of an energetic American, and this 
conflict between old and new cultures is James's central preoccupation. 
Now that you've considered the beginning, turn to the end. John Gardner suggests, in The Art of Fiction, that stories have two kinds of endings.There 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J g 
is the resolution, when "no further event can take place (the murderer has 
been caught and hanged, the diamond has been found and restored to its 
owner, the elusive lady has been captured and married)." In contrast is the 
ending of logical exhaustion, in which the characters have reached "the stage 
of infinite repetition; more events might follow .. . but they will all express 
the same thing—for example, the character's entrapment in empty ritual or 
some consistently wrong response to the pressures of his environment."12 
What sort of ending does the book have? The resolution that Gardner 
describes shows a certain faith that we can triumph over our world, control 
our existence by discovering rules we can follow in order to bring success 
(or break to court disaster) .The ending of logical exhaustion, on the other hand, 
shows that we are trapped, powerless, condemned to repeat the same actions 
over and over again. Each kind of ending demonstrates a certain philosophy 
about the nature of human life. Do you agree with that philosophy? 
That question (Do I agree?) leads us into the third stage of reading: the 
rhetoric phase. 
The Third Level of Inquiry: Rhetoric-Stage Reading 
Your answers to the logic-stage questions should begin to reveal the ideas at 
the core of each novel. During the rhetoric stage, you'll try to decide 
whether you agree with those ideas or not. 
These great novels differ so widely—and your own approach to them 
will depend so heavily on your own philosophy of life, your religious 
beliefs, your experience of work and play and family life—that I can't lay 
down hard and fast "discussion topics" for you. But I can suggest a few topics that will help you begin the process of interacting with the novel's ideas. 
Remember that your rhetoric-stage examination of a novel should take 
place in partnership with another reader. You'll begin the dialogue by 
answering one of the following questions; ask your reading partner to do so 
as well. If you're conducting your discussion by letter or e-mail, your initial 
letter can simply consist of a couple of paragraphs in answer to one of the 
following questions; your reading partner can answer with her own 
thoughts; and you can then move on to the next question. Even if you're 
discussing the book in person, write your answers down in your journal, so 
that your notes can serve as a "history" of the development of your ideas 
about reading fiction. 
What questions should you ask? Most of them will be related to one central query: Is this book an accurate portrayal of life? Is it true? 
I2John Gardner, The Art of Fiction: Notes on Craft forYoung Writers (New York: Knopf, 1983), p. 53. 
8 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
The ideas you'll discuss in the rhetoric stage of novel reading have to do 
with the nature of human experience: What are people like? What guides 
and shapes them? Are we free? If not, what binds and restricts us? What is 
the ideal man or woman like? Is there such a thing as an ideal man or 
woman—or does this idea itself suggest some sort of transcendent "truth" 
that is only an illusion? 
Do you sympathize with the characters? Which ones, and why? Can you find 
some point of empathy (emotional or intellectual identification) with each 
major character? The characters' dilemma, or their reaction to it, must provoke some kind of recognition; even in the oddest and most maniacal character, there should be something that we acknowledge. "Though we can see 
at a glance that Captain Ahab is a madman," John Gardner remarks, "we 
affirm his furious hunger to know the truth." 
In a great novel, even the evildoers possess some emotion or motivation 
that also exists in the reader. The novel's bad guy is a villain not because he 
is a monster, but because some real quality has been distorted and exaggerated until it turns destructive. In the same way, a heroine should not possess 
undiluted goodness; such a character would be unrecognizable. Her greatness should result from her triumph over flaws that we recognize, and might 
even share. If she fails to triumph, like Lily Bart in Edith Wharton's The 
House of Mirth, we should feel that her failure could be our own; were we in 
her shoes, we too might succumb. 
Try to identify the character quality that allows you to sympathize with 
each character: Ahab s pursuit of truth, Lily Bart's longing for beauty, Huck 
Finn's craving for freedom. Do you feel this quality in yourself or observe it 
in others? In the novel, is this quality distorted, or exaggerated, or somehow 
twisted away from the norm? What opposing tendency destroys it, or stands 
in the way of its full flowering? Do you recognize that contrary impulse in 
yourself as well? 
And then consider: The writer selected this quality as the character's central defining characteristic. Is the writer making a statement, through that 
selection, about the human condition—about the universal longings that all 
humans share, and the opposition that we all face as we try to fulfill those 
cravings? 
Does the writers technique give you a clue as to her "argument"—her take on the 
human condition? Point of view, setting, use of detail, stream-of-consciousness 
reflection: Each technique can imply a certain philosophical commitment on 
the part of the writer. Consider the implications of point of view. Nineteenthcentury narrators were fond of the omniscient point of view, which allowed 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 8 1 
them (in effect) to take the position of God: to see all, describe all, and issue 
moral judgments on all. But more than one critic has observed that the slow 
decline in the use of the omniscient point of view has paralleled a decline 
in the traditional belief of God as an all-seeing, all-determining being. Without the omniscient point of view, no single, normal, "standard" point of view 
exists; each character has a different idea about what is happening, and no 
particular point of view is identified as true. 
What does the setting of the book tell you about the way human beings 
are shaped? If the novelist believes that we are produced by our environment—that the place and time in which we live determine who we are— 
she will pay close attention to physical landscapes. But if she believes man 
to be a free soul, with power to triumph over his surroundings, she's more 
likely to concentrate on what's going on inside the characters' heads. Instead 
of lovingly detailed descriptions of physical setting, she'll produce equally 
detailed records of emotions, thoughts, and moods. 
Is the novel self-reflective? Discovering more about the human condition from 
a novel: Is this even possible? Can stories about people convey truth? Can 
written words really communicate something meaningful about existence? 
The answer to those questions is not an automatic yes. The novelist 
assumes, as he writes, that his words convey some sort of real meaning to 
readers; that human existence can be reduced to a page and still remain recognizable. But most writers also feel deep doubt as to whether this will 
actually happen. Does the novel acknowledge this tension? Does it call 
attention to itself, or to the acts of reading and writing? Do the characters 
in it read? What do they gain from their reading? Are some kinds of reading 
praised while others are condemned? Do the characters write? If so, what 
do they hope to achieve through their writing? Are they immortalized or 
destroyed by what they set down on paper? 
If the novel is self-reflective, does it affirm that storytelling can make a 
meaningful statement about human existence—or does it question that 
possibility? The novels that bracket the list below, Don Quixote and Possession, are nearly four hundred years apart in time.Yet both writers reflect on 
the acts of reading and writing. Don Quixote loses sight of reality through 
much reading; the central characters of Possession are rediscovered through 
the stories, poems, and letters that they leave behind. 
Did the writer's times affect him? The common-sense answer to this question would seem to be yes. But this was for several decades a highly debated 
topic, with so-cz\[ed formalists asserting that a novel should be treated on its 
own terms, as an "artifact" that has nothing to do with its times (or its 
8 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
writer, come to that), and that knowledge of a writer's times can contribute 
nothing to an understanding of the fiction at hand. 
It has become increasingly difficult to argue that you can read (for example) The Great Gatsby without knowing something about America in the 
1920s. But the pendulum has now swung somewhat far over to the other 
side, with literary critics asserting that a novel is nothing more than a product of its times and should be read as a sort of imaginative history, a reflection of social customs—particularly those that oppress a particular race, 
gender, or class.Thus The Scarlet Letter tells us how the Puritans treated adulterous women, Huckleberry Finn is about slavery in the mid-nineteenth century, and Heart of Darkness reveals the mindset of colonialists toward the 
native races. 
All of these things are true, but these novels are much more than a reflection of their times; to see them primarily as minihistories of culture is to 
flatten them.The sensible reader should take the middle course: Assume that 
the writer has been influenced by the accepted wisdom of his times, but also 
give him the benefit of imagination. Perhaps he was able, in some of the 
novel's aspects, to make an imaginative leap that took him further than his 
contemporaries. 
As part of your rhetoric-stage discussion, you may want to read a brief 
history of the times in which the writer lived. This doesn't have to be an 
enormous project; a few pages from a basic text will give you some sense of 
the writer's times. The novel fist tends to be focused on American and English works, so you might consider investing in Paul Johnson's History of the 
American People and Kenneth O. Morgan's Oxford History of Britain. A 
slightly more detailed history—and one that pays a little more attention to 
social and cultural trends—is A History of England, by Clayton Roberts and 
David Roberts, which comes in two volumes that overlap: Volume I: Prehistory to 1714, and Volume II: 1688 to the Present. For a broader picture of the 
world, look for John Morris Robert's History of the World, revised in 1993 
and published in the United States by Oxford University Press, or Clive 
Ponting's World History: A New Perspective (Chatto & Winders 2000). 
Ponting's history is briefer and more focused on politics than Robert's. 
A good rule of thumb is to read twenty years on either side of the work 
in question, so that when you read Pilgrim's Progress you should read about 
events in England from 1660 to 1700.You may find it helpful to keep a brief 
timeline of some sort, either along the top margins of your journal or on a 
separate sheet of paper, so that you can remember momentous events. 
If you find yourself getting bogged down, you can skip this part of 
rhetoric-stage reading. It is better to read the novels and skip the history 
than to give up on the whole project. On the other hand, you won't fully 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 83 
understand Huckleberry Finn without reading about the Fugitive Slave Law; 
and ig84 won't make complete sense unless you know something about the 
state of British politics and culture in 1949, when George Orwell wrote his 
pessimistic screed. 
Is there an argument in this book? Now try to bring these different considerations together into a final statement:What exactly is the writer telling you? 
A novel is not an argument, and a story should never be boiled down into 
a syllogism. The primary purpose of a novelist is to lead you through an 
experience, not to convince you of a point. But in many novels, there is an 
idea. The writer, in describing the life of one particular character, is making 
a statement about the human condition in general. Jack Gladney, the professor of Hitler studies who stars in DeLillo's novel White Noise, is drowning in the ephemera of his culture; and so, DeLillo wants you to know, are 
all of us. Thomas Hardy's hapless characters struggle against the implacable 
natural forces that continually push them down into the muck from which 
they strive to rise. They always lose. And so, Hardy wants you to know, will 
the rest of us. 
So think about what happens to the main characters, and why. Is there an 
argument in the hero's (or heroine's) fate—or in the villain's downfall? 
Do you agree? Now you can ask yourself that ultimate question suggested 
above: Is this work true? 
Here you should consider two senses of the word true. A novel that is 
convincing, vivid, engaging, carefully written so that each detail corresponds to reality, a novel that draws you into its world and keeps you interested in the fates of its characters—that novel is real, resonating with our 
own experience of the world. But a work can be true in this sense and still 
present an idea about what human experience should be that is opposite to 
our own convictions. 
Or a work can vividly portray one aspect of human existence while suggesting that this is the only level on which humans can live. 
Or a story can suggest that there is no "should be"—nothing to strive for 
beyond what we see, nothing to believe in beyond what is. 
All of these ideas we may strenuously reject while still finding the book 
itself "believable." So in what sense is the book true? 
Related to this is one final question: What is fiction meant to do? Why are 
you reading a novel at all? Are you expecting to find out some truth about 
human nature? Should a novel reveal some difficult, hard-to-face truth 
about ourselves? Do novels show the inevitable end of certain paths? Or are 
they, instead, agents of moral change? Do they show us models so that we 
84 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
can amend our ways? This idea—that fiction provides us with a model— 
itself has a certain assumption behind it: There is some standard of human 
behavior which applies to all of us, in all cultures, and our quest in life is to 
uncover it. 
The opposing idea was once expressed by Alexander Pope in the phrase, 
"Whatever is, is right."The novel doesn't set out an ideal, because to assume 
that there is such a thing as an unchanging standard of behavior governing 
all people at all times is narrow minded and myopic. The novel has no business in providing models. It simply explores realities: It opens numerous 
doors for you to peer through, but makes no suggestions as to which threshold you should cross. 
THE ANNOTATED NOVEL LIST 
Defoe, Richardson, and Fielding helped create the novel, but they're not on 
this list; literary scholars find them fascinating, but their prose is undoubtedly dated. "And so it fell out to Lady Booby," writes Richardson in Pamela, 
"who happened to be walking arm in arm with Joey one morning in 
Hyde-Park, when Lady Tittle and Lady Tattle came accidentally by in their 
coach. Bless me, says Lady Tittle, can I believe my eyes? Is it Lady Booby?" 
Pamela and Fielding's Joseph Andrews are both satire, the most quickly 
dated of all literary forms; Defoe's prose fares slightly better, but long chunks 
of Robinson Crusoe are devoted to mini travelogues, a popular form at the 
time. ("It happen'd to my farther Misfortune,That the Weather prov'd hazey 
for three or four Days, while I was in this Valley; and not being able to see 
the Sun, I wander'd about very uncomfortably, and at last was oblig'd to find 
out the Sea Side, look for my Post, and come back the same Way I went; and 
then by easy Journies I turn'd Homeward, the Weather being exceeding 
hot, and my Gun, Ammunition, Hatchet and other Things very Heavy." And 
more of the same, in which nothing particular happens.) 
So the Annotated Novel List begins with Cervantes, who anticipated 
those later English writers, and then moves on to Bunyan and Swift. The list 
is heavily weighted toward those novels originally composed in English 
(thus American and British literature), although I have tried to include 
important works of world literature that are available in affordable translations. This list is representative, not comprehensive; the novels on the list 
were chosen, not just for their enduring value, but also because they illustrate some important stage in the novel's development (the allegorical 
impulse, in the case of Bunyan) or because their ideas and characters have 
entered our language. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 85 
The recommended editions combine readable type, affordability, and 
minimal critical apparatus. A number of the older novels are also available in 
Dover Thrift Editions, which are literature for the masses with no explanatory footnotes, not much white space, and a one- to three-dollar price tag. 
(You can find a full list of Dover Thrift Editions at www.doverpublications 
.com.) 
Read the following list in chronological order: 
MIGUEL DE CERVANTES 
Don Quixote 
(1605) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, translated by John Rutherford 
(New York: Penguin Books, 2000); ISBN 0-14-044804-7; $10.00. This recent 
translation reads beautifully and remains faithful to Cervantes's original Spanish text. There are, however, points to reading Tobias Smollett's classic translation of 1733 (republished as a Modern Library edition by Random House in 
2001; ISBN 0-375-75699-X; $11.95). Rutherford tries to render Cervantes 
faithfully; Smollett's translation is closer to a collaboration between himself and 
Cervantes to produce a popular novel called Don Quixote, which entered into 
the English imagination. If y ou get well and truly bogged down in this lengthy 
book, try the abridgment by Walter Starkie (New York: Penguin, 1987; ISBN 
0-451-62684-2; $6.99). 
Alonso Quixada, a poor country gentleman with too much imagination 
and not enough money, becomes so enthralled with tales of chivalry that he 
reads day and night, even selling good farmland to buy books. Soon he 
imagines that he's living in a romantic tale; he renames himself Don 
Quixote [pronounced Kee-HO-tay], claims a village girl as his fair lady, 
recruits the peasant Sancho Panza as his squire, and sets out on a quest. Cervantes makes use of the literary conventions of the picaresque tale, in which 
a rogue wanders through the countryside, taking advantage of the gullible 
people he meets. But Don Quixote is the innocent in this journey, and the 
people he meets (there are 669 characters in Don Quixote) are generally 
hardheaded and intolerant of his fantasies. Don Quixote and Sancho Panza 
wander from adventure to adventure as Quixote's friends and neighbors 
scheme to recapture him and bring him back home. Eventually they succeed, and Don Quixote is brought back to La Mancha to be treated for his 
madness. He's recuperating in a green flannel bedjacket when the young 
Sanson Carrasco, a neighbor's son, comes home from university with the 
news that Don Quixote's adventures have been put into a book with more 
86 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
than twelve thousand copies in print! Excited by their fame, Sancho and 
Don Quixote set off on another adventure; Carrasco, recruited by the village to retrieve the old man yet again, disguises himself as another knight 
and chases the pair through another whole series of adventures. Finally, posing as "the Knight of the White Moon," he defeats Quixote and orders him 
home; Don Quixote totters back to his farm, but soon falls ill with a fever 
and dies. On the surface, Don Quixote is a contradiction, an antibook novel. 
Don Quixote's madness is caused by reading; Sanson Carrasco, the educated 
university graduate, is vengeful and ineffective. But at the novel's end, the 
poor country gentleman Alonso Quixada dies and is buried; Don Quixote, 
the knight created by reading and kept alive through writing, lives forever. 
Don Quixote's adventures are entertaining, but the real fascination of Don 
Quixote lies in Miguel de Cervantes' constant attention to the ways in 
which fables become real in the imagination of the reader. 
JOHN BUNYAN 
The Pilgrim's Progress 
(1679) 
Best editiomThe Penguin Classic paperback (NewYork: Penguin Books, 1987; 
ISBN 0-14-043004-0; $8.95). 
Both Don Quixote and Pilgrim's Progress take place within a fantasy that is 
clearly contrasted to the real world. Cervantes' hero is mad; John Bunyan's 
tale is a dream. In the dream, Bunyan's ragged hero, Christian, has a burden 
on his back and a book in his hand; the burden is ruining his life, and the 
book tells him that he must flee from his home or be destroyed. A mysterious visitor named Evangelist points him toward a narrow wicker gate. 
Christian finally manages to get through the gate and finds a Cross, at which 
point the burden on his back rolls away. But this is only the beginning of his 
spiritual task; now he must travel to the Celestial City. On his way he fights 
the monster Apollyon, escapes from the goblins who haunt the Valley of the 
Shadow of Death, resists the temptations ofVanity Fair (a town convinced of 
the virtues of unbridled capitalism), crosses swords with the Giant Despair, 
and finally reaches the Dark River, where "great horror" falls upon him. 
Rescued by Hopeful, he gains the shore and is escorted by Shining Ones 
into the presence of God. (The sequel to Pilgrim's Progress, written six years 
after the first, is often reprinted as Part II; it tells the story of Christian's wife 
Christiana and his four sons, who follow his path some years later.) Christian, in the manner of good Puritan divines, is prone to setting out spiritual 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 8 J 
truths in neatly numbered lists, as though mature spirituality were simply a 
matter of filling in the correct blanks on a preprinted form. Yet the threat of 
hell is never absent from Pilgrim's Progress; as Christian parades triumphantly 
into the City, he sees another pilgrim taken to a mysterious door at the city's 
foot and thrust through: "Then I saw," he ends, soberly, "that there was a way 
to Hell, even from the Gates of Heaven." 
JONATHAN SWIFT 
Gulliver's Travels 
(1726) 
Best edition:The Oxford World's Classics paperback (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998); ISBN 0-19-283377-4; $4.95. There are many editions of this 
work, hut for some reason most versions use an antiquated-looking, pseudoeighteenth-century, hard-to-read font. The font in this edition is readable. The 
book is also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 0-486-29273-8; $2.50). 
Ship's surgeon Lemuel Gulliver keeps trying to sail from Point A to Point 
B, but bad navigation, pirate attacks, mutinies, and storms push him off course 
every time. First he ends up shipwrecked on the island of Lilliput, where he 
is imprisoned by people six inches high (no mean feat). When he finally 
manages to escape to England, his countrymen strike him as grotesquely 
huge. On Gulliver's second voyage, he winds up on an island of giants, where 
he is treated like a pet.This time he is rescued by an eagle that snatches him 
up and drops him into the sea near an English ship. But back in England, 
he suffers from the same unpleasant change in perception; his fellow Englishmen now look like midgets. Restless, he plans another voyage away from 
home and discovers Laputa, a flying island where the men are obsessed by 
music and mathematics, while the women long for the less preoccupied men 
from a neighboring island. Gulliver's fourth and final journey lands him on 
an island inhabited half by barbarian, humanlike creatures called Yahoos, 
and half by graceful, intelligent horses called Houyhnhnms.When he finally 
returns to England for good, Gulliver is so revolted by his fellow countrymen (who now appear to be Yahoos) that he buys two horses and moves 
into the stable to live with them. Poor Gulliver:Travel is supposed to broaden 
the mind, but living with exaggerated versions of human behavior has narrowed him into a settled hatred of the entire human race. Gulliver's Travels 
is an adventure in perception and (partly) in the power of propaganda; Swift 
leads you to see through Gulliver's eyes and to accept his version of events— 
which, without your noticing, will often veer far from the "truth." 
8 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
JANE AUSTEN 
Pride and Prejudice 
(1815) 
Best edition:The Bantam Classic paperback (NewYork: Bantam Books, 1981); 
ISBN 0-553-21310-5; $4.95. Also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 
0-486-28473-5; $2.50). 
Pride and Prejudice deals not with the male world of quests and sea voyages, 
but with the indoor world of women, thus anticipating by a couple of hundred years the Oprah boom in women's fiction. "It is a truth universally 
acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in 
want of a wife," the novel begins. A wife is the icing on the cake for Charles 
Bingley and Fitzwilliam Darcy, single men with plenty of money and an 
unassailable position in the world. But without husbands, the five daughters 
of the impoverished Bennet family can look forward only to a slow decline 
into poverty. When Charles Bingley rents a house in the neighborhood, 
Jane, the mild and sweet-tempered oldest daughter, falls in love with him. 
But his friend Darcy is appalled by the vulgarity of Mrs. Bennet and the low 
position of the rest of the family, and convinces his malleable friend to give 
Jane up. Meanwhile Darcy, against his will, finds himself attracted to the second daughter, Elizabeth, and finally proposes to her in the most obnoxious 
manner possible. Elizabeth rejects him indignantly. But then a profligate 
rake who was once Darcy s childhood friend seduces Elizabeth's wild and 
uncontrollable youngest sister, Lydia—and Darcy sets out to make the situation right. He also steers Bingley back toward Jane, and Elizabeth, softened 
by these proofs of a changed heart, agrees to marry him. Her father consents 
("He is the kind of man, indeed," Mr. Bennet remarks, "to whom I should 
never dare refuse anything which he condescended to ask"), and the novel 
closes with a double wedding. Pride and Prejudice is one of the most satisfying romances in literature, but it ends with an unasked question: Elizabeth, 
resentful of a world in which appearance is everything, has now moved into 
its center by marrying one of the richest (and most conservative) men in 
England. How will her new life change her? 
CHARLES DICKENS 
Oliver Twist 
(1838) 
Best edition:The Modern Library edition (NewYork: Random House, 2001); 
ISBN 0-375-75784-8; $6.95. This edition has clear, readable type and is made 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 8 g 
worthwhile by George Cruikshank's original illustrations; the text is overfull of 
endnotes, but since the notes are at the book's end, you don't have to look at 
them unless you need a word or term defined. 
An unknown girl gives birth in a workhouse and then dies without revealing her identity; her baby, minutes old, lies gasping for breath on a grimy 
mattress. If the baby had been "surrounded by careful grandmothers... and 
doctors of profound wisdom, he would most inevitably and indubitably 
have been killed in no time." But since no one is present but an overworked doctor and a drunken matron, the baby lives. This caustic reversal 
of fortunes introduces us to Oliver Twist, the orphan child who deserves 
love and care, but is instead used by adults from his infancy on. The matron 
who raises him steals his charity handout; the parish rents him to a coffin 
maker for five pounds; when he runs away to London, the stolen-goods 
fence Fagin teaches him to pick the pockets of passersby Oliver is rescued 
from the streets by the prosperous Mr. Brownlow, but two other thieves, 
Monks and Sikes (with the help of Sikes's working-girl lover Nancy), kidnap him back and force him to help with a robbery. The house s owners, 
Mrs. Maylie and her niece Rose, catch Oliver in the act and decide to 
adopt him, but Monks and Sikes are determined to kidnap the child back 
again. Nancy, who has begun to regret her involvement, warns Rose and 
Mrs. Maylie of the kidnap plot; when Sikes discovers her treachery, he beats 
her to death. (Dickens is a shrewd observer of phenomena for which there 
were no clinical labels: "I must go back," Nancy tells Rose, who tries to 
convince her to leave Sikes. "I am drawn back to him through every suffering and ill usage; and I should be, I believe, if I knew that I was to die by 
his hand at last.") Oliver introduces Rose and Mrs. Maylie to his previous 
benefactor, Mr. Brownlow, and the three adults plan to trap Sikes and 
Monks when they make their kidnap attempt. Sikes hangs himself accidentally while trying to escape the ambush. Monks is captured and turns 
out to be Oliver's illegitimate half-brother; his pursuit of Oliver has been 
an attempt to steal the younger child's inheritance. In two of the book's 
more staggering coincidences, Rose turns out to be Oliver's aunt, and Mr. 
Brownlow realizes that Monks and Oliver are both the sons of his old 
school friend Edward Leeford. Dickens's unlikely plot (and I've left out 
three quarters of it) is meant to demonstrate that children who survive in 
London do so by pure chance, because benevolent individuals happen to 
take pity on them. Oliver Twist was originally subtitled The Parish Boy's 
Progress in a satirical play on Bunyan's title. Christian is a grown man who 
can pursue his own destiny, but Oliver Twist is entirely dependent on the 
kindness of strangers. 
9 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
CHARLOTTE BRONTE 
Jane Eyre 
(1847) 
Best edition: The Signet Classic edition (New York: Penguin Putnam, 1993); 
ISBN 0-451-526554; $4.95. Also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 0-
486-42449-9; $3.50). 
Jane Eyre, an orphan raised by an aunt who dislikes her and cousins who 
torment her, escapes first to school, then to a position as a governess at the 
estate of Thornfield. Her employer, the dashing but manipulative Mr. 
Rochester, persuades Jane to marry him; she agrees, but on her wedding day 
discovers that the strange maniacal laughter and weird happenings in the 
Rochester household are caused by Mr. Rochester's wife Bertha, who went 
insane shortly after their marriage and is confined to the attic. Rochester, 
prevented from committing bigamy, tries to convince Jane to live with him; 
but she flees away over the moors and stumbles onto the cottage of distant 
relations, the Rivers family. She stays with the two sisters, Diana and Mary, 
and is courted by their brother, the reserved and ascetic St. John Rivers. But 
when St. John proposes, telling Jane that God has called her to be both his 
wife and his assistant on his missionary voyages, Jane declines. Fortunately, 
she inherits a small sum of money from a distant uncle, which gives her a 
certain amount of independence. Pondering her next move, Jane has a sudden and vivid vision of Mr. Rochester, calling to her. She returns to Thornfield only to find it blackened and ruined. Rochester's mad wife burned the 
house, herself inside it; Rochester is now free to remarry, but has been 
blinded and scarred in the fire. Jane marries him anyway ("Reader," she 
announces in one of the novel's most famous lines, "I married him"), takes 
care of him, and, as the novel closes, bears him a son. Rochester is one of literature's great rascals: sexy, charming, rich, and disreputable. In Jane, Charlotte Brontë creates the perfect woman for him; she refuses to marry him 
until she, not he, can be the dominant partner. 
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 
The Scarlet Letter 
(1850) 
Best edition: The Bantam Classic (New York: Prentice Hall, 1981); ISBN 0-
553-21009-2; $3.95. Also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 0-486-
28048-9; $2.00). 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 9 1 
Hester Prynne becomes pregnant well after her husband is lost at sea. Her 
Puritan community threatens to execute her for adultery, but when the village minister, Arthur Dimmesdale, intervenes on her behalf, the village elders allow her to live—as long as she wears a scarlet cloth A sewn onto the 
front of her dress. Hester gives birth to her daughter Pearl and lives quietly 
until a stranger appears in town. This weather-beaten man has spent years 
living with the Indians; he calls himself Roger Chillingworth, but Hester 
recognizes him as her missing husband. Humiliated by Hester's pregnancy, 
Chillingworth refuses to reveal his real identity to the town. Instead he 
scrapes up a friendship with Arthur Dimmesdale, whom he suspects (quite 
rightly) of being Pearl's father. Under the guise of manly comradeship, he 
subjects Dimmesdale to mental torture until the minister climbs up onto 
the scaffold, confesses his sin to the whole town, rips open his shirt to reveal 
a bizarre stigmata (an A which has formed itself on the flesh of his chest), 
and then dies. Chillingworth, deprived of the mouse in his cat-and-mouse 
game, dies too. Hester moves away with Pearl, but unexpectedly reappears 
some years later, still wearing the scarlet A on her gown, and goes on living 
quietly in Massachusetts until her death. Pearl, who is born outside of society's moral constraints, manages to escape all social pressures and live happily ever after; but she only achieves this freedom by leaving the AngloAmerican world altogether to marry some mysterious nobleman. (No one 
ever sees him, but letters with a coat of arms that is "unknown to English 
heraldry" arrive for Hester with regularity.) 
HERMAN MELVILLE 
Moby-Dick 
(1851) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback (New York: Penguin, 1992); 
ISBN 0-14-039084-7; $11,95. This edition has a large, readable font, and a 
durable binding (important in such a thick book). 
A schoolmaster (whose true identity is never revealed, although he asks us 
to call him"Ishmael") decides, restlessly, to change his life. He signs onto the 
whaling ship Pequod along with the harpooner Queequeg, a tattooed cannibal from the South Seas. The Pequod is captained by Ahab, a maniacal 
whaler with a scar that runs the whole length of his body and a wooden leg. 
Ahab is determined to find and kill the huge white whale Moby-Dick. 
When the whale is finally spotted, boats are lowered from the ship to chase 
it down; Ahab is in the lead boat, but Moby-Dick charges his boat and 
Ç2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
destroys it. Ahab is rescued, and once again the crew pursues the white 
whale. On the third day of the chase, the whale rams the ship itself and 
splinters it; the rope from Ahab s harpoon coils around his neck and drags 
him down into the water; and the crew all die except for Ishmael, who is 
rescued by a passing ship. 
This may sound fairly straightforward, but the novel is one long exercise 
in symbolism. What is it really about? The human impulse to "create and 
destroy gods and heroes" (Eric Mottram); God's "inscrutable silence" in the 
face of man's pursuit of spiritual truth (James Wood); language, which has 
"so many meanings offered that we end up with meaninglessness" (Wood 
again); man's quest for knowledge, which brings "misery as well as wonder" 
(James Mcintosh); the rejection of cultural authority and the subversion of 
accepted cultural truths (Carolyn Porter); heterosexual anxiety and homosexual identity (too many critics to cite). It's also about obsession; the fruitless quest for a truth that is often sighted but never found; the essential 
isolation and loneliness of the human self, even when surrounded by company; the conflict of natural, savage, uncomplicated man (Queequeg) and 
educated, confused, uncertain man (Ishmael); and (oh, yes) what it's really 
like to chase, harpoon, and cut up a whale. 
HARRIET BEECHER STOWE 
Uncle Tom's Cabin 
(1851) 
Best edition:The Modern Library Classics paperback, which has beautiful large 
print and plenty of white space (New York: Random House, 2001); ISBN 0-
375-75693-0; $8.95. A cheaper edition with smaller print is published by Signet 
Classics (NewYork: Penguin Putnam, 1998; ISBN 0-451-32670-8; $5.95). 
Uncle Tom is a slave on Arthur Shelby's Kentucky plantation. Shelby is a conscientious master, but he is still a slaveowner, and Tom is still an asset. So when 
Shelby gets into debt, he sells Tom "down the river" to the slave markets in 
the Deep South, dreaded by slaves because of the greater cruelty, the hot, 
humid living conditions, and the grueling field labor. Selling Tom, who has 
been with the family for years, is bad, but Shelby also sells the five-year-old 
Harry away from his mother, Eliza. When his indignant wife protests, Shelby 
insists that his debts leave him no choice. But Mrs. Shelby, who is a woman 
and therefore possessed of greater moral sensitivity than any man, argues with 
her husband. Eliza overhears, snatches her child, and runs away. She tries to 
convince Uncle Tom to come with her, but he stays behind out of loyalty, 
knowing that Shelby needs the money from his sale. For this misguided iden-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D p J 
tification with the aims of white people Tom eventually pays with his life. 
He travels down South, but on the way saves the life of Little Eva St. Clare, 
an impossibly good, golden-haired, consumptive child. Little Eva convinces 
her father to buy him, and on her deathbed pleads with Mr. St. Clare to set 
Tom free. St. Clare agrees, but before he can keep his promise he is accidentally killed; his wife sells Tom to pay her debts, and Tom is beaten to 
death by his new master, the drunk and vicious Simon Legree. 
Eliza reaches Ohio after a dangerous passage across a river jammed with 
floating ice cakes. She finds refuge at the home of a proslavery senator who, 
moved by her plight, changes his mind and sends her to a Quaker community, which in turn helps her escape to Canada. Meanwhile, Arthur Shelby, 
haunted by his decision to sell Harry and Tom, decides to look for his slaves. 
When he discovers the circumstances of Tom's death, he meets two other 
slaves who are running away from Simon Legree's brutal treatment; one of 
them, Cassy, turns out to be Eliza's mother. Shelby goes back to Kentucky 
and frees all his remaining slaves; Cassy and her companions go to Canada 
and find Eliza there; and all of the fugitives decide to relocate to Liberia, the 
new colony for ex-slaves. Like Dickens, Stowe wants her readers to feel the 
emotions of the wretched. But while Dickens may find hope in benevolent 
individuals, Stowe sees them as ultimately helpless in the face of an unjust 
system. She wants a complete social reformation, and she borrows highly 
evocative themes (children in peril, bereaved mothers, saintly females) from 
contemporary "women's fiction" in an attempt to enlist her audience's emotions (and thus their wills) in this project. 
GUSTAVE FLAUBERT 
Madame Bovary 
(1857) 
Best editioniThe Vintage Classics paperback, translated by Frances Steegmuller 
(NewYork: Random House, 1992); ISBN 0-679-73636-0; $12.00. Also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 0-486-29237-6; $2.30). 
Gustave Flaubert, the "father of realism," kills his heroine off because she 
tries to live in a romance novel. Emma Roualt marries the village doctor, 
Charles Bovary, because she likes the idea of being the doctor's wife. But the 
reality is so boring that she becomes ill. Her husband gives up his rural practice and moves her to the town of Rouen, where she has a daughter. But 
motherhood doesn't fulfill her yearning for romance; when the baby drools 
on her (certainly one of the great realities of life), Emma recoils in horror. 
Instead she yearns for the law clerk Léon—until he leaves town—and 
94 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
incurs the wrath of her mother-in-law, who complains that Emma is too 
busy "reading novels and all kinds of bad books It's a dangerous business, 
son." Longing for romance, tired of her dull husband with his dirty fingernails and peasant ways, Emma is ripe for the attentions of the town bachelor 
Rodolphe Boulanger, who is "something of a connoisseur: there had been 
many women in his Hfe." Boulanger is no prince, though. He has an affair 
with Emma, promises to carry her off, and then ignores their appointed 
meeting ("I can't be saddled with a child!" he thinks to himself. "All that 
trouble! All that expense!"). Emma, disappointed, begins an affair with 
Léon, who has just returned to town; she goes deep into debt, spending her 
husband's money without telling him until the sheriff comes to confiscate 
their property. Neither Léon nor Rodolphe will help her, so she poisons 
herself. Even here, romance and reality war: "How pretty she is," an attendant sighs over her beautifully dressed corpse, until a "black liquid" pours 
out of Emma's mouth "like vomit" and stains her flounces. Charles Bovary 
dies of grief, leaving their daughter an orphan who has to work in a cotton 
mill—surely a guarantee that she won't share her mother's failings, which 
required a regular source of money for their indulgence. 
FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
Crime and Punishment 
(1866) 
Best edition: The Vintage Classics paperback, translated by Richard Peuear and 
Larissa Volokhonsky (New York: Random House, 1992); ISBN 0-679-73450-
3; $15.00. Also available in a Dover Thrift edition, in the classic translation by 
Constance Garnett (more dated than the Pevera/Volokhonsky translation, but 
well respected) (ISBN 0-486-41587-2; $3.00). 
Raskolnikov commits a murder that even he doesn't understand. His family 
is poor, and his sister Dunya needs a dowry, so Raskolnikov murders an elderly pawnbroker and her sister for the jewelry in their room—even though 
the jewelry is poor stuff, hardly enough to make them wealthy. Raskolnikov 
slowly comes to the attention of the police inspector Porfiry Petrovich. 
When he realizes that he's under suspicion, Raskolnikov briefly considers 
turning himself in, but he abandons this plan when he becomes interested 
in the prostitute Sonya, the devout daughter of a dead clerk and a consumptive mother. 
Meanwhile, Raskolnikov's sister Dunya has managed to become involved 
with three men at once. She breaks off her engagement with the petty 
bureaucrat Luzhin and becomes involved with Raskolnikov's friend Razu-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 9 5 
mikhin instead; Luzhin, bitter over his rejection, plants money on Sonya and 
then accuses her of stealing it. (Fortunately, a neighbor sees him and exonerates her.) Dunya has also attracted the attention of a former student of 
hers, the sinister Svidrigailov, who follows her to St. Petersburg. When 
Raskolnikov finally confesses the murders to Sonya, he is overheard by 
Svidrigailov, who then lures Dunya to his room and locks her in. He promises to help save Raskolnikov if she will marry him, but she refuses; finally, 
Svidrigailov releases her and kills himself in despair. All of this twisted love 
stands in contrast to the love offered to Raskolnikov by Sonya, Dunya, and 
his mother. When they all exhort him to clear his conscience, Raskolnikov 
finally turns himself in and is sentenced to eight years in Siberia. Dunya and 
Razumikhin marry; Sonya follows Raskolnikov to Siberia, where she lives 
near the prison camp and helps care for its inmates. Imprisoned in Siberia, 
Raskolnikov suffers from wounded pride: "Oh, if only I were alone and no 
one loved me, and I myself had never loved anyone!" he thinks to himself. 
"None of this would be!" But under his pillow he keeps a copy of the Gospels 
that Sonya has given him. When he takes them out, the story of his crime 
ends, and a new story begins—but Dostoyevsky makes no attempt to tell it. 
"Here begins a new account," he writes, "the account of a man's gradual 
renewal .. . his gradual transition from one world to another, his acquaintance with a new, hitherto completely unknown reality. It might make the 
subject of a new story—but our present story is ended." Dostoyevsky s careful account of Raskolnikov s growing uneasiness over his crime is a classic 
description of the stages of guilt; it strikes a contemporary note even today, 
a century and a half later. 
LEO TOLSTOY 
Anna Karenina 
(i877) 
Best edition: The Modern Library Classics paperback, translated by Constance 
Garnett, revised by Leonard J. Kent and Nina Berberova (New York: Random 
House, 2000); ISBN 0-67Ç-78330-X; $9.95. 
Stepan Arkadyevich is in trouble—he's been caught cheating on his wife, 
Dolly. Fortunately, Stepan s sister Anna is coming to town. She negotiates a 
truce between her brother and his wife and meets Count Vronsky, who has 
been paying halfhearted attention to Dolly's younger sister Kitty. When 
Vronsky sees Anna he falls in love with her; Anna, despite her husband and 
eight-year-old son, carries on an increasingly obvious liaison with Vronsky 
until she becomes pregnant with Vronksy's child and runs away with him. 
96 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Meanwhile, Kitty pines forVronsky but is slowly comforted by another 
suitor, the solid and worthwhile Levin. They marry and work together to 
run Levin's estate. 
But Anna andVronsky tear at each other. Anna is cut off from her son by 
her husband's decree; she is nagged by grief, guilt, and "an inner irritation, 
grounded in her mind on the conviction that his love had diminished." For 
his part,Vronsky begins to "regret that he had put himself for her sake in a 
difficult position." Their liaison degenerates; they quarrel; Anna rushes to 
the railway station, intending to run away. As she looks at the tracks, she 
thinks, "There . . . and I shall punish him and escape from everyone and 
from myself." She throws herself under the train. Vronksy, devastated, goes 
into the army. 
Levin and Kitty aren't blissful either; Levin goes through a crisis of faith 
that almost drives him to suicide. But the two are held together by more 
than romantic love—they have the formal structure of family that Anna and 
Vronsky lacked. Levin's responsibilities to his family and estate force him to 
endure. And as he continues, doggedly, "laying down his own individual and 
definite pattern in life," he is given the gift of faith. Spiritual strength fills the 
empty structures of his existence. At the book's end, he reflects: "I shall go on 
in the same way.... [B]ut my life now ... is no longer meaningless, as it was 
before, but it has an unquestionable meaning of the goodness which I have 
the power to put into it." Tolstoy's novel ends with a deft mixture of hope 
and realism; Levin's new strength doesn't depend on circumstances, but on 
his decision to believe in the spiritual dimensions of his everyday life. 
THOMAS HARDY 
The Return of the Native 
(1878) 
Best edition: The Penguin paperback (New York: Penguin Putnam, 1999); 
ISBN 0-14-043518-2; $8.95. 
The Return of the Native begins, not with a hero or heroine, but with an 
entire chapter about the landscape: Egdon Heath, a natural force in its own 
right, a "sombre stretch of rounds and hollows . . . singularly colossal and 
mysterious in its swarthy monotony." Eustacia Vye lives on Egdon Heath. 
She is a forceful girl, with "instincts toward social nonconformity" and plans 
for life that show "the comprehensive strategy of a general" rather than "the 
small arts called womanish." She longs to escape Egdon Heath, and when 
ClymYeobright, hometown boy made good, returns to the small village, she 
sees him as her deliverer. They marry—but she's infuriated by his decision 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 97 
to stay in Egdon Heath and become a schoolmaster. And things get worse. 
Clym reads too much and ruins his eyesight, and philosophically becomes a 
woodcutter. Trapped in this peasantlike existence, at the mercy of forces 
beyond her control, Eustacia begins an affair with her old suitor Damon 
Wildeve. When Clym s mother hears of the affair, she visits the Yeobright 
house to intervene. But Eustacia is entertaining Wildeve (in Clym's absence) 
and doesn't answer her mother-in-law's knock. Clym's mother goes away 
across the heath—where she stops to rest and is promptly bitten by a snake 
(Eustacia isn't the only character at the mercy of hostile natural forces). 
Clym, returning from his woodcutting, stumbles across his dying mother. 
He learns from villagers that she has been seen coming away from his home, 
demands an explanation from his wife, and discovers her affair. Eustacia runs 
away to elope with Wildeve, but on her way to meet him in the middle of 
the night, she falls (or jumps) into the nearby millpond and drowns. Damon 
plunges in after her and is drowned as well. Like water, the forces of nature 
and society bubble, pool, and flow all around the characters in The Return of 
the Native, ultimately submerging them in their fruitless attempts to escape. 
Hardy is the greatest "landscape writer" in the English language; his moors, 
fields, and hills are real enough to touch and taste; his dark woods and deep 
pools bristle with menace. 
HENRY JAMES 
The Portrait of a Lady 
(1881) 
Best editiomThe Bantam Classic paperback (NewYork: Bantam Books, 1983); 
ISBN 0-553-21127-7; $4.95. 
Isabel Archer is an American girl with a very American suitor—Caspar 
Goodwood, a tall, brown businessman with a resolute jaw. But Isabel's aunt, 
who has lived with her husband and son on an English country estate for 
years, decides to rescue Isabel from uncouth America and show her Europe. 
In England, Isabel is courted by the noble Lord Warbuton and is half 
inclined to fall in love with her cousin Ralph. Meanwhile her American 
friend Henrietta Stackpole, an independent and persistent reporter for an 
American publication, arrives in England. Troubled by the appeal of old 
(and in her eyes, decadent) Europe for Isabel, Henrietta invites Goodwood 
to visit—but Isabel, determined to make her own way, orders Goodwood to 
go away. 
Fortunately Isabel doesn't have to stretch her self-reliance too far, since 
her uncle dies and, at Ralph's request, leaves Isabel half of his estate. With 
98 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
money in her pocket, Isabel makes the acquaintance of a sophisticated 
widow, Madame Merle, and goes traveling. Madame Merle introduces her 
to Gilbert Osmond, an oddly untrustworthy American with a fifteen-yearold daughter, Pansy. Isabelle agrees to marry Osmond, but Ralph objects 
that Isabel is giving up her liberty: "You were meant for something better 
than to keep guard over the sensibilities of a sterile dilettante!" he cries. 
Isabel refuses to listen. But three years later, she has been diminished by her 
marriage: She has less wit, less curiosity, less brilliance. When she discovers 
that Madame Merle is actually Pansy's mother and has been in contact with 
Osmond, her lover, all along, she is sickened by her husbands deception. She 
announces that she will travel to England (against Osmond's will) to see the 
dying Ralph. After her cousin's death she meets Caspar Goodwood again; 
the American begs her to leave Osmond and come back to America with 
him. She refuses, but the novel ends ambiguously, with Goodwood finding 
out from Henrietta Stackpole that her friend has gone back to Rome: 
"Look here," Henrietta says, "just you wait." Does Isabel finally return to 
him? We don't know, but in her efforts to be free she has consistently wound 
herself into chains; why would marriage to Goodwood bring her any 
greater liberty? 
MARK TWAIN 
Huckleberry Finn 
(1884) 
Best edition: The Bantam Classic paperback (NewYork: Bantam Books, 1981); 
ISBN 0-553-21079-3; $4.95. Also available as a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 
0-486-28061-6; $2.00). 
After he discovers six thousand dollars in a cave, Huckleberry Finn is suddenly in demand.Tom Sawyer wants him to join a robber's band, the Widow 
Douglas and her sister Miss Watson plan to civilize him, and his drunkard 
father kidnaps him and hauls him off to a cabin in the woods. Huck appreciates the freedom to smoke, cuss, and live in dirt, but doesn't enjoy being 
beaten daily, so he fakes his own gory murder and runs off. In the woods, he 
meets Miss Watson's slave Jim, who has also run off to avoid being sold. 
Huck and Jim set off on the Mississippi, headed for freedom. Along the way 
they explore a wrecked riverboat (Huck pretends to know the owner); meet 
up with a crowd of boastful raftsmen (Huck pretends to be the son of a 
riverman); take part in a bitter family feud (Huck pretends to be an orphan); 
and finally join up with two con men who claim to be the exiled King of 
France and the Duke of Bridgewater. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D Q Ç 
Huck tags along while the Duke and the King pretend, in turn, to be 
evangelists, actors, circus performers, and the long-lost heirs of a rich tanner. Meanwhile Jim stays on the raft, fearful of capture. When the Duke and 
the King—broke and exposed as frauds—sell Jim to a local farmer for a few 
extra dollars, Huck plots to free him. He pretends to be Tom Sawyer; Tom 
Sawyer, showing up to help, pretends to be Huck Finn; Jim, who could perfectly well get away on his own, pretends to be in a dungeon so that the two 
boys can mount an elaborate rescue. All three are caught, but Tom Sawyer 
shouts out that Jim has been free all the time. Miss Watson died two months 
before and set him free in her will, but Tom wanted to stage his false rescue 
for "the adventure of it." 
"I reckon I got to light out for the Territory ..., " Huck complains at the 
book's end, "because Aunt Sally she's going to adopt me and sivilize me and 
I can't stand it. I been there before." Huck's flight to freedom—the quintessential American quest—forces him to change identities again and again, 
never settling; as David E Burg writes, Huck understands "that to keep 
moving is as near as one can ever come to freedom."13 
STEPHEN CRANE 
The Red Badge of Courage 
(i895) 
Best edition:The Bantam Classic paperback (NewYork: Bantam Books, 1983); 
ISBN 0-333-21011-4; $3.93. This very short novel is also available in a Dover 
Thrift edition (ISBN 0-486-26463-3; $1.30), and has been published bound 
together with Crane's short stories in several other editions. 
Henry Fleming, a farm boy fighting in the Civil War, worries over his ability to be brave. When his first battle starts, he finds himself in the middle of 
a confused and chaotic mass of soldiers, all shooting wildly; he starts shooting too, pleased and relieved to find himself already fighting. (Crane's battle 
scenes are fascinating for their extreme realism and limited point of view; 
he is the nineteenth-century equivalent of the handheld video camera, 
offering a nonprofessional, man-in-the-street view of events.) The soldiers 
around Henry retreat. Henry follows their example as he did before—but 
this time his crowd-following leads him into cowardly flight. Guilty and 
ashamed, Henry rejoins his regiment, trailing woefully along behind the 
honorably wounded: "He felt that he was regarding a procession of chosen 
I3David F.Burg,"AnotherView of Huckleberry Finn" Nineteenth-Century Fiction, vol. 29, no. 3 
(December 1974): 299-319; 319. 
10 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
beings. . . . He could never be like them." He imagines that the other soldiers are jeering at him as he passes. Suddenly the column of wounded is 
overwhelmed by a wave of men that pours past them in full retreat. Henry 
grabs a passing soldier to ask him what has happened, but the panic-stricken 
man clubs him with his rifle and runs away. Now wounded, Henry finally 
makes his way back to camp and tells them that he was injured in the battle. ("Ah," his corporal tells him, examining his head,"yeh've been grazed by 
a ball. It's raised a queer lump jest as if some feller had lammed yeh on th' 
head with a club.") But soon the regiment is once more engulfed in battle. 
Henry hides behind a tree and keeps on shooting blindly ahead of him. 
When the smoke clears, he discovers (to his surprise) that he's been at the 
forefront of the fighting: He's a hero, no longer a coward. Stephen Crane 
called The Red Badge of Courage a. portrayal of fear, but fear and bravery have 
little relationship to Henry's reputation; his heroism is purely chance. 
JOSEPH CONRAD 
Heart of Darkness 
(1902) 
Best edition: Modern Library Classics (New York: Random House, 1999); 
ISBN 0-375-75377-X; S7.95. Clear, readable type, but don't read the multiple 
introductory essays until you've read the text itself Also available in a Dover 
Thrift edition (ISBN 0-486-26464-5; $1.00). 
Five old friends have gathered on a yacht in the Thames. One of them— 
Marlow, a seaman and wanderer—tells the story of his journey into the 
Congo. Hired by a trading company to check up on their ivory-production 
center, Marlow makes his slow and difficult way deep into Africa. As he travels, he hears again and again of the mysterious Mr. Kurtz, another employee 
of the trading company. Mr. Kurtz sends out magnificent shipments of ivory 
and also takes good care of his native workers, enriching the company and 
educating Africans at the same time. But as Marlow gets closer and closer to 
the heart of Kurtz's operation, he finds run-down ports, broken equipment, 
and hostile Africans. When he finally finds Kurtz, the man is dying; he's 
become more savage than the natives and has ruined an entire section of the 
Congo in his attempts to ship out more ivory. Before Marlow can bring him 
back to England, Kurtz dies, muttering,"The horror!The horror!"Like Bunyan's Christian, Marlow has made a pilgrimage. His journey into Africa has 
been a journey into the innermost recesses of the human soul, but instead 
of a Celestial City he has found only confusion, illusion, lack of clarity, lack 
of meaning, lies, and death. Back in civilization, Marlow meets Kurtz's fiancée, 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 10 1 
who asks about Kurtz's last words; Marlow lies, telling her that Kurtz died 
with her name on his lips. Kurtz's last words reveal the only truth he has discovered about human existence—but it's a truth no one can face. Nor is the 
darkness only in Africa. As Marlow finishes his story, the men on the yacht 
look up and see "a black bank of clouds .. . an overcast sky .. . the heart of 
an immense darkness" hovering over the English landscape. 
EDITH WHARTON 
The House of Mirth 
(1905) 
Best edition: The Signet Classic reprint edition (New York: Penguin Putnam, 
2000); ISBN 0-451-52736-9; $4.95. Skip Anna Quindlen's introduction. 
The New York socialite Lily Bart is twenty-nine and (horror!) still unmarried; with no money of her own, she depends on grudging handouts from 
her aunt and taps her friends for the luxuries that satisfy her sense of beauty. 
Afraid that her days as perpetual houseguest will end when she's no longer 
young and lovely, Lily tries, reluctantly, to snare a rich husband. Her options 
are limited: Simon Rosedale, the Jewish financier whose cash is making a 
place for him in high society, has already asked her to marry him, but she 
cannot bear to sink so low (Wharton's easy anti-Semitism is symptomatic of 
her times). Lawrence Selden, an attractive and sympathetic lawyer, is unfortunately too poor for her tastes. Her best choice is Percy Gryce, a heavy, colorless millionaire who collects Americana and always obeys his mother. But 
Lily despises her own marital ambitions, and her halfhearted schemes fall 
through, ruining her reputation in the process. No longer an "unsoiled 
beauty," Lily descends with startling rapidity through the strata of Gilded 
Age society; finally, she tries wage labor as a milliner, but can't keep up the 
ten-hour workdays. Fired from her job, reduced to living in a cheap boardinghouse while her savings dwindle away, and plagued by insomnia, Lily 
takes a double dose of chloral to help her sleep and never wakes up. Perhaps 
there are things that money can't buy, but in Wharton's America, you can't 
live without it. 
F. SCOTT FITZGERALD 
The Great Gatsby 
(1925) 
Best edition:The Scribnerpaperback reprint (NewYork: Scribner, 1995); ISBN 
0-684-80152-3; $12.00. A cheaper and equally good edition is published by The 
10 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Penguin Group (U.K., ISBN 0-140-77197-2; $9.95) but is sometimes difficult 
to find in the United States. 
Nick Carraway moves away from his innocent midwestern hometown and 
rents a house on Long Island Sound. His beautiful cousin Daisy lives across 
the water; the mysterious millionaire Jay Gatsby lives in a sparkling, brandnew mansion right beside him. Gatsby has loved Daisy since his college 
days. His desire is draped with romantic phrases, but what he really adores is 
Daisy's embodiment of wealth; she gleams "like silver, safe and proud above 
the hot struggles of the poor." When Daisy's husband Tom begins an affair 
with Myrtle Wilson, his mechanic's wife, Jay Gatsby convinces Nick to play 
matchmaker between himself and Daisy. Nick himself falls into a passionless 
relationship with socialite Jordan Baker. As all three affairs run in parallel, 
tensions tighten between the five central characters (the mechanic's wife 
apparently doesn't count). During a disastrous dinner at the Plaza, Tom 
sneers at Gatsby and accuses him of adultery. Daisy and Jay Gatsby leave 
together and drive back to the Sound in Gatsby s car—and accidentally run 
over Myrtle, who rushes into their way. Daisy was driving, but Jay Gatsby 
takes the blame. Myrtle's husband discovers Gatsby's identity, breaks into 
Gatsby s mansion, and shoots both Gatsby and himself. 
Nick organizes the funeral service, but no one comes. Daisy and Tom 
drift away, Jordan Baker marries someone else. And finally Nick moves back 
to his midwestern town, abandoning New York and its deceptive beauty for 
the dark, solid worth of middle America. 
VIRGINIA WOOLF 
Mrs. Dalloway 
(1925) 
Best edition: The Harvest Book paperback (NewYork : Harcourt, 1990); ISBN 
0-13-662870-8; $12.00. 
Clarissa Dalloway steps out of her door in the morning to buy flowers for 
her party that same evening—and instantly we are plunged into the disjointed, image-bright stream of her thought. Mrs. Dalloway follows the 
thoughts of three main characters over the course of a single day in 1923. 
Clarissa Dalloway, a London society woman in her early fifties, remembers 
the long-ago days when she was courted by Peter Walsh, before she rejected 
him. Peter Walsh, now in love with a much younger woman, also muses 
about those days and recollects his first introduction to Clarissa's husband. 
Septimus Warren Smith, a shell-shocked soldier on the edge of complete 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 0 3 
disintegration, replays the events of the war and sees his friends dying in 
flames. The physical lives of the three only intersect twice; once, when Peter 
Walsh strolls past Septimus and his weeping wife in the park; and again at 
the end of the day, when Septimus's physician comes to Clarissa's party and 
remarks, casually, that his young patient committed suicide just hours 
before. But the story actually takes place not in the physical world, but in a 
different kind of universe: a mental reality, where the laws that govern time 
and space are different, where characters who never meet in person intersect, mysteriously, in their thoughts, and where Septimus and Clarissa, unacquainted with each other, are mirror images. Septimus is unable to cope 
with disrupted, shattered, post—World War I England; Clarissa Dalloway survives, but only because she refuses to think deeply ("She knew nothing," 
Woolf writes, "no language, no history; she scarcely read a book now, except 
memoirs in bed"). 
FRANZ KAFKA 
The Trial 
(1925) 
Best edition: A recent translation by Breon Mitchell is clear and captures 
Kafka's use of legal gibberish well (New York: Schocken Books, 1998); ISBN 
0-8052-0999-9; $13.00. 
"Someone must have been spreading lies about Josef K.," The Trial begins, 
"for without having done anything wrong he was arrested one morning." 
It's the morning of his thirtieth birthday, and at first Josef thinks that the 
arrest is a joke. But an Inspector appears and assures him that it is no joke; 
he is undoubtedly guilty, but until his trial he can go about his business. Josef 
K. keeps attempting to refute the accusation, but since he never finds out 
what it is, all his attempts end in confusion. He defends himself in front of 
spectators, only to discover that they are all in fact officers of the court; he 
discovers that the warders who first arrested him are being flogged for their 
conduct and tries to intervene; he tries to engage a lawyer, finds the lawyer 
on a sickbed, is tempted away from the sickbed by the lawyer's nurse (who 
seduces him), and then returns to find that the Chief Clerk of the Court has 
arrived in his absence. These dreamlike, irrational attempts to defend himself continue for a full year. On the morning of his thirty-first birthday, two 
more warders show up and order Josef K. to go with them. He realizes that 
they mean to execute him—but although he has the opportunity to escape, 
he allows himself to be killed. Kafka's opening words suggest that Josef K. 
lives in a rational world; "must have" implies some sort of cause and effect, 
l o 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
"false accusation" assumes some existing standard of justice. But this reasonable order is an illusion. None of the court proceedings make sense; eventually the words that stand for those proceedings (accusation, trial, crime, 
guilt, even Josef K.'s name itself) become emptied of meaning as well. At the 
end, K.'s executioners lead him to his trial in silence. The rational order of 
the universe, and the words that express it, have both been shown to be 
phantasms. 
RICHARD WRIGHT 
Native Son 
(1940) 
Best edition: The Harper Perennial paperback (New York: Harper & Row, 
1989); ISBN 0-06-080977-9; $7.50. 
Bigger Thomas lives in a rat-infested Chicago apartment controlled by 
wealthy Mr. Dalton; the Daltons charge their black tenants enormous rents 
and then give some of the money to black schools, which makes them feel 
enlightened. When Bigger gets a job as chauffeur on the Dalton estate, Mary 
Dalton—the daughter of the house—and her socialist boyfriend Jan treat 
Bigger as a peer. Bigger finds this oddly infuriating. ("Why didn't they leave 
him alone?" he thinks, when Jan shakes his hand. "He was very conscious of 
his black skin and there was in him a prodding conviction that Jan and men 
like him.... made him feel his black skin by just standing there looking at 
him.") In a further egalitarian gesture, Jan and Mary invite Bigger to drink 
with them. All three get drunk. Bigger takes the staggering Mary home, 
back to her room. He kisses her, and then, hearing her mother in the hallway outside, puts a pillow over her face to keep her quiet. Afterward he's 
startled to find that Mary is dead. Panicked, Bigger stuffs her body into the 
furnace and then convinces his girlfriend Bessie to help him write a false 
ransom letter implicating Jan. Bessie starts to lose her nerve, though, and 
Bigger finally murders her in her sleep with a brick. Bessie's murder goes 
unnoticed. But the police decide that Bigger has murdered Mary Dalton 
and mount a manhunt for him, raiding black homes all along the South 
Side. Arrested and put on trial, Bigger becomes an icon for all that whites 
fear in blacks: strength, sexuality, and vengefulness for past mistreatment. 
Jan, uneasily aware that somehow he bears responsibility for Bigger's 
plight, hires the lawyer Max to defend his girlfriend's murderer. ("I was. . . 
grieving for Mary," he tells Bigger, "and then I thought of all the black men 
who've been killed, the black men who had to grieve when their people 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 0 3 
were snatched from them in slavery.") Max admits Bigger's guilt, but argues 
that Bigger's life had been "stunted and distorted" by white mistreatment. 
Despite Max's plea for life imprisonment due to these extenuating circumstances, Bigger is sentenced to death. Wright's novel is a ground-breaking 
exercise in naturalism written from the black perspective; white Americans 
may struggle against natural forces, but black Americans were the physical 
tools of this struggle. 
ALBERT CAMUS 
The Stranger 
(1942) 
Best edition: The Vintage Books paperback, translated by Matthew Ward (New 
York: Vintage Books, 198g); ISBN 0-679-72020-0; $9.95. 
Like Native Son, The Stranger is about a murder that, insignificant in itself, 
demonstrates some truth about human existence. The murder of Mary Dalton shows the hopeless distortion of black-white relations in America; the 
murder of the Arab in The Stranger demonstrates that the events of life have 
no ultimate meaning. The actions of Meursault, the novel's central character, are presented in a flat, unemphasized sequence, so that no action has 
more importance than any other. Meursault s mother dies, so he goes to her 
funeral because everyone seems to expect him to. The day after the funeral, 
he meets Marie by chance, and the two sleep together. Meursault reads an 
old newspaper, sees spectators returning from a football game, decides to eat 
his supper, and tells Marie he'll marry her if she thinks it would give her 
pleasure: "It had no importance really," he thinks. Meursault's upstairs 
neighbor Raymond asks Meursault to help him humiliate his girlfriend. 
Meursault agrees ("I'd no reason not to satisfy him"), but this infuriates the 
girl's brother, who assaults Raymond with the help of an Arab friend. Walking on the beach later, Meursault sees the friend sleeping in the shade of a 
rock, and fires five shots into the man's body for no particular reason. He is 
arrested at once and put on trial. Refusing to show any emotion, he is 
judged to be a dangerous and unfeeling criminal and sentenced to death. 
But Meursault looks forward to execution, since death is the one certainty 
of life; he feels that he is "on the brink of freedom .. . I laid my heart open 
to the benign indifference of the universe." 
In Camus s philosophy of "the absurd," there is no significance to life; all 
humans are condemned to death, facing the inevitable end. The only possible response is to admit that death will come and then to live actively in the 
î o 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
present, making choices without regret. Camus writes in "The Absurd 
Man" that anyone who comes to terms with this truth is "imbued with the 
absurd." Actions have no meaning, but they do have consequences, and 
"those consequences must be considered calmly .. .There may be responsible persons, but there are no guilty ones."14
 Meursault's decision to kill the 
Arab is acceptable because he is willing to suffer the consequences of his 
choice; in his willingness to act, and in his calm acceptance of death, he is 
the model "absurd man." 
GEORGE ORWELL 
1984 
(i949) 
Best edition: New American Library Classics (NewYork: NAL, 1990); ISBN 
0-45-152493-4; $6.95. 
Orwell's 1984 gave us the phrases "Big Brother" and "thought police," not to 
mention a whole new set of fears about the invasion of our private lives. 
Winston Smith lives in a London apartment where a two-way television 
screen monitors his every movement and word. Posters of Big Brother, the 
leader of the Party, remind him that he is constantly under surveillance by 
the Thought Police. Winston works for the Ministry of Truth, which continually rewrites books and newspapers so that Big Brother will appear to 
have predicted all political developments ahead of time. The Ministry of 
Truth aims to reduce all languages to Newspeak, the official language, with 
a vocabulary that gets smaller every year: "In the end," an official explains, 
"we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible, because there will be no 
words in which to express it." 
Winston rebels against the Party by starting a diary. Soon his rebellion 
takes more active forms: He begins an affair with his coworker Julia, and he 
accepts an invitation from his superior, O'Brien, to join a secret brotherhood that fights against the Party. But O'Brien turns out to be a Party spy, 
and as soon as Winston and Julia join the brotherhood they are arrested. 
O'Brien takes charge ofWinston's rehabilitation, convincing him that Winston must believe only what the Party dictates: "Whatever the Party holds 
to be truth is truth," O'Brien lectures. "It is impossible to see reality except 
by looking through the eyes of the Party." Eventually Winston begins to 
I4Albert Camus, "The Absurd Man," in The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays, trans. Justin 
O'Brien (NewYork:Vintage Books, 1991), p. 67. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 0 7 
break; he sits in his cell and writes "Freedom is Slavery. Two and Two make 
Five." But O'Brien wants him to love Big Brother, not simply to obey.The 
final step in Winston's forcible conversion takes place when O'Brien threatens to strap his head into a cage filled with starving rats, so that the rats can 
eat his face. At this,Winston screams,"Do it to Julia! Not me! Julia!" His love 
for Julia has been broken; now he can love the Party. Orwell's hell on earth 
didn't come about in 1984. But in his chilling, detailed vision of a world 
where both mind and will can be manipulated by large and powerful institutions, he was decades ahead of the postmodernists and their condemnation of our advertisement-driven society. 
RALPH ELLISON 
Invisible Man 
(1952) 
Best edition: The Vintage paperback (New York: Vintage Books, 1995); ISBN 
0-679-73276-4; $12.00. 
In Invisible Man, the unnamed narrator exists beneath a veil that reflects 
back to the reader's eyes a white man's picture of what a black man should 
be. He wins a white-sponsored scholarship to a southern college for 
Negroes by fighting other black students in a boxing ring. Because he is 
articulate and presentable, the college asks him to show a visiting white 
trustee around the campus. The trustee insists on being driven into a rural 
slum and then to a bar that serves black veterans. At the bar, a shell-shocked 
black veteran attacks the trustee. When the college president discovers this 
adventure, he expels the narrator and sends him North to work, with "letters of reference" that advise employers not to hire him. Eventually the 
young man finds work in a paint factory known for its bright white paint. 
He gets into a fight, leaving his paint cans unattended; they explode and 
knock him unconscious, landing him in a hospital where he is forced to 
take part in shock-treatment experiments. Finally he escapes from the hospital and collapses in the street, where he is rescued by other blacks and 
given a home. He becomes a spokesman for the "Brotherhood," an organization working for oppressed blacks, and is put in charge of their Harlem 
agenda. But after a falling-out with the Brotherhood leadership, he realizes 
that they see him only as an instrument for their cause. Caught in the middle of a Brotherhood-incited riot, the narrator falls down a manhole. Two 
policemen cover the manhole. So the narrator takes up residence in a secret 
basement room, which he has lined with 1,396 bulbs that burn on stolen 
l o 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
electrical power. He has been viewed by others as a bright black boy, as a 
guide into the seaminess of black life, as unthinking labor, as an experimental subject, as a useful spokesman, as a rioter, but never as himself. Everyone 
around him, the narrator muses, "see only . . . themselves, or figments of 
their imagination—indeed, everything and anything except me." Under the 
ground, the Invisible Man is now literally invisible, as he has been 
metaphorically invisible all his life; yet Ellison's brilliant novel has made him 
visible to the alert reader. 
SAUL BELLOW 
Seize the Day 
(1956) 
Best edition: The Penguin Twentieth-Century Classics paperback (New York: 
Penguin Books, 1996); ISBN 0-14-018937-8; $10.93. 
Tommy Wilhelm, staying in a hotel because he's separated from his wife and 
sons, relies on his irascible, elderly father to pay his hotel bill.Tommy's broke 
and hopes to make a fortune in lard with the help of Tamkin, a doctor who 
claims to be an expert in the stock market—but who disappears, mysteriously, when lard falls precipitously and wipes Tommy's investments out. The 
novel takes place during a single day, but Tommy spends a good part of it 
thinking about the past, remembering all of his attempts to remake himself 
into a new man. He tried to be an actor but failed. He changed his name 
from Wilhelm Adler to Tommy Wilhelm ("Wilhelm had always had a great 
longing to be Tommy. He had never, however, succeeded in feeling like 
Tommy"). He bragged to his friends that he was about to become a vice 
president at his firm but didn't get the promotion. Too ashamed to stay and 
admit his failure, he quit his job but allows his father to boast about his position as vice president, even though both know that the title is a myth. Each 
reinvention of himself fails, including his final attempt to turn himself into 
an investor, since he insists on trusting the advice of Dr. Tamkin even 
though he half suspects him of being a fraud. At the end of the day, Wilhelm 
finds himself at the funeral of a stranger, where he is mistaken for the dead 
man's relative: "He, alone of all the people in the chapel, was sobbing. No 
one knew who he was. One woman said, 'Is that perhaps the cousin from 
New Orleans they were expecting? .. . It must be somebody real close to 
carry on so." As he weeps, Wilhelm finds happiness in his tears. Here at least 
he finds that importance in the eyes of others which he has always sought— 
even though it is based on a false identity. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 0 g 
GABRIEL GARCIA MARQUEZ 
One Hundred Years of Solitude 
(1967) 
Best edition: The Harper Perennial Classics paperback, translated by Gregory 
Rabassa (NewYork: HarperCollins, 1998); ISBN 0-06-092979-0; $14.00. 
José Arcadio Buendia and his wife Ursula are cousins; Ursula is afraid that 
she'll have a baby with a pig's tail, so she bars her husband from her bed. 
When a neighbor jeers at his unconsummated marriage, José Arcadio 
Buendia kills him in a duel and visits Ursula's room in a passion of unproven 
manhood. Ursula's baby, when born, doesn't have a pig's tail, but the dead 
neighbor insists on wandering through his house at night, so that he can 
wash the blood off his throat in the bathroom. So José Arcadio Buendia 
takes his wife and children off to found the new town of Macondo. 
Macondo, isolated at first, is eventually opened to the outside world by 
tribes of gypsies—one of whom, Melquiades, bears a mysterious manuscript written in Sanskrit. Outside trade brings both prosperity and troubles. José Arcadio Buendia's oldest son runs off with the gypsies; his second 
son Aureliano becomes a colonel and fights bloody battles in a vague civil 
war until his mother threatens to kill him with her own hands. ("It's the 
same as if you'd been born with the tail of a pig," she snaps.) Eventually 
Aureliano retreats to his workshop to make little gold fishes, and his greatnephew Aureliano Segundo comes to the center of family life. Segundo 
marries a beautiful, pretentious, and hysterical woman but carries on an 
affair with the villager Petra Cotes, who makes him prosperous by wandering around his property, spreading her aura of fertility. Even magical 
prosperity, though, pales in the face of economic progress: a railroad opens 
into Macondo, and Yankee traders arrive on the train to sell bananas. This 
banana company introduces all sorts of trouble to Macondo: disorder, violence, assassination, and more family troubles. ("Look at the mess we've got 
ourselves into," Segundo's brother, Colonel Aureliano Buendia complains, 
"just because we invited a gringo to eat some bananas.") Led by Aureliano 
Segundo, the banana-company workers go on strike; infuriated, the Yankee 
traders call up a four-year rain that eventually beats the soggy proletariat 
into submission. 
As Segundo's grandson, Aureliano Babilonia, grows to adulthood, he 
develops two obsessions. He has an incestuous passion for his aunt and 
fathers a baby with a pig's tail. And he is enthralled by the mysterious gypsy 
manuscript that arrived in Macondo generations before. After years of trans-
110 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
lation, he discovers that the manuscript tells the whole story of the Buendia 
clan, right down to himself—not "in the order of man's conventional time, 
but... in such a way that [the events] coexisted in one instant." Gabriel Garcia Marquez follows the same narrative strategy, juxtaposing normal events 
with magical ones and casting doubt on the possibility of "realistic" fiction 
that accurately records some sort of "objective history" of humanity. In his 
family history, imagination and fact exist side by side, indistinguishable from 
each other. 
ITALO CALVINO 
If on a winter's night a traveler 
(1972) 
Best edition: The Harvest edition, translated by William Weaver (New York: 
Harcourt Brace & Co., 1991); ISBN 0-15-643961-1; $13.00. 
Salman Rushdie called this "the most complicated book you . . . will ever 
read," but you won't get too lost as long as you know that this novel has 
eleven beginnings and only one end. Calvino's narrator speaks directly to 
you, the reader; you begin to read, only to discover that your novel (apparently a spy romp having to do with exchanged suitcases) has been bound 
wrong at the printers so that the first thirty-two pages repeat themselves 
again and again.You take it back to the bookstore and there meet the Other 
Reader, a beautiful girl who is also in search of the rest of the misbound 
novel. The bookseller gives you a new copy of your book—but this novel 
turns out to be a completely different story. And just as you become 
engrossed in it, you find that the rest of the pages are blank. So it goes for 
the rest of the tale; each story you begin leads you into another beginning. 
These ten opening chapters are linked by your quest to find each novel's 
ending—and, finally, to discover who is responsible for the chaotic state of 
these books. Lingering in the background is a third question: Why is 
Calvino doing this? In each novel's beginning, he mocks a fiction formula 
(the spy novel, the adventure, the coming-of-age tale). And in your quest 
between the tales to find the "real" novel, he continually (and clearly) tells 
you that any "reality" you might find is as much an illusion as each novel 
that you find. "I want you to feel," one novel begins, "around the story, a saturation of other stories that I could tell .. . a space full of stories .. . where 
you can move in all directions, as in space." Any "order" you might find in 
this book (or in life) has been imposed by the will. It has nothing to do with 
reality. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 11 1 
TONI MORRISON 
Song of Solomon 
(i977) 
Best edition: The Plume paperback (New York: Plume, igSj); ISBN 0-452-
26011-6; $14.00. 
Milkman Dead is born in the charity hospital of a Michigan town. His 
father, Macon Dead, is a rent collector, an exile: a black man living in the 
North whose American ancestors are in the South and whose African 
ancestors are entirely unknown. Macon has a sister, Pilate, who was born 
after their mother died in labor; Pilate, mysteriously, has no navel. As children, Pilate and Macon saw their father murdered and ran away to hide in 
a Pennsylvania cave. An old harmless white man was sleeping there; full of 
rage, Macon murdered the man and then discovered sacks of gold nuggets 
in the cave. Pilate refused to let Macon take the gold, and then disappeared 
(along with the gold) while Macon was out of the cave. She tried to work 
in Virginia, but was ostracized because of her missing navel. Eventually she 
traveled back to the cave, collected the bones she found there, and came to 
live in the town where her brother Macon had settled, along with her illegitimate daughter Reba, Reba's daughter Hagar, and a mysterious green 
sack which (Macon thinks) has the gold nuggets in it. 
Milkman has a twelve-year affair with Hagar, but he grows tired of her 
and instead turns for company to his friend Guitar, "the one person left 
whose clarity never failed him." But Guitar has become politically active; he 
has joined a society called the "Seven Days," which executes a white person 
whenever a black man, woman, or child is murdered. Milkman finds politics boring, but when Guitar needs money to carry out one of his revenge 
killings, Milkman offers to help him steal Pilate's gold. But the green sack in 
Pilate's basement holds bones, not gold. So Milkman sets out on a quest to 
Pennsylvania to find out what happened to the gold nuggets. He doesn't 
find the gold, but he does find his roots: he meets the characters who populate Pilate's stories about her childhood, and realizes that the nonsense 
songs the children sing on the streets contain the names of his grandfather 
and grandmother, aunts and uncles. He also realizes that Guitar is following 
him—and that Guitar has become his enemy. As the novel ends, Guitar 
shoots Milkman for the sake of the gold. Milkman's quest from North to 
South goes in the opposite direction from the flight of the escaped slave; it 
is the quest of the freedman who must return South and face the remnants 
of a slave-holding culture in order to reclaim his family ties. 
1 1 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
DON DELILLO 
White Noise 
(1985) 
Best edition:The Penguin paperback (NewYork: Penguin Books, 1991); ISBN 
0-14-007702-2; $14.00. 
Jack Gladney is a professor of Hitler Studies at the College-on-the-Hill; his 
wife, Babette, pathologically afraid of death, is taking black-market "psychopharmaceuticals" from a shady medical research firm that advertises in 
supermarket tabloids; their motley mass of children (produced from six separate marriages) battle various odd insecurities. Gladney, trying to find some 
sort of order in all this chaos, is interrupted by a chemical spill that sends a 
huge black toxic cloud across the landscape. The residents are all evacuated 
until the cloud finally disperses. Back home, Gladney sets himself to track 
down his wife's pill supplier. When he finds the man and has a gun battle 
with him (in imitation of older heroes), nothing in particular comes of it. 
Gladney and Babette and their children end the book in the supermarket, 
shopping (again) as they have every week: Nothing has changed. White 
Noise is like 1984 with no Big Brother; it convinces us that our lives have no 
real meaning. A certain order is imposed on the chaos of events by the 
media and by companies that want us to buy their goods.They invent for us 
stories that seem to make sense out of our lives, but that actually convince 
us that we must have their products. 
A. S. BYATT 
Possession 
(1990) 
Best edition: The Vintage International paperback (NewYork: Random House, 
1991); ISBN 0-679-73590-9; $14.00. 
Roland Mitchell is an academic without job offers, a browbeaten ex-graduate 
student who pays the rent by working for his former dissertation adviser, 
James Blackadder. Blackadder is Britain's foremost authority on the prolific 
Victorian poet Randolph Henry Ash, and Roland spends his days digging 
through Ash's correspondence. One day in the London Library, Roland discovers a forgotten letter from Ash to a mysterious lady love. Joined by his 
fellow scholar Maud Bailey, he steals the letter and sets out to discover the 
lady's identity—and finds Christabel Mott, also a Victorian poet and the 
darling of American feminists. Maud and Roland chase Christabel and 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 1 3 
Randolph Henry through an engrossing labyrinth of letters, journal entries 
hinting at unrevealed mysteries, brilliant poems, critical articles, biographies, 
and stories, each adding another detail to the story of unlikely love. They are 
in turn pursued by Blackadder's bitterest enemy, the American scholar Mortimer P. Cropper, who wants to buy up all of Ash's letters with his limitless 
wealth and take them out of Britain. Along the way, Maud and Roland fall 
reluctantly in love with each other. And when they discover the center of 
the maze, they discover a startling secret—which, as Byatt relies on plot to 
move the last pages of her novel to the end, I won't reveal. 
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES 
Johnson, Paul. A History of the American People. New York: HarperCoUins, 
1999. ISBN 0-06-093034-9; $20.00. 
Morgan, Kenneth O., ed. The Oxford Illustrated History of Britain, rev. ed. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-19-289326-2; $26.50. 
Ponting, Clive. World History:A New Perspective. London: Chatto & Windus, 
2000. ISBN 0-7011-6834-X; $35.00. 
Roberts, Clayton, David Roberts, and Douglas R. Bisson. History of England: Volume I: Prehistory to 1714, 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: PrenticeHall, 2001. ISBN 0-13-206475-8; $46.00. 
Roberts, Clayton, and David Roberts. History of England: Volume II: 1688 to 
the Present, 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 2001. ISBN o13-206483-9; $46.00. 
Roberts, John Morris. The Penguin History of the World, 3rd ed. New York: 
Penguin, 1995. ISBN 0-14-0154-95-7; $17.95. 
The Story of Me: 
Autobiography and Memoir 
* / it 
.r / H E N i WA s your age ..." 
People have always told stories about themselves. Augustine (theologian, 
scholar, African heir of Roman civilization) and Harriet Jacobs (slave, 
mother, African fugitive from American culture) both wrote autobiographies. Yet Augustine's skill at putting words on paper makes his tale of conversion no "better" than Jacobs's chronicle of poverty and flight. No one 
needs to be an expert to write autobiography. 
But the autobiographer is possessed of an odd conviction: that the details 
of his life will be of interest to unknown, random readers. It's a conviction 
that goes against every rule of good party behavior: Don't drone on about 
yourself.Yet the autobiographer tells you about his parents, his second-grade 
classmates, his complicated misgivings over marriage, in the sublime confidence that you will be enthralled. 
Why on earth does he think that you'll keep reading? 
WHY AUTOBIOGRAPHY IS MORE COMPLICATED 
THAN YOU MIGHT THINK 
In the beginning, there was Augustine. 
Augustine, born in North Africa at the tail end of the Roman empire, is 
the first "autobiographer." He wasn't the first writer to jot down details of 
daily life; diaries and journals have been kept since humans have had a sense 
of the passage of time and have possessed written language. But Augustine 
was the first writer to tell the story of his life. 
Turning life into story is not as straightforward as it might seem. A diarist 
notes the events of each day, without bothering to fix them into an overall 
pattern. But the autobiographer has to put his life into order, explaining 
thoughts and events which appear important only in hindsight. And this 
C?fi*vfoée4< 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 1 5 
hindsight is itself shaped by the overall purpose that the autobiographer has 
chosen for his life. 
So the autobiographer's backward gaze doesn't just tell events—it sees 
them as part of a design that exists only because the writer has decided that 
one explanation (and no other) makes sense of his life. 
Skip forward in time from the fourth century to the twentieth; to Richard 
Rodriguez, born to Mexican parents, growing up in California. As a child, 
Rodriguez spoke English at his Sacramento elementary school, but Spanish 
in private ("These sounds said ... I am addressing you in words I never use with 
los gringos. / recognize you as someone special, close, like no one outside.You belong 
with us. In thefamily").But when Rodriguez's teachers suggested that he needs 
more practice in English, his parents insisted that English be used at home 
as well. In his autobiography Hunger of Memory, Rodriguez writes: 
One Saturday morning, I entered the kitchen where my parents were talking 
in Spanish. I did not realize they were talking in Spanish, however, until, at the 
moment they saw me, I heard their voices change to speak English. Those 
gringo sounds they uttered startled me. Pushed me away. In that moment of 
trivial misunderstanding and profound insight, I felt my throat twisted by 
unsounded grief. I turned quickly and left the room. . . . Again and again in 
the days following, increasingly angry, I was obliged to hear my mother and 
father: "Speak to us en inglés" (Speak.) Only then did I determine to learn 
classroom English. Weeks after, it happened: One day in school I raised my 
hand to volunteer an answer. I spoke out in a loud voice. And I did not think 
it remarkable when the entire class understood. That day, I moved very far 
from the disadvantaged child I had been only days earlier. The belief, the 
calming assurance that I belonged in public, had at last taken hold.1 
Did this happen just as Rodriguez describes? No, of course not. The 
grown man's awareness is layered over the child's memory at every point. 
The child was angry; only the adult knows that this was a "moment of trivial misunderstanding and profound insight." The child asked a question in 
English; only the mature Rodriguez sees the connection between this question and the brief exchange in the kitchen, weeks before. And this particular story has importance only because Rodriguez sees the story of his life as 
the story of his entrance into American public life. "I turn to consider the 
boy I once was," he writes, "in order, finally, to describe the man I am now. 
I remember what was so grievously lost to define what was necessarily 
IRichard Rodriguez, Hunger of Memory :The Education of Richard Rodriguez (New York: Bantam, 1982), pp. 21-22. 
î î 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
gained." Had he decided that his life was about the emergence of his sexuality, or the development of a great creative talent, the event in the kitchen 
would have assumed another meaning entirely 
In other words, Rodriguez's story of the event in the kitchen isn't an 
objective reconstruction of the past. Instead, it is part of a tale constructed 
by a writer who has much in common with a novelist; Rodriguez is making a point and marshalling his plot points so that they lead to a climactic 
interpretation. This is what the autobiographer does. And so Augustine is 
the first autobiographer because he chooses a meaning for his life and 
arranges the events of his life to reflect this meaning. Rodriguez becomes 
an American; Augustine becomes a follower of God. 
But Augustine's Confessions make at least four other innovations as well, 
which is why his story has itself become a pattern by which other autobiographers (whether they know it or not) shape their own lives. Unlike earlier writers, Augustine chooses to tell only those events which belong to 
the schema he is sketching out. So he ignores the fathering of a child, and 
instead spends pages on an adolescent theft of pears from a garden, an incident that provides him with a nice echo of Adam and Eve's original sins and 
shows that their flaw is also in him. Unlike earlier writers, Augustine sees 
decisions and thoughts, not big external events, as the true landmarks of a 
life; like the hero of an ancient epic, he journeys toward a new shore, but his 
journey is an internal trek from corruption to holiness. Unlike earlier writers, Augustine puts his private self at the center of the universe; his story is 
not about a Roman, or a North African, or even a church member, but 
about Augustine, an individual whose hidden, private life has enormous 
supernatural significance. Unlike earlier writers, Augustine sees a single 
moment of his life—his conversion—as the pivot around which all else 
spins. Choosing a meaning for the past, relating all else to it, describing the 
inner life of the private self, finding that "watershed" event of the past that 
made the self what it is today: all of these become, after Augustine, the conventions of the autobiography 
And Augustine is the first writer to answer that annoying question: Who 
wants to hear about my life, anyway? For Augustine, as for Margery Kempe, 
Teresa of Avila, John Bunyan, Thomas Merton, and an unbroken line of 
spiritual autobiographers who stretch right up to Charles Colson, the 
answer is: all those who, like me, are sinners (by any measure, a wide intended 
readership). If the purpose of autobiography is to point sinners to grace, the 
autobiographer can be both humble and self-centered. Minute, individual 
self-examination (a most satisfying activity) has enormous importance to 
thousands of readers. After all, the same divine image sleeps in them; they 
must perform the same self-scrutiny and encounter the same God. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 1 J 
"Confessional" autobiography never disappears, but another kind of life 
story grows up beside it. The Godward focus of the Middle Ages begins to 
blur, and the men of the Enlightenment decide that they are not sinners, but 
humans. It is, after all, the age of invention, and a brilliant Venetian glassmaker has created a mirror in which people can see their own faces without the distortion caused by polished bronze. And thinkers of the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries become convinced that they can glimpse their 
private selves with as much clarity as they can see their own faces. 
So Michel de Montaigne, René Descartes, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
steal Augustine's invention, the autobiography, and run away with it. They 
tell stories of their private selves journeying through a secular conversion 
toward a new shore—not holiness, but self-knowledge. 
This creates a whole new knot at the center of the autobiography. For 
Augustine and his fellow religious autobiographers, the journey toward 
holiness is a journey toward self-knowledge. It's a straightforward argument: Holiness is God's most essential quality. So the holier the self 
becomes, the more it becomes like God. And since the self is the image of 
God, the more it becomes like God, the more it becomes itself; it draws 
closer and closer to reality. 
But when the Enlightenment autobiographer peers into his center, he 
doesn't see the face of God reflected there. He sees a self that exists independent of God, independent of society, independent even of his own will 
(the technical term is "autonomous"). The reality of this free, autonomous 
being depends only on—well, on itself.2 
In the absence of a relatively concrete definition of the self as the "image 
of God," autobiographers found themselves forced into skepticism—the 
admission that they didn't know exactly what was down there in their centers. Montaigne, the first "post-Augustinian" autobiographer, announced in 
his collection of essays (first published in 1580) that, since he could not 
know for sure what this mysterious "self" was, or what it knew, he would 
only "assay" (examine) himself in an effort to tell the reader who he thought 
he was. Descartes concluded, in 1641, that he could not be sure of his existence as a "sensing self" (since his senses might be deceiving him) or as a 
"feeling self" (emotions being equally unreliable) or even as a "religious 
self" (since his knowledge of God was no more certain than either sense or 
emotion). He knew only that he was thinking about the problem, and so the 
2
In his chronology in Autobiography: The Self-Made Text (New York: Twayne, 1993; p. xvi), 
James Goodwin pinpoints the "earliest recorded use of word self in the modern philosophical sense of intrinsic identity that remains the same through varying states of mind and experience" as occuring in 1674, in the Poetical Works of the minor poet Thomas Traherne: "A 
secret self I had enclos'd within/That was not bounded by my clothes or skin." 
l l 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
only statement he could make with any assurance was that " 'I am, I exist' is 
necessarily true whenever it is stated by me or conceived in my mind." 
So if these autobiographers don't know exactly who they are, what is the 
purpose of autobiography? 
As it turns out, skepticism doesn't actually change the purpose of autobiography. The story of a life still serves as an example for readers, a model by 
which they can understand their own lives. But the skeptical autobiographer doesn't assume that readers are pursuing holiness above all else; knowledge of God, after all, is no longer the journey to self-knowledge. Instead, 
the skeptical autobiography demonstrates how the writer has shaped his (or 
her) story so that he is able to define his (or her) self in the absence of certainty—in the absence of the God who gave concrete shape to Augustine's 
journey. The skeptical autobiography tells the reader: Here is the meaning I 
chose for my life. I discovered that my elusive self was a thinking being. Might this 
be a meaning that you too could choose? 
That elusive self might not prove to be a thinking being, as it did for 
Descartes. Instead, the self might turn out to be an American, as in Richard 
Rodriguez's autobiography. (You too can find a balance between your heritage and your present national identity.) Or it might prove to be a woman 
struggling against the pressure to be domestic, as in Jill Ker Conway's autobiography The Road from Coorain. (You too can discover your self to be a 
scholar, even though all around you are telling you that your self's identity 
is simply daughter.) Or your self might turn out to be an entrepreneur who 
can make it big in America despite humble beginnings, as in Benjamin 
Franklin's tale of his life in the New World. But whatever the self is discovered to be, the writer argues for its genuineness, its authenticity—and offers 
it as an example for you to follow. 
This sort of autobiography may be post-Augustinian, but Augustinian 
autobiography didn't go away. John Bunyan published the story of his life, 
Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners, to an enormously receptive public in 
1666; it went through six editions in two years, and spiritual autobiographies 
abounded for the next two centuries. Every book on the list at the end of 
this chapter is either spiritual or skeptical, a guide to God or a guide to selfdefinition. The two types of autobiography remain cousins, with a certain 
family likeness that they owe to their common ancestor, Augustine. 
These cousins have continued to borrow and lend from each other. The 
skeptical autobiography often indulges in a kind of confession, very like the 
confessions of sin found in spiritual autobiography. In skeptical autobiography, though, confession is not a path to God's favor. Instead, the willingness 
to expose yourself, warts and all, becomes a mark of sincerity, a further rea-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 1 Ç 
son for your readers to believe you and (perhaps) adopt your way of life. 
Nor does spiritual autobiography escape from the skeptic's need to justify 
the ways of the self to readers who question its sincerity. Teresa of Avila 
offered her story to God, but she also wrote to defend herself (and her plans 
to establish a convent) against her superiors, who doubted the reality of her 
religious visions. Charles Colson's Born Again may offer readers a path to 
God, but Colson has certainly not forgotten all those other readers who 
would prefer to know exactly what went on at the Watergate. 
A FIVE-MINUTE HISTORY OF 
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL CRITICISM 
Like novels, most autobiographies have plots: beginnings, middles, and ends. 
But while novelists are aware of themselves as craftsmen (and women), 
autobiographers are often "accidental writers" who would never consider 
themselves professionals. Novelists think about the conventions and difficulties of writing fiction-, and sometimes even write long essays about how 
novels should be constructed. But most autobiographers put down the 
events of their lives without consulting experts or discussing theories of 
autobiographical composition. Novels can be assigned to schools or movements, such as realism and naturalism; autobiography doesn't have convenient 
literary labels. 
But the artlessness of autobiography is an illusion. Writers of autobiography do use technique. Not only do they restructure the past so that it brings 
meaning to the present, but they follow certain conventions as they retell 
their lives. They may do both unconsciously—but this is still craft. 
Consider the most classic of all autobiographical openings, the one used 
by Benjamin Franklin in his Autobiography"! was born," Franklin writes, "in 
Boston, in New England. My mother was .. . daughter of Peter Folger, one 
of the first settlers of New England." When the American ex-slave Frederick Douglass sets down the story of his life, he too begins with his birth and 
ancestry. "I was born in Tuckahoe," he tells us. "I have no accurate knowledge of my age I never saw my mother, to know her as such, more than 
four or five times in my life She left me without the slightest intimation 
of who my father was." 
But although family provides Franklin with a prototype for himself (his 
ancestors were free men who valued reading and writing and refused to 
kowtow to unreasonable religious authorities), family has no part in the rest 
of Douglass's story. Why, then, does he begin with his birth and parentage? 
1 2 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Because, although he has never studied a book about writing autobiography, he has read other Hfe stories, and his reading has made him aware that 
a "proper" autobiography begins with birth and family ancestry 
This is a convention of autobiography 
These conventions went more or less unexamined until the 1950s, when 
academics finally turned an interested eye toward life stories. Autobiography 
had always been considered a sort of second-class literary undertaking, 
slightly indulgent, requiring no skill other than an endless fascination with 
yourself. But during the fifties, a cluster of books and articles suggested that 
autobiography was in no way the simple, straightforward activity it had 
seemed. Rather, the autobiographer, as Roy Pascal wrote in i960, "half discovers, half creates a deeper design and truth than adherence to historical 
and factual truth could ever make claim to."3 
Why autobiography should suddenly become a topic of critical inquiry 
in the 1950s has never been explained, but—like most midcentury phenomena—this new interest probably had something to do with post—World 
War II trauma. Roy Pascal claimed that autobiography can be a way of discovering a truth that is more true than historical fact, because he lived in a 
time when sensible people longed to triumph over historical facts (that bare 
record of inexplicable slaughter and holocaust). The notion that the critic, 
viewing those facts through the lens of a life story, could find a deeper truth 
beyond them must have seemed beautifully, unbelievably promising. 
By the 1950s, Freudian psychology had also become completely popularized. The idea of the subconscious had entered our language, and had irrevocably dyed our ideas about that elusive self. 
Freud explained that our subconscious directs us even when we're not 
entirely aware of it, and must be excavated if we ever hope to act with any 
sort of freedom, rather than as puppets of unexplained impulses. Saint Paul, 
of course, had provided an explanation of the conflict between conscious 
and subconscious a couple of thousand years earlier, when he lamented, 
"What I would not do, that I do; and that which I must do, I would not do." 
But Paul's model of two opposing selves required a belief in the Augustinian view of the authentic self as the image of God. Freud's model was much 
more congenial to the scholars and theorists who had long accepted the 
skeptical, Enlightenment view of the self as self-designing, self-governing, 
and (in the end) self-understanding. So Freud was a better fit than Paul 
when it came to explaining inexplicable human acts. He offered a solution 
that required, not submission to some external divine power, but rather a 
3Roy Pascal, Design and Truth in Autobiography (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
i960), pp. 61-83. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 2 1 
greater and greater understanding of the space within. Autobiography (like 
an extremely useful psychotherapy session) examined the space within and 
ordered it, identifying and classifying each urge. 
So in the Freudian era (and we're still in it), critics become increasingly 
interested in the strategies that the "I " of an autobiography uses to organize 
that space within. How does the conscious mind (the ego) justify its acts? 
How does it account for those impulses rising out of the subconscious? The 
autobiographer tries to figure out why she has always resented her older 
brother and uses the autobiography as a way to explain. 
Like the conscious mind, the self who sits down to create an autobiography has been pushed, pulled, and driven by forces it has never fully understood. This self begins to set her life down on paper—and, as she reflects on 
past events, begins to discover her own motivations, her own subconscious 
impulses. She writes in the first person—as "I"—but the / of the autobiography lives through those past events with a knowledge denied to the self 
when those events took place. In the end, the / of the autobiography turns 
out to be a very different person than the self it represents. 
This was not a brand-new insight. An occasional autobiographer had 
reflected on this paradox, all the way back to Montaigne, who wrote in 
1580: "In modelling this figure [the "I " in his essays] on myself, I have had to 
fashion and compose myself so often to bring myself out, that the model 
itself has to some extent grown firm and taken shape. Painting myself for 
others, I have painted myself with colors clearer than my original ones. I 
have no more made my book than my book has made me." But Freud supplied a language that allowed literary critics to discuss the paradox as a theoretical problem. The initial burst of books and articles in the mid- to late 
1950s led to an ongoing critical discussion that still prospers: any university 
library will yield titles ranging from the simple to the unintelligible, from 
Robert Sayre ("The person who can write his own story can rise from the 
status of the unknown and inarticulate") to Rodolphe Gasche ("Autobiography is not to be in any way confused with the so-called life of the author, 
with the corpus of empirical accidents making up the life of an empirically 
real person").4 
This ongoing critical discussion (besides winding itself into unintelligibility fairly frequently) has also produced, somewhat after the fact, genre 
labels for autobiography. Sometime in the early 1970s, scholars realized, with 
4Robert Sayre, The Examined Self: Benjamin Franklin, Henry Adams, Henry James (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1964); Rodolphe Gasche, quoted in Jacques Derrida, The 
Ear of the Other: Otobiography, Transference, Translation, trans. Peggy Kamuf, ed. Christie V. 
McDonald (NewYork: Schocken Books, 1985). 
1 2 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
great surprise, that women think of their lives differently than men do. 
Augustine, the first autobiographer, was raised on the tales of Greek and 
Roman heroes, men whose virtues he was to emulate. And so his spiritual 
journey took on the flavor of an epic spiritual quest. 
But Margery Kempe was never given the option of modeling herself 
after an epic hero. Like most women, she was uneducated; rather than epic 
tales, she heard stories of domestic fulfillment. Besieged by her husband and 
fourteen children, she was unable to think of her life as a solitary journey. 
So why should Augustine's experience shape her life story? 
As a genre, women's autobiographies seemed to be distorted by an 
intractable literary tradition that insisted they view their struggles and 
achievements through male eyes.Told that they should be patient, quiet, and 
devoted to the men in their lives, women produced autobiographies in 
which the /was patient,yielding, and passive.The spiritual autobiographies 
of women dealt not with an active grappling with sin, but the difficulties of 
passive submission to the male God. Through the nineteenth century, the / 
in a woman's autobiography was more likely to confess her inadequacy than 
to act vigorously in the face of opposition. As Patricia Spacks observes, the 
autobiography shows a public face, but while the "face a man turns to the 
world ... typically embodies his strength," a woman's public face must show 
a "willingness to yield."5
 Even in the case of social activists such as Jane 
Addams and Ida Tarbell, this publicly yielding face persists. In her study of 
women's stories, Jill Ker Conway points out that the personal correspondence of these women is forcible and full of conviction, but that their autobiographies portray them as passively called to activism, sought out by 
causes rather than seeking them. 
The genre of "black autobiography"—particularly in the United States, 
with its slave-holding past—suffers from the same sort of distortion. African 
American autobiographers found themselves copying the forms practiced 
by whites, even when those forms didn't suit the shape of their lives. In the 
earliest African American autobiographies (the "slave narratives"), the writer 
inevitably begins with birth and parentage, just as a white writer would. But 
the real beginning of the story comes slightly later, in an event that becomes 
a convention of black autobiography: the recognition of blackness. Each 
African American writer views herself as, simply, a person—until a point at 
childhood where she is suddenly gazed at, by someone else, with disdain or 
horror. At this moment, the J sees itself, no longer as "normal," but as something different: as black. From this moment on, the African American auto5Quoted in Carolyn G. Heilbrun, Writing a Woman's Life (NewYork: Ballantine Books, 1988), 
p. 22. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 2 3 
biographer struggles with double vision. Like the white autobiographer, she 
tries to create herself in the pages of her book, but as she does so she cannot help seeing herself through the hostile eyes of others. Blackness 
becomes (in the words of Roger Rosenblatt), both identity and tragic fate, 
a "condition that prescribes and predetermines a life."6 
A second convention marks almost all African American autobiography: 
entry into a world of reading and writing. When Frederick Douglass was a 
child, his mistress began to teach him to read. But her husband halted the 
lessons: "Learning will do him no good, but a great deal of harm," he told 
his wife sternly. "If you teach him how to read, he'll want to know how to 
write, and this accomplished, he'll be running away with himself."7
 So the 
instruction ceased, but Douglass convinced his young white acquaintances 
to explain the ABCs. Learning to read was Douglass's conversion, the point 
at which he stepped over into a new world. Through reading, he gained a 
vocabulary that (as Douglass himself puts it) "enabled me to give tongue to 
many interesting thoughts which had often flashed through my mind and 
died away for want of words in which to give them utterance." And 
through writing, he entered the white world not just as victim, but as witness and activist. Writing gave him power even over his enslaved past, since 
he could now record his days as a slave and fill them with moral judgment 
on the slaveholders. "It did not entirely satisfy me to narrate wrongs—I felt 
like denouncing them," he writes. "I could not always curb my moral indignation for the perpetrators of slaveholding villainy long enough for a circumstantial statement of the facts." 
Autobiography allows a writer to recreate his own life, to read meaning 
back into past events, to give shape and sense to what has been meaningless. 
So how is it different from fiction? (And should we get upset if the facts 
appear to have been stretched just a bit?) 
As autobiographical criticism began to gain steam, more academics began 
to question the line between fact and imagination. Faith in the existence of 
cold, hard facts—knowledge that can be proved by observation or experimentation or some other scientific method of establishing truth—became 
part of our Western point of view around the time of the Renaissance; this 
reliance on scientific proof as the ultimate test of truth separates the "mod6Roger Rosenblatt,"Black Autobiography: Life as the Death Weapon," in Autobiography: Essays 
Theoretical and Critical, ed. James Olney (Princeton University Press, 1980), p. 171. 
Frederick Douglass, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave: Written by 
Himself (1845), chapter 6. 
Frederick Douglass, My Bondage and My Freedom (1855), chapter n . 
1 2 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
ern era" (which began sometime around Copernicus) from what came 
before. But in the last third of the twentieth century, thinkers began to question the infallibility of scientific proof They pointed out that there are many 
different types of certainty, and that "proof" in the modern sense exalts scientific certainty above all others.They pointed out that scientists were people too, and were apt to find facts that they hoped for, as well as facts that 
existed. They pointed out that a "fact," particularly in autobiography, is a 
slippery object. If two historical personages write down two different 
accounts of the same event, might both accounts be true—depending on 
point of view? 
These questioners of modernism were labeled postmodernists. (Modernism and postmodernism are slightly different, in this context, from the 
literary modernism and postmodernism discussed in the last chapter.) Postmodernism helped autobiography to prosper, since postmodernists generally resist labeling one point of view as more "worthwhile" than another, 
which means that the suburban mechanic has just as much right to tell his 
life story as the president. But in praising each individual point of view as 
worthwhile ("Both accounts of that battle are true—the writers were 
standing on opposite sides of the field, that's all!"), postmodernism gradually 
released its hold on the "normative" point of view: that which is true for 
everyone.You no longer read an autobiography to find out the truth about 
past events (an assumption that governed the memoirs of political retirees 
for decades). Rather, you read autobiography to find out what it's like to see 
the world from another point of view, from inside the skin of another person. If the point of view is vividly drawn, so that you understand life as a 
woman or an ex-slave or a second-generation Mexican immigrant, does it 
really matter whether the events are "accurate"? 
Like many questions posted by postmodernism, this one remains unanswered. But in most cases, the reader who peruses autobiography is a practicing postmodernist, even if he doesn't realize it. He's not searching for the 
"facts" so beloved by modernists. He's demonstrating (in James Olney's 
words) "a fascination with the self and its profound, its endless mysteries 
and, accompanying that fascination, an anxiety about the self, an anxiety 
about the dimness and vulnerability of that entity that no one has ever seen 
or touched or tasted."9
 The reader of autobiography (whether spiritual or 
skeptical) is hoping for a map through trackless waters, a handbook to the 
deep interior spaces. And if he does happen to discover exactly what happened at the Watergate, this is simply an unexpected bonus. 
9
James Olney, Autobiography: Essays Theoretical and Critical (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1980), p. 23. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 2 5 
HOW TO READ AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY 
The First Read-Through: Grammar-Stage Reading 
In your first reading of an autobiography (the "grammar stage" reading), 
you're asking a simple question:What happened? Take the writer's assertions 
at face value. You won't be able to see the overall shape of the life until 
you've read the entire work, so don't begin to criticize the author's interpretation of the past until your second read-through. Remember to mark in 
some way—by turning down a page, or making a note in your reading journal—passages that seem to carry some extra significance. Although you 
don't yet know what this significance is (and the passages may, on second 
reading, turn out to be unimportant), these notes will simplify your search 
for answers to the analytical questions that I'll suggest later on. 
Look at the title, cover, and table of contents. This initial survey of the book is 
always your first step. Follow the same process as you did with the novels 
you read for Chapter 5: With your journal and pencil close by, read the title 
page and the copy on the back. Write the title of the book, the author's 
name, and the date of composition on the top of a blank page. Also write a 
short sentence saying who the author is (scholar, nun, politician, slave). 
Glance through the table of contents. Many autobiographies don't have 
chapter titles, but those that do will give you a preview of the shape that the 
writer is giving to his life. Mein Kampf, for example, begins with "In the 
Home of My Parents," and continues on to "Why the Second Reich Collapsed," "Race and People," "The Strong is Strongest When Alone," and 
"The Right to Self-Defence," which gives you a foretaste of Hitler's take on 
himself: He identifies himself with the German people, so that his own "suffering" and rise mirror those of the German nation. (This also allows him 
to do pretty much anything he pleases in his rise to power, since, in his own 
eyes, he is Germany.) If you do get an overview of the writer's purpose, 
write a brief sentence or two about what this purpose might be. 
What are the central events in the writer's life? When you did your initial 
reading of the novel, you jotted down the main events of each chapter to 
provide you with a brief outline of the plot. When you first read an autobiography, you should note the events of the writer's life. Although the 
writer's focus may be on intellectual development or a change in mental 
state, the physical events of a life nevertheless provide a framework to hang 
internal developments on. List these events in order, down the left-hand 
side of a page. Try to limit your list to a single page; an autobiography may 
1 2 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
be crammed with incident, but you don't need to record all of these incidents in your initial outline. Pick out the central happenings. For each chapter, ask yourself: Out of all of these happenings, which two are the most 
important? (This is a somewhat mechanical narrowing device, so if there 
seem to be three important events in a single chapter, don't feel bound to 
eliminate one—and for a long autobiography with many short sections, 
such as Gandhi's, you'll need to eliminate entire chapters.) Birth, education, 
move or travel, marriage, taking on an occupation, catastrophe (a plunge 
into poverty, imprisonment, divorce, death of a loved one), parenthood, 
great achievement, retirement—these form the "skeleton" of a life. As you 
list these events, try also to note what makes them unique—not "Took first 
job" but "Began work as a lawyer, hated the job at first." 
An occasional autobiography (such as those written by Descartes and 
Nietzsche) have very few (or no) external events; in Descartes' Meditations, 
"I cleared my schedule today so that I can sit down and write all this in one 
sitting" is all the physical event you get, and Nietzsche has no "happenings" 
at all. In this case, try to note the primary intellectual events—the conclusions 
that the writer comes to as he marshals his evidence. Look for the words 
"Therefore" or "I concluded" or "Clearly" (or some synonym) in order to 
identify these conclusions; these "terms of conclusion" tell you that, having 
put together a number of facts, the writer is ready to tell you what those 
facts mean. 
What historical events coincide—or merge—with these personal events? As you 
list personal events on the left-hand side of your page, keep your eyes open 
for historical events—those great happenings in the outside world (outbreak 
of war, a change in laws that affects the narrator's rights, natural catastrophes). List these down the right-hand side of the page, across from the personal events with which they coincide. 
The part that history plays in the retelling of a life varies. Sometimes historical events directly affect the writer's life; the passage of the Fugitive Slave 
Act makes Douglass's position in the North precarious; Gandhi's life in India 
is changed forever by the unrest caused by a British crackdown on indigenous freedoms. Sometimes wars and catastrophes just echo dully in the background; sometimes historical events are referred to only obliquely, because 
in the writer's time they formed part of a common knowledge that has 
faded in the present day. In Chapter 5,1 suggested that a one-volume world 
history would set the novel in perspective; you might want to refer to it now, 
in order to get more details about events that seem blurred in autobiography. The most useful book for this purpose is The Timetables of History, a. reference work that lists major events for each year of recorded history in seven 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 2 J 
different categories (politics, art and music, literature, and so on). You can 
easily scan the years that cover the writer's life and make notes of happenings that seem significant. (The absence of an important historical circumstance from a writer's autobiography may be as meaningful as its presence.) 
You can jot down this additional information on the right-hand side of 
the page as well, but write it in a different color—or in some other way distinguish it from the historical information provided by the writer himself. 
Who is the most important person (or people) in the writer's life? What events form 
the outline of that story? Human beings define themselves against others: We 
find our self-definition in our uniqueness. Uniqueness is that which no one 
else has. As we tell the story of what makes us unique, we must tell others' 
stories too, in order to show that our story is different. 
So every autobiography outlines more than one life. Each autobiographer tells at least one other story that plays counterpoint to his own. Often, 
this story is that of a parent; Jill Ker Conway's autobiography is largely the 
story of her relationship with her mother. In the telling, she sketches a compelling portrait of this tragic figure, a woman of energy and talent who is 
kept from exercising her gifts, and so sinks into paranoia and instability. The 
story runs side by side with Conway's and informs it with a certain fear: 
What if Conway, energetic and talented like her mother, is also unable to 
overcome the restrictions her society places on women? 
Nietzsche talks about his father, Harriet Jacobs about the master who 
torments her, Gertrude Stein about the painters of Paris, Elie Wiesel of the 
small sister who disappeared into the concentration camps and who comes 
to symbolize all helpless Jewish children destroyed by hatred. As you read, 
try to identify the figure who stands at the center of the writer's life. On 
another sheet of paper, make a brief list of events that shaped this life—as 
told by the autobiographer at one remove. 
Give the hook your own title and subtitle. As you did with the novels, try 
titling and subtitling each autobiography after you've finished it. This title 
will serve as a memory hook for you as you move into the stage of analysis 
and try to discover the writer's purposes. If you're having difficulty, use this 
format: 
A 's Story: In Which [Writer's Name] 
To fill in the first blank, use a single noun that best describes the author; 
in the second sentence, list one or two of the writer's most notable 
achievements. So Franklin, the father of American autobiography, appears 
as: 
A Businessman's Story: In Which Benjamin Franklin Manages to Rise to Wealth 
1 2 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
and Prominence Through Determination and Hard Work, Despite Starting With 
Absolutely Nothing. 
Or, alternately: 
An American's Story: In Which Benjamin Franklin Frees Himself From All 
Oppression and Creates Exactly the Life He Wants. 
There are many ways to title an autobiography, since lives have many 
facets; don't get hung up on wondering whether you're doing it "right" or 
not. You'll return to this titling again later, and decide whether the title 
you've settled on is still your first pick. 
The Second Level of Inquiry: Logic-Stage Reading 
Now that you've identified the autobiography's main events, you need to 
discover the overall plan (the theme) that ties the work together. Go back to 
those passages that you marked as interesting or confusing and reread them. 
Glance back over your outline as well; reread those sections of the autobiography that seem most central to the writer's life. 
Then use your writing journal to make notes of your answers to the following questions. Each aims to help you answer the most central question 
of all: What pattern has the writer discovered in his or her own life? 
What is the theme that ties the narrative together? Begin by making a hypothesis: Form a first theory about the autobiography's theme. 
First, determine whether the autobiography is primarily spiritual or skeptical in orientation. Spiritual autobiography has the writer's relationship 
with the divine as its organizing plan. True knowledge of God, or a change 
in spiritual state, serves as the life's climax. But this movement toward religious fulfillment might take different forms: a journey; a battle; the facing of 
a trial that must be endured; a psychological revelation that uncovers the 
true nature of the self. What sorts of metaphors does the writer use to represent this spiritual movement? And what does this reveal about her understanding of the divine? Is the knowledge of God a new world to be 
discovered, a territory to be conquered by force, or a mirror where we see 
our own true faces? 
If the autobiography is skeptical, the writer is trying to understand her 
own story without spirituality as its primary organizing theme. "Skeptical" 
doesn't necessarily mean "secular"; religious experience can still play a role, 
but some other theme gives the story its beginning, middle, and end. What 
is this theme? Is it "relational," describing the writer's slow resolution (or 
dissolution) of relationships with parents, siblings, lovers? Is it "oppositional," presenting the life as a conflict between two different possible 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 2 g 
choices? For women, this may involve choosing between domestic and professional lives, between a conventionally feminine life and a life of intellectual or social activism. For men, this opposition might take the form of 
conflict between an expected career and a desired career; or perhaps 
between existence as a public figure and happiness as a private figure. Is it 
"heroic," casting the writer in the mold of a mythic hero or heroine, conquering difficulties and overcoming obstacles? Is it "representational," transforming the writer into a symbol for all other men or women who share 
the same condition? (Harriet Jacobs represents the enslaved mother, Benjamin Franklin the young American man seeking wealth and freedom.) Or 
is it "historical," describing a historical movement (the emancipation of 
women, for example) through the lens of one writer's experience? These 
themes can serve you as starting points for your own thinking, but you 
shouldn't feel bound by them; you can create your own categories as you 
read. 
When you've settled on a possible theme, write a couple of sentences 
describing it. You'll come back and revise the theme at the end of your 
analysis. 
Where is the life's turning point? Is there a "conversion"? "Conversion" is the 
point at which the writer comprehends a great truth about herself and 
changes the direction of her life, or experiences something so shattering, or 
so magnificent, that she is never the same afterward. Even skeptical autobiographies contain conversions. Transformation from one state of being to 
another is necessary for autobiography; if the writer had always been the 
same, she would have no purpose in laying out the chronological events of 
her life. She could simply write a history, with herself as an objective, 
unchanging narrator. But autobiography isn't history; it is the story of a 
growing, changing life. Look for the change. As we saw above, African 
American writers often trace their change to a first recognition of blackness, when they see themselves, for the first time, through the eyes of 
another. Many female autobiographers come to a slow understanding of 
themselves as independent, powerful people, not as adjuncts to someone 
else. Spiritual autobiographers see the divine and find their vision permanently altered. 
Glance back at your outline. Is there a chapter in which important events 
seem to cluster? This cluster might occur just before or just after a transition 
point. Can you find the key words "For the first time"? Frederick Douglass 
is raised by his grandmother and surrounded by "kindness and love"—until 
she takes him to his master's plantation and leaves him there. When he looks 
around, his grandmother is gone. "I had never been deceived before," Dou-
i 3 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
glass reflects, "and something of resentment mingled with my grief at parting with my grandmother .. . [T]his was my first introduction to the realities of the slave system." 
An autobiography may contain more than one turning point; there are 
other transitions in Douglass's story (his mastery of the alphabet, his battle 
with the slave master Covey), although this is the first and most fundamental. You may be able to finger one transition as most central, or it may seem 
that two different points in the story are equally important. You may also 
find that although a definite change takes place between the beginning and 
the ending of an autobiography, so that the "I " who narrates the first chapters seems quite different from the "I " at the end, the change is more gradual. Make a note of whether the "conversion" is immediate or slow, and 
how the narrator is changed. 
For what does the writer apologize? In apologizing, how does the writer justify? "I 
am an ornery character," writes poet May Sarton, "often hard to get along 
with." But she adds immediately, "The things I cannot stand, that make me 
flare up like a cat making a fat tail, are pretentiousness, smugness, the coarse 
grain that often shows itself in a turn of phrase. I hate vulgarity, coarseness 
of soul." Well, who doesn't? That makes us all hard to get along with. Since 
no life is blameless, every autobiography contains an accounting of faults. 
And since humans find it psychologically impossible to live with guilt, 
apologies for these faults are almost always followed by justifications. 
If you can find and mark these confessions and justifications, they will 
help to bring the pattern of the writer's life into view. Apologies appear differently in spiritual and skeptical autobiography. Spiritual autobiography 
requires confession of fault without self-justification; the writer is able to 
pour out her faults before God, because the grossness of the sin doesn't 
affect God's forgiveness. The presence of the divine eye makes honesty possible. (As a matter of fact, in some spiritual autobiographies, the worse the 
sin, the better the forgiveness.) In the Christian tradition, forgiveness means 
that the soul is reborn, becomes new. So the writer who tells, postconversion, of her preconversion Hfe, is in effect writing about a different person— 
which allows even more devastating self-criticism. 
On the other hand, the writer of spiritual autobiography is perfectly well 
aware that readers (not counting God) are finding out about these faults 
too. So even as the writer confesses to God, she may justify herself to you, 
the reader. Does this happen? If so, where? 
In skeptical autobiography, confession of faults takes a different form. 
Honest confession is difficult—perhaps impossible—when a writer unfolds 
his soul to an unknown mass of listeners. Honest acknowledgment of fault 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 3 1 
requires that the confessor be sure of the listener's sympathetic ear. In the 
absence of assured forgiveness, the writer has to hedge confessions about 
with explanations, so that readers who might not be inclined to gracious 
forgiveness cannot dismiss his entire life as unworthy. Very typical of such a 
confession is Gandhi's explanation of his failure to provide his own sons 
with a decent education: "My inability to give them enough attention and 
other unavoidable causes prevented me from providing them with the literary education I had desired, and all my sons have had complaints to make 
against me in this matter," he writes. "Nevertheless I am of opinion that... 
the artificial education that they could have had in England or South Africa 
... would never have taught them the simplicity and the spirit of service that 
they show in their lives today, while their artificial ways of living might have 
been a serious handicap in my public work." In admitting his fault, Gandhi 
not only hedges it ("unavoidable causes"), but provides a reason why his 
fault led to a better outcome. 
What is the model—the ideal—for this person's life? The autobiographer 
apologizes for her life at the point where the story she is telling diverges 
from the one she wishes she could tell. She apologizes because she has fallen 
short of some ideal. What is this ideal? The perfect scholar, the ideal 
wife/daughter/mother, the dynamic leader? 
Whatever it is, the autobiographer is always measuring herself against it. 
"One senses a straining toward perfection in all autobiography," writes 
Roger Rosenblatt, "perfection of a kind that connects the individual with a 
cosmic pattern. . . . There is for every autobiographer an absolute ideal. 
Falling short of it is perhaps what inspires the autobiography in the first 
place; but if we are to understand the lives detailed before us, we must know 
this ideal as fully as we know the 'realities' given us."10 
Look again at your title, subtitle, and theme. Glance back over the apologies that the writer makes. Ask yourself: If this writer could be perfect, who 
would she be? What characteristics belong to that ideal figure that she seems 
to be comparing herself to? And is there any hint where this ideal may have 
originated? The mother who feels guilty over losing her temper with her 
children has absorbed an image of the Ideal Mother (always patient, always 
cheerful, able to entertain a three-year-old for hours with only two Popsicle sticks and glue).The autobiographer who apologizes for her failings as 
wife, as daughter, has also absorbed an image of what she should be. Perhaps 
it has come from her reading, from her parents, or from her religious community. Or perhaps from that vague thing we call "society," which encom-
'Rosenblatt, "Black Autobiography," p. 176. 
i 3 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
passes the media, schooling, and the opinions of random acquaintances. Can 
you trace the ideal image back to its source? 
What is the end of the life: the place where the writer has arrived, found closure, 
discovered rest? It is a peculiarity of autobiography that the writer must bring 
the story to an end before it has ended. As Montaigne remarked in his Essays, 
no life can be fairly evaluated until after death; because of "the uncertainty 
and mutability of human affairs which lightly shift from state to state ... [All] 
the other actions in our life must be tried on the touchstone of this final 
deed... .The assay of the fruits of my studies is postponed unto death." 
But the self-written story of a life can't wait until the author's death. So 
the autobiographer creates an end, a stopping point. "Many more of the dealings of God towards me I might relate," Bunyan concludes in Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners, "but these out of the spoils won in battle have I 
dedicated to maintain the house of God." Won in battle: Although the "real" 
John Bunyan continued to fight doubts and temptations for the rest of his 
life, the "autobiographical" John Bunyan—the / who tells this story—has 
found final victory. 
This "stopping point" question, perhaps more than any other, highlights 
the difference between the narrator of autobiography and the actual person 
who stands behind that narrator. How can any living person know the final 
shape of her life? In the absence of this certainty, she must create a final 
meaning for her Hfe and set it down for us to see. 
Reread the final chapter of the autobiography. Look for statements of 
conclusion, which often (though not always) are introduced with "time 
words" such as so or from then on or now or during. (Darwin's memoirs, for 
example, end with the statement, "I am not conscious of any change in my 
mind during the last thirty years," which places the end of his written life 
startlingly early.) Remember that the writer has selected this particular 
chapter as a vantage point from which he can look back and see his whole 
life spread out in a meaningful pattern behind him; the last chapter usually 
contains the final puzzle piece, the one that makes sense of all else. 
Write a brief paragraph (two or three sentences) describing the writer's 
position at the end of the autobiography (where is she? what is she doing?), 
and quote any evaluation that the writer herself supplies. 
Now revisit your first question: What is the theme of this writer's life? Look 
back at the theme you suggested at the beginning of this evaluative process. 
Does it still ring true, now that you've examined transitions and endings, 
apologies and ideals? Each of these elements should have clarified the 
theme :You should now have a better idea of how the writer is constructing 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 3 3 
herself on paper, how the J of the story is formed. If your ideas have 
changed, revise your description of the autobiography's theme. Then revisit 
your title and subtitle. Do these, too, need revising in the light of your 
deeper study? 
The Third Level of Inquiry: Rhetoric-Stage Reading 
Your evaluative reading of the autobiography centered on the individual 
life portrayed. As you move into your third and final stage of reading, 
broaden your point of view beyond the single written life. What broader 
conclusions does the writer draw about the group he or she belongs to 
(men, women, immigrants, activists), or even more broadly, about human 
nature in general? 
Remember that this stage of reading is best done in the company of 
another reader. Answer the first question (in writing or in conversation), and 
ask your reading partner to respond.Then have your partner answer the second question; you supply the response. This dialogue allows each of you to 
play the part of devil's advocate in turn. 
Is the writer writing for himself, or for a group? Does the writer see himself as 
a solitary soul, unique to the point where he cannot be imitated? This is 
very rare; much more often, the autobiography represents a pattern that 
could be adopted by a larger group of people—or a way of life that certain 
classes of humans are forced into. 
Does May Sarton write for the creative soul; Frederick Douglass, for the 
black man; Harriet Jacobs, for the enslaved mother; Richard Rodriguez for 
the Hispanic American? If so, which ones? Beware of overgeneralizations. 
Which readers can truly identify themselves with the situation of the autobiographer? Rodriguez describes an experience that, perhaps, is recognizable to most second-generation Hispanic Americans—but which parts of his 
story are unique to him, to his particular family and education? Does he 
make the mistake of assuming a universality to his experience that others 
might not share? 
Ask these questions for each autobiography. What parts of the writer's experience does he assume to be universal? Which does he view as unique to himself? Are you part of the "group" which might be expected to identify most 
closely with the writer's experience? If so, does it ring true for you? And if 
not, what parts of the story do resonate with your own experience? 
Finally, make a moral judgment. If the writer is laying down a pattern for 
others to follow, do you find this pattern to be good? And be sure to define 
what you mean by good. Does "good" mean "socially constructive" ("If 
i 3 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
everyone behaved that way, society would run smoothly")? Or "ethically 
consistent" ("This pattern lines up with the laws of morality, or of God, as I 
understand them")? Or "self-fulfilling" ("Anyone who behaved in this way 
would reach their highest potential as a human being")? These are three 
very different meanings of the word "good," although we tend to use such 
common words without thinking carefully about which meaning we 
intend. But think now. Precise use of language marks an educated reader. 
What are the three moments, or time frames, of the autobiography? Remember 
that each autobiography has three distinct time frames: the time during 
which the events actually happened; the time during which the writer is 
putting the events on paper; and the time in which the autobiography is 
read.11
 In your first stage of reading, you became familiar with the first time 
frame, when you listed the happenings of the writer's life. Now take some 
time to think about the second and third frames. 
The second time-frame moment, during which the autobiographer 
writes, is an intriguing one. Why does the writer sit down, at a particular 
point in time, and decide to put down his life? Did a child request family 
information? (This is Benjamin Franklin's stated purpose for writing.) Is 
death approaching? Has a political or cultural event shoved the narrator into 
the spotlight, so that the public is demanding details? Has he been arrested, 
jailed, elected president? 
Find the writer's stated reason for putting down his life in writing. (Only 
the most maniacal ego—Nietszche springs to mind—assumes that it is intrinsically interesting.) Ask whether this reason rings true. (Did Franklin's son 
really ask for his father's entire life to be set down in writing? We never hear 
about the son again after the first paragraph, after all.) And then ask: Was the 
writer at a high or low point when writing? Was the story written in a threemonth burst, or over twenty-five years? An autobiography written in prison 
(as Bunyan's was) creates a different pattern for past events than one written 
at the high point of a life, after immense achievement and public acclaim. 
An autobiography written in a short period encapsulates the narrator's attitude at one brief time in life; one written over years may show more perspective, as the writer revises and returns to the pattern again and again. 
Finally, how has the autobiography been changed by the years that have 
passed since its publication? Books are living objects; they change from 
reader to reader, from decade to decade, from age to age. Hitler's autobiography, published before World War II, sounds to our ears both pathetically 
" I am indebted to Erik H.Erikson's Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence (New 
York: W. W. Norton, 1993) for this insight. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 3 $ 
deluded and weirdly threatening. Franklin's autobiography has limitless 
confidence in hard work and thrift and its ability to launch even the poorest immigrant to the highest level of American society; in today's world, this 
confidence sounds naive. Margery Kempe's visions, which begin right after 
the birth of her first child, can be easily diagnosed as postpartum psychosis; 
Booker T.Washington's appeal to ex-slaves to forget about political power, 
at least for now, grates on contemporary ears. 
You will never rid yourself of your contemporary glasses, but you can at 
least be aware that you have them on. Beware of chronological snobbery: 
People in the past were not more ignorant or less insightful than people 
today. A good dose of antidepressants might have put an end to Margery's 
visions, but they would not have solved most of the underlying difficulties 
in her life, and modern medical science hasn't dealt with postpartum psychosis any better than Margery's confessors—who confirmed her religious 
calling, and thus gave her permission to retreat from a life which she found 
literally unendurable. 
Make an effort to understand each autobiography on its own terms—and 
then put it into the frame of your own time. Ask yourself that most characteristic rhetoric-stage question: Do I agree? Which is more valid, our own 
contemporary understandings, or those of the time? In the sixteenth century, 
Margery walked away from her fourteen children, abandoning them for a life 
of religion. In the twenty-first century, a Texas woman under similar stresses 
took drugs prescribed by her psychiatrists, stayed home with her five small 
children, and drowned them all in the bathtub. Who acted more responsibly? 
Where does the writer's judgment lie? In the "Note to the Reader" that prefaces Thomas Merton's autobiography, The Seven Storey Mountain, William 
H. Shannon remarks that it contains three levels of meaning: 
First, there is the historical level: what actually happened in his life. Second, 
there is the remembered level: what Merton was able to recall of the events of 
his life. Memory is often selective, which means that the remembered past 
may not always coincide with the historical past. Finally, there is the level of 
monastic judgment. . . . [Merton's] monastic commitment colors the way 
Thomas Merton (his religious name was Father Louis) tells the story. The 
Seven Storey Mountain, I believe it can be said, is the story of a young man 
named Thomas Merton being judged by a monk named Father Louis [and 
judged very severely, Shannon notes].12 
I2William H. Shannon, "Note to the Reader," in The Seven Storey Mountain, by Thomas Merton (NewYork: Harcourt, 1998), pp. xxii-xxiii. 
136 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
These same levels of meaning can be found in every autobiography. Each 
story has a historical dimension, a "remembered" dimension, and a 
dimension of judgment. What, or whom, does the writer judge? Is his critical eye turned on himself, or on others? If he criticizes himself, what basis 
does he use for judgment? (Remember that Ideal from your logic-stage 
reading?) If he judges others—society, family, God—is his criticism valid? 
Who is ultimately responsible for his successes and failures: society, family, 
God? 
Do you agree? Does the writer, in your view, shift blame—or judge himself too harshly? 
Do you reach a different conclusion from the writer about the pattern of his life? 
As you glance through the outline of events that you sketched out on your 
first reading, and then at the evaluations you jotted down on your second 
reading, you may see two very different patterns. The autobiographer's life 
may seem self-destructive to you, or petty, or vindictive; yet the writer sees a 
pattern of generosity and victimization. Or you may see great self-sacrifice 
and courage, but the autobiographer sums up with: How wretched and unworthy I am! 
If you were finding a pattern to the events presented, what pattern would 
you find? This is a difficult exercise, since you haven't necessarily been given 
all the information you need; remember that the writer includes those parts 
of his life which fall into a pattern, and eliminates those which don't seem 
to fit. 
But you can ask a related question: What's missing? What might you 
expect to find in this work that isn't there? And why did the writer choose 
to gloss over it? 
You can get at the "missing element" in two ways: through your knowledge of the writer's life gleaned from other sources (You know that he was 
married to the same woman for thirty-five years, yet he never mentions 
her; why?), or through hints that the writer himself drops.Thomas Merton 
refers to a "past" that barred him from entering a religious order on the first 
try, but never writes of what that past is (although Shannon spills the beans 
in the "Note to the Reader"). Franklin remarks that he committed only 
three past actions that were less than perfect (somewhat hard to believe). 
May Sarton writes of a love affair so obliquely that you might miss it on a 
first reading. Why? How would the missing elements throw the pattern that 
the writer is assembling off balance? Would it produce a different pattern 
altogether? 
Do you agree with what the writer has done? Has he been honest, according 
to his lights—or, on reflection, do you feel misled? 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 3 7 
What have you brought away from this story? What expectations did you bring 
to the story? Did you hope to find out how genius worked, or how a difficult marriage can be endured, or how madness was overcome? And did the 
recounting of the author's life help you to understand this? Or are you still 
peering at Rousseau's tales of adolescence and thinking, Yes, but that still doesn't 
explain why a man gives all of his children away to a foundling hospital. 
Lying behind this question is an assumption worth examining: that scientific brilliance, or literary glory, or a new system of philosophy can be 
explained if we examine the life of the man or woman who achieved it. 
Each of the autobiographies in the following list was written by a man or 
woman of accomplishment; this accomplishment justified the writing of the 
autobiography. Yet how far do the events of a life go toward explaining what 
a man or woman has accomplished? 
In an autobiography, you can see, however tentatively, a successful human 
being groping for the secret of success. But you may come away wondering 
how far even a genius understands the workings of his own mind. Sometimes autobiography seems very much like dating. The people involved are 
incapable of making any sort of objective evaluation—but no one else can 
make this evaluation for them. 
So finally: Do you understand more about creativity, or about slavery, or 
about the experience of God, than you did before you began to read? Or 
do you remain on the outside? 
THE ANNOTATED AUTOBIOGRAPHY LIST 
AUGUSTINE 
The Confessions 
(A.D. C. 400) 
Best edition:The Oxford World's Classics paperback, translated by Henry Chadwick (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998); ISBN 0-19-283372-3; $7.93. 
How does a rebel against God become a man who has God as the "hght of 
my heart"? Augustine's account of his life lays out the answer: He finds that, 
as a baby, he already had memories of God, his Creator. But his will and 
intellect did not know God. As a boy, he studies only for self-glorification; 
as a young man, he indulges his "habits of the flesh" and takes a mistress. 
Aware of a certain "poverty of mind," he tries to fill this empty place through 
becoming a teacher (in Carthage), and through becoming a follower of the 
radical prophet Manes. He stays in the Manichean sect for nine years, await-
i 3 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
ing the arrival of an expert who can answer all of his deepest questions about 
good and evil. But when the expert finally arrives, Augustine discovers that 
he is "ignorant of the liberal arts" and has only "knowledge ... of a very conventional kind." His intellect unsatisfied, his enthusiasm for the sect starts to 
dwindle. So does his enthusiasm for teaching, since his students become rowdier and more ignorant every year. "Here I was already thirty," Augustine 
writes, "and still mucking about in the same mire." 
In an effort to regularize his life, he rejects his long-term mistress (and 
their son), goes to Milan to teach, and studies first Neoplatonism, and then 
Paul's Epistle to the Romans. Both offer more intellectual satisfaction than 
Manichean theology—but although his mind becomes convinced of the 
truth of Christianity, his will lags behind. 
Sitting in his Milan garden, "weeping in the bitter agony of my heart," he 
hears a child's voice saying, "Pick up and read, pick up and read." He picks 
up the Epistle to Romans and reads, "Put on the Lord Jesus Christ and make 
no provision for the flesh in its lusts." He writes then, "At once, with the last 
words of this sentence, it was as if a light of relief from all anxiety flooded 
into my heart. All the shadows of doubt were dispelled." He stops teaching, 
becomes baptized, and goes back home. 
So how did the rebel become a saint? His will finally joined his memory 
and his intellect in the knowledge of God. Augustine is the first autobiographer to divide man into three; since man is made in the image of God, 
who is Three in One, human beings consist of memory (reflecting the 
Father), intellect (reflecting Christ, the "Logos" or Word), and the will (the 
Spirit). These three parts are independent of each other—in fact, they battle with each other. God is in man's memory from birth; any questing mind, 
searching for truth, will also encounter God; but for conversion to come 
about, the will must also come into line with the will of God—as it finally 
does, for Augustine, in the garden at Milan. But even as he divides man into 
three neat parts, Augustine laments the inadequacy of the scheme: "I find 
my own self hard to grasp," he writes, "I have become for myself a soil 
which is a cause of difficulty and much sweat." 
MARGERY KEMPE 
The Book of Margery Kempe 
(c. 1430) 
Best edition: The Norton Critical Edition, The Book of Margery Kempe: 
A New Translation, Contexts, Criticism, translated and edited by Lynn 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 j p 
Staley (New York: W. W. Norton, 2001); ISBN 0-393-97639-4; $14.20. 
Although I normally don't recommend critical editions, this paperback is the 
best edition around—Staley translates Kempe's Middle English into modern 
English and footnotes all unfamiliar geographical, historical, and theological 
vocabulary. Remember to save the critical essays until you've done your own 
first reading. 
Margery Kempe dictated her autobiography to a townsman in 1432, just 
before her death at the age of fifty-nine; four years later, a priest transcribed 
these notes into a third-person narrative which refers to the narrator as "this 
creature." Although Kempe's words have been through two sets of male 
hands, they show a wholly female life, fenced in by constant pregnancy and 
the demands of domesticity. Like Augustine, Margery Kempe is torn by 
desires; unlike Augustine, Kempe isn't free to wander about the medieval 
world looking for satisfaction. Nevertheless, she is constantly tugged toward 
the divine. After the traumatic birth of her first child, she sees "devils .. . all 
inflamed with burning flames of fire," ordering her to abandon her faith. 
Her family, afraid she will do herself an injury, keeps her "bound" until she 
has a vision of Christ sitting beside her bed. At this, she is "stabled in her 
wits," goes back to daily life, and becomes first a brewer and then a miller. 
Both of these businesses fail, and Margery has a vision telling her to live 
without the "debt of matrimony" so that she may understand heavenly 
mirth. Mr. Kempe, unconvinced, replies that he will give up sex when God 
appears to him also. So Margery goes on paying her matrimonial debt, giving birth to fourteen children. She also begins to have mystical visions, traveling through time and space in the company of an angel. When Margery 
prays that her husband will be chaste, he's stricken with impotence ("You 
are no good wife," he protests plaintively). Eventually they come to an 
agreement: If he promises not to "meddle" with her, she will pay his debts 
with her own money. 
Kempe's spiritual calling is finally recognized by the archbishop of Canterbury, who gives her permission to wear nun's clothing. Despite opposition, she becomes more and more prominent as a "holy woman," making 
pilgrimages to Jerusalem and Rome and meeting with the famous female 
mystic Julian of Norwich. But even as she becomes a public figure, she is 
pulled back toward domesticity; her aging husband sinks into senility, and 
Kempe returns home to care for him. "And therefore," Kempe writes, "was 
her labor much the more in washing and wringing, and her expense in 
making fires; and hindered her full much from her contemplation." 
140 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
MICHEL DE MONTAIGNE 
Essays 
(1580) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback edition of The Complete 
Essays, translated and edited by M.A. Screech (New York: Penguin Books, 
1993); ISBN 0-14-044604-4; $23.95. 
Because Montaigne continued to revise these essays up to the year of his 
death in 1592, there is, as Screech notes in his foreword, "no such thing as a 
definitive edition." This Penguin edition follows the fairly common practice of 
marking chunks of the essays with A (for the first edition), A1 (for the 1582 edition), B (for the 1388 edition, which made enormous changes to the original 
essays and added an entire new book), and C (for the final edition being prepared at the time of Montaigne's death). Screech also adds '95 to mark additions from the first posthumous edition. These letters in the text are slightly 
distracting at first, but once your eye becomes accustomed to them you can simply ignore them and read the text as a coherent whole. 
The external events of Montaigne's life appear only obliquely in his essays; 
he attended college and became a lawyer; married and had several children 
(only one, a daughter, lived); inherited the family property and sold his law 
practice to devote himself full time to study. But his study was disturbed by 
a slide into "melancholy humor" and disordered "ravings." In order to control his disorderly thoughts, he set about writing the Essays; without political or academic qualifications, he chose to write about what he knew: "I am 
myself the matter of my book," he tells the reader. At a time when only the 
powerful and famous wrote about the splendid events of their lives, Montaigne claimed that the real interest of a life lay not in outward events 
(which are public), but in the thoughts, habits, and emotions that make up 
the private self. 
You need not read every essay unless you're particularly interested in 
sixteenth-century French warfare. Begin with Montaigne's direction "To 
the Reader." In Book 1, read Chapters 2-4 , on the power of emotion and 
grief to shape (and distort) the self; Chapter 9, on memory; Chapters 
19—21, on the shape of a life that looks inevitably forward to death; Chapter 26, on education (for boys); Chapter 28,"On affectionate relationships" 
(this has elsewhere been titled "On friendship" and is the best known of 
Montaigne's essays); Chapter 29, on man's relationship to society; and 
Chapter 51, on the untrustworthy nature of words. 
In Book II, read Chapter 1 and Chapters 5-8, on the various qualities that 
make up what we think of as our "core" or "true" self; Chapter 10, on the 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 4 1 
value of studying the lives of great men (Montaigne winks at the reader 
here, encouraging us to view his own life as "great"); and Chapters 17—21, 
29, and 31, which complete Montaigne's musings on the virtues and vices 
that make up the "self." Finally, in Book III, read Chapters 1—2, on the difference between "useful" actions and "good" actions; and Chapter 13, "On 
Experience." Here Montaigne ponders the nature of truth: can the mind 
think its way to certainty? Drowning in speculation, Montaigne casts a lifeline around the details of everyday life; he chooses, willingly, to limit his 
vision for the sake of sanity, placing a border around the too-wide world. "If 
you have been able to examine and manage your own life," he concludes, 
"you have achieved the greatest task of all." 
TERESA OF ÂVILA 
The Life of Saint Teresa of Avila by Herself 
(1588) 
Best edition: the Penguin Classics edition, translated by J. M. Cohen (New 
York: Penguin, 1988); ISBN 0-14-044073-9); $10.95. The Penguin edition is 
the cheapest and easiest to find, but the print is small; for larger print and an 
equally good translation, try the Image paperback, which is titledThe Life of 
Teresa of Jesus: The Autobiography of Teresa of Avila, translated by E. 
Allison Peers (NewYork: Doubleday, 1991); ISBN 0-383-01109-1; $14.95. 
Written in Castilian Spanish and first translated into English in 1611, 
Teresa's autobiography begins in childhood. Like Augustine, she knows the 
goodness of God, but rejects it. But while Augustine yields to intellectual 
temptations,Teresa is seduced by physical vanity; she tries to "attract others 
by my appearance .. . using perfumes and all the vanities I could get." Sent 
to school in a convent,Teresa learns that "the world is vanity, and will soon 
pass away." She is afraid that she will go to hell and so forces herself to 
become a nun, taking the habit through sheer self-determination, without 
any true love of God. God rewards her with joy in her vocation, but she 
soon realizes that lax observance of the Rule within the convent allows her 
too much freedom to indulge her vanity. She wanders from God, but he 
reproves her and teaches her to return to him in prayer. (Here Teresa stops 
her narrative to describe the four states of prayer and their place in the 
soul's experience of God.) As her story resumes, Teresa tells of her greatest 
vision (of the torments of hell) and her calling to establish a convent in 
which the Rule would be kept "with the greatest possible perfection." 
With the help of a "widowed lady" of means, Teresa founds the House of 
St. Joseph, where the nuns can live a more penitential life. She is opposed 
1 4 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
by her superiors, who think that her visions are delusions. But in fighting 
this "severe persecution," Teresa is given a revelation: "a spiritual transport 
of a kind which I cannot describe .. . a truth which is the fulfillment of all 
truths." This nonverbal truth—greater than the truths of "many learned 
men"—is a rapture in which she glimpses the truth of the Trinity. Augustine anchors himself in Neoplatonism and the New Testament, and Montaigne in the certainties of daily life; but Teresa finds truth neither in the 
intellect nor in physical existence. She points her readers toward a direct, 
mystical experience of God, a "state of ecstasy" in which the soul can 
receive "true revelations, great favours and visions." And she tells her readers, again and again, to trust their own visions—even, perhaps, when 
learned men condemn them as illusory. 
RENÉ DESCARTES 
Meditations 
(1641) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, translated by Desmond M. 
Clarke (NewYork: Penguin Books, 1999); ISBN 0-14-044701-6; $9.95. 
Perhaps Descartes envied Teresa's certainty; he was a deeply religious man, 
but temperamentally incapable of accepting divine truth without question. 
In the Meditations, Descartes doesn't tell the story of his physical life ("I was 
born ..." ) but rather the tale of his intellectual life, which "begins" on the 
day when he sits down to arrange his thoughts and discover which ones are 
actually trustworthy. He begins with his senses, asking, Do I know that my 
experience of the physical world is true? No, he answers; sometimes, his 
senses have deceived him (telling him, for example, that a distant object is 
nearer than it actually is). If his senses deceive him in one thing, it is possible that they deceive him in all, and that all his ideas of the outside world 
are wrong. Nor can he prove, without a doubt, that God (whom Descartes 
believes, rather than knows, to be powerful and good) would not allow him 
to be deceived; it is possible that some evil force has intervened and is holding him in a state of deception. 
Descartes may be deluded about the things that he perceives, but one 
thing is certain: he is thinking about the problem. And if he is thinking, he 
must exist. So he concludes, "I certainly did exist, if I convinced myself of 
something. . . . Thus, having weighed up everything adequately, it must 
finally be stated that this proposition 'I am, I exist' is necessarily true whenever it is stated by me or conceived in my mind." 
Having settled this problem, Descartes can turn to other questions—the 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 4 3 
existence of God, the nature of truth, the relationship between the mind 
and the body. "I will now close my eyes," he continues, "block my ears, and 
shut down all my senses. I will erase from my thought all images or physical 
things ... addressing only myself and looking more deeply into myself. I will 
try to make myself gradually better known and more familiar to myself. I 
am a thinking thing...." Augustine, Margery Kempe, and Teresa attach their 
sense of self to their relationship with God; Montaigne, to his daily existence. But Descartes finds himself in his mind. He does not exist as a sensing thing (this could be deceptive) or as a feeling thing (emotions being 
equally deceptive) or as a religious man (since his knowledge of God is also 
full of doubts); he exists, without debate, only as a thinking thing. This vast 
change in the way that the self considers itself echoes throughout all later 
autobiographies, which continue to excavate the mind, assuming that what 
we think will reveal who we are. 
JOHN BUNYAN 
Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners 
(1666) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback (New York: Penguin, 1987); 
ISBN 0-14-043280-9; $10.95. 
As a Nonconformist, Bunyan rejects the Church of England—its rites, its 
doctrines, its authority, and its congregations. And this makes him very 
much alone. He longs to join other believers; when he hears "three or four 
poor women sitting at a door in the sun, and talking about the things of 
God," he longs to enter into a brand new life. But the women, he writes, 
seem to be "on the sunny side of some high mountain ... while I was shivering and shrinking in the cold." Between the women and himself, Bunyan 
sees a wall; he can't find a way through, until he discovers "a narrow gap ... 
[A]t last, with great striving, methought I at first did get in my head, and 
after that by a sideling striving, my shoulders, and my whole body; then I 
was exceeding glad, and went and sat down in the midst of them, and so was 
comforted with the light and heat of their sun." 
Finally in the company of others who also believe, Bunyan should be 
secure and full of grace. But the temporary comfort and hope that he feels 
is followed by an obsessive desire to blaspheme, and the cycle continues; 
Bunyan fights off temptation, is "put into my right mind again," is assaulted 
by temptation again, understands grace, struggles against guilt again. Finally 
he grasps that his righteousness is not his own, but that of Jesus Christ. 
"Now did my chains fall off my legs indeed." Is this the final act? Not quite; 
l 4 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
darkness descends again on his soul, until God assures him with a final scripture: You are come to Mount Zion, to the city of the living God . . . to the general 
assembly of the first-born ... to the spirits of just men made perfect. At last Bunyan 
has found his company, where others stand with him in the presence of 
God. He is no longer alone. Has he reached salvation at last? Perhaps, but for 
Bunyan, conversion is not a single shining moment, but a long path down 
which he walks, with an eye always cautiously behind: Like Christian in Pilgrim's Progress, Bunyan was threatened by the "door to hell, even at the 
gates of heaven." 
MARY ROWLANDSON 
The Narrative of the Captivity and Restoration 
(1682) 
Best edition: The St. Martin's paperback, edited by Neal Salisbury (NewYork: 
St. Martin's, 1997); ISBN 0-312-11131-7; $14.95. This edition is formally titled 
The Sovereignty and Goodness of God,TogetherWith the Faithfulness 
of His Promises Displayed: Being a Narrative of the Captivity and 
Restoration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson. It contains maps, chronologies, 
and other related documents from the same period; you don't need these, but 
they provide interesting historical background. 
Captivity narratives were a peculiarly American form of autobiography in 
which white settlers, trying to tame the American wilderness and beset by 
thorns, weeds, plague, and storms, are (as a last straw) kidnapped by hostile 
Indians—who become an embodiment of spiritual evil, determined to 
wipe out colonists who are trying to establish God's kingdom on earth. 
In Mary Rowlandson's narrative, Indians attack the little settlement of 
Lancaster, Massachusetts, while Mary's husband—the town minister—is 
away in Boston, asking the governor of Massachusetts to station soldiers in 
Lancaster to protect its residents. Mary sees her oldest sister and her 
nephews killed, but she is captured alive, along with her young daughter 
(wounded by an Indian musket ball) and her other children. Nine days later, 
the little girl dies. The Indians bury her, and Mary and her surviving children are kept for ransom. To avoid reprisals, their captors march them into 
less populated areas. Mary records each day's march in her journal; throughout, she reflects on the similarity between her own plight and the plight of 
Old Testament characters who also suffered. Her experience is always compared with theirs, with God's possible response charted in the same terms. 
Threatened with death if she stirs from the wigwam where she is confined, 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 14$ 
Mary laments, "Now may I say with David, II Sam. xxiv. 14, J am in a great 
strait.... This distressed condition held that day and half the next; and then 
the Lord remembered me, whose mercies are great." 
Put to work, Rowlandson encounters both kind and unkind Indian masters (the women are particularly disagreeable to her). Finally she is ransomed and meets her husband in Boston. Although their children are still 
held captive, eventually they are redeemed and reunited with their parents. 
"I have learned to look beyond present and smaller troubles," Mary writes, 
"and to be quieted under them, as Moses said, Exodus xiv. 13, Stand still and 
see the salvation of the Lord." 
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU 
Confessions 
(1781) 
Best edition: The Oxford World's Classics paperback, translated by Angela 
Scholar (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000); ISBN 0-19-282275-6; 
$10.95. 
Rousseau's autobiography is roughly modeled on Augustine's; like Augustine, Rousseau announces that all men are alike in their sinfulness. "Assemble about me, Eternal Being, the numberless host of my fellow-men," he 
writes, "Let each of them, here on the steps of your throne, in turn reveal his 
heart with the same sincerity; and then let one of them say to you, if he 
dares: / was better than that man" Unlike Augustine, though, Rousseau claims 
sinfulness as the quality that makes him human; he celebrates it, rather than 
lamenting it. He tells us of his perverse sexual tastes, his propensity to steal 
("I decided that stealing and being beaten went together and constituted in 
some sense a contract.... On the strength of this idea I began to steal with 
an easier mind than before."), his decision to put all five of his children into 
a foundling hospital (he refers to the birth of his second child simply as an 
"inconvenience"), his feuds, his hatreds, his failings. And he claims all of 
these as an essential part of a self that was formed, not by God, but by a random set of childhood influences and social strictures. Rousseau paints no 
picture of the self he should have; he merely lays out the self that he is, refusing to apologize for it. 
Without any "ideal" self to use as a pattern, Rousseau is unable to bring 
order to the tale of his life. "The further I advance into my narrative," he 
writes, "the less order and sequence I am able to introduce into it." But ultimately he triumphs over this muddle by simply announcing, / am, like God 
l 4 ^ SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
in the desert. (The echo of Exodus is intentional; Rousseau is not the image 
of God, or a thinking being, but simply himself) And, like God, he cannot be 
judged. The Confessions end with Rousseau's account of a public reading of 
this autobiography before several prominent citizens. He ended this reading, he tells us, with a challenge: "As for me, I hereby declare publicly and 
without fear: that anyone who . . . examines with his own eyes my nature, 
my character, my morals, my inclinations, my pleasures, my habits, and can 
think me a dishonorable man, is himself a man who ought to be choked." 
In the face of this declaration, his audience falls silent, refusing to speak; 
Rousseau is as he is, and no one dares to judge him. 
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN 
The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin 
(i79i) 
Best edition: The Autobiography and Other Writings, edited and with an 
introduction by Kenneth Silverman (Penguin, iç86); ISBN 0-14-039052-9; 
$6.95. This edition contains the Autobiography, selections from Franklin's 
letters, and excerpts from Poor Richard's Almanac, all for $6.95. For a truly 
cheap read, you can buy the Dover Thrift edition of the Autobiography alone 
(Dover, 1996) for a mere $1.50. (ISBN 0-486-29073-5). 
With his Autobiography, Benjamin Franklin invents the American Dream: 
The poor boy from Boston succeeds in business without the help of family 
connections or inherited wealth. And Franklin's character is as self-made as 
his fortune; he decides what virtues he ought to have and sets out to achieve 
them through sheer hard work: "Humility," he writes. "Be like Jesus and 
Socrates." He also deals with flaws sans outside help; Franklin marks faults 
on an ivory tablet with a lead pencil, and wipes them away with a wet 
sponge once they are overcome. Throughout his Autobiography, Franklin 
consistently refers to his mistakes (and his sins against others) as errata, 
printer's errors that are unintentional and easily corrected in the next edition; he is able to make himself flawless just as easily as he makes himself 
rich. But this picture of a self that prospers all alone is an illusion; Franklin's 
family gave him the invaluable skills of reading and writing, and his oldest 
brother gave him his first job. And Franklin's rejection of his faults is equally 
suspect; his reluctance to admit serious error introduces a note of arrogance 
to the character of the self-made American man. For the next two hundred 
years, this character takes its clue from Franklin's aside in Part I: "So convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable creature, since it enables one to find or 
make a reason for everything one has a mind to do." 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 4 7 
HENRY DAVID THOREAU 
Walden 
(1854) 
Best edition: The New American Library paperback (New York : NAL, 1995); 
ISBN 0-45-152707-0; $4.95. 
Thoreau is the anti-Franklin; Franklin's story tells American men how to 
make themselves into men of wealth, but Thoreau sees the American economy as a morass that traps all men, rich and poor together. Even those who 
inherit land become slaves to it, they are forced to work like "machines" in 
order to make property pay. "The mass of men," Thoreau writes, in his most 
famous line, "lead lives of quiet desperation." So Thoreau offers a new pattern for American lives. He retreats to a hand-built cottage on the shores of 
Walden Pond; this withdrawal from the American economy is purely symbolic (the cottage is only a mile and a half from the center of the nearby village), but it allows him to construct a temporary identity as a man free from 
economic necessity, rejecting the need to buy, sell, or work. 
Thoreau's descriptions of his simple life at Walden are not an economic 
solution (he knows perfectly well that all of America cannot retreat to the 
woods) but a form of protest. His essays don't progress chronologically; rather, 
they discuss different aspects of his life at the pond—life in solitude, how to 
treat visitors, the value of reading, his attempts to grow food. "Simplify, simplify," Thoreau preaches. "The nation itself... is .. . an unwieldy and overgrown establishment... ruined by luxury and heedless expense, by want of 
calculation and a worthy aim, as the million households in the land; and the 
only cure for it as for them is a rigid economy, a stern and more than Spartan simplicity of life and elevation of purpose."Thoreau sets himself up as an 
example of this simplicity; his months at Walden are a pattern for us to follow. Walden demonstrates the possibility of a new kind of existence, a "beautiful and winged life" that must break out from the dry husk of the old. 
HARRIET JACOBS 
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, Written By Herself 
(1861) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback (New York: Penguin, 2000); 
ISBN 0-14-043795-9; $10.95. 
Raised by a strict grandmother to be virtuous, Harriet Jacobs is faced with 
an insoluble dilemma: Her master, "Dr. FHnt," is determined to make her 
l 4 S SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
into his mistress.When he forbids her to marry the black man of her choosing, Jacobs is faced with a difficult choice: not between keeping her virtue 
and giving it away, but rather between giving it away by choice or surrendering it to the master she hates. So in order to protect herself, she begins 
an affair with a white neighbor and bears two children by him. This relationship with "Mr. Sands" serves as temporary protection, but Dr. Flint continues to be obsessed by her; he refuses to sell her, and eventually Mr. Sands 
marries a white woman and ends the connection with Jacobs. Several times 
given the chance to escape, Jacobs refuses because she would have to leave 
her children behind. Finally, desperate to avoid Dr. Flint's attentions, she 
fakes an escape—and lives for seven years in a crawlspace in her grandmother's attic. Eventually Jacobs and her children do escape, but the Fugitive Slave Act means that they can be arrested, even in the North. At last 
Jacobs is bought by a sympathetic white friend and set free, but she finds this 
a bitter victory: "A human being sold in the free city of New York! ... I am 
deeply grateful to the generous friend who procured [my freedom], but I 
despise the miscreant who demanded payment for what never rightfully 
belonged to him or his." 
Jacobs knows that her use of fictional names (she calls herself "Linda 
Brent"), her good English prose, and her seven-year existence in an attic 
make her story difficult to believe, so her autobiography includes letters 
from respectable whites, vouching for its credibility. White voices thus 
become an inextricable element of Jacobs's story, reflecting the reality of 
slavery itself: "Slavery is a curse to the whites as well as to the blacks,"Jacobs 
writes. "It makes the white fathers cruel and sensual; the sons violent and 
licentious; it contaminates the daughters, and makes the wives wretched. 
And as for the colored race, it needs an abler pen than mine to describe the 
extremity of their sufferings, the depth of their degradation." 
FREDERICK DOUGLASS 
Life and Times of Frederick Douglass 
(1881) 
Best editioniThe Library of America version, edited by Henry Louis Gates, Jr. 
(NewYork: Library of America, 1996); ISBN 1-8830-11-302; $13.95. Douglass 
wrote his autobiography three separate times. The first version, Narrative of 
the Life of Frederick Douglass, An American Slave was published in 
1845; the second, My Bondage and My Freedom, in 1855; and this third 
and final version in 1881. Each autobiography retells and alters stories from the 
previous version; the Gates edition contains all three. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D i 4 9 
Born to parents he never knew, Frederick Douglass is raised by his grandparents; they are loving and kind, skilled at fishing and gardening, well 
respected by their neighbors. But when he is old enough to work, Douglass 
is taken to his master's plantation and abandoned amid a crowd of other 
children. Stripped of his family identity, he is treated like an animal (the 
children eat from a trough "like so many pigs"). But Douglass refuses to be 
an animal, instead struggling toward a new understanding of himself. He 
learns to read despite his master's objections ("If he learns to read the Bible 
it will forever unfit him to be a slave," the man declares) and begins to consider himself a thinking, speaking human being. When he is beaten and 
abused by the brutal slavemaster Covey, Douglass wrestles Covey to the 
ground—and is finally able to think of himself as a man. "This battle with 
Mr. Covey," writes Douglass, "revived a sense of my own manhood. I was a 
changed being after that fight. I was nothing before—I was a man now." 
Equipped both mentally and emotionally for life as a freedman, Douglass 
runs away to Massachusetts and is recruited by abolitionists to tell white 
northern audiences about his experiences as a slave. Again he remakes himself, this time as a speaker and thinker—too successfully for his abolitionist 
friends, who advise him to keep "a little of the plantation speech .. . [I]t is 
not best that you seem learned." Their fears come true when Douglass is 
denounced as an imposter; his audiences begin to say that he does "not talk 
like a slave, look like a slave, or act like a slave." "They believed," Douglass 
writes, "I had never been south of Mason and Dixon's line." In answer to 
this accusation, he sets down the entire story of his life as a slave in writing—thus reclaiming, as an essential part of his new identity, the years spent 
in bondage. 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON 
Upfront Slavery 
(1901) 
Best edition: The Oxford World's Classics paperback, edited by William L. 
Andrews (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000); ISBN 0-19-283562-9; 
$8.95. 
Slavery ends during Washington's childhood, but in the post-Civil War economy, jobs for freedmen are scarce and unpleasant. Washington, his mother, 
and his stepfather go to West Virginia to work in the salt mines there.Although 
Washington isn't a slave, he is imprisoned by poverty. Education becomes for 
him, as it was for Douglass, the way to form a new identity. Washington 
l 5 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
remakes himself as a scholar and teacher. He works his way through night 
school and then through Hampton University, goes on to do graduate work, 
comes back to Hampton University as a teacher, and in 1881 heads up a "normal school" for black students atTuskegee.The school aims to teach practical skills; in Washington's view, Negroes can form a new racial identity for 
themselves—as citizens, not slaves and victims—through patience, education, 
hard work, and good manners. Forget about political power for right now, 
he advises his readers; improve your hygiene, your table manners, and your 
ability to handle money, and whites will eventually grant you political power 
out of respect. 
Washington appears, in his autobiography, as a humble, hardworking, and 
thoroughly admirable man, an ideal leader for a troubled people. But his 
"accomodationist" view of race relations brings Washington into conflict 
with other black intellectuals, who accuse him of ignoring the need for 
equality in favor of peace. But Washington sees himself as a model for his 
race. Throughout his autobiography, Washington refers to his own experience as the ideal for other young black men. He works in the salt mines and 
goes to school at night; so, too, can they. He is willing to wear a homemade 
cap as a child, rather than insisting that his mother spend precious money 
on a new one; they should be content to scrimp and save toward economic 
independence, rather than splashing money around in an attempt to be like 
whites. He rose to prominence and power through the same patient persistence he recommends to others. 
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
Ecce Homo 
(1908) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, translated by R.J. Hollingdale 
(NewYork: Penguin, 1992); ISBN 0-14-044515-3; $12.00. 
Although Nietzsche announces a conventional autobiographical purpose 
(he is going to trace the influences that have made him into the man he is 
in 1888, at the age of forty-four), his chapters (beginning with "Why I Am 
So Wise" and "Why I Am So Clever") are neither chronological nor logical. As autobiography, Ecce Homo parallels Descartes' attempt to find his "self" 
in his intellect, or Bunyan's attempt to find his "self" in the love of God— 
or Washington's attempt to find his "self" in hard work and education. But 
Nietzsche finds his "self" elsewhere. Nutshelling Nietzsche's philosophy is 
impossible, since he was an existentialist, and since existentialism is a rejection of all systems of philosophy and all explanations for human existence. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 5 1 
Instead, each human action (and each human life) must create its own meaning. Each man is completely free to choose his own path. Existence is so 
infinitely varied that it cannot be reduced to any sort of system. There is no 
"moral code" in the universe—no "right" or "wrong." There are simply 
choices, with consequences that must be endured after the choices are made. 
So Nietzsche's autobiography is a hymn to the uniqueness of his own existence; it is a record of his choices and their consequences. At its end, he rails 
against the "concept of the good man," who is "weak, sick, ill-constructed ... 
an ideal made in opposition to the proud and well-constituted, to the affirmative man"—the man who boldly chooses and in the act of choice finds 
meaning. Nietzsche wrote Ecce Homo in three weeks and then went mad, two 
weeks after sending the manuscript to the printer; the title is drawn from the 
New Testament, where Pilate uses it to point out Jesus Christ to the masses 
before his crucifixion. But for Nietzsche, Christ is not "the man"; he is. He 
does not offer himself as a model (that would set up a standard, an "ideal" 
that applies to all), but rather as an example—a man who finds meaning in 
making his choices and living with their consequences. 
ADOLF HITLER 
Me in Kampf 
(1925) 
Best edition: The most historically interesting version is the earliest unabridged 
English translation, made in 1939 by James Murphy. This edition is available 
from CPA Books (Boring, Oregon: CPA Books, no date, ISBN 0-944379-04-
4; $12.00) and can be ordered through amazon.com. There are several problems, 
however. This is apparently a photographic reprint of a bad-quality original, and 
several pages are smeared. Also, CPA Books is the publishing arm of the Christian Patriot Association, a "'Christian identity" movement that claims that 
Anglo-Saxons are the "true Jews." If you'd prefer not to send money to the 
CPA (which has a wide-ranging menu of activities ranging from defrauding the 
1RS to blowing up adult video stores), you can instead buy the Houghton Mifflin paperback edition, translated by Ralph Manheim only slightly later—in 
1943 (NewYork: Houghton Mifflin, 1998; ISBN 0-395-92303-7; $20.00). 
Hitler wrote Mein Kampf ("My Struggle") while in jail for a failed attempt 
to prevent Bavaria from seceding from the German republic. In Hitler's 
account of his own life, every choice that he makes is dictated by his attempts 
to restore Germany to its previous glories; he is Every(German)man; his 
defeats represent Germany's humiliations, and his rise to power parallels Germany's return to glory. 
i 5 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Even as a child, Hitler writes, he wonders why all Germans did not have 
"the good luck to belong to Bismarck's Empire." He believes that Bavaria's 
defeat by France and its following subjection to French rule (which Hitler 
continually calls "the time of Germany's deepest humiliation") could have 
been avoided if the German people had been united. So from his earliest 
days he is determined to restore the divided parts of Germany to the "great 
German Motherland." He refuses to become a government official and 
turns to painting, not for personal reasons, but because he cannot bear to be 
part of a government that serves French, rather than German, interests. His 
study in Vienna, his initial involvement in politics, his service in the Bavarian army during the first World War, his membership in the German Labour 
Party, and his impatience with the "faulty and ineffective" German government are all motivated by an "intense love" for the German people and a 
"profound hatred for the [French-dominated] Austrian State." Hitler sees 
himself as the only man able to "employ any energetic and radical methods" 
to restore German power; his ravings on the demonic influence of Jewish 
blood and the "loss of racial purity" that "will wreck inner happiness forever" are eerily combined with constant calls to end tiresome bureaucracy 
that sound perfectly reasonable. Plowing through all the vituperation is tiring, so you need not read the entire biography. In Part I, read Chapters I—6 
and Chapter n; in Part II, read Chapters 2—4, 10, 11, and 15, which clearly 
demonstrate Hitler's fantastic understanding of propaganda techniques. The 
twenty-first century may have rejected Hitler's doctrine of racial purity, but 
his techniques of propaganda are still much in use—although they have 
been turned to the service of the market, rather than the nation-state. 
MOHANDAS GANDHI 
An Autobiography : The Story of My Experiments with Truth 
(1929) 
Best edition: The Beacon Press paperback, translated by Mahadev Desai 
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1993); ISBN 0-8070-5909-9; $14.00. 
Gandhi's autobiography is a life in borrowed clothes: he is an Eastern 
thinker using a Western form to tell the West of his search for spiritual truth. 
"I know of nobody in the East having written [an autobiography]," a friend 
tells him, as he begins the task, "except those who have come under Western influence. And what will you write? Supposing you reject tomorrow 
the things you hold as principles today ... ?" So Gandhi's autobiography is, 
in part, an apology for being autobiography at all. He writes that he intends 
to describe his arrival at the spiritual truths which then shaped his political 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J 3 3 
actions, and "as my life consists of nothing but those experiments, it is true 
that the story will take the shape of an autobiography." 
Gandhi is born in India, under British rule; he marries at thirteen (an 
Indian custom, for which he feels he must apologize), and at nineteen travels to England (without his wife and young son) to study law. He then returns 
to India as a barrister, but finds himself without much work. Taking a temporary position in South Africa, he discovers that the Indian population, 
classed as "colored," suffers from discrimination. He stays in South Africa for 
almost twenty years, working for Indian rights. Finally returning to India in 
the middle of post—World War II unrest, he finds the British overlords tightening restrictions on their Indian subjects. His nonviolent protests against 
this repression culminate in a countrywide eruption of civil disobedience, 
which finally force the British to take notice. Throughout the story, Gandhi 
examines himself to find spiritual principles that will govern his political 
actions. Chief among these is the principle ofAhisma, or nonviolence, which 
becomes the directing principle of Gandhi's life; a "votary ofAhisma," Gandhi 
writes, "remains true to his faith if the spring of all his actions is compassion, 
if he shuns to the best of his ability the destruction of the tiniest creature." 
And he discovers this spiritual truth through "deep self-introspection"; he 
has, he tells us, "searched myself through and through, and examined and 
analysed every psychological situation.. .. For me [my conclusions] appear 
to be absolutely correct, and seem for the time being to be final." 
GERTRUDE STEIN 
The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas 
(1933) 
Best edition: The Vintage Books paperback (New York: Vintage, iggo); ISBN 
0-67Q-72463-X; $13.00. 
Gandhi borrows an unfamiliar form, but Gertrude Stein borrows someone 
else's life; her autobiography is, in the words of Estelle Jelenik, "a disguise of 
the self in words."13
 She uses the voice of her companion, Alice B. Toklas, 
but only the first few pages deal withToklas's life; the tale then turns to Stein 
herself.The autobiography begins with the classic "I was born," chronicling 
Toklas's birth in California and takes her up through her late twenties in a 
mere three pages, when the (apparently) transitional point of her life occurs: 
she meets Gertrude Stein, and writes that she has "met a genius." From this 
I3Estelle C. Jelinek, TheTradition ofWomen's Autobiography: From Antiquity to the Present (Boston: 
Twayne Publishers, 1986), p. 39. 
i 5 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
point, Stein adds inToklas's voice,"my new full life began."This mockery of 
the standard autobiographical "conversion" shifts the tale to Gertrude Stein, 
her life in Paris, her friendship with the painters Pablo Picasso, Pierre 
Matisse, and Paul Cézanne; the German offensive that forces her to leave 
Paris; and her work in a war hospital. The narrative runs constantly away 
into capsule biographies of other personalities; the cumulative effect is 
something like one of those portraits made up of hundreds of colored 
squares that, when examined closely, each turn out to be a picture of something else. At the end, the reader has been given a portrait of Gertrude Stein, 
made up of dozens of portraits of other people. 
Stein's autobiography displays characteristics that critics have labeled 
"typically feminine" (as opposed to the "typically masculine" autobiographies that came before): She writes anecdotally, telling stories of people 
rather than politics; and her story is told nonchronologically (were the 
chapters in chronological order, Chapter 4 would be the first, followed by 
Chapters 3,1, 2, 5, 6, and 7).This disregard for order turns Stein's autobiography into a game, something close to a literary version of Clue; to get any 
glimpse of Stein's true self, the reader has to reorder the clues and find out 
what's missing. 
THOMAS MERTON 
The Seven Storey Mountain 
(1948) 
Best editiomThe Harvest Books paperback (NewYork: Harcourt, 1998); ISBN 
0-15-601086-0; $16.00. 
Thomas Merton became a new man when he entered the Trappist order; 
his autobiography tells the story of the "old" Merton, a selfish and self-centered intellectual who is now (figuratively) dead. So he judges his own life 
very harshly indeed, accusing himself of lacking love, that central virtue of 
the Christian life, from his earliest days. His exclusion of his small brother 
from his childhood games, he writes, is "the pattern and prototype of all sin: 
the deliberate and formal will to reject disinterested love for us for the 
purely arbitrary reason that .. . it does not please us to be loved." Merton's 
story of his youth, education, and time at Cambridge aims to show us that 
his sin did indeed follow this pattern, as he continually rejects God's love. 
Merton's mind begins to accept God before his will does. When he reads 
a book on medieval philosophy, he begins to realize that his ideas about 
God—"a noisy and dramatic and passionate character, a vague, jealous, hidden being"—come, not from God, but from images made by other men. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 5 3 
Freed from this distorted idea of God, Merton begins to read theology to 
find out who God is and is drawn to the Catholic Church and its theology—"a tremendous, profound, unified doctrine." This intellectual understanding, though, does not bring Merton much closer to accepting the love 
of God; he condemns himself for talking "for hours about mysticism and 
the experimental knowledge of God" while "stoking the fires of the argument with Scotch and soda." In the end, he is able to submit to the love of 
God only by surrendering to the institution of the church, and accepting, 
with humility, its dictates. "The conversion of the intellect is not enough," 
he writes, a theme that echoes in conversion stories from Augustine to Colson; "as long as the will .. . did not belong completely to God." 
C. S. LEWIS 
Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life 
(1955) 
Best editiomThe Harvest Books paperback (NewYork: Harcourt, ig7$);ISBN 
0-15-687011-8; $12.00. 
Lewis's autobiography is partly the story of his intellectual and imaginative 
development, and partly the tale of his coming to grips with Christian faith. 
This double tale is haunted by the possibility that the two might conflict, 
perhaps fatally. The title of Lewis's story comes from his attempt to discover 
the source of Joy, a piercing experience that he is not entirely able to 
describe in words: "It was a sensation, of course, of desire; but desire for 
what? ... Something quite different from ordinary life ... something, as they 
would now say, 'in another dimension.' " Lewis's pursuit of Joy turns out to 
be the thread that binds his intellect and his faith together. At first, he chases 
Joy with his intellect, studying Norse mythology and other subjects that 
have brought him that unexpected stab of Joy in the past. The middle section of the book traces Lewis's education, painting a delightfully vivid portrait of his life at school, the tutor who introduces him to Greek, and his 
delight in finding book after book that speaks directly to his longing for Joy. 
But as Lewis's delight turns "imperceptibly into a scholars' interest," he 
realizes that Joy has flown. Around the same time, he becomes convinced of 
the intellectual truth of theism; "I gave in," he writes, "and admitted that 
God was God, and knelt and prayed: perhaps, that night, the most dejected 
and reluctant convert in all England." But Lewis's will is not yet God's. He 
is still determined "not to be 'interfered with'... 'to call my soul my own.' " 
Joy, imagination, and intellect do not come together until the story's end, 
when Lewis's will is finally converted in a way that is completely inaccessi-
156 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
ble to his reason: "I know very well when, but hardly how, the final step was 
taken. I was driven to Whipsnade one sunny morning. When we set out I 
did not believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and when we reached 
the zoo I did.Yet I had not exactly spent the journey in thought." Only then 
does Lewis again find himself able to experience Joy—not as an end in 
itself, but as a signpost pointing him to the divine. 
MALCOLM X 
The Autobiography of Malcolm X 
(1965) 
Best edition: The Ballantine Books paperback (New York: Ballantine Books, 
1992); ISBN 0-345-5068-3; $15.00. 
Malcolm X's autobiography was written by someone else: Alex Haley, who 
convinced Malcolm X to tell him his thoughts on an ongoing basis, while 
Haley shaped those thoughts into an autobiography. This collaboration 
with another writer introduces a different voice into the core of the story, 
and in the end changes its entire form. Haley began work on the autobiography while Malcolm X was still a follower of Elijah Muhammad and 
the chief spokesman for the Nation of Islam (which preached the need for 
reparations and the establishment of a separate black nation inside America). In 1964, Malcolm broke with Muhammad and the Nation of Islam, 
disillusioned over Muhammad's extramarital affairs ("I had always taught 
so strongly on the moral issues," he writes, sadly,"I had discovered Muslims 
had been betrayed by Elijah Muhammed himself") and uncomfortable 
with the Nation's increasingly violent rhetoric. (After the break, he discovers that the Nation has approved his assassination.) He forms his own 
organization and begins to preach the "spiritual force necessary to rid our 
people of the vices that destroy the moral fiber of our community." But 
although Malcolm wanted to go back and rewrite the earlier parts of his 
autobiography, which speak glowingly of the Nation of Islam, Haley 
protested. In the end, the completed sections of the autobiography 
remained unchanged, so that The Autobiography of Malcolm X shows with 
unusual clarity a "conversion" from one state of mind to another. It also 
shows a weird prescience: In the opening chapters, Malcolm writes, "It has 
always been my belief that I, too, will die by violence." In the final chapter, 
he sums up his life as "a life that has, as it were, already ended ... now, each 
day I live as if I am already dead." In the epilogue, Haley tells of Malcolm's 
assassination, which happened after the autobiography's completion but 
before its publication. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 $ J 
MAY SARTON 
Journal of a Solitude 
(1973) 
Best edition: The trade paperback from WW Norton (New York, 1992); ISBN 
0-393-30928-2; $13.00. 
Poet and novelist May Sarton wrote a series of journals for publication; each 
tries to make sense of a particular section of Sarton's life. This journal is an 
attempt to understand the nature of solitude, at a time when Sarton is suffering through the end of a romantic relationship. Struggling to find meaning in her isolation, Sarton tries to define the value of her work, which 
demands that she be alone. She airs her frustrations over her inward suspicion (common to creative women) that she is shirking her responsibilities 
by being alone with her books, rather than caring for people. As she writes, 
she realizes that love—the wish to be with another person—has the potential to wreck her work. "It is harder for women, perhaps," she laments, "to 
be 'one-pointed,' much harder for them to clear space around whatever it is 
they want to do beyond household chores and family life. Their lives are 
fragmented." This journal is full of darkness and fragmentation, but Sarton 
continually tries to bring sense and meaning to her chaos. "The darkness 
again," she notes, one Monday. "An annihilating review in the Sunday Times 
... Now it is the old struggle to survive.... On a deeper level I have come 
to believe (perhaps that is one way to survive) that there is a reason for these 
repeated blows—that I am not meant for success and that in a way adversity 
is my climate Somehow the great clouds made the day all right, a gift of 
splendor as they sailed over our heads." Do we really believe that the clouds 
make Sarton's wretchedness irrelevant? No, but we can believe that she 
wants them to. 
At the end of her book Sarton continues to feel guilt over her decision 
(part made, part thrust on her) to live in isolation. But she concludes, "I 
begin to have intimations, now, of a return to some deep self that has been 
too absorbed and too battered to function for a long time. That self tells me 
that I was meant to live alone, meant to write the poems for others." 
ALEKSANDR I. SOLZHENITSYN 
The Gulag Archipelago 
(1973 in English) 
Best edition:The Gulag Archipelago is a massive, seven-volume work. When 
the first two volumes first appeared in English in 1973, they were published by 
i 5 8 SUSA N WISE . BAUE R 
Harper & Row in an affordable paperback version (now out of print, but you 
may be able to find it secondhand; the ISBN is 0-06-080332-0). Now that all 
seven volumes have been translated, the entire work is in print only in expensive, single-volume editions from Perseus Books (Volume I, for example, is 
$25.00; ISBN 0-81-333289-3). However, the unabridged work—all eighteen 
hundred pages of it—is full of details of Russian history and Soviet society that 
aren't necessary to the student of autobiography. The simplest way to read The 
Gulag Archipelago is to use the authorized Perennial Classics abridgment of 
the entire seven-volume memoir, made by Edward E. Erickson, Jr., and 
approved by Solzhenitsyn himself (New York: HarperCollins, 2002; ISBN 0-
06-000776-1; $18.95). 
Solzhenitsyn s autobiography moves from first to second to third person as 
it conveys the nightmarish, absurd quality of arrest and imprisonment under 
the Soviet system. "They take you aside in a factory corridor after you have 
had your pass checked—and you're arrested," Solzhenitsyn writes. "You are 
arrested by a religious pilgrim whom you have put up for the night 'for the 
sake of Christ.'You are arrested by a meterman who has come to read your 
electric meter. You are arrested by a bicyclist who has run into you on the 
street, by a railway conductor, a taxi driver, a savings bank teller " Solzhenitsyn ascribes the submissiveness of the Russian people ("Almost no one 
tried to run away") to "universal ignorance ... Maybe they won't take you? 
Maybe it will all blow over?" But this memoir, written as a call to action, 
was intended to convince its readers that it would not, in fact "blow over." 
Solzhenitsyn leads the reader through arrest, interrogation, and deportation 
to the "corrective labor camps" where men, women, children survive for 
decades, working at hard labor in subzero cold, subsisting on grits and gruel. 
Solzhenitsyn s autobiography is the story not just of himself, but of all 
these prisoners, told in clear detail to make the abstract idea of imprisonment concrete, so that the rest of the world will finally take notice. But 
Solzhenitsyn the man changes throughout the story as well. He learns that 
he too is evil: "In the intoxication of youthful successes I had felt myself to 
be infallible, and I was therefore cruel. In the surfeit of power I was a murderer, and an oppressor. . . . And it was only when I lay there on rotting 
prison straw that I sensed within myself the first stirrings of good." In his 
imprisonment, Solzhenitsyn learns that revolution is the wrong solution to 
oppression. "Even in the best of hearts," he concludes, "there remains ... an 
unuprooted small corner of evil. Since then I have come to understand the 
truth of all the religions in the word: They struggle with the evil inside a 
human being. . . . And since that time I have come to understand the false-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 $ Ç 
hood of all the revolutions in history: They destroy only those carriers of evil 
contemporary with them." 
CHARLES W. COLSON 
Born Again 
(i977) 
Best edition: The Fleming H. Revell paperback (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Revell, 1996); ISBN 0-8007-8633-5; $6.99. 
Colson, Richard Nixon's "hatchet man" during the Watergate years, tells 
his story, as Augustine does, by locating his central flaw and exposing it in 
public confession. But this flaw has nothing to do with Watergate, which 
comes and goes fairly early in the book—and which, Colson continues to 
insist, involved no wrongdoing on his part. As a confessional, Born Again is 
endlessly intriguing in its ongoing tension between honesty and PR; the 
sins Colson confesses are all spiritual, since he denies that any "legal" 
crimes ever occurred. His crime is his personal pride: "Pride had been at 
the heart of my own life," he writes, "as far back as I could remember. . . . 
Of course, I had not known God. How could I? I had been concerned with 
myself. I had done this and that, / had achieved, / had succeeded, and / had 
given God none of the credit, never once thanking Him for any of His gifts 
to me." Like Augustine, Colson makes an effort to understand his new 
belief with his reason: "All my training insisted that analysis precede decision." Like Augustine, he shares his belief at once with a friend—businessman and entrepreneur Tom Phillips, who has climbed to the top of his 
company by "shrewd wits and raw ability" and who assures him that his 
experience is perfectly valid. Like Augustine, Colson comes to faith 
through a book—in Colson's case, one of C. S. Lewis's works on theology. 
But unlike Augustine, Colson finds a very public dimension in his conversion. "Could there be a purpose to all that had happened to me?" he asks, 
in his introduction. "And then I began to see it. The nation was in darkness; there was anger, bitterness, and disillusionment across the land. While 
my inclination was to think in terms of grandiose reforms, God seemed to 
be saying that the renewal of our national spirit can begin with each person—with the renewal of individual spirit." Throughout his story, Colson 
connects personal spirituality with national revival. He clearly positions his 
conversion story, not just as the tale of one man's fall and rise, but a blueprint for the "fixing" of America; like Booker T.Washington, he sees in his 
own story a model for an entire nation. 
î 6 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
RICHARD RODRIGUEZ 
Hunger of Memory : The Education of Richard Rodriguez 
(1982) 
Best edition:The Bantam paperback (NewYork: Bantam Books, 1983); ISBN 
0-553-27293-4; $6.99. 
The opening chapter of Hunger of Memory sets the stage for Rodriguez's 
own understanding of himself, the child of Latino immigrants living in 
America: "My writing is political because it concerns my movement away 
from the company of family and into the city," he writes. "This was my 
coming of age: I became a man by becoming a public man." Language 
becomes the symbol of this movement away from family identity toward 
public identity; Rodriguez learns to speak English in the classroom only 
when his parents refuse to speak Spanish to him at home. This is both great 
gain and shattering loss; Rodriguez is no longer "the disadvantaged child," 
but there is now a new quiet at home: "[As] we children learned more and 
more English, we shared fewer and fewer words with our parents."The very 
words that give Richard Rodriguez a public voice silence him at home. But 
for Rodriguez, the tradeoff is a necessary one. His story serves as a model 
for other Spanish-speaking children; his autobiography is in part an apology 
for English education and a rejection of bilingual education, which deprives 
children of the chance for full public participation. "In public," he writes, 
"full individuality is achieved, paradoxically, by those who are able to consider themselves members of the crowd.... Only when I was able to think 
of myself as an American, no longer an alien in gringo society, could I seek 
the rights and opportunities necessary for full public individuality." As he 
continues to tell his story, Rodriguez explores other tensions between pubHe and private selves: the conflict between his public achievement in academics, and his private intellectual life; his relationship with the Church, 
which through its sacraments and public rituals, "relieved [me] of the burden of being alone before God"; and finally, the very process of writing private scenes in his own life into public autobiography. 
JILL KER CONWAY 
The Road from Coorain 
(1989) 
Best edition: Vintage Books (NewYork: Vintage Books, 1990); ISBN 0-679-
72436-2; $12.00. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 6 1 
Conway's autobiography begins, not with her birth, but with a fourteenpage meditation on the harsh beautiful Australian landscape. It is this landscape—and the demands it makes on those who try to live in it—that 
shapes Conway's childhood and adolescence. She is born on a remote Australian sheep farm, the unexpected youngest child in a family of boys, and 
from her earliest days carries the image of the "ideal woman" as thrifty, 
tough, unemotional, a good manager who "was toughened by adversity, 
laughed at her fears, knew how to fix things which broke in the house, and 
stifled any craving she might have for beauty." Her mother is this ideal 
woman. But as Conway grows, she sees drought, natural disaster, and 
tragedy deprive her parents of their treasured farm. Determined to escape 
this hard world, she relies on her intellectual achievement to make a new 
life for herself as a scholar. But she is still haunted by her mother, who— 
stripped of her outback farm, the world within which she can do meaningful work—becomes instead a manager of her children, overcontrolling, 
paranoid, and irrational. Conway writes, "I was seven before I even laid eyes 
on another female child," and the story of her life is laced through with her 
attempts to figure out how women can find a place in the world when that 
world does not allow them to exercise their talents freely. 
ELIEWIESEL 
All Rivers Run to the Sea: Memoirs 
(1995) 
Best edition: The Schocken Books paperback (New York: Random House, 
1995); ISBN 0-8052-1028-8; $15.00. 
Wiesel's remembrances of the Holocaust are torn between the wish to find 
answers, and the knowledge that those answers will forever elude him. 
"Auschwitz," he writes in this first painful volume of his autobiography, "is 
conceivable neither with God nor without Him." Taken into the camps, 
Wiesel loses his family; liberated, he discovers that no country will welcome him. Finally Charles de Gaulle invites a group of refugees, including 
Wiesel, to France. Here, at the age of sixteen, he has to learn again what 
"normal" life is like. Every certainty, even the ritual certainties of his faith, 
have become meaningless: "How long would we recite the prayer for the 
dead? The mourning period normally lasts for eleven months after a relative's death. But what if you don't know the date of death? Halachic scholars weren't sure how to resolve our situation." Eventually Wiesel is reunited 
with two of his sisters who survived the camps, goes back to school, and 
begins his work as a journalist at the Yiddish paper Zion in Kamf. He goes 
1 6 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
on to describe his continuing involvement in journalism, political speech, 
and public protest through the establishment of the state of Israel and on 
into the 1960s. This would seem to close the story nicely, but Wiesel instead 
ends his memoir with an account of the dream he had just before his wedding: "Of what does a man dream when he is forty years old and has made 
the decision, consecrated by the Law of Moses, to make a home with the 
woman he loves? He sees himself as a child, clinging to his mother. She 
murmurs something. Was it something about the Messiah? He feels like 
telling her, 'You died, and He didn't come. And even if he does, it will be 
too late.' He walks with his father to Shabbat services, and suddenly finds 
himself in the ranks of a procession toward death. . . . He soundlessly calls 
to a gravely smiling, beautiful little girl and caresses her golden hair. His 
thoughts scale mountains and hurtle down steep pathways, wander 
through invisible cemeteries, both seeking and fleeing solitude and receiving stories already told and those he has yet to tell."Wiesel's autobiography 
is an attempt to tell these stories and to bring, for a moment, all of those 
doomed children, women, and men back to life. His mother becomes all 
Jewish women, ripped from her children without the chance to say goodbye; his little sister becomes all massacred children; his father becomes all 
Jewish men, removed from the community of the living before their lives 
were finished. 
RECOMMENDED RESOURCE 
Grun, Bernard, and Daniel J. Boorstin. The Timetables of History: A Horizontal Linkage of People and Events, 3rd rev. ed. New York: Touchstone Books, 
1991. ISBN 0-671-74271-X; $22.00. 
The Story of the Past: 
The Tales of Historians (and Politicians) 
History is above all else an argument. It is an argument between different 
historians. . . . Arguments are important; they create the possibility of 
changing things. 
—JOHN H. ARNOLD 
ICTURE A HISTORIAN at work.You might imagine him in the 
archives of a university library, paging through old records: letters, inventories, bills of sale. You might picture him crouched over dusty artifacts: coins, 
pottery, inscriptions on bits of stone. Or reading old chronicles of battles, 
deciphering Greek accounts of victories and reconstructing the chronology 
of a war. 
In truth, he's just as likely to be in his office, reading another historian's 
most recent book with his feet up on the desk. Since history is (in part) the 
investigation of past events, historians do study the evidence left behind by 
those who lived long—or not so long—ago. This evidence includes papers 
of all kinds: invoices, bills, and receipts, as well as diaries and letters. How do 
we know how the southern plantation economy worked? Through the 
painstaking categorization of paperwork recording sales of slaves, purchase 
of supplies, prices paid for crops. Physical traces left by settlements, travelers, 
and advancing armies are also vital. How do we know how far the Romans 
progressed into Britain? From traces of Roman camps and remains of 
Roman roads and walls, crumbling beneath the grass. 
But this is only a part of what the historian does. "Most practising ancient 
historians," remarks Neville Morley in his primer on studying ancient history, "don't actually spend all their time studying such 'primary' sources; they 
are more often concerned with studying the arguments of other historians."1 
'Neville Morley, Ancient History: Key Themes and Approaches (NewYork:Routledge,200o),p.ix. 
G^tx^ée^ 
î 6 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
The overall task of the historian isn't just to tell you what happened, but to 
explain why: not just to construct a bare outline of facts, but to tell a story 
about them. And this project is generally done in a give and take with other 
historians, not simply by meditating on the evidence itself. The historian 
never sits down with a collection of documents or artifacts with a "fresh 
mind." His mind is already full of other people's theories as to why Rome 
fell, or how African Americans in slavery developed an energetic culture of 
their own. When he examines the evidence, he is already asking: Do the 
theories I already know explain this? Or can I come up with a better interpretation? 
The tales told by historians have much in common with the tales told by 
novelists. Like the novel, the history tells a story about a "hero," an individual, or a country, or perhaps a particular group within a country: working 
women, soldiers, slaves. Like the hero of a novel, this "historical hero" grapples with a problem (poor wages, the demands of war) and finds a strategy 
for coping with it. A history's conclusion, like a novel's climax, pronounces 
a final judgment on the hero's choice of strategy. 
Unlike the novelist, though, the historian has to shape his plot around 
certain historical givens. To use a ridiculously simplified metaphor: It's as 
though both writers are painting a portrait of a woman sitting at a table. But 
while the novelist is painting from imagination and can give the woman any 
features, any race, any age, any dress, the historian is looking at an actual 
young, white woman sitting at a sidewalk table outside a St. Louis eatery. He 
can paint her so that her background fades and her individuality stands out; 
he can paint her as a dreamlike figure against a colorful and busy scene; he 
can paint her so that we notice her race and age and her worried expression, but not her clothes; he can blur her face but paint her shabby dress and 
peeling handbag with great detail. But he cannot make a young white 
woman into a middle-aged Asian matron or into an African American man. 
In this obligation to adhere to what they see in front of them, historians 
actually share the task of autobiographers. Both shape "real" events into a 
design that leads the reader forward to a final interpretation, one that fills 
those events with meaning. But until very recently, historians have rejected 
any comparison with autobiographers. Autobiography, after all, cannot possibly be objective. As Georges Gusdorf remarks, "it reveals ... the effort of a 
creator to give the meaning of his own mythic tale." Objectivity, Gusdorf 
adds, is the task of the historian, who must "discern" the facts beyond the 
myth.2 
2Georges Gusdorf, "Conditions and Limits of Autobiography," in Autobiography: Essays Theoretical and Critical, ed. James Olney (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1980), p. 48. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 6 S 
For generations, objectivity has been the single most important quality of 
the historian. A historian who has personal involvement with a topic has traditionally been viewed as untrustworthy and unprofessional. Autobiography, as the epitome of personal involvement in past events, has ranked at the 
bottom of scholarly endeavors. Even as a source for information about the 
past, autobiography rates little attention. As the historian Jeremy Popkin 
points out, "standard manuals for students caution them against reliance on 
these 'least convincing of all personal records.' "3 
Where did this ideal of the perfectly objective historian come from? 
A FIFTEEN-MINUTE HISTORY OF HISTORY 
Historical writing—which you will sometimes see referred to as "historiography" (graphos is the Greek word for "writing")—developed over the 
course of several thousand years and thus has its own history. My attempt 
to outline this enormous, complicated "history of historiography" should 
be considered as a beginning for your own understanding. It draws simple 
connections where connections are in fact multiple and complex. It suggests direct causes ("Impatience with rationalism led to romanticism") 
where many factors actually came into play, and where the "result" may 
have existed alongside the "cause" for many years. It simplifies great philosophical insights by examining them only as they apply to the writing of 
history. This is why I've capitalized such words as Relativism and Postmodernism in this chapter, turning them into labels for certain types of 
historical writing. 
Think of yourself as a beginning history reader. Beginning readers need 
simplicity before they progress to complexity. When you first teach a child 
her letter sounds, you tell her that a makes the sound heard in cat. The truth 
is that a makes many other sounds as well, but if you tell the beginning 
reader all of the possible a sounds at the same time, she might give up in 
sheer confusion and refuse to learn to read, so she learns only the simplest 
sound first. Once she begins to read, she can begin to understand the additional complexities of the letter a. The following outline provides an "easy 
primer" approach to history; as you continue to read historical writing, you 
will find yourself adding new complexities to its simple structure. 
3
Jeremy D. Popkin, "Historians on the Autobiographical Frontier," American Historical Review, 
vol. 104, no. 3 (June 1999): 725-48; Popkin is quoting G. Kitson Clark's manual The Critical 
Historian. 
1 6 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Ancient history 
Medieval history 
Renaissance history 
"Enlightened" or "rational" approach 
Positivism Romanticism 
* . . J. 
"Progress-ism" Relativism 
I „ I 
"Multiculturalism" Skepticism (Postmodernism) 
Ancient History 
History illuminates reality, 
vitalizes memory, 
provides guidance in daily life. 
—CICER O 
The earliest forms of historical writing are the accounts kept by ancient 
kings of their victories (not, generally, of their defeats). These military 
chronicles have historical value, but they are not "historical writing" 
because they have a single, limited purpose: the immortalization of one particular king. In present-day terms, the ancient chronicles are more like press 
releases than history. When the Assyrian ruler Sennacherib boasts that his 
invasion of Judah destroyed "forty-six . . . strong walled towns and innumerable smaller villages," and that Judah was "overwhelmed" by "the awful 
splendor of my lordship," he is not trying to enlighten inquisitive Assyrian 
readers. He's crowing. 
"History," in the sense of a coherent story written to illuminate the past, 
first appeared' among the Greeks. The great Greek triumvirate of historians—Herodotus, Thucydides, and Xenophon—took a slightly wider view 
of history. Rather than simply boosting the prestige of a king or leader, they 
tried to write the story of men (primarily Greek men).Their purposes went 
beyond puffery: Thucydides writes for "those who desire an exact knowl-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 6 J 
edge of the past as a key to the future, which in all probabiHty will repeat or 
resemble the past." And the Greek historians defined, for the first time, the 
border between myth and "history." Herodotus draws a careful line between 
truth and absurdity; this line doesn't always stretch through territory that a 
modern historian would recognize (Herodotus is quite impressed with 
accounts of a country full of one-eyed people who steal gold from griffins), 
but he is conscious that such a line exists. In their efforts to record what 
really happened—in Thucydides' own phrase, an "exact knowledge of the 
past"—the Greek historians were innovators. 
In other ways, though, their histories bore a family resemblance to the 
ancient chronicles that came before. Greek histories are hero-centered, 
much concerned with kings and generals. "History," for the ancients, happens when great men exercise their ambition, plan, scheme, fight, triumph, 
or show themselves wanting. "Cyrus," begins the historian Xenophon, "set 
about planning that he might be king. . . . When any of the King's court 
came to visit him, he treated them all in such a way that when he sent them 
back they were more devoted to him than to the King." Cyrus's wily diplomacy set into motion an entire string of events, and Cyrus became the 
greatest Persian king because of his own ambitions, not because some great 
pattern had decreed it. History had no "great pattern." History was a swarm 
of interlinked tales, each telling of a great man's life, each life story bearing 
within itself its own causes. No single "purpose" shaped the tales of these 
Greek historians into a great Plan; the Plan came into view only with the 
advent of Christianity. 
Medieval History 
Thus says the Lord to His anointed, 
to Cyrus, whose right hand I have held, 
to subdue nations before him and remove the armor of kings.... 
I will go before you and break in pieces the gates of bronze. 
ISAIAH 45:1- 2 
Medieval historians transformed history from a series of interlinked stories 
to one long, sequential story, with a beginning and an ending decreed by 
God. The interlinked stories of ancient historians were joined by odd and 
unpredictable connections; with Christianity, the links were shaken into a 
straight chain, a line pointing forward, unbending as an arrow, to the End. 
Cyrus became king because God had planned it long before, not because of 
his own driving ambition. 
l 6 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
The first medieval historian is (naturally) Augustine, whose City of God 
proved as central to the idea of Western history as his Confessions were to the 
idea of the Western self. After the Goths sacked Rome in 410, there were 
widespread mutterings that the Christians had caused the catastrophe by 
deserting the old gods. In response, Augustine set out on a thirteen-year 
writing project, a "theoretical history" arguing that all of history records 
the doings of two separate political entities—the kingdom of God and the 
kingdom of men—existing side by side, in the same space and time. The 
members of the two kingdoms share certain goals (the desire to live in 
peace, for example), but in the end, they pursue different purposes: the one 
seeks power, the other worships God.This side-by-side existence creates the 
tensions and conflicts of history, in which God is bringing his kingdom to 
perfection, while unbelieving man fights and resists him. 
This sense of history as God's unfolding plan was a Christian reworking 
of the method of Hebrew historians, who saw all of Israel's past (and future) 
as the outworking of God's plan to form a "holy people" on the earth. By 
shifting the ultimate home of this "holy people" from earth to heaven, 
medieval historians could now tell the story of the entire universe, from 
Creation on, in one unbroken line; all of God's acts in history pointed to the 
birth of Christ, and then past it to the time of Christ's return.This was enormously clarifying to historians, who could now make sense out of what had 
previously seemed shapeless. Faith in the eternal God and reason—that faculty that shapes chaos into order and arranges unsorted heaps of information into patterns—-joined together to lead historians into a story with 
creation at its beginning and the world's remaking at its end. Finally, the 
events of history made sense. 
But visualizing history as God's eternal workshop did little to impress on 
medieval historians the difference between ancient times and their own. If 
all men are made in the image of God, they are essentially alike; if they are 
all part of one story, there is not much more difference between ancient 
times and the present than between the first act of a play and its end. So 
medieval history is marked, not only by its providentialism, but by its tendency to view ancients and contemporaries in exactly the same way. 
(Medieval art inevitably dresses biblical characters in medieval dress, and 
places fifteenth-century weapons in the hands of Hebrew kings.) The sense 
of the past as a foreign country (where, in L. P. Hartley's famous phrase, they 
"do things differently")4
 began to develop only with the Renaissance. 
4
The opening lines of Hartley's 1953 novel The Go-Between: "The past is a foreign country. 
They do things differently there." 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 6 Ç 
Renaissance History 
History is the intellectual form in which 
a civilization renders accounts to itself of its past. 
—JOHANN HUIZINGA 
"Between the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries," historian Joyce Appleby 
remarks, "the Christian scheme of history steadily lost credibility. Certainty 
and conviction about God's purposes in human affairs gave way to growing 
doubts."5 
This is true. Yet the popular picture of an enormous breach between a 
Christian Middle Ages and a secular Renaissance is oversimplified. For one 
thing, "Christian history" never actually went away; for every new European colony in the Americas, there was a historian who claimed that God 
had personally planted that particular settlement in order to bring his kingdom on earth at last. But even more central to the Renaissance practice of 
history was a developing sense of the past as a faraway and alien place, 
removed from the present not by geography, but by time. That sense of time 
(which allows us, in the present day, to draw a straight line that goes from 
left to right and call it a "time line") depended on the Christian hypothesis 
that time was a progression, an arrowlike reality with an undeveloped 
beginning and a perfected end. 
Sometime around 1600, Europeans began to use the word "primitive" to 
mean "undeveloped" or "not yet modern"; as John Lukacs points out,6
 this 
idea of primitive (inferior because it is far away in time) replaced the Greek 
idea of "barbarian" (inferior because it is distant in space, far away from 
Greek land). The concept of "primitive" was followed closely by the idea 
of "anachronism," something happening out of the correct order in time. 
A sense of historical difference didn't arrive full-fledged; Shakespeare's 
Romans are unmistakably Elizabethan ("The clock hath stricken three!" 
Cassius cries, although no clocks existed in ancient Rome), and were acted 
in knee breeches and powdered periwigs as late as the eighteenth century. 
But during the Renaissance, linear time became an accepted reality. The 
Renaissance historian looked at what men had done, within this framework 
5
Joyce Appleby, Lynn Hunt, and Margaret Jacob, Telling the Truth About History (New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1995), p. 58.This is an excellent text on the practices and problems of North 
American historians, and I am indebted to it for its sharp insights on the ongoing relationship between history and science. Appleby herself qualifies this statement later, although she 
does continue to speak of the two eras as radically different. 
6
John Lukacs, A Student's Guide to the Study of History (Wilmington, Del.: ISI Books, 2000), 
p. 16. 
1 J 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
of linear time, and asked, Why? And in finding the answer, he pursued a 
strategy markedly different from that of the medieval writer. 
Reason was not suddenly "discovered" during the Renaissance, as though 
every earlier generation had had its collective brain on ice. Rather, what 
changed during the Renaissance was the material on which reason exercised its powers. A medieval historian, faced with a historical question 
("Why did the barbarian Angles invade Britain and slaughter native 
Britons?") was likely to tussle with deep theological questions about the 
purposes of God and the puzzling ways in which his will was carried out. A 
Renaissance historian, faced with a similar challenge, turned to the study of 
men: their desires, fears, and ambitions. In this, Renaissance history was 
much more like Greek history than like its medieval counterpart, which is 
hardly surprising since Renaissance scholars idolized the classical past. 
But the Greeks were happy to ascribe certain events to the workings of 
divinity. For the Renaissance thinker, the gate to this avenue of explanation 
was slowly swinging closed. The Renaissance was shaped by a philosophy 
that found its clearest expression in Descartes, who (as we saw in his Meditations) looked for a sure place on which to stand, a way to know that his 
conclusions were true. Descartes believed in God, but distrusted God's ability to communicate unambiguously with man. And technological innovations—most notably the telescope—had already revealed that explanations 
given by medieval thinkers who claimed to reason straight from their 
knowledge of God were likely to be incorrect. The only way to be assured 
of a true conclusion was to reason your way to it without taking divine revelation or divine purposes as your starting point. The mountain of God was 
no longer the vantage point with the best view; man's own mind provided 
the higher peak. 
The medieval historian sought to find out what God intended, and to 
illuminate this purpose through the writing of history. The Renaissance historian instead reasoned his way through a chain of past events to find out 
why a civilization rose or fell. And these reasons had immense present 
importance. If God had not decreed the pattern of history, it could be 
altered and controlled. Find out why Rome fell in the past, and you might 
well save your own civilization from a similar fall in the near future. Machiavelli scoured the past for examples of successful leadership; from this historical foundation he reasoned his way to a prescription for effective 
present-day rule. Thomas More, outlining the ideal society, retained those 
past ideas of the Greeks which he thought might solve the problems of the 
English in the future. 
For the first time, history became a matter of becoming, not of being; of 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 J 1 
trying to account for the way that countries develop, rather than simply 
describing them as they were. And the very word becoming implies a sense of 
progress, of movement toward an end point. The Renaissance historians 
didn't raze the foundation of linear time that Christian historians had laid. 
Instead, they knocked down a few walls and built patchwork buildings on 
the old cornerstones. Ironically, the Christian sense of time as a linear progression from a less realized time toward a more complete reality made it 
possible for later scholars to suggest that life might evolve, over time, from a 
primitive to an advanced state. 
The "Enlightened," or "Rational," Approach 
To study history means submitting to chaos 
and nevertheless retaining faith in order and meaning. 
—HERMANN HESSE 
Enlightenment scholars didn't just build patchwork buildings. They erected 
huge enormous glittering temples to Reason all over the landscape. Given 
a chance, Enlightenment thinkers might well have chosen a Darwinian 
metaphor instead: They were finally walking from the primordial, Godridden ooze of the Middle Ages, onto the solid beach of rationalism, to 
bask in the sunshine of free thought. 
Descartes had already suggested (in the early seventeenth century) that 
reason, not divine revelation, was the one true source of knowledge. Now 
John Locke, in the mid-seventeenth century, proposed that man comes into 
the world with nothing but the capacity to reason. No innate knowledge of 
God, no instincts, no natural patriotism: just the ability to see and touch and 
feel and hear the physical world, and to reason about it. Everything that man 
knows, he has learned by analyzing the evidence of his senses. This is the 
source of all knowledge, and man's reason—dealing with tangible, physical 
evidence in a way that is completely reliable and unbiased—becomes the 
ultimate source of truth. Man's mind is the "enlightener." 
The Christian impulse to look for an overall meaning to historical events 
remained. But historians now sought this meaning through exercising their 
reason freely. If unreasonable, illogical factors—religious belief, say, or patriotism—influenced the historian, his pure and reliable reason had been corrupted; he no longer wrote truth. And in the same way, truth could not be 
discovered if historians were pressured by church or state to come to certain 
conclusions: "If we are asked, 'Do we now live in an enlightened age?' " 
Immanuel Kant wrote in 1784,"The answer is,'No,' but we do live in an age 
1 7 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
of enlightenment.... [T]he field has now been opened wherein men may 
freely deal with these things." Freedom meant no preconditions; no preexisting belief in God, no fear of state reprisals. History was not meant to serve 
any sort of ideological end. It was meant to find the truth. 
This idea that a historian could find truth through the scientific examination of the past depended on a new understanding of the cosmos. In the late 
seventeenth century, Isaac Newton's "natural science" had proposed something startling: Universal, cosmic laws governed every level of the universe's 
functioning, from the greatest planetary bodies down to the tiniest fragment. These laws could be proved through mathematics—and they were 
constants throughout the universe. 
Now Enlightenment philosophers had a model for reason: Reason was 
like gravity. Like gravity, it was a mathematical certainty. Like gravity, it was 
a constant throughout the universe. Like gravity, it always brought the same 
conclusions. Just as an experiment, if conducted properly, led to one and 
only one result, so history, if approached properly, would yield one and only 
one correct conclusion: the truth. 
Newton's laws served as a model not only for reason, but for history 
itself. Like scientists, historians could discover historical laws that were just 
as real and predictable as physical laws. Newton observed objects fall, and 
from this reasoned his way to the law of gravity; historians observed 
nations fall, and from this reasoned their way to the laws that govern 
empires. These historical laws, like scientific laws, were universally applicable to all nations—just as the law of gravity governs every object, large or 
small.7 
The search for universal historical laws wasn't simply an academic exercise. It had real, present urgency. All over Europe, the power of the monarchy was fraying at the seams; in France, it pulled apart entirely in 1789. 
Monarchs had claimed to rule by divine right, to hold authority over others because they were chosen by God. But now men saw themselves as 
equal to the king, possessing an equal capacity for reason, and an equal ability to govern themselves. A monarch's claim to God-given authority was as 
dead as a universal belief in the apocalypse. *. 
But without a divinely ordained pattern for government, how should 
nations run themselves? To answer, historians combed the past to find 
those universal historical laws that govern human communities. Locke 
7Appleby, Hunt, and Jacob are among the many historians who have noted the connection 
between the development of Newtonian science and the development of modern historical 
writing (see Telling the Truth About History, pp. 52-76). 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 J 3 
concluded that men govern themselves by entering into a contract with 
their government; Rousseau, that they enter into a contract only with 
themselves. In explaining this new commitment to republicanism, historians relied increasingly on the idea of historical evolution. Not only individual nations, but history itself was evolving toward maturity. Monarchies 
had been for children, but republics were for adults. That idea of "primitive" versus "advanced" has continued to shape the way we think about 
history today: it allows us to talk about the "ancient" world, about the 
"Dark Ages," about "premodern" times and about "modernity," about the 
"end of history." 
The Enlightenment (like literary realism) never really goes away. It 
shaped the identity of the modern West. And like any coherent system of 
belief, it has its own creed, which is still recited today: 
Reason is "autonomous" or independent of any other part of man. The truth 
about the world can be discovered not by faith, not by intuition, but 
through the exercise of the single most important element of the human 
person: the mind. And the mind is capable of escaping bias in order to see 
what really is. 
Institutional authority is suspect. Authority isn't primarily concerned with 
truth but with power. So it tends to insist, blindly, on ideas which will help 
it keep its power, rather than truly exercising its reason in an unbiased way. 
(In modern academic circles, you are only allowed to say this part of the 
creed once you leave the graduate program.) 
Every effect has a cause, and that cause can be discovered. There is no ultimate 
mystery in the world; there is always an explanation. Arthur C. Clarke, best 
known for 2001: A Space Odyssey, once wrote, "Any sufficiently advanced 
technology is indistinguishable from magic." An Enlightenment motto if 
ever there was one: Anything that may seem miraculous to us simply has 
causes and effects that we have not yet discovered. 
Historians of the Enlightenment did their best to remove the mystery 
from the past by putting it under scientific scrutiny. The Greek sense of history as a set of stories, linked together by the passions of great men, had 
given way to the medieval understanding of history as the single story of 
God's work in time. During the Renaissance, this single story had become 
the story of men, not the story of the deity. Now historians viewed history 
as an expanse of physical phenomena that had to be explained. 
The Enlightenment gave birth to two families of historians. One set of 
children worshiped their parent; the other set hated it. Like battling siblings 
who finally hit their fifties, both families end up (after four hundred years or 
so) sitting in the same living room. 
i 7 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
From Positivism to "Progress-ism" to "Multiculturalism" 
(and Thence to Postmodernism) 
Q 
Positivism 
History is a science, no more and no less. 
— J. B. BURY 
Positivism, the Enlightenment's eldest child, was a nineteenth-century 
infatuation with one particular Enlightenment ideal: the historian as scientist. The originator of the term positivism, the French sociologist Auguste 
Comte, was much enamored with the idea of the scientist as synthesizer of 
knowledge, able to observe the facts about human existence and draw from 
them laws that would coalesce into one Grand Theory explaining all.9
 In 
Comte s view, historians were co-laborers at this noble task. 
Positivists held, quite logically, that since both historians and scientists 
pursue the same magnificent end they should pursue it in the same way. 
Despite the move toward "scientific history" during the Enlightenment, for 
most of the eighteenth century history had been an amateur's occupation. 
David Hume, Edward Gibbon, and Mary Wollstonecraft were writers and 
scholars, but none of them had been "trained" to be a historian. Certainly 
no eighteenth-century historians made a living out of history. But the 
nineteenth-century Positivists began to assemble a system of professional, 
scientific training for historians: university seminars, a period of apprenticeship, the publication of a dissertation or some other scholarly work in order 
to gain "entry" into the ranks of the qualified. 
A large part of this scientific training involved the proper handling of 
sources. Nineteenth-century German historians were the first to draw a line 
between "primary sources" (directly produced by the person or during the 
time under study) and "secondary sources" (secondhand evidence or other 
scholarly works). "Scientific historians" modeled their use of sources after 
the scientist's use of evidence. They would no more go on hearsay (as 
Herodotus was quite willing to do) than a scientist would. They had to 
weigh, measure, and validate their evidence firsthand. 
"Evidence," then, came to mean that which could be weighed, measured, 
and validated. For the Positivist, great natural forces were much more worthy of study than great men. Historical events came about not because of 
men's ambitions, but because of physical factors: the distribution of metals 
Positivism is a technical term in law, linguistics, philosophy, and historiography, and has a different meaning in each field. Here I am using it only in its narrow historiographical sense as 
referring to those historians who saw their task as scientific and rational. 
9
 Appleby, Hunt, and Jacob use the wonderful phrase heroic science in their discussion of Comte 
and positivism in Telling the Truth About History. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 J 5 
in a particular country, or the soil in which certain crops grew, or the mountains that protected its cities. People's passions as explanation for historical 
change were suspect—as suspect as God's providential hand. 
"Progress-ism" 
History itself is nothing but the activity 
of men pursuing their purposes. 
—KARL MARX 
"Progress-ism"—faith in forward progress, the belief that history always 
marches toward a better world, always advancing, always improving—was 
the natural sequel to Positivism. After all, scientists were progressing from 
great discovery to great discovery, each one bringing with it the chance to 
transform the world. Historians would do the same. 
The syllogism was simple: If historians do their work with meticulous scientific accuracy, they will discover historical laws. Since historical laws are universal and unchanging, they can prescribe future actions that will bring about 
a more perfect existence. Because reason is the most powerful part of man 
(much more powerful than the will), the recommendations will be carried 
out as soon as people are convinced of their necessity. To convince the intellect of the Tightness of a particular course is always to convert the will, since 
the (weaker) will is always under the control of the (stronger) intellect. (In 
present-day political usage, "progressive" is sometimes interchangeable with 
"liberal," which explains why "Education is the answer" is both supremely 
progressive and quintessential^ liberal as a strategy for social change.) 
Augustine, who found his sinful will to be much stronger than his reason, would have thrown up his hands in dismay. But Augustine lived in a 
different world. In his universe, the Garden of Eden stood as the high 
point; since the first sin, the human condition had headed steadily downward, and only direct divine intervention could make things better. But 
Progress-ism offered a golden future spread out ahead, as the poor, the 
criminal, and the wrong-headed were inexorably converted by the rhetoric of Reason. History became a tool for change: "If history is ever to help 
us solve . . . the great and grievous riddle of life," the historian Jacob 
Burkhardt told his German listeners in the late nineteenth century, "we 
must [understand] .. . the true nature of life on earth.... [F]ortunately for 
us, ancient history has preserved a few records in which we can closely follow growth, bloom and decay in outstanding historical events."10
 Those 
IOJacob Burckhardt, Reflections on History (taken from lectures delivered by Burckardt in Germany in 1868—71, first published in German in 1906; this quote is from the first English edition, published by Allen & Unwin, 1943), p. 21. 
l 7 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
ancient patterns would reveal principles that historians could use to perfect 
the world. 
Faith in progress took several different forms, some more optimistic than 
others. In the practice of English history, historians who saw the past as an 
inexorable progression toward perfection were said to write "Whiggish" 
history. In American history, the progressive movement saw history as a constant struggle between "the people" (honest workers) and "aristocrats" (corrupt and dishonest tycoons) to preserve the American dream. After a time 
of fierce struggle, this conflict would lead to a more perfect American 
democracy. American progressivism drew on the work of Karl Marx, perhaps the most famous evangelist of the progress-in-history gospel. 
Marx looked at the ancient pattern of class struggle throughout all of 
human existence and in this struggle found the historical principle that— 
he believed—could guide man into a more perfect existence. "The history 
of all hitherto existing society," The Communist Manifesto begins, "is the history of class struggles. Freeman and slave, patrician and plebian, lord and 
serf, guildmaster and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood 
in constant opposition to one another." As a Positivist, Marx believed that 
the key to history was the analysis of the tangible, material conditions under 
which people lived. As a believer in historical progress, he was convinced 
that this analysis revealed a historical law that could be used to reshape the 
future: The workers of the world must be given control over the "means of 
production" (the raw materials and equipment needed to produce goods). 
This would bring Utopia: the "worker's paradise." 
Marx saw the constant struggle between two hostile classes of people as 
the engine that drove history toward perfection. Rationalist that he was, 
Marx nevertheless borrowed this idea from the mystical philosopher Georg 
Hegel, who wrote long and largely incomprehensible tracts about history as 
the self-realization of the divine; as history progresses forward, Hegel 
explained, the "divine Spirit" reveals itself more and more, making the 
meaning of existence gradually clearer. Marx jettisoned Hegel's esoteric 
musings about the World-Spirit Made Manifest (along with Hegel's conviction that the process had come to complete fulfillment in Prussia in 1805), 
but he retained Hegel's description of how history progresses forward: two 
opposing forces (in Hegelian terms, "thesis" and "antithesis") struggle, and 
from their struggle a new and more perfect reality ("synthesis") arises. 
Marx's particular brand of Progress-ism altered Progress-ism forever. It 
treated the underclass (which struggled with the overclass) as a vital element 
in the forward movement of history. The laborers were the antithesis of the 
bourgeoisie (the people who control the factories and the production of 
goods—what Americans would consider "upper middle class"). Without 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 7 7 
the struggle between antithesis and thesis, between underclass and overclass, 
there was no synthesis, no forward progress, no communist state. The workers became important in their own right: They were no longer simply the 
poor, criminal, and wrong-headed who needed to be converted by reason, 
but people with their own power ("agency"), their own values, their own 
patterns of life. 
Multiculturalism 
"History, real solemn history, I cannot be interested in.... 
The quarrels of popes and kings, 
with wars and pestilences in every page; 
the men all so good for nothing, 
and hardly any women at all." 
—CATHERINE, IN NORTHANGER ABBEY BY JANE AUSTEN 
The Marxian revolution in historiography altered the historian's universe 
irrevocably. Early Progress-ism tended to be elitist, exalting the work of the 
well educated (who also tended to be well bred and well heeled) and ignoring conflict in history. But after Marx, the poor and oppressed, and their struggle against domination, became essential parts of the historical equation. 
After Marx, historians gradually began to study not just the economically 
oppressed, but all oppressed and dominated people: women, whom Marx 
himself apparently didn't notice, African Americans, Native Americans, and 
then Hispanics, urban dwellers, "subalterns" (peoples who have been colonized by foreign invaders, as in British-occupied India), and so on. The 
study of these multiple cultures was the first stage of a movement that 
expanded beyond the realm of historiography and, some time later, acquired 
the nickname "multiculturalism." 
This study of previously ignored people was sometimes called "history 
from below"—described by the historian Jim Sharpe as "rescuing the past 
experiences of the bulk of the population from .. . total neglect by historians."11
 Historians who worked "from below" realized that focusing only on 
"movers and shakers"—kings, generals, and politicians—gave only a partial 
picture of the past. "History from below"( also known as "social history") 
used nontraditional sources such as personal diaries, oral histories, and interviews to build an alternate history, one that described what "real people" 
were doing as great events rolled over their heads. Some historians turned 
to quantitative analysis: wealth distribution, census results, population 
"Jim Sharpe, "History from Below,"in New Perspectives on Historical Writing, 2nd éd., éd. Peter 
Burke (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2001), p. 27. 
i 78 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
movements, birth rates, causes of death, and a hundred other sets of figures. 
The social historian could draw conclusions about the rights of women, for 
example, by examining hundreds of tax records, finding the instances in 
which women were listed as owners of land, and calculating the conditions 
under which they had gained their property. 
Positivists would have applauded. But social historians didn't use quantitative methods primarily because they were scientific. As a matter of fact, 
social historians tended to be ambivalent about science, which was produced by those well-educated elites to trample on the lives of others. 
Rather, social historians who wanted to write about "the anonymously 
downtrodden" (to use Laurence Veysey s phrase) found themselves faced 
with a problem: Traditional "primary sources" such as letters and memoirs 
were almost always written by elite, educated people—which skewed the 
focus of history toward the relatively small and well-to-do segment of the 
population who were literate and leisured enough to write. So historians 
turned to new sources, piecing together the stories of ordinary people from 
tax records, inventories, birth and death records, advertisements, wage stubs, 
and other kinds of evidence. 
Social historians tended to be wary of drawing conclusions from those 
stories that would apply to the rest of the human race. After all, "traditional 
history" had made the error of assuming that the lives of the "ordinary" 
could be explained by studying events at the highest level of society. The 
social historian wanted to avoid the same trap, instead giving each life its 
proper weight as unique. Laurel Thatcher Ulrich's A Midwife's Tale tells us 
every detail of midwife Martha Ballard's life, but Ulrich avoids making 
statements about "eighteenth-century midwifery," let alone about "women 
in colonial New England"; she aims instead to tell us of this one woman's 
life, a life that would never have been known without the diary, since even 
Ballard's headstone carries her husband's name rather than her own. 
In its most extreme forms, social history focused exclusively on those 
anonymously downtrodden, dismissing any larger unifying themes that 
might link the lives of the downtrodden and their putative tramplers 
together. But even more moderate forms of "history from below" show that 
the Enlightenment vision of universal historical laws that apply to all men 
(and women) had begun to break down. Many social historians rejected the 
validity of a "Story of Mankind," in favor of a multiplicity of separate histories. Any attempt to unite those histories into a coherent whole, they 
objected, would inevitably flatten all those unique stories, reducing them 
back into anonymity. 
So the social historian resisted generalizations, instead keeping her eyes 
firmly on her own small patch of the world and explaining only the truths 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 J g 
governing that particular culture. She rejected the ideal of one objective, 
preferred point of view that would reveal the truth. Instead, she saw multiple points of view, each arising within a particular culture, each yielding a 
different version of the truth. "Generalizations," in the words of the social 
historian Edward Ayers, "numb us to .. . the emotional shadings of historical experience, the subtle and shifting contexts in which people had to 
make choices . . . the instability of even the most apparently permanent 
structures."12 
Which leads us to Postmodernism. But before we complete the journey 
through history, let's go all the way back to the Enlightenment again, and 
meet that other family of historians. 
From Romanticism to Relativism to Skepticism 
(and Thence to Postmodernism) 
Romanticism 
Genuine historical knowledge requires nobility of character, 
a profound understanding of human existence— 
not detachment and objectivity. 
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
Although every eighteenth-century thinker was affected by Enlightenment 
thought, not every eighteenth-century thinker welcomed the Enlightenment creed with joy. Romanticism accepted some Enlightenment ideas 
more or less uncritically; Hke Progressives, the optimistic Romantics believed 
that man was destined to triumph over his environment, rising steadily to 
greater and greater heights. But Romantics saw man boosted to those peaks 
by warm gusts of imagination and creativity—not conveyed there by the 
cold calculations of reason. 
For one thing, the exercise of reason was limited to the physical world. 
Many Romantics rejected the traditional Christianity of the Middle Ages. 
But many retained a pantheistic belief in God, seeing the presence of the 
divine in nature. They worshiped a glorious invisible reality that man could 
glimpse beyond the tangible and the physical; Hegel's theology of the mystical Divine slowly revealing itself in the progress of history was quintessentially Romantic. Against the flattening Enlightened insistence on what 
could be tasted, touched, and seen, the Romantics insisted on the presence 
of mystery in the world. They refused to find single, explicable causes for 
I2Edward L. Ayers, "Narrating the New South," Journal of Southern History, vol. 61, no. 3 (August 
1995): 555-66. 
l 8 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
historical events, or simple, rational answers to great questions. The complexity of the world demanded multiple answers; Edward Gibbon lays out 
so many complexities and multiple explanations for the decline and fall of 
Rome that he never does arrive at a final interpretation. 
Human beings were just as complex. For the Romantic, to classify man 
solely as a rational creature was to take away what makes him distinctively 
human: creativity, intuition, emotion, religious feeling, patriotism. Against 
Positivism, the Romantics claimed Immanuel Kant as their own; Kant 
emphasized the freedom to think, and freedom was central to the Romantic rejection of Positivist logic.The Positivists had turned man into a cog, a 
calculator, a "machine made of meat" (in Marvin Minsky's phrase), whose 
actions could be calculated with certainty from an examination of the factors around him. 
The Romantic historian wanted to bring emotion and creativity, the passions and ambitions of men, back into the study of the past. Enlightenment 
thinkers had emphasized man's sameness, those universal laws which govern 
all human beings. But the Romantics exalted man's uniqueness and infinite 
variety. 
The Enlightenment had scorned patriotism as an irrational corrupter of 
reason, but the Romantic respect for diversity produced an increased 
respect for national identity. Romantic historians followed instead the arguments of eighteenth-century philosopher Johann Gottfried von Herder. 
Herder was willing to believe that historical events had causes, but he was 
skeptical about man's ability to discover those causes with any certainty, 
since they were most likely not single and simple, but multiple and difficult 
to discern—or perhaps psychological, driven by passions that remained hidden even to the historical actors themselves. Human beings were deep wells 
of mystery, and history was an even deeper well; some of its reaches and 
crannies would always remain inaccessible to the historian. 
Herder's insistence on the ultimate mystery of man, rather than humanity's essential sameness, could have led to a skepticism in which no one 
could make any general conclusions about mankind at all. (Indeed, Herder 
wrote, the job of "ordering together ... many occurrences into a plan" was 
beyond reason; it was an act that belonged instead to the "creator,... painter, 
and artist.")13
 But Herder, like thinkers since the Middle Ages, was impelled 
to look for some principle that governed this ordering together. He wanted 
a unified history, not a fractured one, and he found his organizing principle 
in nationalism. 
I3Johann Gottfried von Herder, Older Critical Forestlet (1767-68). Quoted in Michael N. Forester, 
"Johann Gottfried von Herder," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2001 edition), ed. 
Edward N.Zalta, available on line at http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/vvdn2001/entries/herder. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 8 1 
For Herder and the Romantic historians who followed him, national 
identity was something that all people had in common, and yet allowed 
them individuality. National identity, Herder wrote, was partly determined 
by physical landscape, partly by circumstance, and partly "by the inborn and 
self-nourishing character of the peoples.... As man originates from and in 
one race, so his body, education, and mode of thinking are genetic."14
 This 
nationalism seemed to combine the best insights of science (the study of 
physical factors such as landscape, for example) with a Romantic respect for 
that intangible, personal something that makes people different. Historians 
discovered a new interest in the writing of national history. Scholars investigated native languages and collected national folktales—as did the Brothers Grimm, linguists who were forty-odd years younger than Herder. 
Some Romantic nationalists developed a less charming interest in racial 
purity. Herder, German by birth, quotes approvingly from the ancient historian Tacitus, who wrote that "The tribes of Germany, who never degrade 
themselves by mingling with others, form a peculiar, unadulterated, original 
nation, which is its own archetype." Herder adds, ominously, "Now look 
about you The tribes of Germany have been degraded by mingling with 
others." It was a short step from the glorification of national identity to the 
belief that the progression into perfection demanded the mastery of other, 
less worthy nations. 
Relativism 
Nothing capable of being memorized is history. 
R. G. COLLINGWOOD 
In 1957, Karl Popper dedicated his book refuting Romantic nationalism to 
"the countless men and women of all creeds or nations or races who fell 
victims to the fascist and communist belief in Inexorable Laws of Historical 
Destiny."15 
Popper argues that logic prevents anyone from predicting the course of 
human history "by scientific or any other rational methods." History, he 
writes, is affected by the growth of scientific knowledge itself. But the 
growth of knowledge can't possibly be predicted: "If there is such a thing as 
growing human knowledge, then we cannot anticipate today what we shall 
know only tomorrow." So history cannot be predicted either. 
I4Johann Gottfried von Herder, Materials for the Philosophy of the History of Mankind (1784), etext edition (ed. Jerome S. Arkenberg) published in Internet Modern History Sourcebook, at 
www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1784herder-mankind.htrnl. 
I5Karl Popper, The Poverty of Historicism (NewYork: Basic Books, 1957). 
1 82 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Romantic nationalism had proved to be a bloody dead end, but there was 
no retreating backward into "Progress-ism," let alone Positivism, for the 
Romantics. The first half of the twentieth century had destroyed not only 
man's faith in glittering forward progress but also some of the unquestioning faith in the power of science to reveal truth. Popper's use of reason (and, 
later in his book, the principles of quantum physics) to deny the existence 
of the very "universal laws" that Enlightenment historians had so proudly 
proposed shows a growing realization of the limits of science. Widespread 
questioning of science's role as the sole and central revealer of truth would 
take another twenty years, but as scientific knowledge had recently been 
used to kill millions of people as efficiently as possible, it no longer held 
quite its old glamour. 
Wary of any claims to absolute truth, historians moved cautiously toward 
Relativism. Like Positivism, Relativism has slightly different meanings in 
ethics, epistemology, and other philosophical fields. But for historians, Relativism suggested that the quest to find "absolute truth," either in history or 
about history, was misguided. In the last century, dozens of opposing voices 
had shouted their version of absolute truth, and had backed it up with both 
evidence and bloodshed. Which one of those voices had the absolute truth? 
None, the historian answered; each had the truth only as it appeared from his 
position. 
Relativism was similar to the multicultural approach taken by social historians, but it was rooted, not in the study of a particular underprivileged 
group, but rather in disenchantment with the entire Enlightenment construct. The Enlightenment was built on a conviction that two kinds of 
objects existed in the world: that which was studied, and those who studied 
it. This allowed for objectivity, since scholars could remove themselves 
entirely from the object of their study and view it from a safe and neutral 
distance. Now, Relativists rejected the difference between scholar and 
object. In Relativism, a scholar had no neutral space to stand, no inert, 
objective truth to be studied. No matter where the scholar stands, he 
touches, affects, changes, and takes part in the subject of his own research. 
Faithful to its Romantic heritage, Relativism puts the individual and his 
own experiences right at the center of all knowledge. Now the task of the 
historian was not objective study, but the exploration of the past from his or 
her own particular perspective. The historian no longer tried to find some 
grand intellectual synthesis, since this would require him to take a position 
on "truth." He wanted only to put himself into the place of individuals who 
lived in the past. 
Relativism led history away from its traditional focus on politics, military 
history, and economics—all fields that require the historian to come to a 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 8 3 
general conclusion about a whole country—and instead directed the historian toward the experiences of those who might have a different story to tell 
about historical events. "This book," wrote Sarah B. Pomeroy in her study 
Goddesses, Whores, Wives, and Slaves: Women in Classical Antiquity, "was conceived when I asked myself what women were doing while men were active 
in all the areas traditionally emphasized by classical scholars."1
 If women 
were excluded from political, military, economic, and intellectual life, as they 
were for centuries, how could intellectual history, or political history, or 
military history tell anything close to the true story of a civilization? 
Intellectual or political historians might claim to tell the story of a nation, 
but the Relativist saw that they told, simply, a story: a story that was true 
only relative to certain members of that society. 
Skepticism 
Our deepest thinkers have concluded 
that there is no such thing as History— 
that is, a meaningful order to the broad sweep of human events. 
—FRANCIS FUKUYAMA 
As a historical method, skepticism—a doubtful habit of mind toward those 
who claim to know the absolute truth—had been around since (at least) 
Peter Abelard, who wrote in 1120, "By doubting we come to inquiry; and 
through inquiry we perceive truth." All scholars utilize a certain degree of 
skepticism. 
But skepticism as a historical method and Skepticism as a settled philosophy about the very nature of history were two very different things. Historical Skepticism was the logical end to Romanticism, since the Skeptical 
historian rejected entirely the power of the reason to come to any overarching conclusions about human existence. He simply presented his version of the past as one among many possible versions. Nor did he 
pronounce any part of the past to be either good or bad. After all, moral 
judgment on any part of history depends entirely on the point of view of 
the judge; another historian might see the issue differently; those who lived 
in the past would have had another perspective still. 
In its worst forms, Skepticism produced perverse history; in its best forms, 
it motivated historians to new and complex scholarship. As John Arnold 
points out, the Skeptic who asks "Why did the Holocaust happen?" and yet 
refuses to believe the conventional answer of "Adolf Hitler" may end up 
l6Sarah B. Pomeroy, Goddesses, Whores, Wives, and Slaves-.Women in Classical Antiquity (New York: 
Schocken Books, 1975), p. 3. 
l 84 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
denying the Holocaust altogether—or may be forced to delve deeply into 
the "the anti-Semitic and fascist elements within other countries of the 
period," too much ignored by traditional historians of World War II.17 
Yet in all its forms, skepticism leads every scholar to renounce the "myth 
of objectivity"—to admit that the ideal of the scientist-historian is flawed, 
since no human being (scientists included) actually possess the mythical 
Enlightenment brand of reason that can always arrive at truth, regardless of 
national identity, race, class, gender, religious conviction, ambition, greed, or 
all those other competing and jostling parts of the human personality. 
Which brings us, once again, to Postmodernism. 
Postmodernism 
History is an argument without end. 
—PETER GEYL 
Postmodernism means "after the modern age," but although modernity 
preceded Postmodernism, it still exists alongside it. Modernity began with 
Galileo and his confidence that he could reason out the laws which governed the heavens. Modernity covers the whole period of the Enlightenment and beyond; modernity promised that nature could be understood 
and mastered, and that science would improve life; modernity announced 
that "better" meant "faster" and "more efficient ."The West entered modernity first and spread the gospel of the modern age along with its colonies 
and exports. So the modernization of the world is synonymous with its 
westernization: along with modernity, the rest of the globe is offered Western capitalism, Western democracy, freedom of the press, human rights, gender equality, Windows-based operating systems, and cheap hamburgers. 
Modernity is the ultimate expression of that Enlightenment drive toward 
the discovery of historical laws that are universally applicable to all nations; 
modernity's innate drive is to establish one, "modern" way of life on every 
patch of earth. 
Postmodernism protested that modernity was not the way of life, but a 
way of life. Postmodernism pointed out that, all the way back in the Renaissance, when the pronouncement of Descartes became the center of Enlightenment thought, the conclusion "I think, therefore I am" had been 
masquerading as a neutral place to stand. Setting reason at the center of inquiry 
determined where the scholar would end up—just as starting with "I believe 
in God, therefore I am" would dictate a certain type of conclusion. AccordI7John Arnold, His tory.A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 118. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 8 3 
ing to the Postmodernist, the self can no longer say, "I think, therefore I am," 
because human beings do not have a single, central identity. They are made 
up of various, sometimes contradictory impulses and elements: mind, emotions, beliefs, prejudices, gender, sexual preference, class, spiritual leanings. 
Multiculturalism, Relativism, and Skepticism were all forms of Postmodernism. According to Postmodernism, there may indeed be one truth about 
history (Postmodernist historians are agnostic on this point), but there is 
absolutely no way that the historian can be sure he's uncovered it. 
So how do Postmodernists do history? Very, very cautiously. Since there 
are, theoretically, no statements that they can make which will be true for 
everyone (or even a significant subset of "everyone"), Postmodernist historians don't make universal statements or sweeping generalizations. They 
focus carefully on individual lives, and veer away even from little affirmations. Reading Postmodernist history can leave the reader longing for a 
synthesis—or just a simple conclusion. As the historian Jeremy Popkin 
remarks, Postmodernism has brought a great strength to the practice of history by showing that "apparently trivial events, such as the death of an 
utterly unknown Chinese woman of the seventeenth century, can provide 
important insights into historical process," but these "studies of single lives 
often .. . leave historians frustrated: the evidence is never complete and 
conclusive enough to answer all our questions about life in the past."1 
Postmodernism tends to be the scholarship of younger historians, often 
those working on underprivileged groups.Traditional scholars view it with 
some alarm. Popkin's lament is an example of the primary objection to 
Postmodernism: It avoids asking the really difficult questions, and its refusal 
to formulate truths about human existence is (traditional scholars complain) just plain sloppy scholarship. Some Postmodernists have called on 
historians to abandon altogether linear narratives, which connect causes 
with effects, in favor of different models. Elizabeth Deeds Ermarth, for 
example, recommends that historians take a page from the visual arts and 
think in terms of a "collage . . . shaking together their kaleidoscopic facts 
of past, present, and future, and fashioning them once more into an agreeable pattern. .. .That model of collage has the virtue of liberating historians from the constraints of linearity, or from . . . the conventional 
representation of time."19
 Traditional historian Gertrude Himmelfarb 
(among many others) retorts that although Postmodernism "entices us 
with the siren call of liberation and creativity .. . it may be an invitation to 
l8Popkin, "Historians on the Autobiographical Frontier," p. 729. 
I9In History: What & Why? Ancient, Modern, and Postmodern Perspectives, by Beverly Southgate 
(London: Routledge, 1996), p. 123. 
l 8 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
intellectual and moral suicide."20
 Many practitioners of "history from 
below," put off by the more extreme pronouncements of Postmodern historians, have rejected the Postmodern label altogether, preferring to call 
themselves simply practitioners of "microhistory," "women's history," "subaltern studies," or some other topic. 
The battle between traditional and Postmodern history is still rumbling 
on, with acrimony unabated on both sides. 
The End of History 
Our knowledge of the past is something we struggle for; 
it comes from somewhere, 
is created, fought over, and changed. 
—NATALIE ZEMON DAVIS 
In the Star Trek universe (a strange and illogical place that occasionally 
manages to make a philosophical statement in fifty-five minutes, minus 
commercial breaks), one villainous race is more vicious than all the rest: the 
Borg. The Borg are a collective. The Borg want every other civilization to 
be part of their collective too. They bulldoze through the universe, droning 
with monotonous regularity, "We are Borg. Resistance is futile.You will be 
assimilated." No Borg ever thinks of itself as I. 
At least not until the episode "I, Borg," when Captain Jean-Luc Picard 
and his crew discover an injured adolescent Borg and plan to infect it with 
a computer-type virus, which it will then spread to the rest of the collective. But then the young Borg develops a sense of individual identity and 
begins to call itself Hugh. So Picard and the rest decide to skip the virus; 
they believe that this sense of the individual self—a single, separate soul with 
its own identity and dignity—is so powerful that it will, itself, infect the 
Borg collective and make it discontent with its collective existence. 
Implicit in all this is a value judgment: Those who see themselves first as 
members of a community, rather than as individuals, have not yet fully 
developed. They are still children, incomplete, not as mature as those who 
have a Western sense of the self as individual. Furthermore, all human history is moving toward this idea of individuality. It is so powerful that it need 
only be introduced in order to conquer. This is the "end of history"—not 
the apocalypse, but history's final goal. 
20Gertrude Himmelfarb, "Postmodernist History," in Reconstructing History .The Emergence of a 
New Historical Society, ed. Elizabeth Fox-Genovese and Elizabeth Lasch-Quinn (New York: 
Roudedge, 1999), pp. 71-93. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 8 7 
The phrase "the end of history" comes from Francis Fukuyama, who argues 
that all nations inevitably evolve toward modern liberal democracy. Fukuyama 
illustrates a truth about Western historical writing: We have never shaken off 
the medieval Christian inheritance that causes us to look for a meaning, an 
"end" to the process of history. Linear history has become part of our identity in the West; the diagram at the beginning of this section shows my own 
inevitable tendency to see time as a line that points forward. And even Postmodernists have an "end of history" in mind: a paradisiacal time of toleration, when every point of view will be accepted without condemnation. 
HOW TO READ HISTORY 
As you read history, you'll ask yourself the classic detective (and journalist) 
questions: Who? What? When? Where? Why? At the first level of inquiry, ask 
these questions about the story the writer tells:Who is this history about? What 
happened to them? When does it take place, and where? Why are the characters of this history able to rise above their challenges? Or why do they fail? On 
the second level of inquiry, you'll scrutinize the historian's argument: What 
proof does she offer? How does she defend her assertions? What historical evidence does she use? Finally, on your third level of inquiry, ask: What does this 
historian tell us about human existence? How does the history explain who 
men and women are, and what place they are to take in the world? 
The First Level of Inquiry: Grammar-Stage Reading 
Look at the title, cover, and table of contents. This initial survey of the book is 
always your first step. Follow the same process as you did with the novels 
you read for Chapter 5: With your journal and pencil close by, read the title 
page and the copy on the backcover. Write the title of the book, the author's 
name, and the date of publication or composition on the top of a blank 
page. (These are not always the same.) Also write a short sentence about the 
author (scholar, nun, politician, slave). If you are able to glean from the table 
of contents any sense of the work's overall structure, make a note of this as 
well. (For example, Jacob Burckhardt's The Civilization of the Renaissance in 
Italy has an immensely detailed table of contents divided into six general 
sections: "The State as a Work of Art," "The Development of the Individual," "The Revival of Antiquity," "The Discovery of the World and of Man," 
"Society and Festivals," and "Morality and Religion."You might list these 
six topics under your title, as a general guide to the development of Burckhardt's argument.) 
l 8 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Does the writer state his or her purpose for writing? Begin by reading the 
author's preface or introduction; if there is no introduction, read the first 
chapter. (Remember to save critical prefaces written by other scholars until 
after you have read the book itself.) Look for the writer's purpose, which is 
often found in these early pages. Bede, for example, begins his Ecclesiastical 
History by writing, "Should history tell of good men and their good estate, 
the thoughtful listener is spurred on to imitate the good; should it record 
the evil ends of wicked men, no less effectually the devout and earnest listener or reader is kindled to eschew what is harmful and perverse, and himself with greater care pursue those things which he has learned to be good 
and pleasing in the sight of God." In other words, Bede intends, through his 
history, to teach his readers to imitate what is good and avoid what is harmful. When you find the writer's purpose, note it down in your own words 
(or copy it, if it's brief enough). 
What are the major events of the history? What concrete happenings does the 
historian build his story around? Make a chronological list of these events. 
Try not to include too much detail; if necessary, use an arbitrary measure 
and write down only the most important event in each chapter or section. 
Who is this story about? As you read, note down the main characters that 
you meet. Are they individuals, groups of people ("women," for Mary Wollstonecraft; "working-men," for George Orwell), or entire nations? If they 
are individuals, is the history focused on a single person, or on a network of 
individuals who may be related by blood or some other tie? If the historian 
is describing a group of people, how does she distinguish them: by nationality, gender, age, class, job, economic status? And in both cases: Is the historian telling you a "top-down" or "bottom-up" history? In other words, is 
she focusing on those who have wealth, influence, and/or political power? 
Or on "ordinary" people and their daily lives? If the historian is telling the 
story of nations, what is distinctive about each nation? How do its people 
envision themselves: as warriors, men of learning, farmers, free people? And 
how (in the historian's eyes) is this nation better (or worse) than other 
nations? (In works such as Locke's The True End of Civil Government or Niccolô Machiavelli's The Prince, you may find that the central "characters" are 
the ruler or the government on the one hand, and a very broadly defined 
group of "men who are ruled" on the other.) 
What challenge did this hero fine face? Once you've discovered the identity 
of the central character or group of characters, ask yourself the same basic 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 8 g 
question you asked in your first reading of the novel: What is the problem? 
What challenges the ability of the central character(s) to lead full lives? In 
Eugene D. Genovese's Roll, Jordan, Roll, there are two sets of central characters: slaves and slave owners. Both groups are warped and imprisoned by the 
institution of slavery. The middle-class housewives of Betty Friedan's The 
Feminine Mystique are imprisoned by the mystique itself—the perception that 
tending home and children is the only feminine aspiration worth fulfilling. 
You may find more than one answer to this question: Barbara Tuchman, who 
writes about the quite sizable group "fourteenth-century people," lists plague, 
taxes, war, robbery, and half a dozen other challenges. 
Who or what causes this challenge? Once you've identified the challenge 
faced by the character, ask yourself: What explanation does the writer give? 
Who or what is responsible for this? In some cases, the answer will be a system: In Roll, Jordan, Roll, Genovese attributes the challenges faced by both 
whites and blacks to the system he defines as "paternalism." In others, it will 
be much more concrete: The invading D-Day forces in Cornelius Ryan's 
The Longest Day fought, obviously, against the Nazis. In many cases, the 
writer will suggest more than one cause, in which case you'll need to make 
a list. 
Identifying the cause or causes of historical problems is at the center of 
the writing of history. In David Hume's History of England, why did the 
House of Commons call the monarch to be accountable to Parliament? In 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau's The Social Contract, why do men decide to enter 
into the social contract? The historian's task is to answer this question; does 
he succeed in doing so? 
What happened to the historical "heroline"} If you were to sum up the history in a paragraph (as though it were a movie plot), how would you do so? 
You can start by using the answers to the character and problem questions 
above. Say to yourself: "Faced by the problem of [the challenge], [the central character] ..." How should the sentence end? What action does the character take; how does he (or she) struggle against historical odds; how does 
he (or she) plan to overcome a historical problem? If the character is essentially passive, what has he failed to do? (One aspect of Mary Wollstonecraft's 
Vindication of the Rights of Women might be summed up as, "Faced by the 
problem of their lack of education, women failed to realize that they needed 
to think more and feel less.") If there is more than one central character or 
more than one explanation, you may need to construct more than one of 
these sentences. For the more theoretical works, such as Thomas Paine's 
1 Ç 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Common Sense, you will need to put the sentence in the form of a recommendation: "Faced with a brutal and tyrannical monarchy, the citizens of 
the colonies ought to ..." 
This exercise can be carried out on a number of levels. You might make 
a very brief restatement of one overall idea: For Jacob Burckhardt's The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy, for example, you might simply write, 
"Faced with new scientific discoveries and new ideas about what nations 
should be, citizens of Italy developed a new picture of themselves as individuals rather than members of a group." Or you might make a very detailed 
list. Each section of Burckhardt's book offers a different challenge that the 
Italians of the Renaissance faced, and a different analysis of their response to 
each challenge. 
Allow your interest in the book to guide you. If the topic interests you, 
you may want to write a page or more, listing the various problems that the 
historian tackles and the ways in which his central characters respond to 
each; if you find the book less than inspiring, a broader summary is sufficient. In a book such as Plutarch's Lives, in which each separate chapter 
stands on its own as a mini history, you will need to write a sentence or two 
for each biography that you read. 
Do the characters go forward, or backward—and why? In the most basic terms: 
Has there been movement in the history? Are the characters better off or 
worse off by the book's end? Have the events of the history improved their 
lot or made it more dire? Or are the characters in essentially the same place 
on the last page as on the first? If so, is the historian suggesting that change 
must take place in the future? 
When does the story take place? This is a basic question, but certainly not 
irrelevant to the writing of history. It has four parts: What dates does the historian cover in his study? What time frame does this encompass—ten years, 
the lifetime of one person, several hundred years? If the historian is writing 
theoretically, as Rousseau and Locke do, what time frame do his recommendations cover: Are his suggestions for government intended as universal, for all times, or for a particular point in human history? When did the 
historian five? And how much time separates him from his subject? 
Jot down the answers to these questions—but you may find that you'll 
benefit from keeping a time line as well. This doesn't have to be elaborate 
(you can keep a running time line on a sheet of notebook paper, a piece of 
posterboard, a long strip of newsprint, etc.), but you should mark on it the 
dates covered by each history, the birth and death dates of the author, and, 
if appropriate, the two or three most significant events highlighted by each 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 Q 1 
historian. One time line, containing this information for all histories read, 
will help you to keep historians and their works in chronological order. 
Where does the story take place? What part of the world is being described? 
Where is the writer in relation to it? Is he describing his own country in the 
past, or a place removed from his in both time and space? How far away is 
his own country—and culture? A "sense of place" is as central to history as 
a sense of time. Consult a map or atlas as well as a globe; if you have a shaky 
sense of geography, checking the physical place of each history that you read 
will help you begin to order the physical world in your mind. 
The Second Level of Inquiry: Logic-Stage Reading 
Once you've grasped the content of the history, you can move on to evaluate its accuracy. When you analyzed the novel, you asked yourself: How well 
developed are these characters? Do their actions match the personae that 
the novelist has constructed for them? This was a question of internal logic: 
How well did the writer follow his own rules? But in reading a history, you 
need to make an additional critical step. The historian is using outside evidence to build an argument. Does the story told by the historian make good 
use of that outside evidence? Or does it distort the evidence in order to 
shape the story in a particular way? 
Look for the historian's major assertions. Check the last two paragraphs of 
each chapter and the final chapter of the book. These tend to be the places 
where the historian will give a summary statement—two or three sentences 
that briefly review the interpretation of the stories (or other evidence) that 
she has presented. Often the next-to-last paragraph will contain the summary statement while the last paragraph polishes it off with a rhetorical 
flourish. In The Souls of Black Folk, for example, W E. B. Du Bois concludes 
his chapter "Of Mr. Booker T Washington and Others" with this statement 
in the next-to-last paragraph: "The South ought to be led, by candid and 
honest criticism, to assert her better self and do her full duty to the race she 
has cruelly wronged and is still wronging. The North—her co-partner in 
guilt—cannot salvage her conscience by plastering it with gold. We cannot 
settle this problem by diplomacy and suaveness, by 'policy' alone."This is the 
core of Du Bois s argument in all the preceding pages: that the South and 
the North together are responsible for the black plight, and that "the Negro 
race" must call them to responsibility, not wait patiently for reform. The 
final paragraph is a call to his listeners to do just that. 
When you find these summary statements, highlight them; then jot them 
1 9 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
down, in order, in your own words. Leave an extra space between each 
statement, so that you can fill in the next part of the analysis. 
What questions is the historian asking? The act of writing history requires 
the historian to answer questions about the past. Look at your paraphrased 
summary statements and ask: What questions do these statements answer? In 
the example above, Du Bois is asking, "Should the black man be an activist, 
or should he improve himself and wait for recognition?" He answers this by 
asserting the guilt of North and South and calling for activism. 
You won't necessarily need to find a question in every chapter of the 
history. As you look over your summary statements, you will see that a historian may spend several chapters answering the same question. But once 
you've formulated your question, write each question down above the 
summary statements that propose an answer. 
What sources does the historian use to answer them? Does the historian identify his sources? Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, who bases her study of Martha 
Ballard on Ballard's diary, describes her primary source in great detail. But 
more often, you will need to scan footnotes. Does the historian use mainly 
written source documents (letters, journals, bills of sale, etc.), oral sources 
(interviews, folktales), or the arguments of other historians? What use does 
he make of media: magazines, newspapers, advertisements? Does he use 
quantitative analysis of information drawn from tax records or similar 
sources of raw data? Does he make any use of nonwritten cultural sources 
such as songs, architecture, clothing styles, or images? If he does use visual 
sources (paintings, emblems, flags), does he merely describe them, or does 
he furnish an illustration? If he doesn't, does he describe color, texture, features, the place where a visual source appeared, who saw it? Does the historian ever express doubt or reservation about any part of his source 
material? You may want to note down the primary types of evidence used. 
Is this evidence drawn from a broad base? Or does the historian put too 
much reliance on one or two narrow sources? 
Does the evidence support the connection between questions and answers? Now 
that you have questions and answers, it's time to look at the evidence the 
writer provides to connect the two. If W E. B. Du Bois asks, "Should the 
black man improve himself and wait for recognition?" and answers, "No, 
because the North
 fand the South are responsible for his plight," he ought to 
provide two kinds of evidence. In the first place, he should demonstrate the 
guilt of North and South by giving historical facts about what they have 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 g 3 
done to the black man; in the second place, he should support his condemnation of "patient endurance" by showing that North and South have 
responded by becoming more hostile, rather than less. And in fact he does 
exactly this: He writes that for fifteen years, the ex-slaves have been asked to 
"give up . . . three things—first, political power, second, insistence on civil 
rights, third, higher education of Negro youth—and concentrate all their 
energies on industrial education, the accumulation of wealth, and the conciliation of the South As a result of this tender of the palm-branch, what 
has been the return? In these years there have occurred: the disfranchisement of the Negro, the legal creation of a distinct status of civil inferiority 
for the Negro." 
Sometimes a historian will make the connection between question and 
answer simple for you by making a clear causal statement. As you glance 
through the chapters you've already read, look for explicit links between facts 
and interpretations, introduced by the following phrases or constructions: 
Because of [historical factor], the [historical character acted in a certain 
way]. 
Since [historical factor], the [historical character acted in a certain way]. 
Therefore . . . [you'll find a historical factor before this word, and an 
explanation afterward] 
It is clear, then .. . 
It follows, then ... 
It is hardly surprising that .. . 
As a result .. . 
Once you've asked yourself what sort of evidence the historian gives you 
to connect question and answer, take some time to examine this evidence. 
You probably won't be able to pinpoint errors of fact; this would require 
you to look at the actual sources the historian uses. But you can evaluate 
how the historian is using the evidence he cites. Using rules of argument, 
you can decide whether or not the historian is treating his evidence fairly— 
or whether he is playing fast and loose with it in order to come to a hopedfor conclusion. As you evaluate the evidence, look for the following 
common errors: 
i. Misdirection by multiple proposition: Look at those summary statements and see whether there is more than one "proposition" in each. A 
proposition is a single statement of fact; Du Bois makes four propositions in 
the summary above: The North is guilty; the South is guilty; activism will 
l 94 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
work; patient endurance won't work. Although there's nothing wrong with 
statements that contain multiple propositions, a historian may present evidence that explains one proposition and then wrap up with a statement that 
tosses one or two additional propositions into the mix. Because you've been 
convinced that the first proposition is true, the others may slide by your eye. 
Du Bois does give convincing historical evidence that patient endurance 
has not worked in the South, but what about those assertions that the North 
is as guilty as the South? What evidence does he suggest for these? 
2. Substituting a question for a statement: The rhetorical strategy of substituting a question for a statement is more common in spoken arguments 
than in written ones, but historians who hope to rouse their readers to 
action will sometimes resort to this technique. But a question does not give 
information; it implies a statement of fact, but if it were turned into a statement, it would often appear exaggerated or obviously untrue. "Ye that tell 
us of harmony and reconciliation," Thomas Paine fumes, in Common Sense, 
"can ye restore to us the time that is past?"This question is obviously meant 
to convince the reader that reconciliation is as impossible as returning to the 
past. But Paine doesn't state, baldly, "Reconciliation is impossible," because 
he would then have to support that statement with evidence. 
3. Drawing a false analogy: Paine follows up his rhetorical question with 
another: "Can ye give to prostitution its former innocence? Neither can ye 
reconcile Britain and America." The analogy is meant to illustrate the 
impossibility of reconciliation, but that isn't all it does; it draws another partial comparison, and (without directly saying so) implies that reconciliation 
would be a moral evil. An analogy is meant to illustrate one part of an argument; it should never be treated as an exact parallel. A popular eighteenthcentury analogy makes this clear: To say that the universe is like a clock set 
into motion by a Clockmaker makes one very specific point about the relationship between God and his creation—he is responsible for its existence, 
but doesn't need to keep his hand on it constantly to keep it running. But 
the analogy should not then be carried out to imply that the universe will 
"run down"; that is not its purpose. A historian who, like Paine, is also a 
skillful rhetorician will sometimes choose an inflammatory analogy in order 
to imply a conclusion (the moral evil of reconciliation) that he would find 
difficult to support were he to make it directly. 
4. Argument by example: Telling a story is not the same as proving a 
point. Betty Friedan, arguing in The Feminine Mystique that women were 
barred from certain intellectual pursuits in the 1950s, writes, "Girls would 
not study physics: it was 'unfeminine.' A girl refused a science fellowship at 
Johns Hopkins to take a job in a real-estate office. All she wanted, she said, 
was what every other American girl wanted—to get married, have four chil-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 Ç $ 
dren, and live in a nice house in a nice suburb."21
 The first phrase may be 
true, but the second doesn't prove it. Did she apply for this fellowship? Was 
it offered to her out of the blue? (That would seem to disprove Friedan s 
argument.) Did any other girls accept these fellowships? How many, in what 
proportion? No matter how vivid it may be, the example of a woman who 
is convinced that she must stay home and raise her children in order to be 
truly feminine does not prove a systematic, national conspiracy to send 
women home; this must be demonstrated by a much wider sampling of 
American women. 
5. Incorrect sampling: Whenever a historian cites a number of particulars and then draws a conclusion from them, you should look to see 
whether the conclusion is warranted. How many examples does the historian use? Is this a significant number? Are they "representative"—that is, 
drawn from the group about which the historian wishes to make a conclusion? (Women's historians, for example, have pointed out that early feminist 
scholars tended to sample white women, and then draw conclusions from 
them about women generally, without using a representative sample of 
black women as well.) If the sample isn't representative of the historian's 
conclusion, what group does it represent—and should the historian's conclusion be rephrased to cover this group? 
6. Hasty generalizations: Using particulars in history is both necessary 
and complicated; although historical theories have to be rooted in historical realities, it is often tempting to draw a conclusion too quickly. Consider 
this argument: 
Women were oppressed in ancient Greece. 
Women were oppressed in ancient Britain. 
Women were oppressed in ancient China. 
Therefore, women were oppressed in every ancient civilization. 
The conclusion seems likely, but the historian can't actually state it with 
confidence unless she has done an exhaustive survey of every ancient civilization. She can actually only conclude from this that women were 
oppressed in ancient Greece, Britain, and China. This historian has drawn a 
hasty generalization. She could have avoided the error with a qualification: 
"Women were oppressed in the ancient cultures for which we possess the 
most historical evidence." 
7. Failure to define terms: Oppressed is also problematic in the conclusion above. Does it mean "denied the vote but allowed to hold property"? 
2IBetty Friedan, The Feminine Mystique (NewYork: Dell, 1984), p. 73. 
î g 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
"Allowed to vote and hold property but paid lower wages for doing the 
same job as men"? "Not allowed access to abortion"? "Kept in holes and fed 
scraps"? Terms—and abstractions in particular—should always be defined. It 
is simple to use a concept word (freedom, quality, oppression, virtue) without defining it; but the exact ideas attached to each one of these words changes 
over time. Aristotle and Augustine mean two very different things when 
they use the word virtue; Rousseau and Friedan mean very different things 
when they speak of equality. Glance over your summaries of the historian's 
argument. Does the argument lean heavily on abstract terms? If so, does the 
writer define those terms—telling you, for example, exactly which "human 
rights" he's arguing for? "A state of equality," John Locke writes, carefully, 
"[is one] wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having 
more than another." This is a political definition, not a social or economic 
one; equality means something quite different for Mary Wollstonecraft. 
8. Backward reasoning: Backward reasoning finds a causal connection 
where none exists; it takes a description and finds in it a cause. If a historian 
were, for example, to state, "Every empire that has relied on mercenary 
armies has disintegrated" (something which may be historically true, 
although it involves a hasty generalization), he might be able to support this 
statement with historical evidence. If, however, he then concludes, "Empires 
disintegrate because they rely on mercenary armies," he may be ignoring 
other contributing causes. Even if it could be proved without a doubt that 
the first statement were true, it would be illogical to conclude that the mercenary armies were the cause of disintegration. It could be equally true that 
an empire that finds itself disintegrating hires mercenaries in a desperate 
attempt to beef up its defenses—in which case the mercenaries would be 
just a symptom, not a cause. Because two facts are simultaneously true does 
not mean that one arises from the other; it may, but the historian needs a 
great deal more proof to be even partially sure. 
9. Post hoc, ergo propter hoc: Looking for causation is always tricky, and 
historians are particularly prone to the post hoc, ergo propter hoc fallacy—literally 
"after that, therefore because of it." This is the fallacy of thinking that because 
one event comes after another in time, the first event caused the second event. 
So without supplying more information, the historian cannot write: 
Rome recruited its army from mercenaries. 
Then Rome fell. 
Therefore, the army of mercenaries caused the fall of Rome 
The relationship between the mercenaries and the fall could be a coincidence. It might also indicate cause and effect—but the coincidence in time 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 g J 
should be a starting place for the historian's investigation, not a statement of 
conclusion. Even if the historian can find a number of different cases in 
which this sequence occurs, he should still continue to investigate the relationship. After all (in a classic statement of the post hoc, ergo propter hoc fallacy) 
night always follows day, but no astronomer would ever claim that day 
causes night. 
io. Identification of a single cause-effect relationship: Predicting causation is tricky; the post hoc, ergo propter hoc illustrates a wider fallacy: oversimplification. No historian should hang any historical event on a single cause; 
all historical events have multiple causes. Even if the historian can identity a 
perfectly good cause of Hitler's rise to power (Germany's depressed and 
desperate state), she should continue to search for contributing causes: Does 
that depression account for the focusing of German hatred onto their Jewish compatriots? Although it is perfectly acceptable for a historian to spend 
most of her time investigating one particular cause-and-effect relationship, 
it is too simplistic for her to conclude that she has discovered the single 
cause. 
ii. Failure to highlight both similarities and differences:Whenever a historian draws parallels between events that happen in different cultures, or 
different times, does he also account for the differences that divide them? It 
is relatively simple to pick out commonalities between (say) the French 
Revolution and the American Revolution, but historians must also be careful to treat each as unique, coming from a different cultural background. So: 
Does the historian properly understand the differences, or does he flatten 
the variations between times, reading the priorities and problems of the 
present back into the past? 
Can you identify the history's genre? Now that you have examined the historian's questions and answers, the sources he's used and the use to which 
he's put the sources, you should be able to identify the genre, or branch, that 
he is pursuing. Historians have generally agreed on a three-part division in 
historical theme: political, intellectual, and social. 
Political history is the oldest of the traditional branches of history; it 
tells the stories of nations and of leaders, of wars and of treaties, of those 
who control governmental power. Political history focuses on leaders; it 
encompasses traditional biography (the biographies of the famous and 
powerful), diplomatic history, international history, and military history. 
Bede did "political history" So did David Hume, and so does James M. 
MacPherson. 
Intellectual history is rooted in the early part of this century; in American 
historical writing, it came into its own in the 1940s and '50s. Intellectual his-
l 9 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
tory focuses on the ideas that may have led to a particular social movement 
or set of events. Perry Miller's history of New England is an intellectual history, because it is organized around the changing Puritan idea of the 
covenant and the effects that this idea had on Puritan life. Intellectual history 
assumes that people share patterns of thinking, and that those patterns 
change the way they act. It assumes that the content of the mind can be 
known and analyzed with some certainty; it puts an Enlightenment-era 
importance on thinking as the most important part of the human being; it 
assumes that science, philosophy, politics, economics, and (to some degree) 
religion begin in the mind and spread outward to affect the rest of the world. 
Social history arose in reaction to intellectual and political history, which 
were seen as elitist and hyper-rational, focusing on leaders to the exclusion 
of the vast majority of people on earth, and on ideas to the exclusion of religious belief, emotion, class identity, and a hundred other factors. Social historians try to examine those patterns of life which apply to the majority, not 
the minority. They are more likely to use nontraditional sources, on the 
grounds that traditional sources reflect the lives and opinions of a tiny, welleducated elite. Social historians are concerned with how "ordinary people" 
live, and how the patterns of those lives have changed over time. They 
examine politics, economics, wars, treaties, and great events as they affect 
individual Hves. 
There can be a certain amount of overlap between these three fields. 
Influenced by social historians, intellectual historians are more likely than 
they once were to study popular ideas and their manifestation in popular 
(not elite) culture, and the study of economic trends can combine the 
methods of traditional political history with those of social history. However, there is a certain commitment here to a priority of importance:Which 
has more effect on history, great leaders or "the masses"? In your reading of 
each history, can you identify its basic genre? Does it fall more securely into 
the political, intellectual or social camp? Does it do history from above, or 
from below? 
Does the historian list his or her qualifications? Now that you've identified 
the bent of the history, spend a few minutes on the historian: What is his 
bent? First check to see whether he explains his own qualifications. Thucydides, writing in the days before professional historians, explains that he is 
well suited to write about the Peloponnesian Wars because he fought in 
them; later historians are more likely to cite some aspect of their training or 
research. If the historian doesn't remark on his own qualifications, check the 
jacket flap or the back of the book for academic training, personal experience, or other titles. Occasionally a historian will explain his theoretical 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 1 Q Ç 
stance in his introduction. Sometimes you may find it interesting to do a 
Web search on the author's name .You will often come upon a review of one 
historian's work, written by another historian, which will shed light on the 
purposes of both. 
Academic qualifications aren't necessarily the mark of a good historian. 
But historians who have been trained within the university are more likely 
to identify themselves with a particular school of historiography than 
nonacademic historians (such as Cornelius Ryan). Understanding a historian's training and background can help you understand more clearly how 
a historian's work might fit into the categories above. 
The Third Level of Inquiry: Rhetoric-Stage Reading 
Once you've understood the historian's methods, you can reflect on the 
wider implications of her conclusions. What does the historian say, then, 
about the nature of humans and their ability to act with purpose—to 
change their lives or control the world around them? 
What is the purpose of history? After you have grasped the basics of a historical argument, you should step back and consider its conclusions against 
the backdrop of the whole project of history writing: What purpose does 
this history serve? Does the historian see himself as laying out an objective, 
true relation of past events—perhaps for the first time? Is the history 
intended to create a sense of national pride? To impel a group of people to 
action, or to reform? Is it meant to explain the present-day state of some 
modern phenomenon by analyzing its roots? Does it stand as a pattern for 
present-day people, either as an ideal to copy, or as a warning to avoid? Does 
the historian intend to correct previous exaggerations, or to amplify previous understatements? Can you draw, from the purpose of this particular history, any conclusions about the historian's understanding about the nature 
of historical writing generally? 
Does this story have forward motion? Does the history show traces of linear 
movement toward an end? If so, is the writer telling a story of advancement 
from a less developed state toward a more developed state? Or of declension, from a high point down into conflict and chaos? What sort of advancement or decline is traced: political, intellectual, or social? Or, conversely, 
does the story show a lack of forward movement? After you have come to a 
conclusion, ask again: What does the historian believe about human existence generally: Does it progress forward, or are we treading water? Are we 
destined to climb, or doomed to slide downward? 
2 0 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
What does it mean to be human} A history always highlights one particular 
aspect of human beings as central. For John Locke, man cannot be truly human 
unless he is free; for Mary Wollstonecraft, woman cannot be truly human unless 
she is educated; for Jacob Burckhardt, men cannot be truly human unless 
they recognize themselves as individuals first and as members of a community second. In these histories, how are men and women portrayed? Are they 
essentially workers, patriots, members of families, businessmen, rational animals, children of God? What is their central quality?To what must they aspire 
in order to be human? 
Why do things go wrong? A historian's explanations for evil reveal his true 
understanding of man's nature. In the history you've just read, what causes 
one set of people to be challenged or persecuted by another? What motivates the oppressors? Why do people live in squalor? What motivation does 
the historian give to his wrongdoers? Are people inept? Psychologically 
warped by outside factors? Well meaning, but helpless in the face of natural 
forces that push them into misdeeds? Are they greedy, in rebellion against 
God, convinced of their own superiority? 
What place does free will have? Are the people in this story in charge of 
their own fates? Are they powerful or powerless? If they can affect their own 
worlds, is this because they are well-to-do, well educated, in positions of 
power? Or are the poor and uneducated just as capable, in their own way, of 
shaping their lives? (We call this by the technical term agency.) Are rich and 
poor alike helpless in the tide of impersonal historical events? 
Every historian makes a central assertion, somewhere, about responsibility: about human ability or helplessness in the face of historical challenges. 
Or he may attempt to take a middle ground. In The Prince, Machiavelli 
writes, "It is not unknown to me how many have had and still have the 
opinion that because the things of the world are in a mode governed by fortune and by God, that men in their prudence are unable to correct them. 
... I judge that it could be true that fortune is the arbiter of half our actions, 
but that she lets the other half, or nearly that, be governed by us." (Which 
half is which?) 
What relationship does this history have to social problems? Whether or not 
historians should be involved in current policy is an ongoing debate 
between historians. Some feel that historians, with their perspective on the 
past, should be involved in present-day politics and in the formation of 
social theory; others are horrified by this "lack of objectivity." William E. 
Leuchtenberg points out that historians, aiding the counsel in Brown v. Board 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 0 1 
of Education, "made it possible for counsel for black pupils to parry the argument that the framers of the Fourteenth Amendment did not intend it to 
empower the national government to desegregate schools"; this "public history" is an important part of the historian's role. Richard Hofstadter warns, 
on the other hand, "The activist historian who thinks he is deriving his policy from his history may in fact be deriving his history from his policy, and 
may be driven to commit the cardinal sin of the historical writer: he may lose 
his respect for the integrity, the independence, the pastness, of the past."22 
A historian may follow one of three paths in her attitude toward social 
events. She may show disengagement, a commitment to the past for its own 
sake, making no efforts to draw parallels between past and present. She may 
go to the other extreme and follow a policy of advocacy (as Paine, Locke, 
and Friedan do), writing history in order to bring about a social change. Or 
she may pursue a middle path of "indirect advocacy," connecting the past 
with the present but refraining from making direct recommendations for 
social change. Can you identify the path that each historian chooses? 
What is the end of history? If the writer is telling a story of historical 
progress—of ascension toward a higher, more enlightened state of being— 
what does that "higher state" involve? Are the subjects more aware of themselves, more aware of their community, better able to see themselves as 
independent actors, more loyal to their country? Or (if this is a story of 
declension), how is the end different from the beginning? How has the civilization, or group, or subjects declined? How are they worse off at the end? 
In other words, what is the goal of the historical story? What does the 
historian see as the ultimate shape and form of humanity? 
How is this history the same as—or different than—the stories of other historians 
who have come before? A historian interacts with the facts of history, but also 
with the ideas of other historians. As you progress through the reading list, 
compare your answers to the above questions as they apply to each historian. Do you see an overall development in the way history is done? 
Is there another possible explanation? Finally: Given the same facts, would 
you come to a similar conclusion? 
This is an incomplete question, because you don't have all of the historian's sources; you don't know what he might have left out because he 
found it unimportant, what facts have been eliminated which, in the hands 
22Both quotes from William E. Leuchtenberg, "The Historian and the Public Realm," (American Historical Review, vol. 97, no. 1 (February 1992): 1-18. 
2 0 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
of another historian, might have produced an entirely different interpretation. But exercise your creativity: Do the facts you know allow for another 
interpretation? Lytton Strachey writes of Queen Victoria that she "fell more 
and more absolutely under [Prince Albert's] intellectual dominance" until 
he became "the actual controller of the forces and the functions of the 
Crown. . . . Albert had become, in effect, the King of England." Do the 
actions of Albert and Victoria (stripped of Strachey s commentary) admit 
any other interpretation? As you become more familiar with the process of 
history, practice doing history yourself. 
THE ANNOTATED HISTORY LIST 
Your goal in reading through the following list is to understand the ways in 
which the writing of history has changed over time. So these books are 
organized by chronological order of composition, not in order of the subjects studied. It doesn't include all of the "great books" of history—or even 
a good sampling of them. Such a list would take years to work through (if 
any agreement could even be reached about what should be on it).The list 
that follows is compiled for the lay reader, not the professional historian, so 
it doesn't focus exclusively on those books which academics would consider most important. Rather, it combines academic histories (such as Roll, 
Jordan, Roll) with those popular histories (such as The Longest Day) which 
have had a hand in shaping our pictures of the past. Since philosophy is a 
field that requires its own peculiar reading skills and background knowledge, the list veers away from the works of Hegel, Herder, and others whose 
focus was primarily on the philosophy of history, rather than on the writing of history itself. It does include works on politics (Machiavelli's The 
Prince, John Locke's On Civil Government, and so on), since these essays, 
which describe how a country should be run, influence the ways in which 
later historians analyze the governments of the past. 
When reading the more ancient works on the list, don't feel obliged to 
read every single word. The histories of Herodotus and Thucydides are 
quite long and detailed; you need not master every detail of the wars of the 
Greeks to understand the basic nature of the conflicts. Later works, constructed as arguments, should be followed from beginning to end; but in 
histories that offer sets of connected incidents, one or more sets can be 
dropped without significant loss of understanding. Because it isn't necessary 
for the amateur historian to read every word of Augustine, Hume, Gibbon, 
or Tocqueville, the list suggests several places where you can read abridged 
editions instead. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 0 3 
HERODOTUS 
The Histories 
(441 B.C.) 
Best edition: The Oxford World's Classics paperback, translated by Robin 
Waterfield (Oxford: Oxford University Press, iggg); ISBN 0-19-282425-2; 
$9.95. Several good scholarly translations of Herodotus are available in paperback, including the Aubrey de Sélincourt translation (rev. éd., New York: Penguin, 1996; ISBN 0-14-044638-9; $10.95) and the David Grene translation 
(titled The History, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987; ISBN 0-
226-32772-8; $10.50), but the Waterfield translation is particularly pleasant to 
read. 
At the beginning of Book II of The Histories, Herodotus solemnly tells the 
story of two newborn babies who, brought up in silence, both say their first 
words in Phrygian—thus proving that the Phrygians are the oldest race on 
earth. "I heard this version of the story from the priests of Hephaestus in 
Memphis," Herodotus informs us, "but the Greek version includes ... many 
other absurdities." This attempt to separate truth from fiction demonstrates 
Herodotus s wish for accuracy, which earns him the title "father of history." 
Using travelers' tales, priests' stories, and eyewitness accounts, Herodotus 
treats the past not romantically, but realistically, evaluating past kings and 
heroes as actual people rather than legendary heroes. 
Herodotus has a broader purpose than previous historians: "I will cover 
minor and major human settlements equally," he declares, but his primary 
aim is to recount the conflict between the Greeks and the Persians, whose 
King Cyrus first set his sights on the Greek peninsula. But Herodotus 
promises that he will go beyond a mere description of the war: He will 
reveal the roots of the whole conflict. Croesus of Lydia, a fabulously rich 
king who is worried about the increasing power of his Persian neighbor 
Cyrus, thinks that he might benefit from some additional divine intervention, so he sacrifices to Apollo in order to get the Greek gods into his camp. 
He then attacks Cyrus, who trounces him and whisks him off to Persia to 
be burned alive. When Apollo rescues Croesus, Cyrus transfers his wrath to 
Greece. In his efforts to divide truth from legend, Herodotus doesn't eliminate divine intervention from the realm of "truth," and in his evaluation of 
trustworthy evidence he puts stories told by priests at the top of his list. And 
his sense of historical difference is undeveloped (three Persians argue, in 
very Greek terms, about the superiority of democracy, oligarchy, or monarchy as a form of government). But he does make a new distinction: between 
the use of literary resources such as epics (which have to do with heroism, 
2 0 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
ambition, and other humanistic qualities) and the use of eyewitness accounts, 
which reveal facts. 
In the rest of his history, Herodotus goes on to describe Cyrus's rise to 
power, the subsequent reigns of Cambyses and Darius, and the details of the 
war which began under Darius. His accounts of the battles of Marathon, 
after which a messenger runs twenty-six miles with news of the Greek victory and then dies; Thermopylae, where a band of heroic Spartans sacrifice 
themselves to cover the Greek retreat; Salamis, the war's decisive naval battle; and Plataea, the final Athenian victory over the Persian foot soldiers, 
became the central source for all later histories of the Greeks and their wars, 
and his careful attention to military strategy became the model for centuries 
of military history. 
THUCYDIDES 
The Peloponnesian War 
(c. 400 B.C.) 
Best edition: The paperback translation by Steven Lattimore supplies a brief 
and very clear summary before each section—invaluable for the reader unfamiliar with ancient history (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1998); ISBN 0-87220-394-8; 
S14-95-
With the Persian threat suspended, the Greek city-states of Athens and 
Sparta turned on each other, in a series of devastating conflicts known collectively as the Peloponnesian War. The aristocrat Thucydides was an Athenian general until 424 B.C., when he lost an important battle and was exiled. 
From exile, he began to write the tale of the ongoing conflict; although the 
war had not yet ended, Thucydides had already heard legends and distortions, and wished to set the record straight. "The absence of romance from 
my history," he wrote, sternly, "will, I fear, detract somewhat from its interest; but if it be judged useful by those inquirers who desire an exact knowledge of the past... I shall be content" (1122). Thucydides sees his work, and 
the practice of history generally, as a pattern for life, since (as he writes) this 
exact knowledge of the past can serve as "a key to the future, which in all 
probability will repeat or resemble the past." 
Thucydides, like Herodotus, begins well before the war in order to trace 
its genesis, but he is aware of the difficulties involved in writing about the 
distant past: "Because of the amount of time that has gone by," he writes, "I 
have been unable to obtain accurate information about the period that preceded the war. . . . [But] I do not consider those times to have been very 
important as far as either war or anything else is concerned."This wholesale 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 0$ 
dismissal of the early history of the Greek peninsula might cause modern 
historians to gasp, but Thucydides does not see the Greek civilization as 
dependent on anything that came before; it is unique and without ancestors. 
Unlike Herodotus, who sets down an immense variety of material,Thucydides picks and chooses his stories and shapes his final tale into a deliberate 
form: He is an Athenian, and even in exile shows a clear partiality to the 
Athenian cause. In The Peloponnesian War, Athens fights first with Corinth 
after intervening in a dispute between Corinth and several Corinthian 
colonies, and then is drawn into conflict with Corinth's ally, Sparta. Unlike 
Herodotus,Thucydides refuses to attribute any historical events to the intervention of the gods, instead describing long political negotiations between 
the parties, the complicated web of alliances between Greek city-states, and 
the shaky condition of Greece since the end of the Persian war. His account 
shows a slowly declining Athens, weakened by the loss of its great statesman 
Pericles, by the plague, and by a disastrous defeat in Sicily. Athens recalls its 
most famous disgraced general, Alcibiades, to try to reverse its decline, and 
Thucydides infuses this development with a note of hope. But then the history breaks off; Thucydides died without bringing it to an end. Athens (as 
we know from other accounts) was forced into surrender. 
PLATO 
The Republic 
(c. 375 B.C.) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, translated by Desmond Lee 
(NewYork: Viking Press, 1976); ISBN 0-14-044048-8; $8.95. • 
Plato's picture of the ideal civilization served as a template for scores of later 
historians, who held their own nations up against Plato's prototype. The 
Republic uses real, historical figures as mouthpieces for Plato's own arguments; it begins at a festivity where Socrates and several other noted 
philosophers are discussing the makeup of human societies, which should 
(above all) be just. They define justice as a compromise that the State 
enforces in order to keep the citizens safe, but Socrates, who would prefer 
justice to be natural rather than constructed, leads them on to describe what 
a just society would look like. They concoct a country whose rigid class 
divisions are willingly accepted by the citizens, who know the place to 
which they are born; in which education is universal (for men, at least); in 
which citizens act for the good of their country, rather than for their own 
pleasure (since the latter always leads to boredom and dissatisfaction); and in 
which the rational practice of eugenics encourages the strong and intelli-
2 0 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
gent to have children, while the sickly are quietly removed from view. 
The leader of this country would be a philosopher-king, a man with both 
power and wisdom, who understands that all we see is only a shadow of the 
Real; as he governs, he tries to guide his nation into conformity with the Real, 
rather than listening to the will of the masses. His task is to grasp the Real, and 
through this to discover justice, which is itself an Ideal. And this conclusion, 
of course, bears the stamp of Socrates' authority. 
Few present-day historians would dare to copy this method, but Plato's 
willingness to put words into Socrates' mouth demonstrates his own view 
of history: Historical writing involves the discovery of ideas, not of "historical facts," which are (after all) mere shadows. If Plato expresses the Ideal 
(which exists independently of either Plato or Socrates) and does so in a 
way that Socrates could have used, he is doing accurate history; he is holding to truth. Plato's use of Socratic dialogue to reveal his conclusions also 
can be considered "historical"; after all, Socrates contributed to our knowledge of the Real through his invention of the dialogue technique, and in 
this sense is still taking part in the search for the Ideal. 
PLUTARCH 
Lives 
(A.D. 100-125) 
Best edition: There are two simple ways to read Plutarch in English. You can 
read the entire set of biographical sketches in the Modern Library Classics edition, Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans, published in two volumes 
(New York, 2001. Volume I, ISBN 0-375-75676-0, is $13.95; Volume II, 
Plutarch's Lives: The Dry den Translation, ISBN 0-375-75677-g, is also 
$13.95). This translation by the seventeenth-century poet John Dryden, revised 
in 1864 by the poet-historian Arthur Hugh Clough, has become an English 
classic in its own right, but the slightly archaic prose does add an extra level of 
difficulty to the work. As an alternative, you can read selected lives in a more 
engaging modern translation by Robin Waterfxeld, published by Oxford World's 
Classics (Oxford: Oxford University Press). This too comes in two volumes: 
Roman Lives: A Selection of Eight Lives (1999; ISBN 0-19-282502-X, 
$13.95), and Greek Lives: A Selection of Nine Lives (1999; ISBN 0-19-
282501-1; 13.95). 
Plutarch is the first biographer in the modern sense; he chronicles the life of 
men as men, rather than treating them as elements in a larger scheme of historical events. For Plutarch, the lives of great men are the larger scheme. His-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 0 J 
tory is formed by the famous, the powerful, and the privileged. Plutarch began 
a tradition of biographical writing that allowed Thomas Carlyle, hundreds of 
years later, to remark that "the history of what man has accomplished in this 
world, is at bottom the history of the Great Men who have worked here." 
As he writes, Plutarch links together the public accomplishments and 
private life of each of his subjects. "The most glorious exploits," he writes, 
"do not always furnish us with the clearest discoveries of virtue or vice in 
men; sometimes a matter of less moment, an expression or a jest, informs us 
better of their character and inclinations." Furthermore, the public and private are inextricably mixed; private life reveals character, and character 
determines the course of history. So we are told of Romulus's great battles, 
but also of his supreme will to conquer, which made those battles into victories—a quality that led him, in his later years, to insist on being accompanied everywhere by young men who carried leather thongs, so that he 
could instantly command any bystander to be arrested and bound. 
Plutarch tells the stories of Greek and Roman heroes in pairs, with an eye 
to similar virtues and vices. For Plutarch, history is a moral enterprise, and 
historical figures are models to be emulated or shunned. So in the pairing 
of Alcibiades (the Athenian hero) and Coriolanus (who later appears in a 
Shakespearian tragedy), we learn that Alcibiades was graceful and charming 
but warped by "ambitions and a desire of superiority," and that Coriolanus 
had a "generous and worthy nature," but due to a lack of early discipline was 
slave to "a haughty and imperious temper." Both men had checkered careers 
because they were prone to being governed by their faults. But Plutarch 
gives Coriolanus the moral edge, since (bad temper notwithstanding) he 
was a straightforward and upright man, while Alcibiades was "the least 
scrupulous .. . of human beings." Herein lies the lesson: A short fuse is a 
drawback, but unscrupulous behavior is a fatal flaw. These biographies are 
fables to guide moral development; as Plutarch himself writes, "The virtues 
of these great men .. . [serve] me as a sort of looking-glass, in which I may 
see how to adjust and adorn my own life." 
AUGUSTINE 
The City of God 
(COMPLETED 426) 
Best edition: Although scholars of religion and political philosophy will want to 
read the unabridged work (a good version, weighing in at 944 pages, is the Marcus Dods translation published by the Modern Library [New York, 1993]; 
ISBN 0-679-78319-9; $15.95), the amateur historian is probably better off with 
2 0 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
the abridged edition, also published by Modern Library (New York, 1994); 
ISBN 0-67-960087-6; $22.95. 
Augustine, born in North Africa, is known for his elaboration of the doctrine of original sin, which says that all men inherit the sin of Adam from 
birth, and remain self-centered unless called by God to worship him. The 
City of God argues that the community of self-worshipers (the city of earth) 
and the kingdom of God-followers (the city of God) live inextricably 
mixed together on earth. The tensions of history come because the two 
cities, which have different ends, are forced to live side by side. 
Augustine is careful to explain that the city of God is not identical to the 
Church, since not every Church member truly worships God. Nor is this 
city simply made up of Christian individuals, since the church itself is the 
place where God chooses to work on earth. In the same way, the city of 
man is not simply made up of people who don't follow God; nor is it identified as any particular government. Instead, the city of earth is the place 
where men are driven by their lusts, and the most powerful lust is the lust 
for power. In the city of earth, Augustine writes, "the princes and the 
nations it subdues are ruled by the love of ruling." Unlike Plato, Augustine 
sees no way that an earthly state can be just, since it can only enforce justice 
through the exercise of power, and since that power is always flawed. "True 
justice," Augustine remarks, "has no existence save in that republic whose 
founder and ruler is Christ." 
However, the city of God can coexist with some earthly states more easily than with others. Augustine defines a state, or "commonwealth," as a 
group of people bound together by common love for an object. Such a 
commonwealth will be "a superior people in proportion as it is bound 
together by higher interests, inferior in proportion as it is bound together by 
lower." The city of God is the highest type of commonwealth, since it is 
bound together by the love of God, but those earthly states that are bound 
together by a love of peace are much superior to those which are bound 
together by a lust for power. Members of the city of God, who also wish to 
live in peace, can cooperate with an earthly state that pursues peace, but will 
always find themselves in opposition to a state run by a tyrant. "The earthly 
city," Augustine concludes, "which does not live by faith, seeks an earthly 
peace The city of God makes use of this peace only because it must, until 
this mortal condition which necessitates it shall pass away. . . . Thus, as this 
life is common to both cities, so there is a harmony between them." So 
while keeping his eyes firmly focused on the ultimate, unearthly fulfillment 
of the city of God, Augustine still lays out principles by which an earthly 
state can be governed. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 0 g 
BEDE 
The Ecclesiastical History of the English People 
(731) 
Best edition: The Oxford World's Classic paperback, edited by Judith McClure 
and Roger Collins (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000); ISBN o-iç283866-0; $10.Q5. 
Bede s history is one of the first to tell the story of a nation—a political 
entity, as opposed to an ethnic group such as "Greek." Bede uses the past to 
build a sense of national identity, which is no mean feat, considering that 
England began as a patchwork of Danish kingdoms and wasn't united under 
one king until two hundred years after Bede s death. But even though the 
"English" spoke five languages and had a dozen minor kings, Bede sees 
them as having one identity: "At the present time," he writes, "there are five 
languages in Britain, just as the divine law is written in five books, all 
devoted to seeking out and setting forth one and the same kind of wisdom." 
Bede borrows from Augustine in seeing the kingdom of England as having spiritual rather than physical borders (perhaps because the physical borders were rather difficult to define in the mid-eighth century). Thus his 
history is the "Ecclesiastical History" of the English people; it recounts the 
growth of the City of God in England. Bede begins by describing the earliest inhabitants of Britain and Ireland (the Picts, who originally came from 
Scythia), continues on through the Roman occupations of Britain, details 
the ongoing battles between the native Britons and the invading Angles, and 
finally arrives at the coming of Augustine (of Canterbury, not to be confused with Augustine of Hippo, who wrote The City of God), which is the 
turning point of his narrative. Augustine establishes the ecclesia anglorum, the 
distinctively English church, which links together all of the various races of 
England into a spiritual unity. After this point, English kings get relatively 
short shrift (Aelfrith, who was "ignorant of the divine religion," gets one 
paragraph) and Augustine, the spiritual king of England under the spiritual 
emperor Pope Gregory, becomes the star (he gets nine long chapters).The 
Ecclesiastical History continues in this pattern, alternating brief descriptions 
of kings with lengthy tales of bishops. 
Gregory's advice to Augustine shows a concern to establish a common 
practice for the faith that now unites the English. "Make a careful selection 
[of the customs from the various churches]," he orders Augustine, "and sedulously teach the Church of the English, which is still new in the faith, what 
you have been able to gather from other churches... .And when you have 
collected these as it were into one bundle, see that the minds of the English 
2 10 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
grow accustomed to it." This is exactly the story that Bede tells; England is 
a country full of many different peoples, who are nevertheless united in 
their knowledge of God. The History concludes with a national celebration 
of Easter, which symbolizes the "ending point" of the national progression; 
bickering over the exact date of this festivity has finally been resolved (there 
is a long and detailed discussion of the process), and by falling in with the 
rest of Christendom, the English have demonstrated their maturity not only 
as a nation, but as citizens of the kingdom of Christ. 
NICCOLÔ MACHIAVELLI 
The Prince 
(i5i3) 
Best edition: The Harvey C. Mansfield translation, second edition (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1998), ISBN 0-226-30044-6; $8.00. This edition 
has large, readable type and valuable footnotes that explain unfamiliar terms 
and historical references. The Signet Classic paperback, translated by Luigi 
Ricci, revised by E. R. P Vincent, is cheaper at $3.95, but the print is small and 
difficult, and there are no footnotes (NewYork: Penguin Putnam, 1999; ISBN 
0-451-52746-1). 
In the political chaos of Renaissance Italy, with the city-states of Venice, 
Milan, Naples, and Florence struggling to advance their own interests, Niccolô Machiavelli offers his own primer on political technique. He is not 
writing a history, but his method is historical. Each technique is supported 
by historical proof, a demonstration from times past that shows his conclusions to be true. 
Machiavelli begins by surveying the different kinds of territories, states, 
and kingdoms that a prince might rule. Although his musings on the different kinds of Renaissance states (principates, hereditary or acquired; mixed 
principates; kingdoms; and so on) may seem irrelevant, he is using these 
highly particular forms of government to make general statements about 
the nature of massed men. In Chapter III, for example, "Of Mixed Principates," he progresses from a description of the mixed principate to an allimportant statement of political philosophy: "Men willingly change masters 
when they believe they will better themselves." Far from feeling loyalty, subjects are glad to change their governor, as long as they believe that a new 
and better order will follow. 
After explaining the character of the governed, Machiavelli goes on to 
describe the qualities of a governor, giving historical examples for each 
quaHty he recommends, in a return to the biography-as-fable approach of 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 1 1 
Plutarch: "A prudent man ought always enter into the ways beaten by great 
men," he writes, "and imitate those who have been most excellent, so that, 
if your virtue does not reach up to there, at least it gives some odor of it." 
Machiavelli's historical references go all the way back to Moses: "It was necessary for Moses to find the people of Israel . . . enslaved and oppressed by 
the Egyptians, so that they, in order to escape their servitude, would be disposed to follow him." This becomes the first of his principles: The efficient 
ruler will always appeal to the wretchedness of his people in order to 
improve his moral authority over them. 
For Machiavelli,"good" means "effective," which has led to his reputation 
as a conniver free of morality. But he does have a morality. The "good," in 
Machiavelli's scheme, is that the country would prosper. (He ends The Prince 
with a plea to Lorenzo de' Medici to come and rescue his ailing city.) And 
since the prosperity of the country benefits the individual members of it, 
actions taken by the prince that might seem "wicked" actually become 
"good" if they benefit the state and its people. As a matter of fact, Machiavelli sees sustained wickedness as a bad option both for prince and for 
country. A single cruel action, he notes, may be necessary "at one stroke for 
the necessity of securing oneself," but continual cruelty means that the 
prince must always rule "knife in hand; nor can he ever rely on his subjects." 
In The Prince, politics are based, not on the "ideal" but on the "real"—and 
remaining in power is the greatest reality of all. 
SIR THOMAS MORE 
Utopia 
(1516) 
Best edition: The Norton Critical Edition paperback, second edition, translated 
and edited by Robert M. Adams (New York: W. W. Norton, 1991), ISBN 0-
393-96145-1; $9.95. Go ahead and read the introduction, which includes brief 
historical background, but save the critical essays for afterward. 
Plato describes an ideal society, Machiavelli the society that actually exists; 
Thomas More writes instead an "imaginary history," proposing a society 
which might work. He puts himself into this history, telling the story of a 
character named Thomas More, who after Mass one day meets the traveler 
Raphael Hythloday (the name is invented from a combination of Greek 
words and means something like "talented teller of nonsense"). Hythloday 
describes his travels in a distant land called Utopia (or "Noplace"). Like a 
novelist, More uses the old form of the travelogue satirically, following 
Hythloday through this imaginary land, which embodies an eclectic collec-
2 1 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
tion of classical and New Testament principles. Utopia has fifty-four identical cities, all the same, exactly twenty-four miles apart. All citizens have the 
same living conditions. Everyone takes turns doing the farm work, with all 
land held in common.Value is based on usefulness, not scarcity (so that gold 
is worth nothing). Everyone believes in a Divine Power of some kind, but 
no one religious sect is allowed to proselytize, since "if one religion is really 
true and the rest are false, the true one will sooner or later prevail by its own 
natural strength, if men will only consider the matter reasonably and moderately." This "moderation" is at the center of More's Utopia, which is based 
on the ability (and willingness) of all men to exercise both reason and selflessness, doing the right thing by choice. More, like Augustine, seems to be 
skeptical about the possibility of a Christian state (which would need threats 
and violence to enforce faith), but he describes a state where an unspoken 
Christian ethic undergirds every law: "No man," More writes, "should conceive so vile ... an opinion of the dignity of man's nature as to think ... that 
the world runneth at all adventures governed by no divine providence. And 
therefore they believe that after this life vices be extremely punished and 
virtues bountifully rewarded." Without this shared religious context, 
Utopia—like Bede's England—would have no coherence. 
JOHN LOCKE 
The True End of Civil Government 
(1690) 
Best edition: The Cambridge paperback edition, Locke: Two Treatises of 
Government, third edition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988); 
0-521-35730-6; $11.00. "The True End of Civil Government" is the second 
treatise in this volume, which also includes Locke's first treatise (on the nature 
and justification on monarchy). 
John Locke lived during a time of growing hostility toward monarchies, but 
nevertheless found himself defending a pair of monarchs. Decades before, 
Parliament and the English had executed the Stuart king in favor of Oliver 
Cromwell's English republic, but eventually tired of Cromwell's draconian 
measures and brought the Stuarts back to England. Unfortunately, the Stuart male heirs proved so incompetent that, in 1688, the English put a Stuart 
daughter on the throne instead: Mary, who, with her Dutch husband 
William, was allowed to be queen only on condition that she cooperate 
with Parliament. This "Glorious Revolution" (glorious because bloodless) 
established a contractual monarchy, in which power began to shift away 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 1 3 
from the monarch toward Parliament, which was (theoretically) representative of the people. 
Locke writes in support of this revolution. Political authority, Locke 
argues, should only be exercised to protect property. When man is in a "state 
of nature," he must protect his own property, which forces him into a constant state of war; instead, men can join together into a "commonwealth" 
and form a government, to which they delegate the job of preserving each 
man's right to his own property. 
This contract between men and their government does require that men 
"give up . . . liberty of a kind," but Locke sees this as necessitated by the 
greed of men: "For if men could live peaceably and quietly together, without uniting under certain laws and growing into a commonwealth, there 
would be no need at all of magistrates or politics, which were only made to 
preserve men in this world from the fraud and violence of one another." 
Furthermore, it is a very limited surrender, since government should only 
concern itself with property issues; it is "a power that hath no other end but 
preservation, and therefore can never have a right to destroy, enslave, or 
designedly to impoverish the subjects." 
Yet Locke has little faith that government will limit itself to such a narrow field. So he suggests that government have three branches: a legislative 
group that makes laws protecting property, an "executive" branch to oversee their enforcement ("It may be too great a temptation to human frailty, 
apt to grasp at power, for the same persons who have the power of making 
laws to have also in their hands the power to execute them"), and finally a 
third branch, called the "federative," to deal with foreign powers. But if this 
separation of powers doesn't keep a government from overstepping its limited responsibilities, the government can be dissolved. The commonwealth 
gave it power, and the commonwealth can take that power away, instead 
"erecting a new legislative .. . as they shall find it most for their safety and 
good." Locke's essay ends without answering at least one vexing question: 
Since this common authority is appointed by those who have property, and 
since the government is responsible to those who appoint it, what of those 
who have no property? 
DAVID HUME 
The History of England, Volume V 
(1754) 
Best edition: The six-volume paperback series published by the Liberty Fund 
(Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, Inc., 1985). The set has been numbered chrono-
2 1 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
logically, so that Volume I details Roman Britain to the death of King John in 
1216; Volume II deals with the early monarchy until 1485, Volumes III and IV 
cover the Tudors; and Volumes V and VI chronicle the Stuart kings—the most 
recent royal house). But Hume actually wrote his accounts of the Stuart kings 
first. Volumes V and VI were the first written and were published in 1734 and 
1737 respectively;Hume then continued backward with his work.You need only 
read Volume V of the Liberty Fund edition on the Stuarts in order to understand Hume's methods and aims, but you can continue on with the whole series 
if the urge strikes you.
23 
David Hume set out to write a history of England that would, in good 
Enlightenment fashion, demonstrate a bias-free exercise of reason. Like 
Locke and many others, he preferred to see Parliamentary limits on royal 
power. But he rejected the arguments of contemporary historians, who 
insisted that the English had always been free, and that tyrannical monarchs 
had seized rights historically belonging to the people. A scientific analysis of 
the past, Hume insisted, would show that English kings generally acted 
without consulting Parliament or any other body of advisors, and (in fact) 
were strongest when they did so. When Parliament demanded accountability from the monarch, it set a historical precedent. 
So Hume began his history of England with the Stuart kings; it was at 
this point, he wrote, that the increasing aggression of the House of Commons forced the monarchs to react. In his view, flaws in Parliament did just 
as much to produce unrest in England as any defect on the part of the Stuart kings: "The meetings of Parliament were so precarious," he writes, "their 
sessions so short compared to the vacations, that, when men's eyes were 
turned upwards in search of sovereign power, the prince alone was apt to 
strike them as the only permanent magistrate invested with the whole 
majesty and authority of the state.... By a great many, therefore, monarchy, 
simple and unmixed, was conceived to be the government of England; and 
those popular assemblies were supposed to form only the ornament of the 
fabric, without being in any degree essential to its being and existence." 
Hume was immediately accused of "Tory prejudice," of supporting the 
right of the monarchy to do as it pleased. But in fact Hume, skeptic as he 
was, rejected any royal pretensions to divine privilege. On the other hand, 
he had a low opinion of the masses, and thought that whatever government 
23The volumes are $10.00 each; the ISBNs are Volume I,o-86597-022-X;Volume 11,0-86597-
027-0;Volume III, 0-86597-029-7;Volume IV, 0-86597-031-9;Volume V, 0-86597-033-5; 
Volume VI, 0-86597-035-1. The ISBN number for the entire paperback series, which costs 
$50.00, is 0-86597-020-3. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 1$ 
could best keep the country peaceful and prosperous should be in power, 
never mind philosophical arguments for or against it (the "utilitarian" point 
of view). 
Hume did not pursue scientific research methods or sort his sources carefully, so the Histories are full of minor (and sometimes major) errors of fact. 
His history is "enlightened," not because of his method, but because of his 
aims: He did not intend to prove any particular point of view, but rather to 
take whatever story the past told and relay it to a large audience. "The first 
Quality of a Historian is to be true and impartial," he wrote in a letter to a 
friend; "the next is to be interesting." 
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU 
The Social Contract 
(1762) 
Best edition: The Penguin paperback, translated by Maurice Cranston (New 
York: Penguin, 1968); ISBN 0-14-044201-4; $9.00. 
Locke and Rousseau both see government as a contract—but Rousseau, 
unlike Locke, believes that men come to this contract with innate goodness. 
For Rousseau, man in his natural state has a moral sense (he is a "noble savage," uncivilized but naturally ethical). However, although man may be naturally good, his social structures are bad, particularly those that encourage 
property ownership. Ownership is society's original sin: everything began to 
go downhill the first time a man said, "This is mine." But salvation is possible through the social contract. 
This social contract is an association that men enter into by mutual 
agreement. Rousseau's model for this is the family; he argues that fathers 
and children (mothers seem to have dropped out of the picture) both give 
up a certain amount of liberty "for their own advantage": The children get 
protection, the father gets love. In the same way, the "state" is an association 
in which the members get protection, and the state gets (rather than love) 
the enjoyment of ruling. In this association, freedom is preserved because all 
of the members give up the same rights to join: "Since each gives himself 
up entirely, the condition is equal for all. . . . [N]o one has any interest in 
making it burdensome to others." Every member has power over every 
other member, which is the essence of the social contract: "Each of us puts 
in common his person and his whole power under the supreme direction of 
the general will [T]his act of association produces a moral and collective 
body ... called by its members State when it is passive, Sovereign when it is 
active." 
2 1 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Rousseau goes on to define laws as the will of the whole people, drafted 
by the legislature and imposed by the general will of the people. He does 
see a possible flaw, though: "Of themselves, the people always desire what is 
good," but unfortunately they "do not always discern it." Therefore, the 
people need a Legislator—a "great man" who is able to see clearly what the 
people need even if they don't see it themselves. But this great man is not a 
dictator, because, although he writes the constitution of a state, he has no 
role in enforcing it. Rather, the people will enforce the laws—presumably, 
because they recognize in it that "good" which they desired but were 
unable to articulate on their own. Rousseau's efforts to explain how this 
will work in real life leads him into multiple contradictions. However, in 
The Social Contract he is himself taking on the role of the Legislator; he is the 
"great man" who can discern what the masses cannot, and he can comfortably leave its execution in other hands. 
THOMAS PAINE 
Common Sense 
(1776) 
This brief essay can be purchased by itself as a Dover Thrift edition (NewYork: 
Dover Publications, 1997; ISBN 0-486-2Q602-4) for $1.50; no frills, no footnotes. For slightly larger print and under margins, you'll need to jump to a collection of Paine's writings that includes a number of other essays as well; the 
Oxford World's Classics edition, edited by Mark Philp, includes "The Rights 
of Man," "Dissertation on the First Principles of Government," and several 
other essays and letters (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998; ISBN 0-19-
283557-2; $9>95)-
Continuing the trend of the age away from an active and powerful state, 
Thomas Paine remarked that the best government was the one that governed the least (a principle which became known as laissez-faire).Writing at 
the time of the American Revolution, Paine was less political philosopher 
than propagandist, determined to convince the colonists (and Pennsylvanians in particular) that monarchy was dead. 
Paine starts out by drawing a distinction between government and society. Society, he writes, "is produced by our wants, and government by our 
wickedness The first is a patron, the last a punisher. Society in every state 
is a blessing, but government even in its best state is but a necessary evil; in 
its worst state an intolerable one." Society is what people join together to 
do; government is made necessary in society because of "the inability of 
moral virtue to govern the world." For Rousseau, society and the state were 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 1 J 
the same. For Paine, the "state" is society's unwelcome guest, the policeman 
who has to stay in the guest room to protect "life, liberty, and property," even 
though none of the family really wants him there. 
This "policeman" government should not be a monarchy. To prove this, 
Paine sketches out a history of the world in which idyllic equality once ruled. 
In "the early ages of the world," he writes, "according to the scripture 
chronology, there were no kings; the consequence of which was there were 
no wars; it is the pride of kings which throw mankind into confusion." Paine 
holds this vague early time of equality as his ideal (referring to the quiet rural 
lives of the patriarchs, and ignoring the violent details of Genesis). In order 
to reinstitute this pastoral innocence in the present, delegates from each 
colony should attend a yearly assembly where they would cast lots to find 
out who would be president for a year. This president is simply a chairman 
for the assembly, which will pass only those laws approved by at least threefifths of the assembly. This will restrain vice, since, all together, the delegates 
will serve to check each other's ambition. Paine fears that, if any one man 
gains power for too long (four years being an unthinkable period), he will 
inevitably become a tyrant—like the English monarch, who is now too busy 
protecting his own power to protect the life, liberty, or property of the American colonies. Only God is free from this impulse to tyrannize: "But where 
says some is the King of America? I'll tell you Friend, he reigns above, and 
doth not make havoc of mankind like the Royal Brute of Britain." 
EDWARD GIBBON 
The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 
(1776-1788) 
Best edition: Penguin publishes both an abridged and an unabridged version of 
Gibbon's massive history. Reading the unabridged version is a long-term project: Horatio Hornblower, C. S. Forester's fictional naval captain, survived threeyear voyages with Gibbon as his only reading material. The abridged version 
edited by David Womersley is probably best for most readers (New York: Penguin, 2001; ISBN 0-14-043764-ç; S16.00).24 
Gibbon's great achievement was to write a history that attempted, in good 
Enlightenment style, to analyze all of the possible causes of his immensely 
large and complex effect, the decline and fall of Rome. He also returned to 
the original Latin sources, although not the original documents themselves. 
24The ISBNs for the unabridged Penguin paperbacks, each priced at $24.95,
 ar e a s
 follows: 
Volume I, o-i4-043393-7;Volume II, o-i4-043394-5;Volume III, 0-14-043395-3. 
2 1 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
The scientific analysis of primary sources suggested by those who professionalized history would come after his death. 
Gibbon's interest in Rome reflected his interest in the present; Rome, a 
noble experiment in just government, failed despite its centuries of success. 
Lying behind the efforts to understand Rome's fall is a subtext: Perhaps, next 
time, a civilization can achieve Rome's greatness without its fall."In the second century of the Christian era," Gibbon's history begins, "the Empire of 
Rome comprehended the fairest part of the earth, and the most civilised 
portion of mankind The image of a free constitution was preserved with 
decent reverence; the Roman senate appeared to possess the sovereign 
authority, and devolved on the emperors all the executive powers of government." Yet this separation of powers did not preserve the empire. Why? 
In the Decline and Fall, Gibbon excels at uncovering all of the factors that 
led to the decline: the state of its economy, the effect of various technologies, geography, class warfare, the rise of new cultural and religious ideas, 
flawed forms of government, and more. He is not quite so successful in 
recapturing the mindset of ancient peoples; indeed, he leans heavily on 
blanket characterizations of large groups of people. In his chapter on the 
formation of the Christian church, for example, he writes, "While [Christians] inculcated the maxims of passive obedience, they refused to take any 
active part in the civil administration or the military defence of the empire. 
. . . But the human character, however it may be exalted or depressed by a 
temporary enthusiasm, will return by degrees to its proper and natural level. 
. . . The primitive Christians were dead to the business and pleasures of the 
world; but their love of action, which could never be entirely extinguished, 
soon revived, and found a new occupation in the government of the 
church. . . . The catholic church soon assumed the form, and acquired the 
strength, of a great federative republic." Here Gibbon footnotes various 
church fathers, including Tertullian and Origen, and adds a number of facts 
about the accomplishments of church councils. But his interpretation rests 
on his assumption that he can categorize a large group of ancient people as 
essentially the same as contemporary people; he does not, in other words, 
manage to put himself back into the minds of the ancients. 
MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT 
A Vindication of the Rights of Woman 
(1792) 
Best edition: Two equally good editions are currently in print: the Penguin 
paperback, edited by Miriam Brody (New York: Penguin, 1992; ISBN 0-14-
043382-1; $10.93) and the Modern Library Classics paperback, with notes by 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 1 g 
Katherine Lee and an introduction by Katha Pollit (New York: Random 
House, 2001; ISBN 0-373-75722-8; $10.QS). Whichever edition you choose, read 
Wollstonecraft }
s text before you read the introductions and critical apparatus. 
As a young woman, Wollstonecraft tried to establish her financial independence by working first as a companion, then as a school administrator, a governess, and finally a professional writer. She published A Vindication of the 
Rights of Woman in 1792, the same year that Thomas Paine published The 
Rights of Man. Locke, Paine, and Rousseau had claimed that men should rule 
themselves;Wollstonecraft asserts that women should do the same. But Wollstonecraft has a low opinion of women's ability to do so, not because their 
minds are inferior, but because they have never been trained. Instead of being 
taught to use their reason, they have been taught an "artificial weakness," 
which "gives birth to cunning" and "those contemptible infantine airs that 
undermine esteem even whilst they excite desire."Wollstonecraft argues that 
three qualities—reason, virtue, and knowledge—make us capable of happiness and allow society to function. But women are not allowed to train their 
reason, because they are denied education. They are taught to be deceptive, 
not virtuous: "Women are told from their infancy, and taught by the example of their mothers, that a little knowledge of human weakness justly termed 
cunning, softness of temper, outward obedience, and a scrupulous attention 
to a puerile kind of propriety, will obtain for them the protection of man." 
And they are encouraged to exalt feelings rather than knowledge: "Their 
senses are inflamed, and their understandings neglected, consequently they 
become the prey of their senses .. . and are blown about by every momentary gust of feeling. . . . [T]heir conduct is unstable, and their opinions are 
wavering." These are harsh words, but Wollstonecraft blames an educational 
system that teaches "one half of the human race" to live in "listless inactivity and stupid acquiescence." Society, she argues, trains women only to be 
wives. A real education, which would train women to think and be strong, 
would transform society itself: Without so much practice in tyrannizing 
women, men would no longer turn so quickly to tyranny. 
Wollstonecraft directs her screed at middle-class women and at men. In 
her introduction, she explains that the aristocratic woman is so dissipated by 
great wealth that she cannot be redeemed by education. (She doesn't 
explain why poor women are excluded.) Men are included in her audience 
because she must convince those who are responsible for legislation to carry 
out her reforms. And, in any case,Wollstonecraft was perfectly aware that she 
was writing primarily for men: Paradoxically, her essay would have been 
too difficult for most women, who had not been taught to follow a logical 
argument—or in many cases, to read at all. 
2 2 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE 
Democracy in America 
(1835-40) 
Best edition: The whole, enormous, unabridged work is available in an 800-
page Perennial Classics paperback, translated by George Lawrence and edited 
by J. P. Mayer (New York: Harper Perennial, 2000); ISBN 0-06-095666-6; 
$20.00. But most readers will be better off with the abridged Signet Classic 
paperback, edited and abridged by Richard D. Heffner (New York: Penguin, 
2001); ISBN 0-451-52812-3; $7.95. 
The French politician Alexis de Tocqueville had aristocratic blood but liberal inclinations; believing that modern governments (including his own) 
were inevitably evolving toward democracy, he traveled through America to 
examine how democracy looked in practice. There, he found a vexing contradiction: The citizens of this great democracy often displayed a "peculiar 
melancholy .. . in the bosom of abundance" and a "disgust with life .. . in 
the midst of an easy and tranquil existence. .. . I saw the freest and most 
enlightened men placed in the happiest condition that there is in the world; 
it seemed to me as if a kind of cloud habitually covered every visage, and I 
thought them grave and almost sad, even in their pleasures." 
Tocqueville attributes this ennui to the very freedom and equality at the 
center of democratic practice. Freedom allows citizens to indulge in "the 
single-minded pursuit of the goods of this world"; equality fills them with 
"a kind of ceaseless trepidation" because each citizen is competing with 
every other citizen, and "has but a limited time at his disposal to find, to lay 
hold of, and to enjoy" those material benefits. In this,Tocqueville is echoing 
Plato's cautions in The Republic: Plato warned that the man who is devoted 
to the pursuit of pleasure, rather than virtue (which includes acting on 
behalf of the state rather than on behalf of self) will find himself searching, 
unceasingly, for new amusements.The very freedom on which democracies 
depend—the freedom of citizens to participate in their government—ironically tends to produce a preoccupation with pleasure, rather than with civic 
duty: in America, Tocqueville remarks, it is quite difficult to convince citizens to take part in their own assemblies. Constantly drawn by the pursuit 
of goods, feeling the pressure of others all around pursuing the same goods, the 
weary citizen of the democratic society has little energy left for participation 
in government. 
Tocqueville sees in action the principles that Locke and Rousseau proposed 
in the abstract; he sees the flaws in Locke's focus on property (materialism makes citizens uninterested in the general welfare) and Rousseau's 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 2 1 
proposal of complete equality (it produces competition and can lead to a 
tyranny of the majority). Materialism and undifferentiated equality are the 
two thorny problems of a democracy: "Men who live in democratic times 
have many passions," he writes, "but most of their passions end in love of 
wealth or issue from it. . . .When fellow citizens are all independent and 
indifferent, it is only by paying them that one can obtain the cooperation of 
each; this infinitely multiplies the use of wealth and increases the value of 
it ordinarily, therefore, one finds love of wealth, as principal or accessory, 
at the bottom of the actions of Americans; this gives all their passions a family resemblance, and is not slow to make of them a tiresome picture." 
KARL MARX AND FRIEDRICH ENGELS 
The Communist Manifesto 
(1848) 
Best edition: The Signet Classic paperback (New York: Penguin Putnam, 
1998); ISBN 0-451-52710-0; $5.95. 
The Communist Manifesto was first published in 1848, when Karl Marx was 
twenty-nine and Friedrich Engels was twenty-seven. In the composition of 
this manifesto, the two moved from socialism (which implied a Utopian and 
ultimately peaceful commitment to shared property) to communism 
(which had a more aggressive ring to it, suggesting that a revolt would bring 
this sharing into existence). 
In the Manifesto, Marx and Engels argue that history must be studied in 
terms of material goods: In order to understand how people live, you must 
first understand how they earn their livelihood. Their own examination of 
history through this lens reveals that one class of people, which they label 
the bourgeoisie, now controls the means to produce goods on a large scale. 
This control of the "means of production," which requires the investment 
of capital, has "put an end to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations . . . and 
has left remaining no other nexus between man and man than naked selfinterest, than callous 'cash payment.' .. . It has converted the physician, the 
lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into its paid wage-labourer 
... [and] has reduced the family relation to a mere money relation." In short, 
our modern economic system has "alienated" men and women from their 
work; rather than treating their work as a way of life, they labor only for the 
cash payment at the end. 
This has come about because the bourgeoisie, needing "a constantly 
expanding market for its products" continually revolutionizes the "modes of 
production" (the way goods are produced) so that products can be made 
2 2 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
faster and in greater quantities. In response, a working class has developed— 
the proletariat, who "live only so long as they find work, and who find work 
only so long as their labour increases capital. These labourers, who must sell 
themselves piecemeal, are a commodity ... exposed to all the vicissitudes of 
competition." Because the workman is a commodity, he can attract only 
that sum of money that he needs for his maintenance. Wages go down, skill 
is no longer essential because the factory system divides tasks into meaningless parts, and "the small tradespeople, shopkeepers, and rentiers, the 
handicraftsmen and peasants . . . sink gradually into the proletariat, partly 
because their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on which 
Modern Industry is carried on . . . partly because their specialized skill is 
rendered worthless by new methods of production." It's difficult to argue 
with this description, in a world where every family restaurant cowers 
before the Golden Arches. But the prescription that follows—remove the 
capital from the hands of the bourgeoisie and put it into the hands of the 
state, which is the proletariat "organized as a ruling class"—ignores the corrupting effects of power so feared by Locke and Paine. 
JACOB BURCKHARDT 
The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy 
(i860) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, translated by S. G. C Middlemore (NewYork: Penguin, 1990); ISBN 0-375-75926-5; $15.95. Part II, "The 
Development of the Individual," is most central to Burckhardt's argument. 
It is to Jacob Burckhardt that we owe the popular conception of the 
Renaissance as the time when man began to be modern. Burckhardt writes, 
"In the Middle Ages both sides of human consciousness—that which was 
turned within as that which was turned without—lay dreaming or half 
awake beneath a common veil. The veil was woven of faith, illusion, and 
childish prepossession, through which the world and history were seen clad 
in strange hues. Man was conscious of himself only as member of a race, 
people, party, family, or corporation—only through some general category. 
In Italy this veil first melted into air: an objective treatment and consideration of the State and of all the things in this world became possible. The subjective side at the same time asserted itself with corresponding emphasis: 
man became a spiritual individual, and recognized himself as such."25 
25Jacob Burckhardt, The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy, trans. S. G. C. Middlemore (New 
York:Albert & Charles Boni, 1928),p. 143. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 2 3 
Burckhardt's chronicle of the Renaissance turns on this analysis of these 
years as the "first modern" age. Frederick II, for example, is described as "the 
first ruler of the modern time . . . early accustomed .. . to a thoroughly 
objective treatment of affairs."War itself became a "purely rational" activity. 
Italy began to "swarm with individuality." This "perfecting of the individual" led, in Burckhardt's analysis, to the modern idea of fame; the modern 
forms of wit and satire; the form of the modern university; modern humanism; and a dozen other traits recognizable as belonging to modern life. For 
Burckhardt, the Italian city-states of the Renaissance stand as the first modern, republican governments based on classical ideals; Italy's use of the 
ancient city-state model, "strengthened in turn the republican ideal and 
contributed mightily to its triumph later in modern nations and primarily 
in our own." And although various scholars have questioned this pivotal role 
of the Italian Renaissance (Burckhardt tends to flatten the difference 
between Renaissance times and his own), this interpretation became a standard and is still widely held. 
W. E.B.DUBOI S 
The Souls of Black Folk 
(1903) 
Best edition: The Penguin paperback (New York: Penguin, 1996); ISBN 0-14-
018998-X; $9.9$. This book is also available in a Dover Thrift edition (smallish print, not much white space, but affordable); ISBN 0-486-28041-1; $2.00. 
Du Bois, a Harvard-trained sociologist who taught at Atlanta University, 
begins his book by stating that "the problem of the Twentieth Century is the 
problem of the color-line"—an observation that shapes the work of almost 
all later writers of African American history. Du Bois's work is a combination of history, autobiography, and cultural study, ranging from the history of 
African American education, the failings of Reconstruction, the meaning of 
African American "sorrow songs," to the place of Booker T.Washington as 
an African American leader. Du Bois's sharp disagreements with Washington's 
accommodationist policies (Washington believes that "the Negro's future rise 
depends primarily on his own efforts") highlight Du Bois's own analysis of 
American society as fatally flawed for its black citizens. 
Central in all of his writings is Du Bois's concept of "double consciousness," which he explains through the metaphor of "the Veil." Black Americans, he argues, see themselves with double vision: with their own 
self-vision, but also through the eyes of hostile whites. "It is a peculiar sensation," he writes, "this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at 
2 2 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
one's self through the eyes ... of a world that looks on in amused contempt 
and pity. One ever feels his two-ness—an American, a Negro; two souls, two 
thoughts, two unreconciled strivings. . . . The history of the American 
Negros is the history of this strife. . .. [The Negro] simply wishes to make 
it possible for a man to be both a Negro and an American, without being 
cursed and spit upon by his fellows, without having the doors of Opportunity closed roughly in his face." Like the black autobiographers of the last 
chapter, Du Bois has single vision until a childhood moment when a girl at 
his school refuses to take his visiting card: "Then it dawned upon me with 
a certain suddenness that I was different from the others," he writes, "shut 
out from their world by a vast veil." 
Existence within this veil gives the Negro one advantage, though. Comparing it to the "caul" which marks a newborn baby as having second sight, 
Du Bois says that this removal from the mainstream of American society 
gives the Negro truer sight, a perspective that reveals its flaws. The veil is 
more hindrance than benefit, though; so much so that when Du Bois s baby 
son dies, he writes that his grief is mixed with relief: "The Veil, though it 
shadowed him, had not yet darkened half his sun Fool that I was to think 
or wish that this little soul should grow choked and deformed within the 
Veil." Perhaps finally despairing of seeing the Veil lifted, Du Bois—an 
admirer of Marx—ended his life in Ghana, after becoming an active member of the Communist party. 
MAX WEBER 
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism 
(1904) 
Best edition: The Routledge Classics edition, translated by Talcott Parsons, second edition (NewYork: Routledge, 2001); 0-415-25406-X; $15.95. 
Weber's argument—that the Calvinist Protestantism of America's Puritan 
settlers was a foundation for capitalism—rests on a theological syllogism. In 
Calvinism, the saved are not brought into the kingdom of God by their own 
efforts, since all men by nature are helpless to do anything good (or even 
turn to God on their own). Instead, some are "elect," chosen by God out of 
his good favor and grace. Because this choice of salvation (or damnation) 
belongs to God's secret councils, no man can presume to know who is elect 
and who isn't. But since man without God is capable of nothing good, those 
who do plenty of good works and display God's blessing on their lives prove 
to others—and to themselves—that they belong to the elect. This, Weber 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 2$ 
says, produces a strong psychological drive to work, work, work, as a way of 
self-assurance (after all, no one wants to be damned). 
Weber appends to this the theological concept of the "calling," which he 
sees as unique to Protestantism: The highest kind of life was not renunciation of the world and withdrawal to a monastery, but rather excellence-and 
achievement within the world, in whatever place God has "called" you to. 
For the Calvinist, Weber writes, the "elected Christian is in the world only 
to increase this glory of God by fulfilling His commandments to the best of 
his ability... .The span of human life is infinitely short and precious to make 
sure of one's own election. Loss of time through sociability, idle talk, luxury, 
even more sleep than is necessary for health ... is worthy of absolute moral 
condemnation. . . . Thus inactive contemplation is also valueless, or even 
directly reprehensible if it is at the expense of one's daily work. For it is less 
pleasing to God than the active performance of His will in a calling." 
This valuing of every moment of time helped to support Western 
"rationalization": a commitment to the most efficient methods of accomplishing every task in politics, economics, and daily life. Rational activity 
wastes no time. And the most certain way to advance in a Western capitalistic society is to adopt rational methods—to become more efficient. Advancing becomes not only economically necessary but philosophically essential, 
since the acquisition of goods becomes a mark of God's favor. Leisurely 
work, or remaining in the same stratum of society to which you were born, 
becomes a mark of failure—and possibly of damnation. "The religious valuation of restless, continuous, systematic work in a worldly calling," Weber 
concludes, "as the highest means of asceticism, and at the same time the 
surest and most evident proof of rebirth and genuine faith, must have been 
the most powerful conceivable lever for the expansion of. . . the spirit of 
capitalism." 
LYTTON STRACHEY 
Queen Victoria 
(1921) 
Best edition: The Harvest Books edition (San Diego: Harcourt, 1983); ISBN 
0-15-675696-X; $15.00. 
In Queen Victoria, Strachey portrays a middle-class housewife who happens 
to sit on a throne. "Discretion is not the better part of biography," Strachey 
once said, but his portrait ofVictoria is adulatory. Despite a hot temper, the 
child Victoria was "very truthful; whatever punishment might follow, she 
2 2 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
never told a lie," and her governess Fraulein Lehzen made sure that she was 
taught "the virtues of simplicity, regularity, propriety, and devotion. The little girl, however, was really in small need of such lessons, for she was naturally simple and orderly, she was pious without difficulty, and her sense of 
propriety was keen." As queen,Victoria was devoted to "unremitting industry" and with the help of her consort, Prince Albert (who showed "indefatigable perseverance" in opening museums, founding hospitals, collecting 
art, and making speeches to the Royal Agricultural Society) toiled unceasingly for her country. She grew to be "very short, rather stout, quite plain," 
and dressed "in garish middle-class garments." To the end of her life, Strachey writes, she was accessible to her people, who "felt instinctively Victoria's irresistible sincerity ... vitality, conscientiousness, pride, and simplicity." 
These middle-class virtues, not brilliance or political acumen (or any of the 
virtues ascribed to Renaissance rulers), made Victoria a good queen; she was 
an ordinary person, not a monarch claiming divine power and authority. 
Furthermore, Victoria—even though a queen—shows herself to be such 
a perfect Victorian woman', adoring wife, mother of a large brood (nine children), occasionally irrational and never intellectual. As a girl, Strachey s Victoria does make an effort to break from this mold; she announces that she 
will never marry, and her expression moves from "ingenuous and serene" to 
"bold and discontented." Fortunately, though, she falls in love with her 
cousin Albert, marries him, and becomes truly feminine. She is happiest 
when she is living a quiet domestic life at her country house, Balmoral; 
Albert, the more intelligent of the two, arranges her papers and duties for 
her, while "Victoria, treasuring [his] every word, preserving every letter" is 
"all breathless attention and eager obedience." She is a woman, and Strachey 
loves her because she doesn't commit the impertinence of being a prince. 
GEORGE ORWELL 
The Road to Wigan Pier 
(1937) 
Best edition: The Harvest Books paperback (San Diego: Harcourt, 1973), first 
American edition; ISBN 015-676750-3; $13.00. 
Orwell's project began as a documentary report; he was asked by the board 
of editors of the Left Book Club (devoted, according to its own literature, 
to "the terribly urgent struggle for World Peace & a better social & economic order & against Facism") to write about the daily lives of the unemployed in the north of England. Orwell traveled north and documented the 
lives of both the unemployed and the working poor. His descriptions of 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 2 J 
daily life are unstintingly realistic, detailing both the squalor of the working 
poor ("Sink in living room. Plaster cracking and coming off walls. No 
shelves in oven. Gas leaking slightly. . . . Bugs, but 'I keeps 'em down with 
sheep dip' ") and the psychology of poverty ("The basis of their diet, therefore, is white bread and margarine, corned beef, sugared tea, and potatoes.... 
Would it not be better if they spent more money on wholesome things like 
oranges and wholemeal bread? .. .Yes, it would, but the point is that no ordinary human being is ever going to do such a thing. . . .When you are . . . 
underfed, harassed, bored, and miserable, you don't want to eat dull wholesome food.You want something a little bit 'tasty' "). 
So what is to be done about this poverty? In Orwell's view, English 
socialism hasn't managed to bring reform because it is divided from within. 
English socialists are alienated from the proletariat, which they theoretically support, by a gap of culture and manners. When a white-collar Englishman becomes a socialist, Orwell writes, he remains "vastly more at 
home with a member of his own class, who thinks him a dangerous Bolshi, than with a member of the working class who supposedly agrees with 
him; his tastes in food, wine, clothes, books, pictures, music, ballet, are still 
recognisably bourgeois tastes. . . . He idealises the proletariat, but .. . he is 
still responding to the training of his childhood, when he was taught to 
hate, fear, and despise the working classes." Furthermore, Orwell adds, those 
white-collar workers who do belong to the proletariat don't recognize it; 
they think of themselves as middle-class. He asks, "How many of the 
wretched shivering army of clerks and shopwalkers, who in some ways are 
actually worse off than a miner or a dock-hand, think of themselves as proletarians? A proletarian—so they have been taught to think—means a man 
without a collar. So that when you try to move them by talking about 'class 
war,' you only succeed in scaring them; they forget their incomes and 
remember their accents, and fly to the defense of the class that is exploiting them." English socialists, Orwell concludes, must learn how to explain 
the exact ways in which English workers are exploited, rather than simply 
borrowing rhetoric from the communists: "[T]he essential point here is 
that all people with small, insecure incomes are in the same boat and ought 
to be fighting on the same side." 
PERRY MILLER 
The New England Mind 
(1939) 
Best edition: The reprint edition breaks this work into two volumes, both published by Belknap Press (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1990); 
2 2 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Volume I is titled The New England Mind: The Seventeenth Century 
(ISBN 0-674-61306-6; $24.go,); Volume II, The New England Mind: From 
Colony to Province (ISBN 0-674-61301-5; $20.95). You can choose to read 
only the first volume if you prefer, although both are fascinating. 
Like Max Weber, Perry Miller writes about the intersection of Puritan theology with the new American project. Unlike Weber, Miller is not particularly concerned with economics; he is an "intellectual historian," meaning 
that he focuses on ideas and how they change actions. For Miller, the central 
idea in Puritan New England is the covenant between God and man. Since 
God chooses to "elect" only on the basis of his sovereign will, his grace is 
unpredictable. Puritan piety was thus full of doubt over whether or not 
believers have truly been selected, despair over sin, and anguish over God's 
inscrutability—which the Puritans managed to contain by constructing a 
logical and entirely reasonable set of doctrines. In the doctrine of the 
covenant, men can be sure of salvation because God has entered into an 
unbreakable agreement with them. 
This covenant between God and man became the model for Puritan 
society generally; as Miller writes, covenant theology "was of tremendous 
value to the leaders of Massachusetts, not only in the realm of faith and personal conduct, but just as much in the realm of politics and society." Miller 
describes how Puritans entered into church membership by publicly testifying about their experience of grace. This membership was itself a 
covenant entered into by a sacred oath, and this covenant granted full citizenship in the civil community to each member who entered it. The children of church members were admitted provisionally; as they came of age, 
they too had to enter the covenant through testifying about their experience of grace. But although the first generations of Puritans were scrupulous in pursuing membership, fewer and fewer children applied for full 
membership. Concerned at this decline—which affected both community 
and church—the Puritan leaders instituted the Halfway Covenant, which 
allowed provisional members to be baptized into church membership and 
to be full citizens—although not to take part in the central sacrament of the 
church, the Lord's Supper. 
In Miller's history, this Halfway Covenant and the developments that followed it (a later Puritan divine even opened the Lord's Supper to those who 
had not made a profession) indicate a decline in piety—a secularization, a 
diminishing of the concern with God's approval. The Puritan "city on a 
hill," the place where God's kingdom on earth had finally found a place to 
settle, began to crumble from within; doctrinal agreement ("the first three 
generations in New England paid almost unbroken allegiance to a uniform 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 2 g 
body of thought") gave way to disagreement and fracture. "Compared with 
the founding generation," Miller writes, "there had been a notable falling off 
and lessening of zeal." Although recent scholars of Puritanism have taken 
issue with this fairly simple pious-to-indifferent story of declension, Miller 
has remained the single most influential Puritan historian of the twentieth 
century. 
JOHN KENNETH GALBRAITH 
The Great Crash ig2g 
(1955) 
Best editiomThe Mariner Books paperback (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1997); 
ISBN 0-395-85999-9; $14. 
Galbraith wrote his history in 1954 and revised it twice afterward; the later 
editions reflect on developments in the 1970s and afterwards that seem to 
echo those of the 1920s. In his preface, Galbraith writes that, although the 
story of the Great Crash is worth telling "for its own sake," he also has a 
"more somber purpose. As a protection against financial illusion or insanity, 
memory is far better than law." Galbraith s purpose is a moral one, then, or 
at least a social one: He aims to preserve culture through creating a common 
agreement among its members, rather than legislating from the top down. 
"For protecting people from the cupidity of others and their own," he concludes, "history is highly utilitarian. It sustains memory and memory serves 
the same purpose as the SEC and, on the record, is far more effective." 
Galbraith's lively history of the Great Crash centers around the year 
before the crash, when interest in the stock market swelled and then crested. 
Although he pays a certain attention to purely economic factors, his main 
interest lies in the characters who acted in the drama; the crash is rooted in 
their motivations. In 1928, Galbraith writes, the American people were "displaying an inordinate desire to get rich quickly with a minimum of physical effort." To do so, they bought shares in companies that had been formed 
for the sole purpose of buying shares in other companies. They put blind 
trust into financial experts who boasted of their "professional financial 
knowledge, skill, and manipulative ability.""One might make money investing directly in Radio, J. I. Case, or Montgomery Ward," Galbraith writes, 
"but how much safer and wise to let it be accomplished by the men of 
peculiar knowledge, and wisdom." Objectivity is not Galbraith's aim; "fiscal 
incest" is the least provocative term he uses for the advice given by these 
experts, who relied on a "hocus pocus of lines and areas on a chart," and he 
has none too high an opinion of the investors who bought into their advice 
2 3 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
either. They were willing to be convinced, he suggests, because they simply 
wanted to be rich; and as the stock markets nosedived, experts and investors 
alike were willing to deceive themselves: "If one has been a financial 
genius," he concludes, "faith in one's genius does not dissolve at once.To the 
battered but unbowed genius, support of the stock of one's own company 
still seemed a bold, imaginative, and effective course.... They bought their 
own worthless stock. Men have been swindled by other men on many 
occasions. The autumn of 1929 was, perhaps, the first occasion when men 
succeeded on a large scale in swindling themselves." 
CORNELIUS RYAN 
The Longest Day 
(1959) 
Best edition: The Touchstone Books paperback (New York: Touchstone Books, 
1994); ISBN 0-671-89091-3; $14.00. 
Ryan's account of D-Day uses the techniques of microhistory—the close 
examination of one part of history in an attempt to illuminate the whole. 
The Longest Day aims to illuminate World War II through a detailed and 
scrupulous recounting of the events of June 6, 1944. (The book was also 
made into a John Wayne movie in 1962.) Ryan, a war correspondent who 
also flew bombing missions with the U.S. Air Force, examines events on 
both sides with a reporter's eye: "In the ground-floor room he used as an 
office," Chapter 2 begins, "Rommel was alone. He sat behind a massive 
Renaissance desk, working by the light of a single desk lamp." Later, we 
meet Eisenhower, struggling to decide whether or not to invade on June 6: 
"The American who had to make that great decision wrestled with the 
problem and tried to relax Eisenhower's trailer, a long low caravan somewhat resembling a moving van, had three small compartments serving as 
bedroom, living room, and study." Ryan maintains this same calm, detailed 
tone as he describes the wave of invasions on the beaches on D-Day: 
"Caught by a sudden swell, the craft swerved sideways, lifted and crashed 
down on a series of mined steel triangles. Jones saw it explode with a shattering blast. It reminded him of a 'slowmotion cartoon—the men, standing 
to attention, shot up into the air as though lifted by a water spout.... [A]t 
the top of the spout bodies and parts of bodies spread like drops of water.' " 
He widens his point of view only occasionally, as in the book's final paragraph: "Soon this most occupied of all French villages would be free—as 
would the whole of Hitler's Europe. From this day on the Third Reich had 
less than one year to live." But even here, Ryan returns almost at once to his 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 3 1 
narrower focus; the paragraph concludes, "In the Church of St. Samson the 
bell tolled midnight." 
Ryan used 383 oral interviews to construct his soldiers-eye view of DDay, but an academic historian would find the result to be less than pure 
"microhistory." Although Ryan does focus on the experiences of individual 
soldiers on June 6, he places their stories within a preexisting understanding 
of D-Day and its place in the whole war, which he constructed not from 
soldiers' stories, but from more traditional sources. In an interview about his 
technique, Ryan remarked that he used the oral interviews "to place the 
individual into the overall significance of the big picture"2
 whereas a "professional" historian would have allowed the oral interviews to determine 
the shape of the whole. 
BETTY FRIEDAN 
The Feminine Mystique 
(1963) 
Best edition: The most recent paperback edition was published in 2001 (New 
York: WW. Norton, 1997; ISBN 0-393-32257-2; S12.95). First, read the book 
itself; then, go back and read the 'Introduction to the Tenth Anniversary Edition," which was written in 1973 and is reprinted in this edition; last, read 
Friedan's introductory essay, written in 1997. 
Friedan describes an American world ruled by the "feminine mystique," the 
powerful idea that "truly feminine women do not want careers, higher education, political rights All they had to do was devote their lives from earliest girlhood to finding a husband and bearing children." She echoes the 
complaints of Mary Wollstonecraft, but she doesn't picture women as 
imprisoned in the home for the last three hundred years. Rather, she writes, 
"old-fashioned feminists" were making progress until the 1950s, when 
something strange happened: Women began to go backward. The average 
marriage age dropped. The proportion of women attending college 
dropped. Women "who had once wanted careers were now making careers 
out of having babies." And these women tried to accept home and family as 
the fulfillment of all their dreams, stifling their longing for wider horizons: 
"If a woman had a problem in the 1950s and 1960s, she knew that something must be wrong with her marriage, or with herself. . . .What kind of 
woman was she if she did not feel this mysterious fulfillment waxing the 
26Quoted in Roger Horowitz, "Oral History and the Story of America and World War II," 
Journal of American History, vol. 82, no. 2 (September 1995): 617—24. 
2 3 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
kitchen floor?" To build this picture of housewives trying to be content as 
they slowly wither away, Friedan depends on interviews (The Feminine Mystique began as a questionnaire to Friedan s Smith classmates) and women's 
magazines. "The image of woman that emerges from this big, pretty magazine," she writes, after examining the table of contents for a 1960s issue of 
McCalls, "is young and frivolous, almost childlike; fluffy and feminine; passive; gaily content in a world of bedroom and kitchen, sex, babies, and 
home Where is the world of thought and ideas, the life of the mind and 
spirit?" 
Friedan offers an explanation which is partly social (after the war, women 
magazine writers went back home, "started having a lot of children, and 
stopped writing," while "men, back from the war, who had been dreaming 
about home, and a cozy domestic life" took over the media),partly Freudian 
(American culture accepted Freud's description of women as "childlike 
dolls, who existed .. . to love man and serve his needs"), and partly economic ("[T]he really important role that women serve as housewives is to 
buy more things for the house. . . . [T]he perpetuation of housewifery, the 
growth of the feminine mystique, makes sense (and dollars) when one realizes that women are the chief customers of American business. Somehow, 
somewhere, someone must have figured out that women will buy more 
things if they are kept in the underused, nameless-yearning, energy-to-getrid-of state of being housewives"). Friedan's conclusions are as energetic 
and convincing as her methods are flawed: Who is that "someone" who figured out that women must buy, and what were black, Hispanic, and workingclass women doing while Friedan's white suburban housewives languished 
in their plush houses? But Friedan, like Thomas Paine, is more evangelist 
than historian; she too has a revolution in mind. "When enough women 
make life plans geared to their real abilities," she concludes, " [they] can fulfill a commitment to profession and politics, and to marriage and motherhood with equal seriousness." 
EUGENE D. GENOVESE 
Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made 
(1974) 
Best edition: The Vintage Books paperback (NewYork: Random House, 1976); 
ISBN 0-394-71652-3; $19.00. 
In his groundbreaking work of African American history, Genovese argues 
that the history of slavery cannot be understood unless slaves and masters 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 J J 
are seen as interdependent: Slaves shaped the world of the whites just as 
surely as whites shaped the world of the blacks. He rejects the widely 
accepted idea that slavery rendered the slaves completely dependent, 
defenseless, and without family relationships. Instead, Africans in slavery 
developed their own customs, their own world; this "separate black national 
culture" formed as the slaves "struggled to survive spiritually as well as physically—to make a livable world for themselves and their children within the 
narrowest living space and harshest adversity." Genovese s new emphasis on 
slave "agency" (the power to resist) put a revolutionary spin on the independence and strength of slaves, who were no longer viewed as passive victims. Slave religion is a prime example of the African American ability to 
resist white control: Although white Christianity told slaves to obey their 
masters, the slaves developed their own unique, particular form of Christianity, which instead emphasized God's vengeance on oppressors and the 
promise of freedom after death. 
But Genovese doesn't fall into a simplistic analysis of slaves as directing 
their own destinies—or of masters as entirely evil. He argues instead that 
whites and blacks were "organically" related. Slaves and masters changed 
each other's worlds in a relationship based on paternalism: White plantation 
owners acted as "authoritarian fathers who presided over an extended and 
subservient family, white and black." This paternalism mixed evil and good. 
It "brought white and black together and welded them into one people 
with genuine elements of affection and intimacy"; it obliged whites to care 
for their slaves out of a "strong sense of duty and responsibility," but also 
allowed them to treat them with cruelty and hatred. Paternalism led blacks 
to serve their masters out of genuine obligation and affection, but also 
warped them so that they accepted white authority over blacks as somehow 
natural. The role of the plantation mammy is, for Genovese, emblematic of 
this complicated relationship: "To understand her is to move toward understanding the tragedy of plantation paternalism. . . . Primarily, the Mammy 
raised the white children and ran the Big House either as the mistress's 
executive officer or her de facto superior.... In general, she gave the whites 
the perfect slave—a loyal, faithful, contented, efficient, conscientious member of the family who always knew her place; and she gave the slaves a 
white-approved standard of black behavior. She also had to be a tough, 
worldly-wise, enormously resourceful woman." And yet, in wielding this 
power, she became dependent on her white "family," unable to establish 
authority among her own people. Genovese's refusal to trace simple 
oppressor-oppressed relationships acknowledges the slaves' power and independent culture, even as he refuses to gloss over the horrors of slavery. 
2 3 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
BARBARA TUCHMAN 
A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous Fourteenth Century 
(1978) 
Best edition: The Ballantine paperback (New York: Ballantine Books, 1987); 
ISBN 0-345-34957-1; $16.00. 
Tuchman's study of the fourteenth century assembles the century's details 
into a pattern that resembles our own: "After the experiences of the terrible twentieth century," she writes in her preface, "we have greater fellowfeeling for a distraught age whose rules were breaking down under the 
pressure of adverse and violent events. We recognize with a painful twinge 
the marks of a period of anguish when there is no sense of an assured 
future." She examines this fourteenth-century "period of anguish" from the 
point of view of Enguerrand de Coucy VII, a minor nobleman who advised 
two French kings and married an English princess. 
Tuchman illustrates the decline of chivalry, in which the knights, who 
were supposed to protect the weak, became a tyrannical class in their own 
right. She rejects any romantic ideas of a pastel-colored knights-and-ladies 
society, instead describing late-night drinking sessions in castle halls as latemedieval biker-bar brawls in which knights groped ladies, insulted them, 
and scuffled with angry husbands. She describes Christianity's power over 
every aspect of daily life ("Christianity was the matrix of medieval life: even 
cooking instructions called for boiling an egg 'during the length of time 
wherein you say a Miserere'"), but is pessimistic about its ability to bring 
peace or virtue ("The Church, more worldly than spiritual, did not guide 
the way to God"). She tells of the Black Death, but finds this only to be one 
disaster in a time that was "a succession of wayward dangers; of the three 
galloping evils, plague, and taxes; of fierce and tragic conflicts, bizarre fates, 
capricious money, sorcery, betrayals, insurrections, murder, madness, and the 
downfall of princes; of dwindling labor for the fields, of cleared land reverting to waste; and always the recurring black shadow of pestilence carrying 
its message of guilt and sin and the hostility of God." 
Tuchman is more interested in politics than in ideas, and her history 
focuses on the complicated (and ultimately destructive) attempts of the 
English and French to make peace while simultaneously stealing each 
other's land, rather than the development of philosophy and science. She 
details the lives of the warrior class, but doesn't pay much attention to the 
peasants; her concern instead is to describe a time of political crisis and disorder, in which English invasions, French weakness, predatory knights, and 
corrupt clergy shaped the course of events. In describing the violence and 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 235 
unrest of the fourteenth century, and in comparing it to our own times, 
Tuchman is arguing for a certain historical uniformity, rejecting both a simple "progressism" (which would see the twentieth century as naturally better 
than the fourteenth) and a pessimistic sense of decline (which would view 
the twentieth century as spiraling downward into unheard-of dangers). 
BOB WOODWARD AND CARL BERNSTEIN 
All the President's Men 
(1987) 
Best edition: The Touchstone Books paperback, second edition (New York: 
Touchstone Books, 1994); ISBN 0-671-89441-2; $14.00. 
Woodward and Bernstein's book on Watergate is based on the reports they 
filed with the Washington Post, news stories that played a large part in 
Nixon's eventual resignation. In a twist that postmodernists might applaud, 
All the President's Men keeps its writers in full view; it begins not with Nixon 
or with any of the president's men, but with Woodward. "June 17, 1972. 
Nine o'clock Saturday morning. Early for the telephone. Woodward fumbled for the receiver and snapped awake. The city editor of the Washington 
Post was on the line. Five men had been arrested earlier that morning in a 
burglary at Democratic headquarters, carrying photographic equipment 
and electronic gear. Could he come in?" 
The history ofWatergate is one of slow discovery by the American people of high-level misdeeds. In their slowly unfolding chronicle, Woodward 
and Bernstein stand in for "typical Americans," understanding a complicated and disgraceful sequence of events one tiny fragment at a time. The 
style is immediate and unadorned: "Woodward told Stoner that the Post had 
a responsibility to correct an error. No comment. If an apology was called 
for, it would be given. No comment. Woodward raised his voice to impress 
on Stoner how serious it was when a newspaper made a mistake. Finally, 
Stoner said he wouldn't recommend making any apology to Bob Haldeman." That prose won't win any awards, but it matches the purpose of the 
book: to uncover, as clearly and nonsensationally as possible, the "truth." 
All the President's Men begins with the Watergate break-in and ends with 
the indictments of the president's men. Its last paragraph recounts the president's speech to the American people on January 30,1974: "The President 
said,'I want you to know that I have no intention whatever of ever walking 
away from the job that the American people elected me to do for the people of the United States.' "All the President's Men was completed in 1974 and 
came out just before Nixon's resignation on August 9, 1974; it is thus not 
2 3 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
only a history of the break-in and its investigation, but part of history itself. 
(You can still read the original Woodward-Bernstein story on the break-in, 
published in the Washington Post on June 19, 1972, at www.washingtonpost 
.com/wp-srv/local/longterm/tours/scandal/watergat.htm.) 
JAMES M. MCPHERSON 
Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era 
(1988) 
Best edition: The Ballantine paperback (New York: Ballantine Books, 198g); 
ISBN 0-345-35942-9; $18.00. 
"Both sides in the American Civil War professed to be fighting for freedom," McPherson's preface begins—thus summing up the difficulty of 
"compressing[ing] the war and its causes into a single volume." Faced with 
a South that claimed to be taking up arms to protect "political rights... and 
State sovereignty" and a North that insisted it was fighting to preserve the 
"last, best hope .. . of republican freedoms in the world," McPherson sets 
out to balance political and military events (and rhetoric) with the social 
and economic developments that helped to fuel the war. 
McPherson's initial chapter surveys the condition of the United States at 
mid-century: its unrestrained growth, especially in the West; the state of the 
southern economy, including its dependence on cotton and on the low-cost 
slave labor that made cotton production economically feasible; the growing 
gap between rich and poor; ethnic conflict; the fast growth of urban population; the improved transportation that allowed goods to be sold far away 
from their point of manufacture; labor protests; and the evolution of the 
"child-centered nurturing family." These widely varied descriptions all set 
the stage for McPherson's narrative of the Civil War, which begins in Chapter 2 with James K. Polk's presidency and the spark that ignited the war: the 
argument over whether, in this rapidly expanding United States, the new 
territories admitted to the Union would be slave-holding or free. From this 
point on, McPherson unfolds a detailed military and social history of the 
Civil War. He is careful to outline all the groups that took different positions 
on the war, avoiding lumping all Union or all Confederate sympathizers 
together. 
McPherson's achievement lies, not in a particularly unique or startling 
take on the Civil War, but on his ability to pull together into one coherent 
whole the bewilderingly varied details of the war and the unendingly disparate theories on how and why the war progressed as it did. McPherson's 
story ends with the Union victory, which "destroyed the southern vision of 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 237 
America and ensured that the northern vision would become the American 
vision." But in this new America, many problems remain. McPherson's history ends with a question: "What would be the place of freed slaves and 
their descendants in this new order?" 
LAUREL THATCHER ULRICH 
A Midwife's Tale: The Life of Martha Ballard, 
Based on Her Diary, 1783-1812 
(1990) 
Best edition:The Vintage paperback (NewYork: Random House, 1991); ISBN 
0-679-73376-0; $14.00. 
The narrow subtitle of Ulrich's history points out a new direction in history: the study of the individual, the small, and the particular. Perry Miller 
could write about all of New England; sixty years later, Ulrich focuses on 
one woman, one diary, and a span of time that covers one generation. 
Although Martha Ballard's diary hints at larger social developments—for 
example, the encroachment of professionally trained male doctors on 
obstetrics, formerly the province of midwives and nurse practitioners— 
Ulrich is very careful not to draw sweeping conclusions. Her method is to 
examine the past for particularity, not for universality; to highlight the 
unique, not to look for connections. This discomfort with generalizations 
reflects a postmodern distrust of truth that applies to all social classes, as well 
as Ulrich's discontent with "traditional" sources of history. "Martha Ballard's 
diary," she writes, in her introduction, "connects to several prominent 
themes in the social history of the early Republic"—but it is essentially different from those records left by men in positions of power. The diary 
restores "a lost substructure of eighteenth-century life" and "transforms the 
nature of the evidence upon which much of the history of the period has 
been written." For example, when Ephraim Ballard, Martha's husband, goes 
to debtor's prison, Martha runs out of wood. This problem aggravates her 
tense relationship with her older son, on whom she is now forced to rely— 
the "axis of her life," Ulrich writes, has been "tipped" toward her son. 
Martha's relationship with her son and her son's wife, who eventually 
decide to take over the family home and relegate Martha to a single bedroom, becomes increasingly difficult, producing in Martha's diary a "peculiar mixture of self-righteousness and self-sacrifice," in which Martha 
continues to cook for her son's family while refusing to ask him to gather 
wood. "Most historians have studied imprisonment for debt as an aspect of 
economic and legal history," Ulrich writes. "Martha's diary shifts the focus 
23 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
from mortgages and lawyers to wood boxes and sons, showing how family 
history shaped patterns of imprisonment in an era of political and social 
transformation." 
These "forgotten" family records tell a history that sometimes complements and sometimes contradicts the traditional histories of the period. This 
new focus is highlighted in Ulrich's conclusion, where she writes, "To celebrate such a life is to acknowledge the power—and the poverty—of written records. Outside her own diary, Martha has no history. .. . It is her 
husband's name, not hers, that appears in censuses, tax lists, and merchant 
accounts for her town. . . . Without her diary even her name would be 
uncertain. . . . Martha lost her given name as well as her surname at marriage. For 58 of her 77 years, she was known as 'Mrs. Ballard.'... No gravestone bears her name, though perhaps somewhere in the waste places along 
Belgrade Road there still grow clumps of chamomile or feverfew escaped 
from her garden." 
FRANCIS FUKUYAMA 
The End of History and the Last Man 
(1992) 
Best edition: The Avon paperback (New York: Avon Books, 1993); ISBN 0-
380-72002-7; S15.00. 
Fukuyama's book, an expansion of his 1989 essay "The End of History," 
argues that History with a capital H (that is, not a sequence of events, but a 
"single, coherent, evolutionary process") inevitably moves toward the modern, liberal democratic, industrialized state. Modern science is at the center 
of this movement; it has had "a uniform effect on all societies that have 
experienced it" because it "makes possible the limitless accumulation of 
wealth, and thus the satisfaction of an ever-expanding set of human desires." 
Because of modern science, "all human societies, regardless of their historical origins or cultural inheritances . . . must increasingly resemble one 
another." 
The power of science explains the modern movement toward industrialization, but not the phenomenon of spreading democracy (after all, plenty 
of industrialized countries have operated under other forms of government). So why is democracy also transforming the modern world? 
Fukuyama explains that while animals merely want food, shelter, and safety, 
men are driven by an additional need—the desire to be "recognized" by 
others as having worth and dignity. This "desire for recognition," Fukuyama 
argues, is what impels all societies toward democracy: Liberal democracy 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D ^3 9 
treats its citizens as adults, not children, "recognizing their autonomy as free 
individuals. Communism is being superseded by liberal democracy in our 
time because of the realization that the former provides a gravely defective 
form of recognition." He spends a great deal of time defining and illustrating this "desire for recognition," which he calls thymos, and discussing how 
it interacts with love of country, nationalism, ethnicity, religion, and other 
"irrational" (by which he means "unsystematized," not "ridiculous") desires 
of the human soul. Finally, he asks: Is the liberal democratic state truly the 
end—the highest goal—of history? Does it "adequately satisfy the desire for 
recognition," or would a better, future form of society satisfy this desire in a 
more thorough manner? 
By the end of his final section, "The Last Man," Fukuyama has concluded that liberal democracy is the "best possible solution to the human 
problem." And since the move toward liberal democracy is strengthened by 
"the homogenization of mankind .. . as a result of economic development," soon humanity will appear, not like "a thousand shoots blossoming 
into as many different flowering plants," but rather like "a long wagon train 
strung out along a road"—some "pulling into town sharply and crisply" (having arrived at the blessing of democracy), some stuck in the mud along 
the way, and some "attacked by Indians... set aflame and abandoned along the 
way."Which are these failed societies (and who the Indians might be) is left 
for the reader to decide; in a style of historical writing diametrically 
opposed to that of Ulrich, Fukuyama describes a Hegelian history that rolls 
on toward a glorious end, with historical details submerged in the swelling 
tide of fulfillment. 
The World Stage: 
Reading-
 through History with Drama 
To read a play is a contradiction in terms. . . . Plays are to be seen and 
heard and responded to as one responds to a rite or a spectacle. They 
cannot be simply read, as one reads a novel. 
—EDWARD PARTRIDGE, critic 
Plays are literature and exist as complete experiences on a page, and are 
not made a complete experience in performance. Reading a play ... is as 
thrilling an experience as seeing it. 
—EDWARD ALBEE, playwright 
A comfortable room, tastefully but not expensively furnished. Upstage right, a door 
leading into the hall, upstage left, a door leading to Helmer's study. 
"The cold passed reluctantly from the earth, and the retiring fogs revealed 
an army stretched out on the hills, resting." 
These opening lines, written within two years of each other, affect the 
reader differently. The comfortable room, tastefully but not expensively furnished, appeals to the eye but to no other sense; it is a blank background, 
ready to contain any event from murder to marriage. But the second landscape reveals not just a physical place, but also a mood and an expectation. 
The scene is one of malingering, of reluctance, of slow revelation; the fog 
rises only grudgingly from the ground, and the stretched-out army, like a 
dragon, might at any moment wake up, rise, and scorch the ground. 
The first opening lines—from A Doll's House, written in 1897—are those 
of a play by Henrik Ibsen; the second opening lines belong to Stephen 
Crane's short novel The Red Badge of Courage, published in 1895. The play 
and the novel have a certain family likeness: Both move characters through 
C?/i4&fo>ée& 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 4 1 
a scenario. Both use dialogue to advance the plot and develop the characters. Both deal with the same basic conflict: Crane's hero discovers his manhood, Ibsen's Nora realizes that her femininity imprisons her. And both 
stand at the same historical point in the development of storytelling; Ibsen 
and Crane are both realists, writing lifelike accounts of a point of psychological transition in a character's life. 
Yet the two stories are very different. Like novels, autobiographies, and 
histories, plays follow the same basic trajectory we've already traced three 
times: from an ancient fascination with heroism and fate and a medieval preoccupation with the plan of God, through a Renaissance interest in humanity's limitless quest for knowledge and an Enlightenment conviction in the 
power of reason, to a modern preoccupation with realistic, "scientific" 
explanations, and a postmodern disgust with that same scientific obsession. 
But plays and novels cannot be read in the same way Crane the novelist provides you with every impression he wants you to have; Ibsen the playwright 
supplies only one dimension of his story. He must leave sight, sound, mood, 
and expectation in the hands of the directors, lighting technicians, scene 
designers, costumers, and actors who will put A Doll's House on stage. 
The stage imposes other restrictions on the stories told by plays. Novels 
can sprawl across vast landscapes; plays must fit on stage and within an audience's attention span. Novels wander into the pathways of the characters' 
minds; plays tell you what characters say and do, not who they are.The subject of the play is not the life of the mind, but human action. Even patterns 
of speech change, from page to stage. As the novelist Joyce Carol Oates 
writes, "What shimmers with life on the page may die within minutes in 
the theater . . . prose is a language to be spoken to an individual, recreated 
in an individual readers consciousness, usually in solitude, while dramatic 
dialogue is a special language spoken by living actors to one another, a collective audience overhearing."1 
The dialogue found in a novel echoes only in the mind of the individual 
reader, who recreates it in private. The dialogue of a play is heard in the 
company of a crowd of listeners—and as any teacher will tell you, a crowd 
of listeners has a weird, unpredictable personality of its own. What's more, 
the playwright has no control over the presentation of the story to that 
crowd.The novelist keeps watch over sentences, shaping and polishing them 
in the knowledge that every reader will read the same words. But the words 
of a play are mediated by (at least) two separate sets of people: the director 
who stages and interprets the play, perhaps even cutting it into a different 
final form, and the actors who lend their own faces and personalities to the 
'Joyce Carol Oates,"Plays as Literature," Conjunctions, vol. 25 (Spring 1995): 8-13; 9. 
2 4 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
characters. A play is the polar opposite of autobiography: Autobiography 
takes what is private and controls it by shaping it into an acceptable form 
before allowing a reader to peep at it; the play gives itself to unknown handlers, trusting them with the job of setting it before its audience. 
If the play is such a collaboration, why bother to read it? 
Because you can act as director, allowing the play to take shape in your 
mind. Think for a moment of Hamlet. Hamlet, the prince of Denmark, is 
preoccupied (haunted, we might even say) by his father's recent death. "I see 
my father," he muses to his friend Horatio, referring to his memories of the 
dead king. But Horatio, unknown to Hamlet, has already seen the ghost of 
Hamlet's father stalking around the battlements, and he wheels around to 
look for the specter: "Where, my lord?" "In my mind's eye," Hamlet snaps, 
thinking this to be self-evident. 
Hamlet's father may have a poignant existence in his son's mind, but 
Hamlet doesn't do anything about his father's death until the ghost makes a 
visible, on-stage appearance to him as well. Only then is Hamlet spurred to 
take action. And this action leads, ultimately, to the death of everyone he 
loves (not to mention several unfortunate bystanders). If Hamlet had been 
able to exercise his imagination a little more competently, drawing his own 
conclusions from his father's haunting presence in his memory, the ghost's 
appearance (and all of the deaths that unspool from this physical manifestation) wouldn't have been necessary. But once the ghost appears in a particular form—once Hamlet's idea of his father is forced by necessity to "take 
flesh," once the ghost issues final orders to his son—a chain of particular 
events is set into motion and can't be stopped. 
What's the lesson for the reader? Once staged, a play takes on an irrevocable reality, an inevitable outcome imposed on it from without. But while 
it is still in a reader's mind, subject only to her imagination, it is full of limitless potential; it is richer than any staged version. 
More than any other form of literature, the play is placebound. It is designed 
to be performed on a stage, so it is shaped by the possibilities and hmits of 
staging which the playwright has in his mind as he writes. And the play is 
written not for the world, but for a particular, local audience (one way in 
which the "play proper" differs from the movie or TV script). Greek comedies were written for Athenians; medieval morality plays for illiterate 
churchgoers; English comedies of the Restoration for upper-middle-class 
Londoners; modern plays for Broadway or Chicago or London. Although 
these plays can speak to a much wider audience, they draw their form from 
the conventions that local audiences understand. Shakespeare wrote his 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 243 
tragedies with the restless groundlings in the pit in mind, knowing that they 
might hurl things at the stage if they weren't entertained with "low humor" 
between noble soliloquies. This changed the final form of his plays. 
Since the development of drama is so intensely affected by local theaters, 
local histories, local customs, and local dilemmas, the only way to write a 
decent "history of the drama" would be to treat each country and tradition 
separately. Each country has its own ancient plays and rituals, its own path 
into postmodern times. So the brief theatrical history that follows is focused 
on one particular part of the world: the English-speaking part. Ancient 
Greek dramas and European plays in translation do appear, but primarily 
because of their influence on English-language playwrights; I could not do 
justice to German expressionism, Russian symbolism, and French absurdism 
without covering German, Russian, and French history (which would 
require, among other things, better fluency in German, Russian, and French 
than I possess).2 
A FIVE-ACT HISTORY OF THE PLAY 
Act I: The Greeks 
Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, Aristotle 
Women and men have probably acted out stories for thousands of years (a 
whole subfield of cultural anthropology has grown up around the playlike 
rituals of ancient cultures), but the earliest written plays come from ancient 
Greece. The first Greek playwright was a poet named Thespis, who lent his 
name to the entire theatrical enterprise. In the early days of Greek drama, 
poets usually recited their works alone on stage. Thespis appears to have 
introduced the innovation of a chorus that sang, danced, and spoke dialogue 
with him in a back-and-forth interchange. Since all of Thespis s plays have 
disappeared, it's impossible to be sure of this, but the "chorus"—a "group 
character" that converses with the plays' heroes—appears in all later Greek 
drama. 
The great Greek playwrights who followed Thespis composed their plays 
for enormous outdoor stadiums that held as many as twenty thousand spectators; the plays were performed at festivals where the actors began at dawn 
2Readers who are interested in investigating these traditions could consult a complete theater 
history as a starting place. History of the Theatre, 8th éd., by Oscar Brockett (Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon, 1998), is a standard text; the paperback Oxford Illustrated History of the Theatre, edited 
by John Russell Brown (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), is a briefer, more affordable 
history. 
2 4 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
and shouted out their lines for hours, and where the audience was likely to 
spend the intervals between plays feasting (and drinking). In such a setting, 
acting was not a matter of conveying emotion by a turn of the head, an 
expression, or a graceful gesture. The spectators were too far away (and 
probably too intoxicated) for subtleties. 
Instead, the actors wore heavy masks, each expressing a single emotion, 
and relied on their speeches to carry the play forward. Special effects were 
limited; the most elaborate visual effect was provided by a crane that creakingly lowered an actor playing Zeus or Apollo to the stage (thus the phrase 
deus ex machina, "god from the machine," to describe the unexpected 
appearance of a deity). The most elaborate actions—sea battles, earthquakes, 
stabbing deaths, and boiling children—tended to happen out of sight of the 
audience, with the Chorus (a group of fifteen or so men, picked months 
ahead of time and given special training in singing, dancing, and physical fitness) describing the action as it peered offstage. 
Given the setting, the Greek plays were constructed as spectator sports: 
They retold mythological stories in a familiar form, so that the audience 
already knew what events to expect and when to expect them. A Greek play 
typically had five parts (which later served as the model for the traditional 
five-act English play); the prologue, during which the audience hears about 
the "backstory" of the play; the parados, the entry of the Chorus during which 
it chants or sings an introduction to the action that will follow; the episodes, 
which consist of several different "scenes" between the play's main characters; the interludes, which come between the scenes, indicating a change in 
action or in place, and which consist of recited commentary or explanation 
(these interludes might have required the Chorus to move from one side of 
the stage to the other, in a ritualized progression known as strophe and antistrophe); and finally the exodus, the last climactic scene. As the episodes built 
toward the exodus, the spectators would follow along, waiting for the moment 
of crisis and the denouement, or resolution, that came after.The whole process 
required sympathy with the play's hero, something like the emotion found 
in a football stadium during a home game; ancient Greek drama, with its 
arena performances, its ritualized costumes and victory gestures, and its 
demand for audience empathy, probably resembled the Super Bowl more 
than it did a modern-day Broadway production. 
Aristotle, who followed the great Greek dramatists in time, codified their 
conventions into law in his Poetics. The purpose of the play, Aristotle writes, 
is mimesis—an imitation of life that grants the viewer greater understanding 
of the truths of existence. To be effective, this mimesis should be tightly 
focused on a narrow section of life; thus every play should have three "unities." Unity of time decrees that a play should take place during "a single 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 245 
circuit of the sun" (centered on the moment of highest significance, in other 
words, rather than on an entire life); unity of action means that the play 
should focus all of its events around a single great event or theme; unity of 
setting dictates that the action should take place, as far as possible, in a single physical place. Tragedy, the most powerful form of mimesis, is the story 
of a hero who is "worthy of respect (spoudaois) and who makes a significant 
intellectual (not moral) error which leads to his downfall from happiness to 
misery."3
 Oedipus, with the best of intentions, makes the error of trying to 
avoid his destiny; Agamemnon, forced to choose between two evils, picks 
the wrong one. Tragedy succeeds, Aristotle writes, when it evokes pity (the 
emotion we feel when we see undeserved evil happening to someone else) 
and fear (which comes when we consider that this undeserved evil might 
happen to us too).The implication is clear: Moral missteps are relatively easy 
to avoid, but even the most upright man can make an honest mistake that 
will lead to catastrophe: You too could be Oedipus. If the tragedy is to be 
mimetic, offering the watcher (or reader) greater understanding, it must contain katharsis—a clear explanation as to why the hero encountered disaster.4 
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides wrote tragedies; Aristophanes wrote 
comedies. Comedy, depending as it does on contemporary manners and 
morals to set up the jarring contrasts at its center, always dates more quickly 
than tragedy; a joke about politics loses its kick (try watching a Jay Leno 
monologue from the Bill Clinton era), but the danger of wrong choices 
never goes away.The Romans, who came after the Greeks and stole most of 
their literary principles, wrote more comedies than tragedies—which is 
why neither the Roman playwrights nor Aristophanes are so widely read 
today as the Greek tragedians. 
But even the tragedies of the Romans were inferior to those of the 
Greeks. Drama generally held a lower place in the Roman social scheme. 
Roman theater groups, like Greek troupes, acted at festivals. But while the 
Greek festivals tended to be centered around play performance, Roman 
dramas had to compete with the more spectacular performances of lion 
fights, chariot races, and stadium sea battles. (In one of his prefaces, the 
3
Leon Golden,"Othello, Hamlet, and Aristotelian Tragedy," Shakespeare Quarterly, vol. 35, no. 2 
(Summer 1984): 142-56. 
4Katharsis, a word used only once in the Poetics, is a hotly debated term, but many scholars 
now agree that it refers, not to an emotional "purging"felt by the audience, but rather to the 
clarity that comes within the play when the reasons for the hero's fall come sharply into 
focus. George Whalley writes, "It is the incidents within the action itself (not the emotions 
of the audience) that are purified, brought into a sharp focus specific to tragedy" ("On Translating Aristotle's Poetics," the introductory essay to Whalley's translation of Aristotle's Poetics 
[Montréal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1997], p. 27). 
2 4 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
tragedian Terence complains that the first two performances of his play were 
canceled because the audience left halfway through to go see the gladiator 
shows.) The Romans made no innovations in dramatic themes; these would 
come during the Middle Ages, when the Greek dramas had entirely slipped 
from view. 
Act II: Mystery and Morality 
Everyman 
College theater-appreciation texts notwithstanding, Christianity didn't 
bring an end to classical drama; the barbarians who invaded Rome did. 
Classical drama needed physical space for its spectacles, players who could 
devote weeks to rehearsal and training, and spectators who had time to sit 
and watch. Without a leisured and prosperous population, classical drama 
(like professional football) had no space to exist. Acting didn't disappear, 
since traveling bards, wandering acrobats, and clowns wandered through 
England and Europe all through the Middle Ages, but the theater crumbled. 
But just as Christianity gave history a new shape—turning the linked 
episodes of the Greeks into a straight line pointing toward apocalypse—so 
the Christian church gave drama a new physical space within which it 
could remake itself. The church as an institution was not particularly enthusiastic about acting as such.The wandering bards, acrobats, and clowns were 
known for their loose morals, and the church's bishops and theologians 
were suspicious of classical dramas composed in worship of Zeus, Apollo, 
Athena, and other "demons." But the drama itself was remarkably compatible with the Christian view of the world. After all, plays were structured 
around action, and Christianity was all about God's meaningful acts in history. Plays were built with a beginning, a middle, a crisis, and a resolution; 
Christianity found the beginnings of its story in the Garden of Eden, the 
middle in Israel's existence as a nation, the crisis in the Crucifixion, and the 
resolution in the Resurrection. And Christianity had its own classical hero 
in Christ-Adam, a composite figure who made the wrong intellectual 
choice in the Garden of Eden and suffered catastrophe on the cross. All of 
human history, post-Resurrection, was a denouement, a. working out of the 
rippling effects of this one central event. 
Furthermore, the rituals of the church were themselves theatrical, relying 
on a constant retelling of the Creation-Crucifixion-Resurrection tale. 
Church services even included dialogue. The reading of the Old Testament, 
the gospels, and other portions of the New Testament out loud in each service, an attempt to bring the sacred Word to a largely illiterate populace, often 
involved conversations between different biblical characters. Although no 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 4 J 
one knows for sure when different "actors" were assigned to the different 
parts of scriptural dialogue, a chanted portion of the Easter service that 
recounts the dialogue between the angel at the tomb and the three Marys 
who came to anoint Christ's body was probably dramatized first. Initially, 
the parts were read by different voices; eventually (perhaps) costumes and 
props were added. Maybe this additional entertainment tended to increase 
Mass attendance. We can only speculate, but we do know that other scriptural stories were soon acted out as well. These "mystery plays" ("mystery" 
here takes its oldest, biblical sense of something once hidden, now revealed 
and explained) retold the stories of Creation, the Fall, Cain and Abel, Noah's 
Flood, the raising of Lazarus, the Last Supper—the central scenes of the 
Bible, all the way through to the Last Judgment.5 
At some point (driven, perhaps, by an increasing audience, or by the 
church's wish to evangelize), the drama went outside. The mystery plays 
moved from the center of worship to the center of village activity—the 
marketplace. In the process, mystery plays acquired the first corporate sponsors. The water-drawers' guild supplied the flood for the Noah's Ark mystery play while the carpenters built the Ark; the bakers' guild cooked up an 
elaborate Last Supper, and the goldsmiths created jewelry for the Three 
Kings to offer to the Christ Child. At one point, the guild use of the plays 
for product placement grew so shameless that the city ofYork put a ban on 
guild emblems. The "secularization" of the plays extended to attentiongrabbing subplots as well; the Noah's Ark mystery play incorporates a subplot about Noah's wife and her unwillingness to enter the ark; the Second 
Shepherd's Play is mostly about sheep stealing, although the Christ Child 
makes an extremely brief appearance right at the end. 
These mystery plays are not direct descendants of the Greek tragedies; 
their origin is entirely different.Yet there are certain lines of continuity. Like 
the Greek dramas, the mystery plays offer illustrations of truths about existence, not psychological studies of individual characters. Noah's wife, a 
medieval shrew who scolds her husband and swears by Jesus Christ, is a 
walking anachronism, but her place in the story illustrates God's gracious 
redemption of the undeserving. Mystery plays were filled with types and 
generalizations, designed to illustrate qualities, not personalities. 
In time, the morality play—the allegorical exploration of character qualities—became detached from its Bible-story foundation and stood on its 
5
Since evidence is scant, this is speculation. Some scholars have suggested that the mystery 
plays might instead have grown out of secular roots (folk dances, mummers' plays, and so on), 
but that's speculation too. 
2 4 S SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
own. Morality plays told the story of a character representing man, wrestling 
with abstractions made concrete: Lust, Ambition, Greed, Sloth. He is advised 
in his struggle by Good and Bad Angels, who encourage him to choose such 
companions as Friendship, Confession, and Penance instead. The Castle of 
Perseverance stars Mankind and his (successful) temptation by Lust-liking, 
Flesh, and Pleasure; after Mankind dies, Mercy, Justice, Peace, and Truth (the 
"four daughters of God") argue about whether he should be allowed into 
heaven. Everyman, the best-known medieval morality play, brings Death on 
stage to inform Everyman of his impending demise. Everyman's companions, from Wealth to Friendship, soon desert him, leaving him with only 
Good Works at his side. 
By the fifteenth century, the acting of plays had been entirely removed 
from the physical space of the church. Companies loaded their scenery onto 
wagons and traveled from town to town with their morality and mystery 
plays; the drama gained its own place as outdoor theater. Actors spoke their 
lines, close to their audiences, where the emotions on their unmasked faces 
could be clearly seen. 
Act III: The Age of Shakespeare 
Christopher Marlowe, William Shakespeare 
"Oh, what a world of profit and delight, of power, of honor, of omnipotence!" exclaims Dr. Faustus, Christopher Marlowe's discontented hero. "All 
things that move between the quiet poles/Shall be at my command!"The 
possibility of controlling the world was new to the Renaissance; increasing 
knowledge of the physical universe seemed to promise a new dominance 
over it. For the first time, man was not merely a soul poised between heaven 
and hell, waiting out his days on earth so that he could begin his real life in 
heaven. He was a personality—in the words of Jacob Burckhardt, a "manysided man," a free individual with power to act in the world and to change 
it. The flat, allegorical Everyman of medieval drama had become a person, 
full of complexities, ambitions, and potential. 
Shakespeare dominates the Renaissance, but the first "person" in English 
drama belongs to Christopher Marlowe. Marlowe, two months older than 
Shakespeare, was already writing in the 1580s, ten years before Shakespeare's 
first "dramatical histories" came to the stage. His early play Tamburlaine, 
about the fearsome Mongol conqueror who called himself the "scourge of 
God," rejects the notion that Tamburlaine might be an instrument of divine 
purpose; he is instead an active, thinking human. "Nature," Tamburlaine 
tells one of his victims, 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 24g 
Doth teach us all to have aspiring minds; 
Our souls, whose faculties can comprehend 
The wondrous architecture of the world 
And measure every wandering planet's course, 
Still climbing after knowledge infinite, 
And always moving as the resdess spheres, 
Wills us to wear ourselves and never rest. 
In Doctor Faustus, Marlowe takes Everyman and turns that flat character 
into an individual. Faustus, restlessly climbing after "knowledge infinite," is 
faced with the same choice that Everyman is given: knowledge and wealth 
on earth or bliss in heaven. Unlike Everyman, Faustus chooses earth; like 
any good Renaissance scholar, he is unable to turn his back on the unfolding knowledge of the physical world, even if it means his damnation. 
And at the play's end, Faustus has both knowledge and hell. The Renaissance (and later, the Enlightenment) praised human ability to act: to survey 
a situation, analyze it, decide on a course of action, and carry it out triumphantly. Yet the two greatest Renaissance playwrights are skeptical of 
simple Renaissance optimism. Shakespeare writes comedies, tragedies, and 
histories—but he never writes victories. Even the happy endings of his 
comedies are bittersweet, spiked through the heart by past misunderstandings and the possibility of future dissolution. Shakespeare's heroes are 
thoughtful and able to act, but they are also unhappy, conflicted, divided 
against themselves. 
Greek literature (and architecture) was rediscovered during the Renaissance, and Shakespeare is obviously aware of Aristotle's laws for dramatic 
form: He writes his plays in five acts and makes a half-hearted attempt to 
maintain the unities. But he asks his audiences to empathize with his heroes, 
not because they are morally upright, but because their motivations are psychologically credible. Lear's demand that his daughters love him more than 
their husbands is twisted but pathetically real. We grit our teeth over Hamlet's indecision, but his unwillingness to throw a match into the bonfire 
piled up in the middle of his family is perfectly comprehensible. Richard III 
is a moral monster but an efficient politician, an individualist who looks first 
to his own end, rather than the larger good, quite different from the Oedipus who tries nobly to do what is best for his people, even in the face of private catastrophe. 
And, of course, all of these men come to sad ends. The Renaissance saw 
man as free to choose his own path, rather than bound into God's preordered design; Shakespeare's heroes are free, but they are far from happy. 
2 5° SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
"All the world's a stage," Shakespeare wrote, in the most quoted lines of As 
You Like It: 
And all the men and women merely players; 
They have their exits and their entrances, 
And one man in his time plays many parts, 
His acts being seven ages.... 
Last scene of all, 
That ends this strange eventful history, 
Is second childishness and mere oblivion, 
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything. 
Greek drama had acted out, ritually and with stylistic gestures, the place 
of man in a world governed by immovable forces; man could not always 
avoid breaking the universe's rules, but at least he knew why the resulting 
chaos descended on him. Medieval drama had acted out, ritually and with 
the Bible as its playbook, the place of man in a comprehensible universe 
where God had already determined his beginning, middle, and end. But in 
this third act of the human drama, a time of constant discovery, when no 
one knew what the astronomer might see in the heavens next, the players 
on stage were acting out a play without a predestined end. Renaissance scientists and philosophers might see this undetermined end as a glorious one, 
brought about by man's increasing power over the universe; Shakespeare is 
not so sure. 
The age of Shakespeare was brought to an end not by an intellectual movement, but by politics. The theater—not to mention England's economy— 
flourished under Elizabeth I and her heir, James I. But the powerful Puritan 
wing of Parliament found James's son Charles I to be insufficiently Protestant; they started a civil war, exiled the king (and later executed him) and 
campaigned against all things Catholic and all things libertine. Sculptures and 
all art that bore the taint of the icon were destroyed; the theaters, centers of 
public immorality, were closed down; England lay under the rule of Oliver 
Cromwell.The English playwrights fled to France or retired; actors got other 
jobs; the "spirit of Elizabethan drama was largely extinguished." 
This great disruption illustrates, more clearly than any theoretical argument, how different the drama is from the novel, or the autobiography, or 
6Albert Wertheim, "Restoration Drama: The Second Flowering of the English Theatre," in 
SooYears of Theatre History, ed. Michael Bigelow Dixon andVal Smith (Lyme, N.H.: Smith and 
Kraus, 2000), p. 82. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2j J 
the work of history. If a government declared novels to be immoral, novelists would go right on scribbling in secret; memoirists have written their stories in prison camps, under repressive regimes, in hiding. But plays cannot be 
held a secret room. They must have a space to inhabit, or else they die. 
Act IV: Men and Manners 
Molière, William Congreve, Oliver Goldsmith, 
Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Oscar Wilde 
Until his death in 1659, Cromwell went on trying to "fix" society by running it according to Puritan principles, and banning (among other things) 
horse races, dancing, and Christmas. But in 1660, Parliament rejected the 
Puritan commonwealth and brought Charles's heir, Charles II, back out of 
exile. And there was great rejoicing, not so much over Charles II—who was 
inclined to figure prominently in brothel brawls, street riots, pub fights, and 
all sorts of other disruptive messes—as over the absence of Cromwell's government.The theater made a strong return. Charles II issued royal licenses for 
two theater companies, which he declared to be the only legal theaters in 
London (thus the birth of the term "legitimate theater"). The playhouses 
were rebuilt—but with a difference. The theater of Shakespeare's time had 
developed from the marketplace, grass-roots drama of the Middle Ages. The 
theater of the "Restoration" was an elite institution, run by aristocrats and 
licensed by the king himself. Shakespeare's Globe had seated fifteen hundred, with plenty of cheap tickets for anyone who wanted to stand in front 
of the stage. The new London playhouses held five hundred at the most, 
with no standing room for the working-class "groundlings." 
And the plays which the prosperous audiences came to see were very different from the plays of the Renaissance. The late seventeenth and early 
eighteenth centuries were times of political uncertainty, during which 
philosophers were laying down arguments against the old hierarchies that 
had governed society for centuries. England's monarchy, unlike others, had 
survived its crisis, but the old order was not what it had been; Charles II was 
a trifler, ruled by his mistresses, and his court—those aristocrats theoretically 
given, by God, the task of ruling their inferiors—was even worse. Nor did 
the monarchy fare well in the years that followed. Charles's heir, the 
Catholic James, unexpectedly fathered a child, at which point the English, 
unable to bear the prospect of a Catholic dynasty, got rid of him and 
imported the Dutch William, hemming him about with restrictions. It was 
an age of lofty political ideals and of practical compromises, of rhetoric 
about man's freedom combined with real constraints on man's existence, of 
2 S 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
an enormously high respect for the common man combined with a downto-earth distrust of what that common man might do if he were actually 
allowed to take over. 
In the absence of old certainties and old gods, Restoration and eighteenthcentury society turned to new stabilities, combining a new passion for classical art and architecture (structured, symmetrical, stable, and ruled by 
unvarying laws) with an unending respect for manners, which became a way 
of mastering the uncertainties of a rapidly shifting society. Manners reinforced the existence of an upper (and upper-middle, middle, lower-middle, 
and working) class, in a world where philosophers were rejecting hierarchy; 
Rousseau might write about radical equality, but the man in the street was 
snickering at his neighbor's inability to tie a cravat properly. 
Restoration and eighteenth-century dramas held to classical forms—but 
mocked society's obsession with manners, especially those that hedged sex 
and marriage. And the greatest Restoration and eighteenth-century dramatists are, like Shakespeare, pessimists about human nature. In the plays of 
Oliver Goldsmith and Molière, characters use manners as weapons which 
allow them to do as they please; a power-hungry, savage face snarls beneath 
the mask of manners. Locke and Rousseau may debate calmly about man's 
nature, but Goldsmith and Molière are the hecklers, shouting from the corners, "You think man is ruled by reason? Come and see what human beings 
are really like." 
In an age in which scientists, politicians, historians, and novelists were 
announcing that man was ascending to the stars, playwrights—those who 
actually had to put people on stage so that they could act—were not convinced. Their plays are full of compromise, stupidity, crassness, malice, evil, 
and all uncharitableness. Their upper-class heroes are tyrants and triflers; 
Goldsmith's Mr. Marlow announces proudly that he can enjoy himself only 
in the company of common women, whom he can seduce without feeling 
guilty. Goldsmith goes so far as to put his "low" hero Tony Lumpkin at the 
center of his story. Lower-class characters, he argued, had a greater range of 
emotions and qualities, because fashion did not make them the same by 
smoothing their characters into uniformity. Did his upper-crust audience 
get the joke against them? Apparently not; they laughed at Tony Lumpkin 
and applauded when Marlow got the girl. 
"Manners," that artificial shape given to the ultimate chaos of life, were 
ordained by a society that believed in rules and in the smooth, scientific, 
clockwork functioning of the universe. The comedy of manners satirized 
the rules, and in doing so displayed a certain distrust for man's ordering of 
the world. But these comedies still held to the classical conventions of the 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 5 J 
play itself—the five-part structure, the unity of time and place and action. 
This "neoclassical" structure transformed playwriting into a rational activity; in good Enlightenment fashion, reason, the most important part of man, 
was in firm control of the imagination. 
Act V: The Triumph of Ideas 
Henrik Ibsen, Anton Chekhov, George Bernard Shaw, T. S. Eliot, 
Thornton Wilder, Eugene O'Neill, Jean Paul Sartre, Tennessee Williams, 
Arthur Miller, Samuel Beckett, Robert Bolt, Tom Stoppard 
The nineteenth-century Romantics revolted against this Enlightenment 
vision of humans as thinking machines. Romantics rated emotion and creativity much higher than rationality; the playwright was not an artisan, but 
a genius unlimited by conventions and rules. By the late nineteenth century, 
playwrights began to shake off those Aristotelian ideals in favor of wilder, 
freer, and more anguished forms. 
The Romantics rejected, not only the ordered classical play structure, but 
also the Enlightenment optimism which announced that the world could 
be classified, ordered, and dominated. The Romantics wrote in the clear 
knowledge that man's reach would always exceed his grasp, and that no 
knowledge would ever satisfy his deepest longings. 
Romantic poets were prey to angst, depression, and self-slaughter, and 
their plays were "poetical dramas," wild, fantastic poem-plays that could not 
physically fit onto the nineteenth-century stage. Straining against the 
Enlightenment framework, these poets were still imprisoned by the conventions of the stage—until the early part of the twentieth century. 
Modern dramatists, led by Berthold Brecht (born just before the century's turn), had an epiphany:They rejected the "realistic conventions" of the 
stage in order to portray life with more truth. "Theatrical realism"—preserving the illusion that the action on stage is "real" through traditional sets, 
natural dialogue, and the observance of an invisible "fourth wall" between 
audience and actors—was now seen as complicit in the illusion of order, a 
false structure that (like the manners of the eighteenth century) found imaginary rules in a world which was actually made up of chaos and disorder. 
Brecht, probably the most influential theorist of the drama since Aristotle, rejected the idea that some inexorable destiny governs human existence 
and leads us toward a meaningful end. In his plays, he also rejected the traditional play structure leading to a climax; in Brechtian "epic theater," there 
is no more "decreed end," no "resolution" resulting from the characters' 
actions. Instead, these plays are sets of linked episodes; they concern, not 
2 5 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
heroes or men of action, but (in the words of Brecht s friend and interpreter 
Walter Benjamin) the "Untragic Hero," a thinking man making his way 
from episode to episode. 
In his effort to shake the audience from its preoccupation with order, 
Brecht prescribed the insertion of intervals to "destroy illusion" and "enable 
the spectator to adopt a critical attitude." The "fourth wall" also disappears: 
"The stage is still elevated," Benjamin writes. "But it no longer rises from an 
immeasurable depth: it has become a public platform."7
 In other words, 
there is no "stage," no exalted point from which any member of society has 
any right to make pronouncements about what is right and what is orderly; 
the actors and audience are grappling together with the play's ideas. In a 
Brechtian play such as Tom Stoppard's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are 
Dead, or Peter Schaffer's Equus, the audience might be seated partially on 
stage; the actors might wander down to sit with the audience. Thornton 
Wilder's Stage Manager speaks directly to the audience, introducing the 
players by their real names. He doesn't want the onlookers to become lost 
in the story of Emily and George; he wants them to keep themselves firmly 
in mind throughout. 
In English-language drama, two "Brechtian" movements have been particularly widespread: symbolic drama, and the "theater of the absurd." Symbolism is based in part on the work of the French poet Stéphane Mallarmé, 
who wrote that drama should be "evocative rather than descriptive, and 
relying upon suggestion as opposed to statement."8
 Mallarmé went a step 
further than Brecht (who had no particular objections to scenery or costumes); he wanted the stage to be stripped and "detheatricalized," reduced 
to bareness, so that the playwright could offer the audience obvious symbols. 
For the symbolist, the orderly appearance of the world is a veil that hides 
real truth; the only way past the veil is through the use of symbols, which 
can momentarily lift it and give us a glimpse of what lies behind. Symbolist 
drama (such as Samuel Beckett's Happy Days, which features a woman 
buried up to her waist in sand but only aware of her predicament in fleeting glimpses) features oblique, nonrealistic dialogue, long disruptive pauses, 
and little action. 
"Theater of the absurd" rejects theatrical realism, not so much because 
the conventions of the theater are inadequate, but because traditional explanations of the meaning of life are themselves inadequate. To quote the play7Walter Benjamin, "Studies for a Theory of Epic Theatre," in Understanding Brecht, trans. Anna 
Bostock (London: NLB, 1973), pp. 15-22 (first published in German in 1939). 
8Haskell M. Block, Mallarmé and the Symbolist Drama (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 
1963), p. 103. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 255 
wright Eugène Ionesco, man is "lost in the world, [and] all his actions 
become senseless, absurd, useless." So absurdist drama eliminates cause and 
effect, turns characters into types rather than portraits, and reduces language 
to a game which has no power to convey meaning. Samuel Beckett's Waiting for Godot, published in 1952, is "theater of the absurd." It lacks plot, character development, and (for that matter) setting, and guides the audience 
toward the conclusion that life, too, lacks plot, character, setting, and any 
possibility of meaningful communication. Dramatists who use the principles of the "theater of the absurd" belong to no particular school, since they 
insist that any shared agreement between minds is an illusion; each writer is, 
by definition, "an individual who regards himself as a lone outsider, cut off 
and isolated in his private world."9
 But they do share an attitude: All certainties have disappeared, be they religious, political, or scientific. "Absurd," 
writes Ionesco, "is that which is devoid of purpose Cut off from his religious, metaphysical, and transcendental roots, man is lost."10 
Theater of the absurd was one expression of modern despair, but not 
every modern playwright is sunk in despair—and not all have chosen to 
express their doubts about life through symbols or absurdity. Tennessee 
Williams, Arthur Miller, Robert Bolt, and others may borrow from Brecht 
(Bolt's Common Man in A Man for All Seasons is not so very different from 
Wilder's Stage Manager), but they allow their stories to unfold within a particular place and time: Tudor England, the New York of the 1940s, a hot 
apartment in a Polish neighborhood. Playwrights who maintain a level of 
dramatic realism in their dramas find truth in the actions of characters; they 
believe that an audience can recognize a human likeness in the actions and 
motivations of another person. Tom Stoppard makes a statement about language by allowing Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to disappear into a whirl 
of confusion and absurdity at his play's end; but Arthur Miller tells us about 
American capitalism in his detailed psychological portrayal of Willy Loman, 
sixtyish salesman, and Tennessee Williams writes about despair through his 
portrait of an alcoholic southern belle. Realistic drama, in the words of 
Anne Flèche, "provides a motivation for dialogue, a reason for being. It 
promises a fullness of meaning, a logic that connects character Thoughts 
are connected through dialogue; they become lucid and perceptible.11
 Symbolism and absurdism reject the possibility that words can reveal any truth 
9Martin Esslin, The Theatre of the Absurd (Woodstock, N.Y.: Overlook Press, 1973), p. 4-
IOQuoted in A Century of Innovation: A History of European and American Theatre and Drama since 
the Late Nineteenth Century, by Oscar G. Brockett and Robert Findlay, 2nd ed. (Boston: Allyn 
& Bacon, I99i),p. 312. 
"Anne Flèche, Mimetic Disillusion (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1997), p. 26. 
2 5 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
about human existence; dramatic realism retains its faith in language. Both 
kinds of drama continue to exist side by side. 
THE PURPOSE OF DRAMA (OR, WHY BUY A TICKET?) 
In 1959, the dramatist Harold Habson—faced with plays full of symbols and 
absurdities—wrote indignantly, "It is time someone reminded our advanced 
dramatists that the principal function of the theater is to give pleasure It 
is the duty of the theater, not to make men better, but to render them harmlessly happy."12 
The debate about what theater ought to do has continued ever since. 
"Serious" theater—whether realistic or not—has continued to attract a sizable audience, but since Restoration times and the elimination of cheap 
tickets for groundlings, "popular" and "serious" theater (read "entertainment" and "exploration of ideas") have continued to diverge. Brecht and his 
followers stripped the stage and sent actors out into the audience. But the 
"popular" theater developed a quite different form: melodrama, which sold 
hundreds of thousands more tickets than the serious theater. In melodrama, 
good and evil were clearly defined, and the villain got what he deserved 
while the audience cheered. The melodrama, with its affirmations of married love, patriotism, motherly affection, and the dangers of debt, gambling, 
and drinking, was what most people saw while the intellectuals were 
attending performances of No Exit. In America, Uncle Tom's Cabin became 
one of the most successful melodramas ever, with over five hundred touring 
companies presenting it ("Many actors spent their entire professional lives 
playing in Uncle Tom," remarks Daniel Gerould).13
 Under the Gaslight introduced audiences to London poverty and ended with the poor working girl 
rescuing a bound victim (a one-armed veteran) from the path of an oncoming train (an image which became emblematic of the melodrama). 
Melodrama was entertainment, but it also represented a third path 
toward truth; as Peter Brook writes in his well-known study The Melodramatic Imagination, melodrama was born in a time of "radical freedom," 
when audiences needed "the promise of a morally legible universe to those 
willing to read and interpret properly its signs." Realistic drama claimed 
that human beings could find truth in careful psychological portraits, makI2Quoted in G.W. Brandt, "Realism and Parables (from Brecht to Arden)," in Contemporary 
Theatre (London: Edward Arnold Publishers Ltd., 1962.), p. 33. 
I3Daniel C. Gerould, American Melodrama (New York: Performing Arts Journal Publications, 
1983), p. 14. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 5 J 
ing the mind the place where connections between people are possible; 
nonrealistic drama claimed that no connections between people are possible at all; melodrama asserted that ultimate good and evil exist, and that 
"even when facing an abyss, man may choose to believe in good and 
evil."14
 Melodrama is no longer performed today, but that's not because no 
one believes in good and evil anymore; the function of melodrama has 
shifted to the summer blockbuster movie with its good guys, bad guys, and 
victorious endings. 
Serious theater, battling both the movies and Cats for spectators, remains 
perpetually in crisis. At its best, a serious play provides what Peter Brook 
calls the "Holy Theatre"—a place where the audience can see "the face of 
the invisible through an experience on the stage that transcended their 
experience in life.They will maintain that Oedipus or ... Hamlet or TheThree 
Sisters performed with beauty and with love fires the spirit and gives them 
a reminder that daily drabness is not necessarily all."15
 This doesn't always 
happen in serious theater, which has been justly accused of unintelligibility 
and bleakness. 
In Equus, the last play on the annotated list, Peter Shaffer expresses his 
own yearning for some connection with the ineffable that can't be conveyed only with words but requires speech and action. How this will be 
conveyed in the future (the techniques of symbolism and theater of the 
absurd have become somewhat dated) is still an open question. Movies will 
not kill the theater any more than the e-book has killed the paperback, but 
there's no particular agreement among contemporary playwrights as to 
what degree of realism is necessary for an audience familiar with the conventions of film. Like the novel, the drama has seen something of a move 
away from abstraction: "If I read one more article about how we all have to 
steer ourselves away from narrative and realism because TV and film do that, 
and our job is to 'push the envelope,' " writes the playwright Theresa 
Rebeck, "I'm just going to throw up. This elitism is driving audiences 
away"16
 "The audience needs to be clear about what's up on stage," the 
playwright Marsha Norman insisted, in an interview in 1999: 
Television does such a great job with social issues, with personal family 
drama, the kinds of things that were the mainstay of a certain segment of theater writers; Arthur Miller, for example. . . . Those things are actually better 
I4Peter Brooks, The Melodramatic Imagination (New Haven:Yale University Press, 1976), p. 204. 
I5Peter Brook, The Empty Space (NewYork: Atheneum, 1983), pp. 42-43. 
l6Theresa Rebeck, Theresa Rebeck: Collected Plays igSg-iggS (New York: Smith and Kraus, 
1999), P-9-
2 58 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
done on television. . . .What we look for in the theater are things that only 
theater can do, not what TV and film can do better.17 
What theater can do better than TV is to imagine. Norman's dialogue is realistic, but her sets are bare (her play Trudy Blue operates "at mental speed," the 
character imagining herself from set to set while the actors use only five 
chairs and a table) and Norman identifies this "getting to pretend" as theater's strength. But it is notable that her pretending involves character development; although it has retained some elements of dramatic nonrealism, 
contemporary theater seems to have moved away from the symbolic, philosophical "idea play," back to the exploration of the human personality. 
HOW TO READ A PLAY 
Compared with novels and autobiographies, plays are generally quite short. 
This may allow you to add one extra step to your reading process: Before 
the "first level of inquiry" reading, considering scheduling a block of time 
in which you can sit down and read the play straight through in one sitting, 
without stopping or looking back. After all, a play is constructed to be acted 
during a single evening; and since acting takes place in time, the production 
always moves forward, never backward. Novels, autobiographies, and histories are designed to be read slowly, with time for meditation, and with the 
freedom to turn back and compare a writer's conclusions with the premises. 
But a playwright knows that the audience won't have the luxury of looking. Your first reading should reflect this reality. 
If you cannot take the time to do this (with some longer plays, such as 
Shakespeare, you may simply find it too cumbersome), you can progress 
directly to the first level of inquiry. 
The First Level of Inquiry: Grammar-Stage Reading 
Just as you did when reading the novels, ask these basic questions as you 
read: Who are these people? What happens to them? And how are they different afterward? As you read, if you sense that one particular scene is essential—even if you're not quite sure why—make a note of it or turn down the 
corner of the page, so that you can glance back at it after you've finished 
your first-level reading. 
I7Interview in BOMB Magazine (New York), January 1999, on line at www.bombsite 
.com/norman/normani2.html and www.bombsite.com/norman/norman13.html. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 5 Ç 
Look at the title, cover, and general organization of the play. Read the title page 
and back copy; write the play's name, the author's name, and the date of 
composition on your blank page. Beneath, make a note about the general 
historical era that the author belongs to. Is he an ancient Greek, an Englishman of the Restoration; is she a post-World War II American? If you gather 
any useful information about the author or about the play's structure, make 
a note of that as well; it may help you to read intelligently: "Reality and illusion intermix [F]ate leads our two heroes to a tragic but inevitable end" 
reads the back of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead; if you know this, 
you won't expect realistic scenes, and you'll be able to look out for 
"inevitabilities" as you read. 
Then, glance at the play's divisions. Note the number of acts: three, four, 
five, one? Does the play keep to classical structure, or is it episodic, like a 
Brechtian play? Does it divide symmetrically into two halves? If so, look for 
a "clifmanger" toward the end of the first part. Is there a separate prologue 
or epilogue? These are probably locations for an introductory or final statement of purpose. Arthur Miller's two-act Death of a Salesman closes with a 
separate scene, the Requiem:"He only needed a little salary!" the salesman's 
wife cries, but her son answers, "No man only needs a little salary"—which 
is one of the play's organizing themes. 
When you encounter stage directions, read them carefully. As you begin to read, 
pay attention to stage directions, both descriptions and notes about the 
movements of actors across the stage. Older plays often contain very little 
(or nothing) in the way of stage directions: "Enter Oedipus" is about all the 
direction you'll find in "Oedipus the King," and even this was inserted by 
the play's translator. However, if you read with attention to what the characters are doing, you will find clues in the characters' speeches that will help 
you to picture their actions on the stage. "Hamlet in madness hath Polonius 
slain," the king announces, "And from his mother's closet hath he dragged 
him." Hamlet has just slain Polonius, but without the king's speech, we 
wouldn't know what action he took afterward. 
More recent scripts are more likely to lay out the scene with great detail: 
"At a plain strong oak table," writes George Bernard Shaw in Saint foan, 
"seated in chair to match, the captain presents his left profile. The steward 
stands facing him at the other side of the table, if so deprecatory a stance as 
his can be called standing. The mullioned thirteenth-century window is 
open behind him. Near it in the corner is a turret with a narrow arched 
doorway leading to a winding stair which descends to the courtyard." Shaw 
could hardly be more specific. 
What conclusion can you come to? The setting of Oedipus is not central 
2 6 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
to the play's meaning; it has been played in modern dress, in the South 
before the Civil War, in Japanese masks, as an African American gospel production (as has Hamlet, with varying degrees of success). Saint Joan, on the 
other hand, can only be played in fifteenth-century France. When a playwright provides you with this level of detail, he intends you to take note. 
Don't simply skim past the description and move on to the dialogue. 
Instead, take the time to picture the scene in your mind; when you find a 
clue such as the king's speech above, pause for a moment to visualize the 
action it describes. 
You may find it helpful to sketch the stage and the furnishings, and then 
to trace in pencil, as you read, any movements indicated by the playwright. 
Whenever the writer takes the time to write such directions as [Rising in 
front of a character's dialogue, or [Crosses stage left], he is emphasizing that 
action in order to draw attention to something on stage: the speech, the 
actor, another character. If the character "crosses stage left," does she cross to 
another character, to an empty space, to the shadow of a tree, to the threshold of a door? 
Keep a list of characters as you read. Unlike the novel, which introduces you 
to each character in turn, the play generally lays out the dramatis personae 
right up front. Glance down the list; if you wish, you can make a note of each 
character in your own journal, so that you can jot identifying sentences after 
each one. (You may feel more inclined to do this if the list seems confusing 
or too large.) In contemporary plays, the dramatis personae will sometimes 
include the names of the actors who premiered the part. So, in A Streetcar 
Named Desire, you'll find that Marlon Brando was the first actor to play Stanley Kowalski, with Jessica Tandy as Blanche Dubois. Sometimes this can help 
you to visualize a part, since the director undoubtedly cast an actor who 
seemed to be physically "right" for the role in its first performance. 
Watch for physical descriptions of the characters, or "tags" explaining 
emotion. Shaw provides both: Joan, he writes, has an "uncommon face; eyes 
very wide apart and bulging as they often do in very imaginative people, a 
long well-shaped nose with wide nostrils, a short upper lip, resolute but fulllipped mouth, and handsome fighting chin." Later, Captain Robert de Baudricourt makes a speech which is prefaced with the following tag [his 
irresoluteness now openly swamping his affected decisiveness]. 
As with stage directions, if the writer inserts these tags, she means you to 
pay attention to them; make notes of the physical description of the characters, and of any hints of the character's emotional makeup that the tags 
might provide. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 6 1 
Briefly note the main event of each scene. As you finish each scene, write 
down a simple sentence describing the primary action and the actors who 
take part in it. As you write, don't forget that other characters may be on 
stage as well. It is simple, when reading, to imagine the characters, not on 
stage, but in the actual place where the writer puts them: a courtroom, a living room, a basement. But in actuality they are sitting on a raised platform 
in front of people who are staring at them. The playwright, as the critic 
Ronald Hayman remarks, has the problem of giving them something to do: 
"Whenever there is more than one character on stage," Hayman counsels, 
"the reader needs to keep them all in mind. The temptation is to concentrate exclusively on whoever is speaking. A character who is Ustening—or 
not listening—may be contributing no less to the theatrical effect If they 
are not speaking, what are they doing?"18 
Can you identify a beginning, middle, climax, and resolution? A play, no matter 
what it treats, has to ask an initial question, or set before you a scene which 
has in it some kind of tension. What is the initial question or tension? The curtain rises; you see Oedipus the king, standing at the top of the temple steps 
while his people stream up them to ask the gods why Thebes has been 
struck with plague, blight, miscarriage, crop failure. Oedipus doesn't know, 
and neither do we; we need the answer to this question. Tom Stoppard 
begins Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead with an entirely different kind 
of tension: Two well-dressed Elizabethans are sitting on a bare stage, flipping 
coins—but the coin toss has turned up heads eighty-six times in a row. 
Why? 
A playwright, no matter how avant garde, has an audience sitting in front 
of his stage. He has to keep their interest; he cannot simply tell them what 
he thinks about life, as though he were writing a philosophical essay. He has 
characters on that stage, and he needs to make the audience care about their 
actions, if he is to attract their attention and keep it through the rest of the 
play. In Thornton Wilder's Our Town, Wilder creates tension by hinting at 
his characters' ends:"There's Doc Gibbs comin' down Main Street now," the 
Stage Manager remarks, "comin' back from that baby case. And here's his 
wife comin' downstairs to get breakfast. Doc Gibbs died in 1930. . . . Mrs. 
Gibbs died first—long time ago in fact.... She's up in the cemetery there 
now." As he speaks, Mrs. Gibbs comes on stage and starts to fix breakfast, and 
the audience watches her. Normally, watching someone fix breakfast isn't all 
that interesting, but knowing that someone is going to die: That puts you in 
Ronald Hayman, How to Read a Play (New York: Grove Press, 1977), p. 14. 
262 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
the position of the immortals.You know something Mrs. Gibbs doesn't. And 
you're wondering: Is her death going to be part of the plot? When will it 
happen? 
Where is the point of greatest tension? Somewhere in the play, events will 
reach a point where the problems seem most intractable, or when emotion 
is at its highest peak.This is the play's "middle"; it may not be the exact middle of the performance, but it is the structural middle that sets us up for the 
play's climax and resolution. In A Streetcar Named Desire, the tensions 
between the four central characters—Stanley and his wife Stella, Stella's sister Blanche and Stanley's friend Mitch, who is courting her—reach their 
highest point in the first scene of Act III, when Stella discovers that Stanley 
has warned Mitch away from her sister. It is at this point that the characters 
are the most estranged from each other; here, they seem unlikely to ever 
come to an agreement. 
Where does the play's action reach its climax? At what point does the tension 
result in an action that changes the characters or their situation? Generally, 
the "middle" is not the same as the climax: A Streetcar Named Desire reaches 
its climax—its highest point—when Stanley assaults Blanche in the fourth 
scene of Act III. The assault is the playing out of the tension in that "middle" scene, in which Stanley (acting out of mixed hatred and lust) ruins 
Blanche's romance and alienates his wife; when he attacks Blanche near the 
play's end, he is making physical his hatred and lust, and potentially ruining 
his relationship with his wife forever. 
Identifying the "middle" and the climax is a tool to help you understand 
the playwright's use of tension and resolution; it isn't an exact science, and 
you shouldn't fret about finding the "right" scene. Simply look for the point 
at which the play's tensions become very clear, and then ask yourself: What 
action do these tensions produce? Sometimes, you may find that the "middle" and the climax happen back to back. In Our Town, you can make a good 
argument for the "middle" occurring at the end of Act II, when Emily and 
George both panic just before their wedding, insisting that they don't want 
to "grow old"—"Why can't I stay for a while just as I am?" Emily wails, 
feeling with keenness the passing of time. The "climax" then comes at the 
end of Act III, when Emily—dead and buried—goes back to relive her 
twelfth birthday and breaks down into weeping: "I can't go on," she sobs. "It 
goes so fast. We don't have time to look at one another." 
But you could also make a good argument that in this case the "middle" 
occurs when Emily decides to revisit her childhood, against the warnings 
of the other dead, and that the climax follows in the same scene. Don't 
get too obsessed with this: choose a "middle" and climax that makes sense 
to you. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 263 
Where is the resolution? What happens after the climax? What results does 
it bring; what happens to each character afterward? The last scene of A 
Streetcar Named Desire shows Blanche's madness, Stella's grief, and Stanley's 
complete lack of regret. Our Town ends without resolution for the characters: "They don't understand," Emily says, hopelessly, of both the living and 
the dead, and the Stage Manager reappears to close the action with the flat 
remark, "Eleven o'clock in Grover's Corners.—You get a good rest, too. 
Good night." You, the reader, are supposed to find the resolution of this play 
yourself. 
Which "act" of the drama does the play belong to? Is the structure Aristotelian, 
separated into acts that build toward an end? Or is it Brechtian, divided into 
episodes that lead you gradually toward the acceptance of an idea? 
What holds the play's action together? Is the play given coherence through its 
plot—a set of events leading toward a resolution? Or is it held together 
through the study of a character's mind? Do you keep reading because you 
want to find out what happens, or because you care about what happens to 
a particular character? Is the play united by an idea that the author is exploring? Does it try to elicit an emotion from you, or is it attempting to lead you 
toward a conclusion? Do the last speeches express an intellectual conclusion, or an overwhelming emotion? If you're unsure, pretend that someone 
has walked through the room where you're reading and asked, "What's the 
book about?" If you're reading The Importance of Being Earnest, you might 
answer, "It's about a lot of mix-ups in identity." Mistaken identity: Oscar 
Wilde is writing to make you laugh, but also to make you think about how 
people assign identity to each other. 
It's fine to answer the question, "What is this book about?" with "I have 
no clue." Sometimes that's the point of an "idea" play that explores meaninglessness. 
Write a two- or three-sentence explanation of the play's title. Books are inevitably 
retitled by publishers (T. S. Eliot's original title for the book-length poem 
The Waste Land was He Do the Policemen in Different Voices), but playwrights 
tend to get to keep their own titles; plays are generally performed before 
they are published, and the title of the play is part of the script. So you can 
assume that the play's title sums up, describes, or in some way adds to the 
play. What is the title's relationship to the play? Does it refer to characters, 
plot, ideas, emotion? Does it refer to a climactic event {Death of a Salesman), 
a place {The Cherry Orchard), a person {A Man for All Seasons)? What was the 
playwright implying through the choice of title? 
2 6 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
The Second Level of Inquiry: Logic-Stage Reading 
As you move into a more detailed criticism, reread the play. Try to come to 
a final decision about the play's coherence: Does it come from a connected 
plot, from the psychology of a particular character, or from the exploration 
of an idea? The playwright may use more than one kind of coherence (plot 
often involves character), but which do you think to be central? Did you 
answer the question, "What is it about?" with a person, an event, or an idea? 
Once you've answered this question, move on to one of the three options 
below. 
If the play is given unity by plot... List the events that lead up to the play's 
climax. Each event should lead into the next; can you find the connections 
between them? Ask, "Why does this event produce the next event?" Jot 
down a brief sentence describing each connection; this will give you a 
glimpse of the play's "bones." 
Now ask yourself: What genre does this resemble? Is it a romance, in 
which two characters are held apart by circumstance or misunderstanding 
until they manage to connect? Is it an adventure, progressing from one 
excitement to another? Is it purely comédie, centered around incongruous 
and bizarre happenings? Is it "tragic," telling the tale of the fall of a hero? Is 
it a mystery? The slow revelation of facts unknown to the main characters 
is an effective way to advance the plot. Peter Shaffer's Equus borrows absurdist techniques, but in form it is much like a mystery: Why does Alan Strang 
blind the horses at the stable where he works? 
Many plays are a mixture of genres, but if you're able to identify one that 
dominates, go on to ask: Why did the playwright choose this particular set 
of techniques to move the play along? Is there some match between the 
genre and the subject of the play? What techniques does he borrow from 
other genres? "Genre" is an infinitely flexible term, so don't worry too 
much about whether you're "getting it right"; your goal is to try to discover 
how the playwright moves the action along: through suspense, by revealing 
facts, by building an ominous sense of looming catastrophe? 
If the play is given unity by character . . . Ask, for each major character, the 
same basic questions you asked for the novel in Chapter Five: What does 
each character want or hope to accomplish? What blocks each character 
from getting what he or she wants: Her own failings or flaws? Another character? Circumstances? What strategy does a character follow in order to get 
what he or she wants? Is she successful? Does he suffer defeat? 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 265 
If the play is given unity by an idea . . . Can you state the idea? Read again 
any prologue or epilogue, read the last two pages in each act. See if you can 
formulate the idea into a sentence. What does each character stand for? In 
an "idea play" you need not analyze the characters as though they had real 
wants, needs, and plans; they "stand for" something else. What does each 
major event do to the characters? Compare their state at the beginning and 
end of the play; what change has there been? Does that change help to illustrate the playwright's idea? At the beginning of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern 
Are Dead, the two central characters are flipping coins and arguing about 
their tendency to come up heads every time. At the end, all the characters 
in both plays (Stoppard's, and Shakespeare's Hamlet, which has been running 
along in the background) die—except for Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, 
who disappear in a cloud of sentence fragments. What movement has there 
been? At the beginning of the play, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are 
assuming that there must be an explanation for the phenomenal run of 
heads; they are still operating under the "old" idea of order in the world. At 
the play's end, they have given up the idea of explanations. 
No matter what unifying factor the play uses, go on to answer the following questions. 
Do any of the characters stand in opposition to each other? Contrasts are a powerful rhetorical strategy, and particular powerful when they are visual. Are 
there oppositions of character in the play? Oppositions of class? Physical 
oppositions? In Goldsmith s She Stoops to Conquer Tony Lumpkin and his 
cousin's lover Hastings are at opposite ends of the social spectrum, as are 
Lumpkin's beloved Bet Bouncer and Hastings's love, the refined Miss 
Neville; they are physical opposites as well in every possible way. Of Shakespeare's aristocratic pair of ladies in A Midsummer Night's Dream, one is very 
tall and the other very short. In Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead, the 
two central characters present very little contrast; in fact, they call each 
other by the wrong names, which is part of Stoppard's point. 
If you can find contrasts in character, class, setting, physical type, speech, 
or some other element of the play, list the contrasting elements on two sides 
of your journal and write a very brief description of each. How does this 
strategy on the part of the playwright add to the play's coherence? 
How do the characters speak? Read the speeches of each character out loud, 
several times. Read several speeches from the same character in a row. Then 
read another set of speeches from another character. Do their speech patterns differ? 
2 66 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
If the characters are individuals, developed as unique people with their 
own backgrounds, wants, and needs, you should see a difference in speech. 
In Arthur Miller's Death of a Salesman, the sixtyish Willy Loman has one pattern of words ("The street is lined with cars.There's not a breath of fresh air 
in the neighborhood Remember those two beautiful elm trees out there? 
When I and Biff hung the swing between them?") and his desperate, thirtyish son Biff has another ("This farm I work on, it's spring there now, see? 
And they've got about fifteen new colts And it's cool there now, see?") 
In an "idea play" all speeches may sound the same. In T. S. Eliot's Murder 
in the Cathedral, a fable about the corrupting effects of power, Thomas 
Becket says: "You think me reckless, desperate and mad. / You argue by 
results, as this world does, /To settle if an act be good or bad." The Chorus, 
responding to him, chants, "We did not wish anything to happen. / We 
understood the private catastrophe, / The personal loss, the general misery, 
/ Living and partly living." The two voices are identical. 
This exercise may help you to clarify further the question of coherence: 
If the characters all sound the same, either the playwright has slipped up, or 
this is not a character-driven play. 
Is there any confusion of identity? In a novel, which often gives you the privilege of hearing the characters' thoughts, the characters know who they are. 
In drama, which presents a character to the gaze of an audience, there is 
much more room for deception: The gap between what (or who) a character appears to be, and what (or who) he ultimately proves to be, may be 
immensely wide. From Oedipus on, confusion over identity stands as a constant element in drama—which, by its very form, has to do with how an outside observer views characters. 
Mark any aspects of identity confusion in the play and ask: What purpose 
does this identity confusion serve? Identity is the most essential element of 
human existence; what statement about the human condition does this 
confusion make? In the case of Oedipus, identity is essential: Oedipus has 
tried to become someone else, but his attempts to change his identity are 
doomed to failure. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead demonstrates the 
opposite; identity is a matter of chance, a meeting of elements by coincidence to form a whole. A different meeting of elements, a different set of 
coincidences, would result in an entirely different identity. What purpose do 
the confusions of identity serve in A Midsummer Night's Dream, She Stoops to 
Conquer, The Importance of Being Earnest? 
Is there a climax, or is the play open ended? Does the playwright lead you 
into a satisfying resolution, with the plot wound up, the fate of the charac-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 6 J 
ters settled, an idea neatly stated? Or does the play illustrate a dilemma, 
some problem which intrinsically resists a solution? A playwright will generally allow the form of a play to reflect the possibility—or impossibility— 
of resolving the problem that he has presented. 
What is the play's theme? Be very careful when you reduce a play to a "thematic statement." After all, a playwright is writing a play, rather than a philosophical essay. If he could state his "theme" easily in prose, he'd write the 
essay instead. Thomas Merton, who was a poet and critic as well as a monk, 
once warned, "The material of literature and especially of drama is chiefly 
human acts—that is, free, moral acts. And, as a matter of fact, literature, 
drama, poetry, make certain statements about these acts that can be made in 
no other way. That is precisely why you will miss all the deepest meaning of 
Shakespeare, Dante, and the rest if you reduce their vital and creative statements about life and men to the dry, matter-of-fact terms of history, or 
ethics, or some other science. They belong to a different order."19 
However, even Merton adds, "Nevertheless, the great power of something like Hamlet, Coriolanus, or the Purgatorio or Donne's Holy Sonnets lies 
precisely in the fact that they are a kind of commentary on ethics and psychology and even metaphysics, even theology." When the playwright sat 
down to write, something vexed him, nagged at him, and demanded expression. What was it? Can you try to sum it up? This answer should not be the 
same as your answer to "What is this play about?" Hamlet is about a man of 
thirty who can't bring himself to accuse openly his uncle/stepfather of 
murder, but that is not its theme. 
There may be a number of good answers to this question; I have seen at 
least fifteen thoroughly respectable statements of the theme in Hamlet. Try 
to come up with one. State, in three or four sentences, what problem the 
playwright is tackling—and what answers he may have found. 
The Third Level of Inquiry: Rhetoric-Stage Reading 
In the "rhetoric stage" level of inquiry, you can ask many of the same questions of the play that you asked of the novels: How does the writer create 
sympathy between you and the characters? How does he reflect on the 
human condition? What is humanity's central problem in this play? (You 
can refer back to the chapter on "Reading the Novel" for a full list of these 
questions.) 
These are useful questions, but remember: A play is not a novel. A play is 
I9Thomas Merton, The Seven Storey Mountain (New York: Harcourt, 1998), p. 197. 
2 6 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
centered on visible action. So in your rhetoric-stage reading of the play, take 
a more active role. Begin to see the play not just vertically (creating a relationship between you and the characters) but horizontally, as something 
that has been presented and re-presented over time, each time creating a 
new set of relationships between the characters and an audience which 
occupies a different place—and perhaps, a different time. 
How would you direct and stage this play? Depending on your enthusiasm for 
the play, you can carry out this project for one scene, for one act, or for the 
whole play. Consider writing out answers to these questions: 
i. Who will play the main characters? Assign the main characters to 
actors: imaginary actors (describe them), real actors (draw on your knowledge ofTV, movies, or local theater), or even people you know (members of 
your family, friends; if Blanche Dubois reminds you of a disturbed second 
cousin, write in that cousin's name). Putting a face and body, mannerisms 
and a tone of voice to each character will immediately begin to shape the 
play in your mind. 
2. What sort of stage will you use? Will it be a raised platform, or on the 
same level with the audience? Will it be a "picture stage" (flat, behind curtains) or a stage that juts out into the auditorium? Will the audience be on 
two, three, or four sides ("theater in the round")? How large is your auditorium? Do you see this play as most effective in a small studio theater that 
seats fifty, a college auditorium that seats four hundred, a huge theater with 
balconies? Will you use a curtain or not? 
Will the actors ever breach the "fourth wall"—the barrier between audience and the stage? Will they be drawn into the audience—entering for one 
scene, perhaps, from the back of the theater and walking down the aisles? If 
so, what will you be intending to accomplish through this? And what relationship will the play create between itself and the audience? Will the 
onlookers be passive, active, part of the action, removed from it? 
3. What scenery and costumes will you use? Will you be recreating a 
historical period or setting your actors in the present day? Will the scenery 
be realistic or impressionistic—suggested, rather than elaborately developed? Will a certain color or shape dominate? If so, why? 
4. Mark the sound effects and visual effects. How will you carry them 
out? Are there crowd noises, ringing bells, traffic sounds, battle noises? How 
do you hear these? Reading is a silent activity, but a play demands sound. Will 
the sound be subdued in the background, overwhelming and surrounding 
the audience? How does each player on the stage react to the sound? 
If the play calls for visual effects that are out of the ordinary (such as 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 6 g 
transparent walls, the appearance of a ghost, a dream sequence), how will 
you light or stage this? How do the actors react to the appearance? Do they 
all see it, or does only one react while the others remain blind to it? If so, 
how do they react to the player who reacts? 
Remember that often sound and visual effects are found, not in stage 
directions, but in the dialogue of other characters. "It faded on the crowing 
of the cock," gasps one of Denmark's frightened soldiers, watching the ghost 
of Hamlet's late father fade away—something we would otherwise not have 
known. 
Will the play have music? What sort of music, and when? With your 
imagination and a CD collection, you have a vast resource for selecting 
background music. 
In most cases, if you're going to do this for an entire play, it's simplest to 
be able to write directly into the script. 
5. Can you write out stage directions? You can do this for one or two 
scenes—or for more. Mark each character's movements. What are they 
doing the entire time they're onstage? If the playwright has given you very 
specific directions, what has she left for you to add? If you stage a scene in 
two different ways, does the meaning of the scene change? 
All of these are beginning questions for direction; if you find yourself 
interested in the process, investigate one of the books on the reference list 
at the end of this section (see p. 302). 
6. Does your staging emphasize the play's theme? How will you use 
costume and setting, music and visual effects, movements, speech and 
silence, to bring out the theme which you've identified in the play? 
7. How have other directors interpreted this play? Watch several staged 
productions of the play, live or on film. This, obviously, will be limited to 
productions from the last fifty or sixty years, but even this should give you 
some idea of how these plays have been presented. Do they emphasize the 
same theme, or shift it from production to production? If you can, watch 
two different stagings fairly far apart in time. How are the productions different in costumes, in staging, in style of dialogue, in emphasis? (A list of 
plays available in video format follows on p. 303.) 
THE ANNOTATED DRAMA LIST 
The following list of editions certainly does not encompass all the good editions and readable translations of these works, but I have tried to indicate 
the translations I found the most readable and accurate, as well as those editions that combine affordability and helpful footnotes with decent-sized 
2 J 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
type. Many of these plays (including the Greek ones) are available in Dover 
Thrift editions for under $2.00. These cheap paperbacks are often a good 
way to read the English plays, but in the case of the Greek plays and those 
modern plays originally written in a foreign language, the Dover editions 
are usually outdated or anonymous translations, often stilted or inaccurate. 
A thorough list of dramatists worth reading might include John Dryden, 
John Webster, Ben Jonson, Edward Albee, Eugène Ionesco, David Mamet, 
Harold Pinter, Sam Shepard, John Guare, Margaret Edson, Marsha Norman, 
and more.This particular list was chosen because the plays on it are readable, 
and because they serve as good representatives of the development of drama 
from ancient Greece to the 1970s. What plays from the last thirty years will 
endure? Perhaps Marsha Norman's Pulitzer Prize—winning 'Night, Mother 
(although a Pulitzer isn't necessarily a guarantee of immortality). Perhaps 
plays of Harold Pinter or Sam Shepard, although it's impossible to say which 
ones. (A "greatest plays of the twentieth century" list will be much easier to 
compile twenty years from now.) 
AESCHYLUS 
Agamemnon 
(c. 458 B.C.) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, The Oresteian Trilogy, translated by Philip Vellacott, is both readable and affordable (New York: Penguin, 
1956); ISBN 0-14-044067-4; $9.95. A more recent translation by David R. 
Slavitt, Aeschylus i:The Oresteia (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1997), is more poetic, more immediate, and freer. Slavitt, a poet himself, reinterprets as often as he translates, but the result is highly enjoyable and 
more readable than the more standard Vellacott rendering (ISBN 0-8122-1627-
X; $14.95). 
Agamemnon is the first of a trilogy of plays known as The Oresteia; the other 
two plays, The Libation Bearers and The Eumenides, complete the story of 
Agamemnon's unfortunate family. A little background is necessary: The Trojan War has already started. The Trojan warrior Paris stole Helen, wife of the 
Greek king Menelaus, and carried her off to Troy;20
 Menelaus recruited his 
20The play also assumes that the audience knows how the Trojan War began: The goddess of 
discord, Eris, offered a golden apple to the fairest of the goddesses. Aphrodite, Hera, and Athena 
asked Zeus to decide which one was the most beautiful, but he (wisely) declined to judge 
and sent them to Paris instead. Paris chose Aphrodite, not for her beauty, but because she promised to reward him with the most beautiful woman in the world. With the competition over, 
Aphrodite helped Paris to magic Helen away from Menelaus and back to Troy. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 J 1 
brother Agamemnon (who happened to be married to Helen's sister 
Clytemnestra) to be commander in chief of an enormous Greek army. But 
the goddess Artemis, who loved Troy, blew great winds on the fleet to keep 
the Greeks from sailing. Agamemnon, knowing that the expedition was the 
will of Zeus, consulted the prophet Calchas, who told him that Artemis 
could only be appeased by the sacrifice of Agamemnon's daughter Iphigenia. Agamemnon performed the sacrifice against the wild objections of his 
wife. The wind died, the Greeks sailed for Troy, and the battle dragged on 
for ten years.Troy finally fell, and messengers set out to carry the good news 
back to Greece. 
As Agamemnon begins, the Watchman, Agamemnon's loyal servant, is 
standing on top of Agamemnon's palace, watching for news ofTroy's defeat. 
The Chorus, made up of men too old to fight, enters and fills in the story of 
Iphigenia's sacrifice (which the Chorus condemns as an act of "utter ruthlessness .. . impure, unholy"). Clytemnestra then arrives and hears that Troy 
is indeed fallen; Agamemnon is on his way home. (Menelaus, it appears, has 
been lost at sea.) She spreads sacred tapestries on the ground to welcome her 
husband, but when Agamemnon arrives (bringing with him the captive Trojan princess and prophetess Cassandra, Paris s sister), he refuses to walk over 
them. Only a god should walk over the tapestries, he tells her; he is simply a 
man. But Clytemnestra finally persuades him to come in. 
Cassandra, remaining behind, is overcome by the god Apollo and pours 
out a confused and bloody tale about slaughter and a bathtub—in the middle of which she reveals that Agamemnon carries a curse on him. His father, 
Atreus, punished Agamemnon's brother Thyestes for sleeping with Atreus s 
wife by roasting Thyestes' children and serving them to his brother. Cassandra sees the children's ghosts ("What do they carry in their hands? O 
piteous sight! / It is their own flesh—limb and rib and heart they hold, / 
Distinct and horrible, the food their father ate! / I tell you, for this crime 
revenge grows hot"). Sure enough, Clytemnestra stabs both Agamemnon 
(in his bath) and then Cassandra, claiming that Agamemnon deserved to die 
because he sacrificed her daughter. 
Agamemnon did sacrifice Iphigenia—but only to please Zeus, who 
wanted the Greeks to conquer Troy. So why did he deserve death? Because 
Zeus gave him two wrong choices (displease the king of the gods, or sacrifice his daughter) as punishment for Atreus s wrongdoing. Agamemnon was 
thus forced into an act that was simultaneously evil and good because of his 
father's sin; in its portrayal of the effect of a parent's evil on a child, Agamemnon keeps its immediacy even today. 
2 J 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
SOPHOCLES 
Oedipus the King 
(c. 450 B.C.) 
Best edition: As with Aeschylus, you can choose between a more literal and older 
translation, or a newer
 ureinterpretation" of the text. The older translation, The 
Oedipus Cycle (San Diego: Harvest Books, IQ77) was originally done by 
Robert Fitzgerald and Dudley Fitts in 1939 (ISBN 0-15-683838-9; $11.00). 
The newer, Oedipus the King (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988), was 
done by Stephen Berg and Diskin Clay in 1978 (ISBN 0-19-502325-0; 
$8.95). However, the Fitzgerald-Fitts translation has held up very well and is 
just as readable as the later translation; it also includes the other two plays in 
the cycle, Oedipus at Colonus and Antigone. 
When King Laius of Thebes was mysteriously murdered by a highwayman, 
Oedipus took over both his throne and his wife. But now the king must discover why Thebes is plagued with sickness, disaster, and blight. He sends his 
brother-in-law Creon to ask the oracle of Apollo at Delphi for answers; 
Creon comes back with the news that Thebes is harboring the criminal 
who killed King Laius. 
Oedipus promises to find this criminal, calling the prophet Teiresias to 
help him. But whenTeiresias accuses Oedipus himself of the crime, the king 
grows angry. Creon, he shouts, has put the prophet up to this to take the 
throne away from him. Creon denies any design on Oedipus s crown ("If I 
were king," he objects, "I would have to do things which I did not want. / 
So why should I seek the crown rather than the pleasant untroubled life I 
now lead?") But Oedipus exiles him anyway. 
At this rash act, Oedipus's wife Jocasta tries to reassure her husband. 
Prophecies don't always come true, she tells him; back when she was married to Laius, the oracle at Delphi predicted that their three-day-old baby 
would someday kill Laius, so Laius sent a man out to expose the baby on a 
hillside. "We knew then," she says, "that the son would never kill his father. / 
The terror of the prophecy would die there on the hills. / That is what the 
prophet said, my king. / Pay it no mind. God alone shows us the truth." 
Laius, she adds, was not killed by his son, but at a place where three roads 
meet. Oedipus is horrified. He remembers, years ago, blundering into a hostile party of travelers at a three-road junction, killing the oldest member of 
the party, and fleeing. He never knew the identity of his victim. But he 
orders his men to find the old servant who was supposed to expose Jocasta's 
baby son. When the servant is finally found and brought back to the palace, 
he admits that he gave the baby to a shepherd in Oedipus s home country; 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 7 J 
Oedipus realizes that he is both Jocasta's son and the murderer of King 
Laius, his natural father. The Chorus enters to describe the final scene, in 
which Jocasta hangs herself, and Oedipus blinds himself. Creon returns 
from exile, assumes the throne, and grants Oedipus s wish: that he must now 
in turn be exiled. Oedipus s fate comes about, despite valiant attempts to 
avoid it—and he has been brought low by the intellectual and moral 
integrity that impelled him to seek out the truth about his parentage. "The 
power that made you great," Creon concludes, "was your destruction." 
EURIPIDES 
Medea 
(c. 431 B.C.) 
Best edition: The Oxford World's Classics paperback, Euripides: Medea, 
Hippolytus, Electra, Helen (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998) is 
translated by James Morwood into readable, contemporary prose (ISBN 0-
1928-2442-2; s7.95); you can also buy Medea alone in the Dover Thrift paperback, which offers a clear but slightly dated translation by Rex Warner (New 
York: Dover Publications, 1993); ISBN 0-486-2754-85; $1.00. 
Medea opens with the Nurse on stage, ready to tell us Medea's back-story: 
When the hero Jason came to Medea's country to steal the Golden Fleece 
from her father, she helped him, and then ran away with him. Now they live 
in exile in Corinth—but Jason has deserted Medea and her two sons in 
order to marry the daughter of Creon, Corinth's king. "I'm afraid she's 
dreaming up some dreadful plan," the Nurse warns. "She is dangerous. . . . 
But here come the boys, back from their game. / They have no idea of their 
mother's troubles /Young minds are still untouched by grief." 
This ominous foreshadowing precedes bad news: King Creon arrives to 
banish Medea and her sons from his country. He tells Medea that she will die 
if she stays in Corinth even one more day; when she begs him, he grants her 
twenty-four more hours.Jason arrives to confirm Créons banishment; even 
though Medea pleads with him to remember his oaths, he rejects her. So 
Medea pretends to repent of her earlier bitterness and sends Jason's new wife 
a beautiful robe—imbued with poison, so that the princess dies horribly as 
soon as she puts it on. Creon, who tries to help her remove it, dies as well. 
Medea waits to hear of the deaths and then, reciting a chilling and contradictory list of reasons (her boys will be killed in revenge, and it is better 
that she should kill them than another; her boys will remain in Corinth 
while she is in exile, and they will miss her; she will make the children suffer "to hurt their father," although she will "suffer twice as much myself"), 
2 7 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
takes her two boys into her house and murders them. They scream for help, 
but the Chorus hesitates ("Shall we go in? / This is murder. / I'm sure we 
should help the boys.") and in the end remains outside. Jason arrives, furious and frightened, but Medea refuses to let him see the boys' bodies; she 
will bury them in secret so that her enemies cannot desecrate the graves. 
Medea's confused self-justification, her decision to kill the children whom 
she both loves and hates, Jason's desertion, and the Chorus that hesitates 
when it should act: All strike a weirdly contemporary note, in this story of 
a woman who is mistreated by men and kills her own children in response. 
ARISTOPHANES 
The Birds 
(c. 400 B.C.) 
Best edition :Two good editions exist. The Complete Plays of Aristophanes, 
edited by Moses Hadas (New York: Bantam Boohs, 1962) contains the R. H. 
Webb translation of "The Birds," which is readable and clear; it is affordable at 
$5.95 and has very, very small print (ISBN 0-5332-1343-1). The Peter Meineck translation Aristophanes I: Clouds, Wasps, Birds (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1998) is more contemporary and much easier on the eye, and 
provides explanatory footnotes; it is also more expensive (ISBN 0-87-220360-
3; $12.95). 
The surviving Greek comedies have a fairly standard structure: the prologue 
introduces a "happy idea," the Chorus discusses the idea, and a series of 
scenes shows how the "happy idea" would work out in real life. In The Birds, 
the "happy idea" is a civilization without unnecessary bureaucracy or false 
prophets. Two Athenian men—Peisthetaerus and Euelpides—leave Athens. 
"It isn't that we've anything against the city as such," Euelpides remarks, "it's 
as grand and happy a place as ever a man paid a fine in. But the Athenians 
yammer away in the lawcourts for the whole of their lives." Led by their pet 
crow and pet jackdaw, they find their way to the Kingdom of the Birds. The 
birds (played by a singing, dancing chorus of twenty-four men in feathered 
costumes) plan to peck them to death for human crimes against birds, but 
the Hoopoe suggests that the humans might be able to advise them on selfprotection: "It wasn't from their friends that cities learned to perfect their 
fortifications," the Hoopoe points out, "it was from their enemies." 
So the Athenians teach the birds how to gather their fragmented peoples 
together into one state. The result is Cloud-cuckoo-land, the great and 
happy city of the birds, which immediately begins to attract humans who 
want to "feather their nests" by creating bureaucracies: the Oracle Man 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 7 $ 
arrives, offering to sacrifice for them, the Inspector insists that he must be 
paid a fee to look over the new city, and the Statute-Seller offers to make 
laws for a fee. All are turned away. Finally, the birds manage to wall off 
Olympia and intercept the savor of all sacrifices; the gods, helpless in the 
face of so much bird resourcefulness, send Prometheus, Poseidon, and Heracles to offer Peisthetaerus the goddess Sovereignty ("the very beautiful girl 
who looks after Zeus's thunderbolts for him") in marriage, if only he will 
ask the birds to unwall their frontier. The birds agree, and the play closes 
with a wedding song and dance. Written in a time when Athens suffered 
from far too many lawmakers, clerks, and prophets, The Birds is a Utopian 
vision of a land which has none. 
ARISTOTLE 
Poetics 
(c. 330 B.C.) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, translated by Malcolm Heath 
(NewYork: Penguin Books, 1997) is careful but rather dry (ISBN 0-1404-4636-
2; $10.95). The St. Augustine Press edition, Aristotle on Poetics, translated 
by Seth Benardete (South Bend, Ind. : St. Augustine Press, 2002), is literal and 
clear, but heavy on the explanatory footnotes (ISBN 1-58-731026-0; $10.00). 
Aristotle's essay on the art of dramatic poetry is partially concerned with the 
technique of drama, but the center of his argument has to do with the purpose of poetry. Like all art, poetry must be mimetic—it must imitate life in a 
way that brings greater understanding to the listener. Imitation, Aristotle 
points out, is man's natural way of learning; he is imitative by nature from 
childhood, and good imitations bring pleasure. Tragedy is the imitation, or 
mimesis, of noble characters; comedy of inferior persons. Aristotle never 
returns to a further discussion of comedy, although part of the Poetics has 
been lost (and perhaps his prescriptions for comedy along with it). 
Tragedy is the mimesis of a particular kind of life: the hero of noble character suffers through a peripeteia, a sudden downturn in his fortunes. This 
reversal should lead him to anagnorisis ("recognition"), an understanding of 
why this change in fortunes has come about. Tragedy succeeds, Aristotle 
writes, when it evokes two emotions. Pity is the emotion that we feel when 
we see a catastrophe coming upon someone else. (The German idea of 
Schadenfreude, a pleasurable shudder when you hear that something bad has 
happened to someone else, is not unlike Aristotelian "pity," although Aristotle does not see pleasure as part of the experience.) Pity is a somewhat 
removed emotion; fear, on the other hand, comes when we recognize that 
2 J 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
catastrophe might equally well happen to us. A good tragedy is not only 
mimetic, offering the watcher (or reader) greater understanding, it must contain katharsis—a clear explanation to the audience as to why the hero encountered disaster. 
For Aristotle, tragedy is always a moral enterprise: Capable men, he writes 
"should not be shown changing from prosperity to disaster because that is 
not terrible or pitiful, but simply repulsive; and dissolute men should not be 
shown changing from bad fortune to good, because it doesn't engage even 
sympathy, let alone pity or terror." Pity and terror are best aroused when a 
good man is shown going from good fortune to bad; and the most pitiable 
things of all are acts done by blood relations to each other. 
Everyman 
(FOURTEENTH CENTURY) 
Best edition:Everyman and Medieval Miracle Plays, edited byA.C. Cawley (NewYork: Random House) contains a whole selection of other biblical plays 
from medieval times as well (ISBN 0-4608-7280-X; $6.95). A standard text of 
Everyman is also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 0-48-628726-2; 
$1.50), which includes versions of four mystery plays (including The Second 
Shepherd's Play, Abraham and Isaac, and Noah's Floodj. 
In Everyman, the first character onstage is God, who announces that he will 
require a "reckoning" of every man's person because his creatures are so 
spiritually blind. He summons Death and sends him to Everyman (which is 
to say, the whole human race). Everyman himself is going happily about his 
everyday life when Death arrives; in a panic, he begs Death for a reprieve, 
but only wins the right to look for a companion on his voyage. He tries Fellowship and Family, but neither will go with him; Fellowship points out, 
reasonably enough, that if he were to go with Everyman, he would never 
again come back; Kindred and Cousin plead that they have toe-cramp. He 
then tries Wealth and Riches, but this is no good either, since (as they 
explain) their "condition is man's soul to kill." Eventually Everyman is 
forced to turn to more ethereal companions—Discretion, Strength, Beauty, 
Knowledge, and Good Deeds (who is lying on the ground, so weakened by 
Everyman's sinful neglect that he cannot stand).They agree to accompany 
him, but as Everyman approaches the grave, all of his companions desert 
him—except for Good Deeds, who remains by him as he descends into the 
world below. "They all at the last do Everyman forsake," says the Doctor, the 
"learned theologian" who delivers the epilogue, "Save his Good Deeds 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 J J 
there doth he take." It's a somewhat unexpected ending: Why is Good Deeds 
the only character able to pass between the two worlds, when Knowledge 
and Discretion are left behind? 
Good Deeds is a fusion of the spiritual and the physical. Every listener, the 
Doctor warns, should "make his account whole and sound" so that he too 
can ascend to God. The financial, earth-bound metaphor is no mistake: To 
ignore the spiritual is to be blind, but to be "enlightened" is to see the spiritual and physical bound together into one whole. And this respect for the 
physical aspect of Hfe is seen in the form of the allegorical form of the play 
itself—with every spiritual reality represented by a character of flesh and blood. 
CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE 
Doctor Faustus 
(1588) 
Best edition: The Oxford World's Classic edition, Dr. Faustus and Other 
Plays, edited by Eric Rasmussen (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998); 
ISBN 0-19-283225-2; $10.95. Also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 
0-48-628208-2; $1.50). 
Faustus already has degrees in divinity, law, and medicine, but although he 
has all the knowledge that any good medieval man could wish for, he wants 
more. Browsing through a book of magic, he decides to make a deal with 
the devil. Good and evil angels appear at once, the good angel begging him 
to forsake knowledge ("O Faustus, lay that damned book aside"), the evil 
angel promising, "Be thou on Earth as Jove is in the sky, / Lord and commander of these elements." His mind is made up: Faustus raises up 
Mephistopheles, the devil's servant, agrees to his terms, and signs the pact 
with his blood (which congeals as he tries to write). 
With all the power in the world and twenty-four years of Hfe left, Faustus at first demands explanations for the great questions of the universe. But 
as time goes on, he begins to trifle his power away. He turns invisible to play 
tricks on the famous, flies around the world, and demands to have Helen of 
Troy brought back from the dead for his own. As death draws near, he begins 
to panic, but each time he tries to puU back from the deal, Mephistopheles 
offers him another temptation. As he descends into heU at the play's end, 
Faustus mourns, "See, see where Christ's blood streams in the firmament! 
One drop would save my soul... .Ah, rend not my heart for naming of my 
Christ;Yet wiU I caU on him—O spare me, Lucifer!" 
Despite his pleas, Faustus never does caU on God, although he has ample 
opportunity. Faustus is a Renaissance man—a seeker after great knowledge, 
278 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
set free from theological restrictions—yet in finding knowledge, he loses 
something. Marlowe is not recommending a simple return to medieval 
faith; Faustus cannot simply call on God. But a deep ambivalence about the 
new order comes through: If God is removed from the center of life and 
man is put in His place, what will the world be like? With no company but 
his own, man might find himself speaking the words of Mephistopheles, the 
devil's servant, who describes hell in the new order as a state of mind: 
Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscribed 
In one self place; for where we are is hell, 
And where hell is, there must we ever be. 
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 
Richard III 
(1592-93) 
Best edition: There are dozens of paperback Shakespeare editions, but the 
Oxford School Shakespeare series, edited by Roma Gill (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), is the best Shakespeare around: clear, with footnotes that 
explain unfamiliar vocabulary and references, illustrations, and notes on staging 
(ISBN 0-19-832049-3; 17.95). Also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 
0-48-628747-5; $1.50). 
Two branches of the royal family, theYorks and the Lancasters, are battling 
over England's throne. The Yorks murdered the Lancaster king, Henry VI, 
and his heir, Prince Edward; the York king Edward IV took the throne. But 
Richard, Edward IV's younger brother, wants to be king. He murders his 
other brother Clarence (a possible contender for the throne) and marries 
Anne (the wife of the murdered Prince Edward). When Edward IV dies, 
Richard ascends the throne, poisons his wife Anne, and sends his nephews 
Edward and Richard—Edward IV's rightful heirs—to the tower, where 
they are murdered. But Richard has been cursed by Queen Margaret, 
Henry VI's widow, and Nemesis, in the shape of yet another Lancastrian 
cousin named Henry, arrives and challenges him to battle. Haunted by the 
ghosts of all he has killed, Pdchard III goes into the Battle of Bosworth Field 
shaken; he is killed after losing his horse (and crying out the play's most 
quoted lines: "A horse! A horse! My kingdom for a horse!"). 
It's easy to be confused by the multiple Henrys, Richards, and Edwards 
casually mentioned by Shakespeare. Use the following chart to sort them 
out as you read. The common ancestry of Lancaster and York goes all the 
way back Edward III, who had five sons and thus produced way too many 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 J g 
royal personages; he was the common great-great-grandfather of both Henry 
VI and Richard III. The Lancasters are in the middle of the chart below, the 
Yorks on the right side; the war between them ("The War of the Roses") 
erupted after Henry IV, an illegitimate descendant of Edward III, claimed 
the throne; the Yorks could claim descent from a legitimate son of Edward's. 
Edward III 
Edward the Black 
Prince, oldest son 
(died before 
becoming king) 
Richard II 
(succeeded 
Edward III) 
LANCASTER 
John of Gaunt 
(illegitimate son) 
married Blanche 
of Lancaster 
Henry IV 
(threw Richard II 
off the throne 
and took over) 
Edmund 
(legitimate) 
Richard, 
Earl of Cambridge 
Richard, Duke of York 
married Cecily Neville 
Henry V married 
Owen Tudor— Catherine of York, 
married Catherine 
after Henry's death 
| Henry VI Edward IV Richard III Edmund Clarence 
Edmund Tudor married Margaret i—' 1 
Edward Richard 
Henry VII Prince Edward 
married Anne 
The Richard of Shakespeare's play is a mesmerizing figure: evil, compelling enough to convince Anne to marry him even though he is responsible for her husband's death, charming when necessary, hypocritical, with 
just enough conscience to be afraid of ghosts. He is marked by his willingness to change his speech, his plans, and even his body to each occasion: "I'll 
be at charges for a looking glass," he muses, when Anne first rejects him, 
"And entertain a score or two of tailers /To study fashions to adorn my 
body." Richard is an intelligent, practical, effective, Machiavellian ruler who 
uses any means to gain his own ends.Yet he can only exert so much control; 
Queen Margaret's curse haunts him. Richard is caught in a cycle of history 
in which "every murder is both crime and punishment for crime, until at 
the end Richard pays the final penalty."21 
21
 Wolfgang H. Clemen, "Tradition and Originality in Shakespeare's Richard III," Shakespeare 
Quarterly, vol. 5, no. 3 (Summer 1954): 247-57. 
2 8 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 
A Midsummer Night's Dream 
(1594-95) 
Best edition: The Oxford School Shakespeare edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994); ISBN 0-19-831973-4; $7.95). Also available in a Dover 
Thrift edition (ISBN 0-48-627067-X; $1.00). 
The plot of Shakespeare's most famous comedy centers around three groups 
of characters: four young lovers, a group of rustic players, and a tribe of 
fairies. We meet the lovers first. Hermia wants to marry Lysander, but her 
father wants her to marry another suitor, Demetrius. He appeals to the local 
nobility—Duke Theseus, who is himself getting ready to marry Hippolyta, 
the vanquished warrior queen. Theseus tells Hermia that she has to marry 
her fathers choice, so Hermia and Lysander make plans to run away. Hermia tells no one but her best friend Helena, who (since she is in love with 
Demetrius herself) immediately runs to Demetrius and tells him that his 
intended is running off with another man. 
Meanwhile, the rustics, led by Bottom the weaver, are meeting in the 
palace woods to practice the play that they will perform for Theseus on his 
wedding day. But the woods have fairies in them—Oberon the fairy king 
and Titania the fairy queen, who are in the middle of a marital tiff. To 
improve his wife's temper, Oberon sends his servant Puck to gather magic 
nectar which will cause Titania to love whomever she sees when she wakes 
up. In the middle of this, Demetrius storms into the woods, looking for 
Hermia; he is followed by Helena, weeping pathetically. Oberon feels sorry 
for Helena and tells Puck to put the nectar on Demetrius s eyes as soon as 
he falls asleep; unfortunately, Puck gets confused when Lysander and Hermia show up as well and puts the juice on Lysander's eyelids instead. When 
Lysander wakes, he sees Helena, still trailing after Demetrius, jumps up, and 
runs after her—leaving Hermia all alone. 
Oberon, who has decided to revenge himself on Titania, finds her bower 
and puts juice on her eyelids himself. The rustics blunder in and start their 
rehearsal; Puck, hovering mischievously in the wings, gives Bottom a donkey's head. When Titania wakes, she falls madly in love with the ass-headed 
weaver and takes him to her bower. Oberon finds this funny, but he is 
annoyed when he finds that Puck has anointed the wrong young man; now 
Lysander is chasing Helena, Helena is chasing Demetrius, Demetrius is chasing Hermia, and Hermia is sobbing pathetically after Lysander, who has forgotten all about her. Oberon tells Puck to blot the scene out with a fog and 
anoint everyone's eyes correctly; he himself goes to find Titania and takes 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 8 1 
the spell off her. The play ends with a triple wedding: Theseus and Hippolyta, Demetrius and Helena, and Hermia and Lysander (since Hermia's 
father, finding that his prospective son-in-law is now in love with another 
woman, agrees to let Hermia marry her choice).The rustics perform their 
play (very badly), and Oberon andTitania show up to bless the wedding. 
All is well, but only because of chance and fairy intervention, and even 
the wedding has its dark side; Hippolyta is only marrying Theseus because 
he conquered her, and Demetrius, at least, is still enchanted. At the play's 
end, Puck concludes: 
If we shadows have offended, 
Think but this, and all is mended, 
That you have but slumber'd here, 
While these visions did appear 
The happiness at the play's end is just as illusory as any shadow. 
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 
Hamlet 
(1600) 
Best edition: The Oxford School Shakespeare edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992); ISBN 0-19-831960-6; $7.95. Also available in a Dover 
Thrift edition (ISBN 0-48-627278-8; $1.00). 
Hamlet is a hero, but he isn't an active hero; unlike Oedipus, who goes to 
some pains to deliver Thebes from plague and to discover the truth of his 
birth, Hamlet broods, hesitates, and regrets that he must act: "The time is 
out of join. O cursed spite / That ever I was born to set it right!" His greatest desire is not simply to avoid action, but to avoid existence; in his most 
famous speech ("To be, or not to be, that is the question....") he wishes to 
"dissolve into a dew." 
Told, in a visit from his father's ghost, that his uncle Claudius (now married to his mother) killed him by pouring poison into his ear, Hamlet frets 
over what to do. He pretends madness to disarm his uncle (and as part of his 
act, brutally rejects Ophelia, the daughter of the lord chamberlain, Polonais). He then seizes on the chance visit of a group of players to stage a 
retelling of the murder in front of Claudius. Frightened, Claudius plots to 
get rid of Hamlet. Hamlet, on the other hand, is given a perfect opportunity 
to kill his uncle during prayer, but declines, making the excuse that the king 
would go straight to heaven were he killed in a state of grace. 
2 S 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Polonius, sure that the prince is insane, hides in the queen's rooms when 
her son goes in to speak with her. But Hamlet, hearing the old man behind 
the draperies and thinking him to be Claudius, finally acts—at the wrong 
time and place. He stabs Polonius through the curtains and then discovers 
his mistake. Conscience stricken, he agrees to leave Denmark and go to England; Claudius has arranged for him to be killed, but he escapes and returns 
to Denmark, sending ahead of him a letter announcing his intentions. 
Ophelia, her father dead, loses her wits and drowns herself. Her brother 
Laertes returns for her funeral; Claudius convinces him to challenge Hamlet to a duel with a poisoned sword, and, just to be on the safe side, puts 
poison in a cup as well. When Hamlet arrives they fight; Laertes wounds 
Hamlet, but Hamlet (not realizing the sword is poisoned) scuffles with him 
and wounds him with it as well. Meanwhile the queen drinks the poisoned 
drink; Laertes, dropping to his knees, confesses that he too is dying, and 
that Hamlet is doomed. Hamlet grabs the poisoned sword, kills Claudius, 
and dies himself—finally brought to action by a series of coincidences 
beyond his control. 
MOLIÈRE 
Tar tujje 
(1669) 
Best edition: Richard Wilbur's 1961 translation Tartuffe (San Diego: Harvest 
Books, 1991) is enjoyable to read but pricey; it renders the play into rhymed 
couplets (ISBN 0-15-688180-2; $10.00). The Signet Classic edition done by 
Robert Frame, Tartuffe and Other Plays (New York: Signet Books, 196 j) is 
an excellent translation and offers you six other plays as well, all for $6.95, but 
the print is small (ISBN 0-4515-2454-3). 
The pious hypocrite Tartuffe meets Orgon, a Parisian gentleman, in church, 
and by pretending piety convinces Orgon to take him into his home. 
Tartuffe is a great favorite of Orgon and his mother, but the rest of the 
household is not deceived. When Tartuffe gives the maid a handkerchief and 
orders her to cover her bosom because "such sights . . . evoke sinful 
thoughts," she remarks, "You are mighty susceptible to temptation. I could 
see you naked from top to toe, without being in the least tempted." And 
Orgon's brother-in-law Cléante warns him that he has been taken in: 
"There are hypocrites in religion," he says. "I know nothing more odious 
than the whited sepulchre of a pretended zealot, than those downright 
impostors .. . who, from motives of self-interest, make a trade of piety." 
Instead of listening, Orgon accuses Cléante of becoming a freethinker. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 283 
And worse is to come: he decides that his daughter Mariane, in love with 
Valère, should marry Tartuffe. ("I had promised you toValère," he sighs, "but 
beside his being inclined to gamble, as I am told, I also suspect him to be 
somewhat of a free-thinker; I never notice him coming to church.") Elmire, 
Orgon s wife, tries to convince Tartuffe to leave her daughter in peace, but 
instead the "holy man" tries to seduce her. ("Men of our stamp love discreetly," he assures her.) Her son Damis overhears Tartuffe s attempts and 
runs to Orgon with this tale—but Orgon disinherits him, accusing of slandering the "saint," and makes over his estate to Tartuffe instead. "All the 
world's goods have but few charms for me," remarks Tartuffe, while accepting the gift. 
So Elmire arranges for Orgon to hide under a table while she meets with 
Tartuffe and persuades him to renew his addresses; when Tartuffe does so, 
Orgon tries to throw him out. But since Tartuffe now owns the estate, the 
king's officers have to remove him by force. "I renounce all pious people," 
Orgon cries. "Henceforth I shall hold them in utter abhorrence and be 
worse to them than the very devil." "You exaggerate again!" Cléante 
reproves him. "You never preserve moderation in anything.You never keep 
within reason's bounds; and always rush from one extreme to another." But 
lack of balance is not Orgon's only flaw; the truth is that he has been able to 
exert complete control over his household through Tartuffe, using the holy 
man's manners as a mask for his own tyrannical desires. 
WILLIAM CONGREVE 
The Way of the World 
(1700) 
Best edition: The Norton paperback, second edition (NewYork: W.W.Norton, 
1995); ISBN 0-3939-0075-6; S12.00. Also available in a Dover Thrift edition 
(ISBN 0-48-626867-5; ti.50). 
The Way of the World is crammed with incident, even though it holds to the 
Aristotelian unity of time (taking place over the course of only one day). 
Intrigues and subplots boil from every act, but the skeleton of the plot is 
constructed around Mirabell, a gentleman who once pretended to be in 
love with Lady Wishfort but who is now in love with the heiress Mrs. Millamant; Lady Wishfort, who now hates Mirabell for pretending to love her; 
and Mrs. Millamant herself, who happens to be Lady Wishfort s niece (and 
ward). 
Mirabell may love Millamant now, but he used to keep Lady Wishfort s 
daughter as a mistress, before she married his best friend Fainall. Fainall 
284 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
(who also keeps a mistress) would like Millamant to marry Mirabell, since 
Lady Wishfort would then get angry, disinherit Millamant, and pass that 
money along to her natural daughter—Fainall s wife. But Millamant has not 
quite made up her mind to marry Mirabell, keeping him at a distance with 
witty remarks. "A man," Mirabell complains, "may as soon make a friend by 
his wit, or a fortune by his honesty, as win a woman with plain-dealing and 
sincerity" This lack of plain dealing continues. Mirabell has his servant pose 
as an imaginary rich uncle to convince Lady Wishfort of his worth as a 
suitor, but Lady Wishfort decides to court the "rich uncle" herself. When 
Lady Wishfort s nephew, Sir Wilfull Witwoud, arrives and begins to woo 
Millamant (very awkwardly), Millamant and Mirabell manage to reach an 
agreement of marriage. 
Meanwhile, Fainall has decided to take a more direct route to Lady Wishfort's money; he tells her that he will publicize her daughter's premarital 
affair with Mirabell unless she hands Millamant's inheritance over. But 
Mirabell foils this by blackmailing Fainall in turn, threatening to reveal his 
present mistress. Sir Wilfull Witwoud, seeing that Millamant loves Mirabell, 
tells Lady Wishfort that he has no wish for Millamant and would rather 
travel to foreign parts; Lady Wishfort sighs "I can hold out no longer. .. . I 
am ready to sink under the Fatigue" and agrees to the marriage. The characters (none of whom are admirable) are moral insofar as they are successful. Fainall turns out to be the villain at the end, less because he is evil than 
because he has been outwitted. The play is famous for its conversations; the 
characters talk, talk, and talk, using wit and words to conceal their true feelings far more often than they do to reveal them. 
OLIVER GOLDSMITH 
She Stoops to Conquer 
(i773) 
Best edition:The Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 0-48-626867-5; Si.50) happens 
to be the simplest and best way to read the play. 
Goldsmith's play, which involves two well-bred young men on their way to 
propose to two well-bred young women, has none of these well-bred people at its center; the true power of the play is Tony Lumpkin, an "awkward 
booby." Mr. Hastings and Mr. Marlow, two gentlemen of education and 
wealth, set out to visit the Hardcastle household. Marlow is supposed to 
court the daughter of the house, although the two have never met; their parents have arranged the meeting, unaware that Marlow is incapable of speak-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 283 
ing to a woman of his own class and can only be at ease with servants and 
barmaids. Hastings, Marlow s friend, has volunteered to come along because 
he is already in love with the household's resident niece, Miss Neville. The 
Hardcastles intend Miss Neville to marry Tony Lumpkin, Mrs. Hardcastle's 
son from her previous (low) marriage—which will keep Miss Neville's fortune in the family. But Tony is unwilling; he is in love with Bet Bouncer, a 
country girl with "cheeks as broad and red as a pulpit cushion." 
When Marlow and Hastings stop at the local alehouse to ask for directions to the Hardcastle estate, they accidentally insult Tony Lumpkin, who 
by way of revenge tells them that they will never reach the Hardcastle estate 
by nightfall—but that an inn is right around the corner. This "inn" is, however, the Hardcastle house itself. Hastings and Marlow storm into it, treating 
the bewildered Hardcastles like servants and innkeepers. When Hastings 
meets Miss Neville, he realizes his mistake—but the two decide to keep the 
joke going as cover for their own plans to elope. They tell Marlowe that 
Miss Hardcastle, by a great coincidence, is also visiting this "inn," and introduce the two. But Marlowe is too frightened of this aristocratic lady to look 
her in the face. So she dresses as a barmaid and sashays past him (this is the 
"stooping to conquer" of the title), awakening his interest. Eventually, all 
mistaken identities are righted. Miss Neville marries Hastings; Marlow proposes to Miss Hardcastle and then discovers that she is the daughter of the 
house; Tony renounces his claim to Miss Neville in favor of Bet Bouncer. 
Goldsmith's play casts into question the idea of "low"; who is lower, the 
honest Tony, or Marlow, who is ready to seduce a barmaid on first meeting? 
RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN 
The School for Scandal 
(1777) 
Best edition: The School for Scandal and Other Plays (New York: Penguin, 1988); ISBN 0-14-043240-X; $10.93. This edition also includes The 
Rivals and The Critic, Sheridan's other famous comedies. The play is also 
available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 0-48-626687-7; ti.50). 
Sir Peter Teazle is newly married to the daughter of a country squire; he has 
a lovely young ward, Maria; and he has acted as "a kind of guardian" to two 
young men who lost their father in childhood—the Surface brothers, 
Joseph and Charles. 
In public, Joseph appears to be "amiable . . . and universally well-spoken 
of," while Charles is "the most dissipated and extravagant young fellow in 
2 8 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
the kingdom, without friends or character." But appearances are deceiving. 
Charles is actually good natured, although spendthrift; and Joseph is actually 
"artful, selfish, and malicious." Charles is in love with Maria, but Joseph 
(who is favored by Sir Peter) wishes only for her fortune. 
Charles and Joseph's uncle, Sir Oliver Surface, arrives from Australia; he 
has been hearing contradictory reports about his nephews, so he poses as a 
moneylender ("Mr. Premium") and calls on Charles. Charles tries to borrow from him on the strength of his possible inheritance from Sir Oliver 
himself: "Though at the same time," Charles adds, "though at the same time 
the old fellow has been so liberal to me that I give you my word I should 
be very sorry to hear that anything had happened to him." "Not more than 
J should, I assure you," Sir Oliver remarks. Charles offers to sell the family 
portraits to raise money, and, in one of the play's most famous scenes, auctions them off to "Mr. Premium" and two other moneylenders. But he 
refuses to sell the portrait of Sir Oliver—and Sir Oliver himself, touched, 
decides to pay off his nephew's debts. 
Meanwhile, Joseph is in his own library, carrying on an affair with Sir 
Peter Teazle's young wife. While they are engaged in intimate conversation, 
Sir Peter arrives and Lady Teazle leaps behind a nearby screen. What follows 
is a "screen scene," a convention of manners plays, in which characters overhear private conversations from a hidden place. Lady Teazle overhears Sir 
Peter, telling Joseph his suspicions that Charles is having an affair with his 
wife, but Sir Peter then hears Charles arriving and leaps into a closet himself. When Charles comes in, he begins to describe how he once found 
Joseph and Lady Teazle together. To stop him, Joseph opens the closet door 
and reveals Sir Peter; Charles knocks the screen down and finds Lady Teazle, who begs her husband for forgiveness. Sir Peter collects his wife and 
marches out, giving Charles (now debt free) permission to marry Maria. All 
has been "righted" (despite Charles's shaky character), but only because 
"manners" were breached in the two pivotal scenes: Sir Oliver and Sir Peter 
both hear speeches not intended for them. 
HENRIK IBSEN 
A Doll's House 
(1879) 
Best edition: The translation by Frank McGuinness (New York: Faber & 
Faber, 1996) is contemporary and readable; it opened on Broadway in 1997 
(ISBN 0-37-119129-0; $12.00). The Signet Classic edition Ibsen: Four 
Major Plays;Volume I (New York: Signet, 1963), translated by RolfFjelde, 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 8 7 
is more formal but still readable; the collection, which also includes three other 
Ibsen plays, is cheaper but has very small print (ISBN 0-45-152406-3; $6.Q5). 
Nora Helmer has broken the law. Needing money for her husband's medical expenses, she forged her father's signature in order to borrow it from the 
bank. (It is illegal for women to borrow money without authorization from 
a husband or father.) Her friend Mrs. Linde is shocked to hear this, but 
Nora has been able to pay the loan back regularly through saving part of her 
dress allowance and doing copywork jobs late into the night. ("Oh, sometimes I was so tired, so tired. And yet it was splendid to work in that way and 
earn money. I almost felt as if I was a man.") 
But now Nora's husband, Torvald, has become a director at the bank 
where she took out the loan—and the officer who approved it, Mr. Krogstad, 
is about to lose his job. He asks Nora to intervene for him. When she 
refuses, he tells her that he knows her secret: Her father's signature was dated 
three days after her father's death. If he loses his job, he will reveal her crime. 
Nora tries to avert the crisis—but Torvald refuses to listen to her pleas for 
Krogstad. The man loses his job, and Torvald receives a letter from Krogstad 
describing Nora's crime. "You've been my pride and joy," Torvald bellows at 
Nora, "and now I find you're a hypocrite and a liar and worse, worse than 
that... a criminal!"Torvald is afraid that Krogstad will broadcast Nora's sins 
through polite society unless he's given his job back: "It'll have to be hushed 
up," Torvald decides. "We shall have to make it look as if nothing has 
changed between us. .. . I mean, you'll obviously have to stay on in the 
house, but you won't be allowed to have anything to do with the children." 
Then, in the midst of his diatribe, he receives another letter from Krogstad, 
who has decided to marry Mrs. Linde and no longer wishes to hold any 
threat over Nora's head. Relieved of the threat of public humiliation, Torvald immediately reverses himself: "Poor little Nora, I understand.... For a 
man there's something intensely reassuring and pleasurable about knowing 
that he's forgiven his wife. . . . It's as if she becomes somehow doubly his 
possession, as if he's allowed her to be reborn, so that in some way she 
becomes both his wife and his child." 
At this, Nora packs up to leave. "I've been your doll-wife," she tells him, 
"just as I was Daddy's doll-child when I was at home." It would take a miracle, she tells her husband, for their relationship to become a marriage; she 
walks out and leaves him. Nora loves her husband, as society demands, but 
this very love leads her into an act condemned by those same social laws. 
Caught in this paradox, she finds her home ruined and her husband's love 
for her revealed as, simply, an extension of his own self-respect. 
2 8 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
OSCAR WILDE 
The Importance of Being Earnest 
(1899) 
Best edition: The Avon paperback (New York: Avon Books, 1974); ISBN 0-
3800-1277-4; $4.50. Also available in a Dover Thrift edition (ISBN 0-48-
626378-5; ti.oo). 
In London, Jack Worthing calls himself Ernest; when he is at his country 
estate, where his eighteen-year-old ward Cecily lives, he calls himself Jack 
and attributes all his city doings to his (nonexistent) brother Ernest. Jack is 
in love with Gwendolen Fairfax, the cousin of his friend Algernon Moncrieff. He proposes to her in town, using the name Ernest, and she agrees, 
since it has always been her dream to marry a man named Ernest. Her aunt, 
Lady Bracknell, demands to know Jack's family background; when Jack 
reveals that he was discovered in a handbag in Victoria Station, Lady Bracknell refuses to consent to the match; Gwendolen promises to write to Jack 
at his country address. Algernon, overhearing (and knowing that Jack's ward 
Cecily, an extremely pretty girl, lives at this address along with her governess, Miss Prism), decides to visit. 
He arrives at the estate before Jack and introduces himself as Ernest, Jack's 
brother. Cecily falls in love with him at once and promises to marry him 
(since she has always wanted to marry someone named Ernest). Unfortunately, Jack has decided that his dual identity has gotten too complicated; he 
arrives in black and announces the death of his brother Ernest to the bewildered Cecily. Gwendolen then arrives in a fury, having heard that Cecily has 
become engaged to Mr. Ernest Worthing. To straighten things out, Jack and 
Algernon admit their real names; both girls threaten to break off their 
engagements unless Jack and Algernon are both rechristened Ernest immediately. Lady Bracknell, arriving for the christenings, recognizes Miss Prism 
as the nursemaid who, twenty-eight years before, accidentally left Lady 
Bracknell's baby nephew at Victoria Station in a handbag. Jack is this 
nephew, Algernon's older brother—and he was christened Ernest. "Gwendolen," he says solemnly, "it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly 
that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth."Wilde, who was 
convicted of homosexuality in the courts and sentenced to two years at hard 
labor, mocks conventions of heterosexual marriage. The dual identities of 
his male characters (Ernest-Jack, Algernon-Ernest) are the more remarkable 
since his female characters are undivided; all that frothy comedy stems from 
more serious uncertainties about the nature of identity. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 8 Ç 
ANTON CHEKHOV 
The Cherry Orchard 
(1904) 
Best edition: The Penguin Classics translation by Peter Carson, Anton 
Chekhov: Plays (NewYork: Penguin, 2002) is both contemporary and affordable (ISBN 0-1404-4733-4; $g.oo) and contains four other Chekhov plays as 
well. The translation in Chekhov: The Major Plays, by Jean-Claude van 
Itallie (NewYork:Applause Books, 1995), was originally done in 1974for the 
New York Shakespeare Festival; it is more American in idiom and easier to 
read, but may be difficult to find (ISBN 1-33-783162-9; $7.93). 
Lopakhin, once a peasant, is now a rich man. He is waiting at Madame 
Ranevsky's elaborate family estate for her return from Paris. The estate has 
been under the management of her adopted daughter Varya and her brother 
Gaev, but Madame Ranevsky s extravagances have run it into debt. When 
Madame Ranevsky arrives with her daughter Anya, Lopakhin tells her that 
the estate will have to be auctioned—unless she raises money by dividing 
the land and renting it to weekend vacationers. "Forgive me, you appear not 
to understand," she says. "If there is one truly remarkable thing in this entire 
region it is my cherry orchard." Unable to face the gradual dismantling of 
her aristocratic way of life, Madame Ranevsky ignores the debts; Varya, 
more realistic, frets over her unsettled relationship with Lopakhin. ("He's 
too busy with his .. . business," she tells Anya. "There's great talk about the 
impending wedding.... [B]ut there's nothing, it's just .. . a dream"). Anya, 
who once loved the cherry orchard "like a person," is courted by Peter 
Trofimov, a socialist who hates what the orchard represents. "Why do I care 
less about the cherry orchard than I used to?" Anya says to Peter, and he 
answers, "Your orchard is all of Russia. Your father's father, and his father, 
and his, were owners of serfs. They owned human lives. From every tree in 
your orchard there are people hanging, they peer at you through the 
branches, you can hear their voices moaning in the leaves." 
Finally the family decides that the money sent to them by an aged relative will suffice to buy the place back, and Gaev goes cheerfully off to the 
auction. But the estate sells for six times Gaev s money—to Lopakhin, who 
now owns the place where his father was a serf. "The dull and lowly 
Lopakhin will take his axe to the cherry orchard and send the trees 
whistling to the ground!" he shouts, drunkenly Although they weep, the 
family promptly makes new plans. Gaev finds a job at a bank, Madame 
Ranevsky plans on returning to Paris, Anya decides to go to university and 
2 g o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
promises her mother that she will soon support both of them. At the play's 
end, the sound of axes is heard offstage as the cherry orchard is chopped 
down. There are no villains or heroes in The Cherry Orchard, and Chekhov 
offers no answers. Instead he shows us the world of the aristocrats, now passing away, as simultaneously beautiful and oppressive, wistfully desirable and 
fatally flawed; the complexities are carefully painted, not resolved. 
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
Saint Joan 
(1924) 
Best edition: The Penguin paperback (New York: Penguin, 2001); ISBN 0-
1404-37QI-6; $10.00. 
Shaw's own preface lays out his twin preoccupations: to deal fairly with the 
medieval belief in the miraculous ("In the Middle Ages people believed that 
the earth was flat, for which they had at least the evidence of their senses: 
we believe it to be round ... because modern science has convinced us that 
nothing that is obvious is true"), and to write a tragedy with "no villains ... 
If Joan had not been burnt by normally innocent people in the energy of 
their righteousness her death at their hands would have no ... significance." 
The play continually returns to this question of perspective: Truth and falsehood depend on the position of the observer. 
As the play begins, Joan arrives at the fortress of the soldier Robert de 
Baudricourt to convince him to give her a horse and a company of soldiers 
so that she can help the Dauphin regain his throne (now held by Henry VI). 
Robert is skeptical, but his friends have already agreed to accompany Joan; 
"What is the good of commonsense?" they ask. "Nothing can save our side 
now but a miracle." So Robert sends Joan to the Dauphin, who eventually 
gives command of his army to "the Maid." Joan leads the army against the 
English, who are besieging Orleans; the wind miraculously changes direction, allowing her soldiers to sail across the river, and the English are defeated. 
The English then meet with the French bishop of Beauvais.The English 
chaplain insists that Joan is a witch, and the earl of Warwick is afraid that 
loyalty to Joan might distract the masses from loyalty to their own feudal 
lords. The bishop believes that Joan's nationalism is a threat to the church; 
"the Catholic Church knows only one realm, and that is the realm of 
Christ's kingdom." He is at first reluctant to cooperate with the English: 
"You great lords are too prone to treat the Church as a mere political convenience," he snaps. "I am no mere political bishop." But he finally agrees to 
help turn Joan over to Warwick and his soldiers, who burn her at the stake. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 g 1 
The tragedy of this ending is lightened, though, by the epilogue, in which 
Joan and her enemies appear to Charles in a dream. "The burning was 
purely political," Warwick tells her pleasantly. "There was no personal feeling against you, I assure you." "I bear you no malice, my lord," Joan says 
politely. A 1920s clergyman then enters the dream to announce that Joan 
has been made a saint; when they laugh at him for his "extraordinarily 
comic dress" he retorts stiffly, "You are all in fancy dress: I am properly 
dressed." This is Shaw's summation: Each character in the play thinks himself "properly dressed," doing what is right in his own eyes. And the play 
itself leaves the final judgment on Joan's life to the audience. 
T. S. ELIOT 
Murder in the Cathedral 
(1935) 
Best editiomThe Harvest Books paperback (San Diego: Harvest Books, 1963); 
ISBN 0-15-663277-2; $8.oo. 
Eliot's priest, Thomas Becket, shares the reservations of Shaw's bishop: He 
too worries that political ambition will distort his service to God. But while 
Saint Joan employs a slightly tongue-in-cheek theatrical realism (Shaw's 
medieval Frenchmen speak like twentieth-century gentlemen), Eliot's play 
is impressionistic, featuring symbolic characters (Tempters, Assassins, and a 
Chorus that speaks in unison) and written in verse ("Seven years and the 
summer is over," chants the Chorus, setting the scene, "Winter shall come 
bringing death from the sea"). 
The play's central character is the archbishop of Canterbury, the "turbulent priest"Thomas Becket, who has spoken against Henry II's extension of 
royal powers into areas that he believed should belong to the church. Afraid 
of the king's anger, Becket has fled to France. As the play begins, he is 
returning to England, in a scene reminiscent of Palm Sunday ("the people 
/ Lining the road and throwing down their capes").The people of Canterbury are ready to welcome him ("He . .. was always kind to his people"), 
but unresolved tensions between Becket and the king remain. Three priests 
worry about the dangers of Becket's return: He, Hke the king, is a proud and 
powerful personality, "Loathing power given by temporal devolution, / 
Wishing subjection to God alone." 
In another echo of Christ's story, Tempters come to Becket, promising 
him wealth, influence, and peace if he will only satisfy the king. "Power is 
present," one of the Tempters explains, "Holiness hereafter." Becket rejects 
each temptation: "Shall I, who keep the keys / Of heaven and hell, supreme 
2 g 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
alone in England, / . . . Descend to desire a punier power?" But Becket's 
final temptation leads to a severe psychological struggle, one with no resolution: He is tempted to become a martyr willingly, and so to have even 
more glory. No matter what decision he makes, Becket sees corruption in 
himself "Is there no way, in my soul's sickness, / Does not lead to damnation 
in pride?" 
At the play's end, the Knights sent by Henry chase Becket, murder him, 
and then step forward to address the audience directly, explaining in prose 
that they are "four plain Englishmen who put our country first." Becket 
may lose himself in anguished contemplation of his own sin, but these 
knights are convinced that they are acting rightly. Eliot, like Chekhov and 
Shaw, refuses to resolve his conflicts, but the struggle he presents is an internal one—taking place not primarily between Henry and Becket, but within 
the mind of Becket himself. 
THORNTON WILDER 
Our Town 
(1938) 
Best edition: The Perennial Classics paperback (New York: Harper, 1998); 
ISBN 0-0609-2984-7; $9.00. 
Our Town begins by drawing our attention to its unreality; the Stage Manager comes onto the scene and introduces us to the actors who play each 
character.This story of the small-town residents of Grover's Corners is meant 
to be a philosophical reflection, a set of illustrations revealing a truth about 
human existence. Emily Webb and George Gibbs meet as children, marry 
("Almost everybody in the world gets married," the Stage Manager remarks, 
as they prepare for the wedding), and have children; Emily dies and enters 
the community of the dead. The play's climax comes when Emily decides to 
relive her twelfth birthday. She sees her parents and brother (now dead), and 
tries to go through the day as she did when she was twelve, but she grows 
frustrated with the blindness of ordinary people: "Oh, Mama," she bursts out 
to her mother, "just look at me one minute as though you really saw me. 
Mama, fourteen years have gone by. I'm dead.You're a grandmother Wally's 
dead, too. . . . Don't you remember? But, just for a moment now we're all 
together. Mama, just for a moment we're happy. Let's look at one another." 
Mrs.Webb, unheeding, goes on cooking, and Emily breaks down. "It goes so 
fast," she sobs."We don't have time to look at one another Do any human 
beings ever realize life while they live it?—every, every minute?" "No," the 
Stage Manager answers. "The saints and poets, maybe—they do some." 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 g 3 
Our Town shows the details of those lives that go "so fast"; it aims to illustrate the particular value of each moment of ordinary time. In the end, the 
play is hopeful about the human condition. "We all know that something is 
eternal," the Stage Manager remarks. "And it ain't houses, and it ain't names, 
and it ain't earth, and it ain't even the stars [E]verybody knows in their 
bones that something is eternal, and that something has to do with human 
beings." Wilder is a humanist: We may have little control over our world, 
over our decisions, and over the passage of time, but what we do within that 
world is meaningful in some eternal sense. Our Town is a tragedy, but a tragedy 
that recognizes humanity's essential worth—not its essential insignificance. 
(Wilder is the only American to win Pulitzer Prizes for both drama and fiction, for the plays Our Town and The Skin of Our Teeth and the story The 
Bridge of San Luis Rey.) 
EUGENE O'NEILL 
Long Day's Journey Into Night 
(1940) 
Best edition:TheYale University Press paperback, second edition (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2002); ISBN 0-3000-9303-5; $12.95. 
O'Neill (1888-1953) wanted this play, written in 1940, to remain unpublished for twenty-five years after his death, but it was first produced in 1956. 
James Tyrone, his wife Mary, and their two sons—Jamie, in his mid-thirties, 
and Edmund, ten years younger—have just finished breakfast on an August 
morning. But amid the trivial family exchanges, tensions grow: James and 
Jamie quarrel, Jamie sneers at Edmund, Edmund coughs, and Mary begins 
to yearn for the morphine to which she is addicted. By lunchtime, when the 
doctor calls to tell Edmund that he is consumptive, Mary has taken her first 
shot of morphine and James has started to drink. In midafternoon, Marymakes an effort to reconnect:"James!" she cries."We've loved each other! ... 
Let's remember only that, and not try to understand what we cannot understand. ... [T]he things life has done to us we cannot excuse or explain." 
But James is unable to respond. Each member of the family, isolated and 
dreading this solitude, tries to form alliances with the other members, and 
these alliances continually shift and change, creating anger and bitterness.22 
Mary mourns over the death of the child born between Jamie and Edmund, 
blaming both James and Jamie: "If I hadn't left him with my mother to join 
22I owe this insight to Stephen A. Black/'O'Neill's Dramatic Process," American Literature, vol. 
59, no. 1 (March 1987): 58-70. 
2 9 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
you on the road," she accuses her husband, "because you wrote telling me 
you missed me and were so lonely, Jamie would never have been allowed, 
when he still had measles, to go in the baby's room I've always believed 
Jamie did it on purpose. He was jealous of the baby""Can't you let our baby 
rest in peace?" James asks wearily. But Mary can find peace only by retreating further into her drug addiction and pretending a return to her girlhood. 
"You go back," she muses, "until at least you are beyond [pain's] reach. Only 
the past when you were happy is real." 
Night finally falls. Edmund, who has left the house in anger, returns at 
midnight to find his father, drunk, sitting at the table. He drinks with his 
father, quoting Baudelaire: "If you would not feel the horrible burden of 
Time weighing on your shoulders and crushing you to earth, be drunken 
continually." Jamie enters, drunk as well; Mary descends from her room, 
high on morphine. Edmund tries once again to connect with his mother. 
But she is trapped in the past. "I remember," she says, slowly. "I fell in love 
with James Tyrone and was so happy for a time." And the play ends. 
O'Neill shows the slow building of tension partly through dialogue, but 
largely through the characters' faces and voices; he uses dialogue tags to 
reveal this hidden dimension of the drama (He gives her a quick apprehensive 
glance, reads one dialogue tag, but if his suspicions are aroused her tenderness 
makes him renounce them and he believes what he wants to believe for the moment. 
On the other hand, Jamie knows after one probing look at her that his suspicions are 
justified. His eyes fall to stare at the floor, his face sets in an expression of embittered, 
defensive cynicism). 
JEAN PAUL SARTRE 
No Exit 
(1944) 
Best edition: The Stuart Gilbert translation in No Exit and Three Other 
Plays (NewYork: Vintage Books, 198g); ISBN 0-6797-2516-4; $12.00. 
Garcin, newly dead, enters hell and finds himself in a French drawing room, 
with no bed (so that he cannot sleep), no mirrors (so that he cannot reflect 
on his own identity), no windows (so that he cannot connect with the outside world), and no toothbrush (no personal possessions)—just a weird 
bronze ornament on the mantelpiece, too heavy to lift, and a paper knife for 
cutting the pages of books (although no books are in the room) In Sartre's 
version of hell, humans are incapable of taking any action—and also barred 
from any oblivion, even the briefest. The lights never turn off, and the valet 
who shows him to his room never even blinks. "Ah," Garcin says, "it's life 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 Ç 5 
without a break.... One has to live with one's eyes open all the time." And 
there is no escape; outside the room are only passages, more rooms, more 
passages, and stairs. 
Two more characters enter the room: Inez, a lesbian whose lover killed 
both of them ("For six months I flamed away in her heart, till there was 
nothing but a cinder. One night she got up and turned on the gas while I 
was asleep"), and Estelle, a society woman who ran away with her lover, 
killed their baby, and then died of pneumonia. Estelle laments the lack of a 
mirror: "When I can't see myself I begin to wonder if I really and truly exist. 
I pat myself just to make sure, but it doesn't help much." "You're lucky," Inez 
answers, "I'm always conscious of myself—in my mind. Painfully conscious." Each character wants something from the others; Inez wants Estelle, 
Estelle wants Garcin to affirm her desirability to men, Garcin wants Inez to 
recognize him as brave and courageous. But in hell, each character has lost 
the capacity to act. Exasperated with each other, they manage to get the 
door open—but can't bring themselves to leave the room. "Hell is—other 
people," Garcin concludes, "we are together forever, and ever, and ever.... 
Well, well, let's get on with it " 
Those are the play's last words, but of course they cannot "get on with it." 
Sartre's existential philosophy found meaning only in what man is able to 
do; when action is impossible, man is in a meaningless hell. No Exit points 
out a contradiction in existentialism itself: Meaning only comes when man 
is able to act with some control to change his future. Yet this action must 
always involve other people—and whenever man is dependent on the 
actions of others to validate his own, he lacks control and is caught in a 
cycle that never ends. The only meaningful choice that remains is death. 
And when man cannot choose death, he is truly in hell. 
TENNESSEE WILLIAMS 
A Streetcar Named Desire 
(1947) 
Best edition: The New Directions paperback (New York: New Directions, 
ig8o); ISBN 0-81-120765-X; $9.95. 
Blanche Dubois, a southern lady, arrives at her sister's house with nothing 
but her suitcase; she has lost the family estate in Mississippi, Belle Reve 
("Beautiful Dream"), and has nothing left. Her sister, Stella, is married to the 
blue-collar Stanley Kowalski. Blanche finds Stanley common and "apelike"; Stanley finds Blanche snobbish, affected, and dishonest. The two battle 
for Stella's loyalty. Blanche's weapons are her gentility, the memories of their 
2 g 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
shared past, and guilt."I stayed and struggled!" she tells her sister. "You came 
to New Orleans and looked after yourself!" Stanley's hold over Stella is sexuality; "There are things that happen between a man and a woman in the 
dark—that sort of make everything else seem—unimportant," Stella tells 
Blanche. She becomes pregnant, and Stanley's hold over her is strengthened. 
In a fight over a poker game, Stanley wrecks the apartment's living room and 
hits Stella; Blanche carries her off to a friend's apartment, but Stella returns 
as soon as Stanley calls her. "The only way to live with such a man," Blanche 
snaps, "is to—go to bed with him! And that's your job—not mine!" 
Blanche is tentatively courted by Stanley's friend Mitch. But Stanley, 
snooping through Blanche's past, discovers that she is notorious for her 
drunken promiscuity. He tells the idealistic Mitch of Belle's reputation, and 
Mitch rejects her. When she realizes what Stanley has done, Blanche begins 
to scream at him—but Stella goes into labor and Stanley takes her to the 
hospital. Mitch arrives, driven to see Blanche one more time, and Blanche 
admits that she has lied about her past: "I don't tell the truth, I tell what 
ought to be the truth." When Mitch refuses to marry Blanche but tries to 
seduce her anyway, Blanche throws him out. Stanley, coming back to the 
apartment from the hospital, high with excitement, finds Blanche alone 
there and rapes her. She goes insane; in the play's last scene, a nurse and doctor arrive to take her away. She goes with them, puzzled but accepting, while 
Stella weeps in Stanley's arms, distraught and guilty, but not moving away 
from her husband's body. The play is realistic psychological drama: Stanley 
hates Blanche but also desires her; she loathes him but finds his sexuality 
compelling. It is also social commentary: There is no place for Blanche, the 
genteel southern lady, in this new urban world. 
ARTHUR MILLER 
Death of a Salesman 
(1949) 
Best editiomThe Penguin paperback (NewYork: Penguin Books, 1998); ISBN 
0-1404-8134-6; $9.00. 
Willy Loman, sixtyish salesman, lives in a tiny NewYork house, trapped and 
caged by the buildings all around him and by his own insufficiencies. He has 
just returned from a fruitless attempt to drive up to his sales territory 
"beyond Yonkers"—"I suddenly couldn't drive anymore," he tells his wife 
Linda. "The car kept going off onto the shoulder, y'know" He is losing his 
sales territory, reduced from his salaried position at the company to working on commission, suffering from confusion between past and present. 
Willy's two sons, Happy and Biff, in their thirties and unsuccessful, are both 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 Ç J 
home; their presence exaggerates Willy's confusion. As he speaks to them in 
the present, he imagines the past, and these scenes play out on stage. He sees 
himself encouraging the young Biff's athleticism, overlooking his tendency 
to cheat and his failing grades in math. 
When Biff and Happy realize that their father is borrowing money to pay 
his bills, they plan to ask Biff's former boss, Bill Oliver, to invest in a new 
sporting goods business. They tell Willy that they will meet him in the 
evening for dinner, after getting the money from Oliver. Willy, inspired, goes 
himself to ask his own boss for a salaried position: "Selling was the greatest 
career a man could want," he muses, while his employer waits impatiendy 
for him to be done. "In those days' there was personality in it, Howard.There 
was respect, and comradeship Today, it's all cut and dried, and there's no 
chance for bringing friendship to bear—or personality.... I put thirty-four 
years into this firm, Howard, and now I can't pay my insurance! You can't 
eat the orange and throw the peel away—a man is not a piece of fruit!" 
But Willy is "thrown away"—he is fired. Meanwhile Biff sees Bill Oliver 
but doesn't dare ask for money, suddenly realizing what a failure he was in 
his previous job for Oliver. When Willy arrives at the restaurant, the three 
quarrel over the past. The young Biff appears on stage. He has just failed his 
senior math class and won't be able to take up his college athletic scholarship. He searches out Willy to ask for help, but finds his father in a motel 
room with another woman. The young Biff storms out, giving up on college; the older Biff accuses his father of ruining his Hfe. 
They leave the restaurant separately. Back home, Willy realizes that his life 
insurance (twenty thousand dollars) would set Biff up in his new business. 
"That boy—" he cries out,"that boy is going to be magnificent!" He leaves 
the house and crashes the car, killing himself. In the epilogue, Linda weeps: 
"I can't understand it He only needed a little salary.""No man only needs 
a little salary," Charley replies. Miller himself called the play a tragedy—one 
about "the common man," who is "as apt a subject for tragedy in its highest 
sense as kings were," because the psychology of all men is the same. In this 
psychological tragedy, Miller adds, the "tragic feeling is evoked in us when 
we are in the presence of a character who is ready to lay down his Hfe, if 
need be, to secure ... his 'rightful' position in his society... .There are among 
us today, as there always have been, those who act against the scheme of 
things that degrades them."23
 Twentieth-century capitaHsm degrades WiUy: 
"The competition is maddening!" he complains at the play's beginning, but 
his battle against it is doomed to catastrophe. 
23
 Arthur Miller, "Tragedy and the Common Man," New York Times, February 27, 1949, section II, pp. 1,3. 
2 g 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
SAMUEL BECKETT 
Waiting for Godot 
(1952) 
Best edition:The Grove Press paperback (NewYork: Grove Press, iggy);ISBN 
0-80-213034-8; $11.00. 
In the first act of Waiting for Godot, two tramps—Vladimir and Estragon— 
arrive on stage and stand beside a tree, waiting for Godot to arrive. They 
chant back and forth, neither adding to the other's knowledge: 
ESTRAGON: What exactly did we ask him for? 
VLADIMIR: Were you not there? 
ESTRAGON: I can't have been listening. 
VLADIMIR: Oh .. . Nothing very definite. 
ESTRAGON: A kind of prayer. 
VLADIMIR: Precisely. 
ESTRAGON: A vague supplication. 
VLADIMIR: Exactly. 
ESTRAGON: And what did he reply? 
VLADIMIR: That he'd see. 
ESTRAGON: That he couldn't promise anything. 
VLADIMIR: That he'd have to think it over. 
No more information is ever provided. Two other travelers—Pozzo and his 
slave Lucky—arrive on stage, chat for a while, and then leave. A boy arrives 
and tells the two that Godot won't be coming, but will come the following 
day. They decide to go, but don't budge. ("Well, shall we go?" "Yes, let's go." 
They do not move. ) In the second act, the exact same events occur: Lucky 
and Pozzo arrive again, although they have changed roles, and don't 
remember meeting Vladimir and Estragon the previous day. Vladimir makes 
an effort to change the situation: "Let us not waste our time in idle discourse!" he suddenly exclaims. "Let us do something while we have the 
chance!" But they keep on waiting. The boy shows up again and says that 
Godot will not be coming, but doesn't remember delivering the identical 
message the day before. Vladimir and Estragon debate hanging themselves, 
but don't have a strong enough cord. "I can't go on like this," Estragon says. 
"That's what you think,"Vladimir retorts. They again decide to leave, again 
fail to leave, and the curtain falls. 
Godot never arrives (asked what Godot "means," Beckett once remarked, 
"If I knew, I would have said so in the play"). But waiting, not Godot, is at 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 2 Ç Ç 
the center of the play. Beckett is a symbolic writer, and the two tramps waiting for some vague and undefined end are symbols for the human experience: in Martin Esslin's words, "the act of waiting as an essential and 
characteristic aspect of the human condition."24
 Every human being waits 
out the period between birth and death, unable to perform any significant 
act, to understand the world, or even to communicate meaningfully with 
another human being. 
ROBERT BOLT 
A Man For All Seasons 
(i960) 
Best edition: The Vintage Books paperback (New York: Vintage Books, 1990); 
ISBN 0-67-972822-8; $9.00. The preface, by Bolt himself, is an essential part 
of the play and suggests Bolt's own preferences for sets, costumes, and so on. 
Thomas More is under pressure from Henry VIII to sanction his divorce 
from Catherine of Aragon, so that he may marry Anne Boleyn; but More 
refuses. Cardinal Wolsey wants More to agree with the king. "If you could 
just see facts flat on, without that horrible moral squint," he says,"you could 
have been a statesman." But Wolsey displeases the king; More succeeds him 
and comes under even greater pressure from Henry VIII, who wants More's 
public blessing because "you are honest. What's more to the purpose, you're 
known to be honest." When the king commands More to swear on oath 
that the marriage is legal, More refuses and is imprisoned. No one can find 
grounds for executing him, but Thomas Cromwell, Secretary to the Council, is determined to smooth the way for the king. He offers More's pupil 
Richard Rich the gift of a position as Collector of the Revenue, collects 
from him seemingly innocent "tidbits of information," and dangles the possibility of public recognition before the younger man. Rich is susceptible to 
this temptation. (Early in the play Rich complains that the only recognition 
he's ever had is "one half of a Good Morning delivered at fifty paces by the 
Duke of Norfolk. Doubtless he mistook me for someone else." "Be a 
teacher," More counsels him, advising him to avoid the quest to be well 
known. "You'd be a fine teacher." "And if I was, who would know it?" Rich 
objects."You, your pupils, your friends, God," More replies."Not a bad public, that.") Trapped by his increasing wealth and prominence, unable to give 
either up, Rich agrees to lie about More in public, accusing him of treasonous statements. More, condemned, turns to Cromwell: "What you have 
24Esslin, The Theatre of the Absurd, p. 29. 
3 o o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
hunted me for is not my actions, but the thoughts of my heart," he says. "It 
is a long road you have opened. For first men will disclaim their hearts and 
presently they will have no hearts. God help the people whose statesmen 
walk your road." 
"Thomas More," wrote Bolt in his own preface, "knew .. . what area of 
himself he could yield to the encroachments of his enemies, and what to the 
encroachments of those he loved At length he was asked to retreat from 
that final area where he located his self. And there this supple, humorous, 
unassuming and sophisticated person set like metal." More's identity is 
located in his integrity before God; the oath which Henry demanded of 
him would have identified his most private self with a lie. Like Saint Joan 
and Murder in the Cathedral, Bolt's play combines historical truth with nonrealistic elements (the Common Man, a choruslike figure who comments 
on the action and takes minor roles) in order to investigate a psychological 
problem: the location of the self. 
TOM STOPPARD 
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead 
(1967) 
Best edition:The Grove Press paperback (NewYork: Grove Press, 1967); ISBN 
0-80-213275-8; $12.00. 
Two minor characters from Hamlet, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, are trying to figure out why they have been summoned to Elsinore, but they keep 
getting interrupted—first by the Players, arriving to perform at Claudius's 
court, and then by Ophelia charging through, pursued by Hamlet. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are helpless to direct their own lives; they can't act, 
because they can't make up their minds about what to do next. "Set loose 
to find our own way," Guildenstern mourns. "We are entitled to some direction. .. . I would have thought." They can't even figure out which way the 
wind is blowing in order to find their own direction: 
GUIL: I'm trying to establish the direction of the wind... .Trace it to 
its source and it might give us a rough idea of the way we came in— 
which might give us a rough idea of south, for further reference. 
ROS: It's coming up through the floor. (He studies the floor.) That can't 
be south, can it? 
GUIL: That's not a direction. Lick your toe and wave it around a bit. 
Ros considers the distance of his foot. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J 0 1 
ROS: No, I think you'd have to lick it for me. 
Pause. 
GUIL: I'm prepared to let the whole matter drop. 
All of the actions of the play are determined by Hamlet, which (running 
offstage) turns into a theatrical version of Fate, providing an inevitable 
sequence of events, but no meaning to accompany them. Rosencrantz and 
Guildenstern try to get rid of Polonius's body, take a sea voyage with Hamlet to England, are attacked by pirates, and discover that Hamlet has ordered 
their deaths. To their surprise, they discover that all of the Players are 
(improbably) on board as well. "Pirates could happen to anyone," the chief 
Player says, comfortingly, but the two are inconsolable over the letter. When 
the Player adds, "Most things end in death," Guildenstern stabs him: "No 
one gets up after death!" he screams—but the Player, after dying spectacularly, hops up to take a bow. All the Players then kill each other, leaving 
Guildenstern and Rosencrantz among the bodies. "There must have been a 
moment at the beginning where we could have said—no," Guildenstern 
says. "But somehow we missed it." Both disappear from view as lights come 
up to show the final scene from Hamlet, with the last speech of Horatio 
slowly drowned out by music and darkness. There is no cause and effect in 
the play; the two occupy a world which they cannot understand; they have 
nothing to help them interpret the actions around them. Language is useless, their efforts to take action end in absurdity, and the form of the play 
itself reflects the impossibility of reaching true understanding.25 
PETER SHAFFER 
Equus 
(1974) 
Best edition: The Penguin paperback (New York: Penguin, 1974); ISBN 0-
1402-6070-6; $8.93. 
Equus, told as a Brechtian series of numbered scenes, follows an extended 
psychotherapy session between psychiatrist Martin Dysart and his seventeen-year-old patient Alan Strang, who has blinded six horses with steel 
spikes. Strang, isolated from his family and from his society, is a worshipper 
25
 Roger Ebert, who saw the play in its original theatrical run and later reviewed the film, 
provides several intriguing comments on the differences in form between the two in his 1991 
review of the film in the Chicago Sun-Times, available on Une at www.suntimes.com/ebert 
/ebert_reviews/1991/03/639806.html. 
3 0 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
of a great, strange, elemental god he calls "Equus." Equus is a force compounded from his love of horses, sexual desire, a warped sense of religion, 
isolation, disappointment, and (above all) his sense that something great, 
overwhelming, transcendent, and beyond his control occupies the universe. 
Alan s worship of Equus torments him, but it also serves to protect him 
from the banalities of a world filled with chattering consumerism: "Remington ladies' shavers!" customers shout at Alan, as he desperately tries to 
fulfill his duties as a shop attendant. "Robex tableware? Corydex? Volex? 
Pifco automatic toothbrushes?"The psychiatrist Dysart discovers this belief, 
but is reluctant to remove it: "He'll be delivered from madness," Dysart cries 
out at the play's end. "What then? .. . I'll give him the good Normal world 
where we're tethered .. . blinking our nights away in a non-stop drench of 
cathode-ray over our shrivelling heads!" He may "cure" Alan Strang, returning him to the twentieth-century world of materialism and irrelevance by 
taking away his delusions of the cruel, powerful, beautiful, mocking god 
Equus. But Dysart himself knows that some great inexplicable force lies 
hidden in all men "crying out, 'Account for Me!' " 
Shaffer argues for the irreducible complexity of human beings, their ultimate mystery. His play deals with the internal, not the external, landscape, 
and so he sets Equus on an abstract stage, where the actors sit on benches on 
the stage (and sometimes in the audience) while waiting to perform their 
scenes. The action is both internal and clearly symbolic, standing for some 
part of man which is in danger of being eliminated altogether by "normality." The "gods" have returned in Shaffer's play; but this time they dwell in 
the deep reaches of the mind, not on Olympus. 
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FOR RHETORIC-LEVEL READING 
Ball, William. Sense of Direction: Some Observations on the Art of Directing. Hollywood: Drama Publishers, 1984. A good guide to all the basics of directing scenes. 
Bloom, Michael. Thinking Like a Director. London: Faber & Faber, 2001. 
Begins with the first reading of the play and takes you right through 
rehearsals. 
Gillette, J. Michael. Theatrical Design and Production: An Introduction to Scene 
Design and Construction, Lighting, Sound, Costume, and Makeup, 4th ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill. This standard textbook covers all aspects of 
staging for beginners. 
Ingham, Rosemary. From Page to Stage: How Theatre Designers Make Connections Between Scripts and Images. Portsmouth, N.H.: Heinemann, 1998. A 
little more detail on designing sets and scenery. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D jO j 
STAGED PLAYS AVAILABLE IN VIDEO OR DVD FORMAT 
If you are searching for a particular play, you can consult the Internet Movie 
Database at www.imdb.com. Although the site does not sell or rent films, 
you can search an immense database for all available versions of a play and 
use that information to find the film at an online or bricks-and-mortar 
store. The movie equivalent of the ISBN (the unique code which identifies 
each published book) is the ASIN. Note that the versions below are not 
necessarily good versions. But they are a director's vision of how the play 
should be presented—and so worth comparing with your own vision. 
Agamemnon 
1991, directed by Peter Meineck and Graham Mitchell; available in video 
format from Films for the Humanities (films.com), ISBN 0-89113-024-1. 
Oedipus Rex 
1957, directed by Abram Polonsky and Tyrone Guthrie; in this version, the 
actors wear Greek masks. ASIN B00006674E. 
Medea 
1959, adapted by Robinson Jeffers, starring Judith Anderson; this is the 
black-and-white film made from the Broadway production. ASIN 
B00000K3UC. 
1970, directed by Pier Paolo Pasolini, starring Maria Callas in a nonsinging 
role. In Italian, but you can sometimes find it with subtitles. ASIN 
6301007360. 
Everyman 
Currently, the best taped performance available is one produced by a British 
university group; it costs $25.00, including postage, and can be ordered 
from Dr. J.-A. George, c/o Department of English, University of 
Dundee,Dundee,DDi 4HN, Scotland; e-mailj.a.George@dundee.ac.uk. 
Doctor Faustus 
1968, directed by Nevill Coghill, starring Richard Burton and Elizabeth 
Taylor. ASIN 6302806364. 
Richard III 
1956, directed by and starring Laurence Olivier; long considered one of 
Oliviers best performances. ASIN 6302969271. 
1995, directed by Richard Loncraine, starring Ian McKellen; set in the 
1930s. ASIN 6304046006. 
A Midsummer Night's Dream 
1936, directed by William Dieterle and Max Reinhardt, starringjames Cagney, 
Olivia De Havilland, and Mickey Rooney; includes Mendelssohn's music. 
ASIN 6302804655. 
1969, directed by Peter Hall, starring Ian Holm and Judy Dench; a Royal 
3 0 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Shakespeare Company production that also includes Ian Richardson, 
Diana Rigg, and Helen Mirren. ASIN B00004Z1KG. 
1996, directed by Adrian Noble; a video adaptation of a staged Royal Shakespeare Company production. ASIN 6305470456. 
1999, directed by Michael Hoffman, starring Michelle Pfeiffer and Kevin 
Kline; set in late nineteenth-century Italy. ASIN 6305622892. 
Hamlet 
1948, directed by and starring Laurence Olivier; significantly but thoughtfully cut, this film won four Oscars. ASIN 6303605486. 
1964, directed by Bill Colleran and John Gielgud, starring Richard Burton; 
a videotaped Broadway performance, no ASIN. 
1969, directed by Tony Richardson, starring Nicol Williamson and Judy 
Parfitt. ASIN 0800105877. 
1990, directed by Franco ZefErelli, starring Mel Gibson; heavily cut. ASIN 
B0000541VR. 
1996, directed by and starring Kenneth Branagh; Branagh set out to film the 
entire play, cutting nothing. ASIN 078062999X. 
2000, directed by Michael Almereyda, starring Ethan Hawke and Kyle 
MacLachlan; set in modern-day New York City. ASIN B00005QATW. 
She Stoops to Conquer 
1971, starring Ralph Richardson and Trevor Peacock; a British television 
production, no ASIN. 
A Doll's House 
1959, starring Julie Harris and Christopher Plummer; a stage performance, 
broadcast for television. ASIN B00004STCA. 
1973, directed by Patrick Garland, starring Claire Bloom and Anthony 
Hopkins. ASIN 0792846389. 
1992, directed by David Thacker, starring Juliet Stevenson and Trevor Eve; a 
televised version, no ASIN. 
The Importance of Being Earnest 
1952, directed by Anthony Asquith, starring Michael Redgrave. ASIN 
6300988848. 
1988, directed by Stuart Burge, starring Joan Plowright and Paul McGann. 
ASIN B000062XIK. 
2002, directed by Oliver Parker, starring Rupert Everett, Colin Firth, and 
Judy Dench. ASIN D00006JDVX. 
The Cherry Orchard 
1959, starring Helen Hayes and John Abbott; a televised version, no ASIN. 
1971, directed by Cedric Messina, starring Jenny Agutter, Peggy Ashcroft, 
and Edward Woodward; televised in the UK, no ASIN. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 0 5 
2002, directed by Michael Cacoyannis, starring Alan Bates and Charlotte 
Rampling. ASIN [not yet available]. 
Saint Joan 
1957, directed by Otto Preminger, starring Jean Seberg and John Gielgud. 
ASIN 6303118127. 
Murder in the Cathedral 
1952, directed by George Hoellering, starring John Groser (withT. S. Eliot 
as the Fourth Tempter!); a British production, no ASIN. 
Our Town 
1940, directed by Sam Wood, staring William Holden and Martha Scott; significantly different from the Wilder play, however. ASIN 6303562515. 
1977, directed by George Schaefer, starring Ned Beatty, Hal Holbrook, and 
Glynnis O'Connor; a televised version. ASIN 6300180328. 
1989, directed by Gregory Mosher, starring Spalding Gray and Penelope 
Ann Miller; a PBS-filmed version of a Lincoln Center performance. 
ASIN 6303443923. 
Long Day's Journey into Night 
1962, directed by Sidney Lumet, starring Katharine Hepburn and Ralph 
Richardson. ASIN 6302484499. 
1988, directed by Jonathan Miller, directed by Jack Lemmon and Kevin 
Spacey. ASIN 6302034922. 
1996, directed by David Wellington, starring Peter Donaldson and Martha 
Henry; the full title of this Canadian film is Eugene O'Neill's Long Day's 
Journey into Night, no ASIN. 
A Streetcar Named Desire 
1951, directed by Elia Kazan, starring Vivien Leigh and Marlon Brando. 
ASIN 6304039506. 
1984, directed by John Erman, starring Ann-Margret and Treat Williams. 
ASIN 6302362830. 
1995, directed by Glenn Jordan, starring Alec Baldwin and Jessica Lange. 
ASIN 6304052723. 
Death oja Salesman 
1966, directed by Alex Segal, starring George Segal, Gene Wilder, and Lee J. 
Cobb; a television version, abridged from the play. ASIN B0000639JD. 
1985, directed by Volker Schlondorff, starring Dustin Hoffman and Kate 
Reid. ASIN 630478578X. 
Waiting for Godot 
1988, directed by Samuel Beckett himself, starring Rich Cluchy and 
Lawrence Held; the full title of this television production is Beckett Directs 
Beckett: Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett, no ASIN. 
3 o 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
2001, directed by Michael Lindsay-Hogg, starring Barry McGovern and 
Alan Stanford; an Irish production, no ASIN. 
A Man For All Seasons 
1966, directed by Fred Zinnemann, starring Paul Scofield and Wendy Hiller. 
ASIN B0000048WH. 
1988, directed by and starring Charlton Heston, also starring John Gielgud 
and Vanessa Redgrave. ASIN 6301216601. 
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead 
1990, directed by Tom Stoppard himself, starring Tim Roth, Gary Oldman, 
and Richard Dreyfuss. ASIN 6303191398. 
Equus 
1977, directed by Sidney Lumet, starring Richard Burton and Peter Firth. 
ASIN 6301966449. 
y 
History Refracted: 
The Poets and Their Poems 
LLPOEMSAR E about God, love, or depression. 
Who would have thought my shriveled heart 
Could have recovered greenness? It was gone 
Quite underground; as flowers depart 
To see their mother-root, when they have blown, 
Where they together 
All the hard weather, 
Dead to the world, keep house unknown. 
These are thy wonders, Lord of power, 
Killing and quickening, bringing down to hell 
And up to heaven in an hour. 
Making a chiming of a passing-bell. 
We say amiss 
This or that is: 
Thy word is all, if we could spell.... 
And now in age I bud again, 
After so many deaths I live and write; 
I once more smell the dew and rain, 
And relish versing 
—From "The Flower," by George Herbert 
depression: an area lower than the surrounding surface 
love: that state of feeling arising from sympathy or natural ties 
God: what is invoked 
—Adapted from The Oxford English Dictionary 
"Poem" is an impossibly broad word. It embraces arrangements of words 
that may be sensibly direct, as in Robert Frost's "Birches": 
G^^ée^ 
3 o 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
When I see birches bend to left and right 
Across the lines of straighter darker trees, 
I like to think some boy's been swinging them. 
But swinging doesn't bend them down to stay 
As ice storms do 
obscurely allusive, as in John Donne's "Air and Angels": 
Twice or thrice had I loved thee, 
Before I knew thy face or name, 
So in a voice, so in a shapeless flame, 
Angels affect us oft, and worshipped be; 
Still when, to where thou wert, I came, 
Some lovely glorious nothing I did see. 
or just plain perplexing, as in Allen Ginsberg's "Supermarket in California": 
What peaches and what penumbras! Whole families shopping at night! 
Aisles full of husbands! Wives in the avocados, babies in the tomatoes!— 
and you, Garcia Lorca, what were you doing down by the watermelons? 
The poem can chronicle some aspect of the past, as history does; the 
poem can tell us a story about a character, copying the function of the 
novel. Like autobiography, the poem can reveal the poet's own developing 
sense of self; like drama, the poem can bounce dialogue back and forth 
between speakers, demanding that the onlooker take a part in imagining the 
scene. But poems are not history, or autobiography, or fiction. They are 
written in poetry. 
Novels, autobiographies, histories, and most plays are written in prose. 
Poetry and prose are words which define each other; as a literary label, 
"poetry" most commonly means "that which is not prose" (and vice versa). 
So how are the two different? Most poets—and critics—would probably 
answer, "I know poetry when I see it"—a useful cop-out that can also be 
applied to great art and pornography. As you read poetry, you too will 
develop an eye and ear for that mysterious, ethereal dividing line between 
poetry and prose. But as you begin the project of poetry reading, consider 
using this simple definition as an early guide: Poetry is like a periscope. It 
always involves a watcher (the reader), peering through the periscope at 
something being watched, the "thing" that the poem is about—a sensation, 
or mood, or problem, or person, or tree, bush, or river. But the poem's sub-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 0 Q 
ject does not imprint itself directly on the watcher's eye; it bounces from 
one mirror to another first, and each mirror becomes part of the image that 
eventually strikes the eye's lens. 
The two mirrors in this "periscope" are the poet and the language of the 
poem. In a poem, the poet never disappears; his mind, his emotions, and his 
experiences are part of the poem. The novelist or playwright will often try 
to stay out of sight, so that the reader can experience the story or play without continually remembering its author. But a poem is an expression of the 
poet's presence. Compare these two scenes, both set in eighteenth-century 
groves, by the novelist Jane Austen and her contemporary, the poet William 
Wordsworth. In Austen's Pride and Prejudice, Elizabeth Bennet has just 
turned down Mr. Darcy's arrogant proposal of marriage. The next morning 
she goes for a walk to clear her head. 
After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was 
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and look into 
the park.The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had made a great 
difference in the country, and every day was adding to the verdure of the 
early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught a 
glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park; he was 
moving that way; and fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced her name. She had turned away, but 
on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, 
she moved again toward the gate. He had by that time reached it also, and 
holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said with a look of haughty 
composure, "I have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of 
meeting you.Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?"—And then, 
with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight. 
This is prose; EHzabeth and Darcy meet in the grove, he gives her a letter and 
Jane Austen herself is nowhere to be seen. But William Wordsworth's "Lines 
Written in Early Spring" put the poet right in the middle of the grove: 
I heard a thousand blended notes, 
While in a grove I sat reclined, 
In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts 
Bring sad thoughts to the mind. 
To her fair works did Nature link 
The human soul that through me ran; 
3io SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
And much it grieved my heart to think 
What man has made of man. 
Through primrose tufts, in that green bower, 
The periwinkle trailed its wreaths; 
And 'tis my faith that every flower 
Enjoys the air it breathes. 
The birds around me hopped and played, 
Their thoughts I cannot measure:— 
But the least motion which they made 
It seemed a thrill of pleasure. 
The budding twigs spread out their fan, 
To catch the breezy air; 
And I must think, do all I can, 
That there was pleasure there. 
If this belief from heaven be sent, 
If such be Nature's holy plan, 
Have I not reason to lament 
What man has made of man? 
The reader (peering through the periscope) sees the twigs, the birds, and the 
primrose tufts—and Wordsworth himself, reclining right in the middle of 
the grove and lamenting what man has made of man. His sensations, his perceptions, and his conclusions are woven right through the fabric of the 
scene.We see the grove through his own eyes; and although we also see Elizabeth and Darcy through Jane Austen's eyes, we are not made aware of it, as 
we are in Wordsworth's poem. 
The presence of the poet is an essential part of the poem—even in those 
poems where the poet makes a conscious effort to express his own absence, 
as Mark Strand does in his 1980 poem "Keeping Things Whole": 
In a field 
I am the absence 
of field. 
This is 
always the case. 
Wherever I am 
I am what is missing. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J 1 1 
Mark Strand may be missing a strong sense of his own presence (he defines 
himself entirely by negations), but he is standing, large as life, right in the 
middle of this poem. 
Because of this presence, the poem always reminds you that the poet is 
not neutral toward the subject of her work. Rather, she takes one of three 
positions. She is "depressed," alienated from the world of the poem, struggling to find her place in it or pushing it away, uneasy and not at home; she 
is "in love," embracing the poem's subject, speaking out of sympathy and 
affection for it; or she is invoking something from outside herself, channeling some transcendent truth beyond her capacity to understand, something 
that exists independently from her own ease or discomfort in the world; an 
outside force to which she stands as witness. 
Let the light of late afternoon 
shine through chinks in the barn, moving 
up the bales as the sun moves down.... 
Let the fox go back to its sandy den. 
Let the wind die down. Let the shed 
go black inside. Let evening come.... 
Let it come, as it will, and don't 
be afraid. God does not leave us 
comfortless, so let evening come. 
—Jane Kenyon,"Let Evening Come" 
All poetry is about God, love, or depression. 
The second "mirror" of the telescope is language.The language of poetry 
is self-consciously formal—meaning that the form of each poem (its words, 
their arrangement and sequence) can't be separated from the poem's ideas. 
In prose, words and ideas have a slightly looser relationship. Almost any 
novel or autobiography can be made into a movie. A play can be turned into 
a musical or a one-person show; a history can be transformed into a special 
for the Learning Channel. In each case, the work keeps its essential identity 
even though its words are altered. 
But a poem is only a poem as long as it retains its original words.The sixhour movie version of Pride and Prejudice is still Jane Austen, but a paraphrase of "Keeping Things Whole" is no longer Mark Strand. The poet's 
language never becomes a transparent window through which meaning 
can be seen: In a poem, the language is the meaning. A poem cannot be 
written in any other way. Its form, its function, and its meaning are all one. 
3 1 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
And the more "poetic" a piece of prose is, the more it resists paraphrase; 
Italo Calvino's poetic novel If on a winter's night a traveler has never been 
dramatized, while Harriet Beecher Stowe's prosy masterpiece Uncle Tom's 
Cabin has been turned into a movie, a play, a musical, a minstrel show, and 
a comic book series. 
DEFINING THE INDEFINABLE 
When forced into corners and ordered to cough up definitions of poetry, 
poets almost always resort to metaphors. 
"Poetry is a way of taking life by the throat" (Robert Frost). 
"Poetry is like making a joke. If you get one word wrong at the end of a 
joke, you've lost the whole thing" (W. S. Merwin). 
"Poetry is above all a concentration of the power of language, which is 
the power of our ultimate relationship to everything in the universe" (Adrienne Rich). 
"Poetry is like ice skating: you can turn quickly. Prose is like wading. It 
also has a lot of good. You can see your toes, for example" (Robert Pinsky). 
"Poetry is like love—easy to recognize when it hits you, a joy to experience, and very hard to pin down flat in a satisfying definition" (Marie 
Ponsot). 
"A poem is like a radio that can broadcast continuously for thousands of 
years"(Allen Ginsberg). 
"Poetry is like shot-silk with many glancing colours, and every reader 
must find his own interpretation according to his ability and according to 
his sympathy with the poet" (Alfred, Lord Tennyson). 
None of these definitions say anything about rhyme, meter, stresses, or 
tropes. Although poetry makes use of all of these techniques (and more), 
poems are not characterized by any poetic technique in particular, since 
conventions of poetic language change from century to century. Ancient listeners knew that they were hearing poetry when they heard an epic simile, a 
dramatic comparison which implies a connection between two events. 
Here is Homer's Penelope, mourning her son's flight: 
She stayed a long time without a word, speechless, and her eyes 
filled with tears, the springing voice was held still within her. 
At long last she found words to speak to him and answer: 
"Herald, why is my child gone from me? There was no reason 
for him to board fast-running ships, which serve as horses 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3*3 
for men on the salt sea, and they cross the expanses of water. 
Must it be so that even his name shall be gone from men's minds?"1 
Fast-running horses were used in battle; Penelope is losing her son to the 
aftereffects of the Trojan war, just as she lost her husband to the war itself. 
The epic simile is a structural marker of ancient poetry. 
But by medieval times, the epic simile has been replaced by other structural markers: the division of each poetic line into two halves, with at least 
two words in each line alliterating, beginning with the same sound. Beowulf, 
we learn, ruled his land for fifty years in peace until a new threat began 
to dominate the dark, a dragon on the prowl 
from the steep vaults of a stone-roofed barrow 
where he guarded a hoard; there was a hidden passage 
unknown to men, but someone managed 
to enter by it and interfere 
with the heathen trove. He had handled and removed 
a gem-studded goblet; it gained him nothing
 2 
This too is poetry, but it uses different conventions and different structural 
markers. Medieval listeners (or readers) knew that they were in the presence 
of poetry as soon as they heard those alliterative syllables: gem, goblet, gained. 
(Seamus Heaney's translation, quoted above, preserves this alliteration.) But 
the ancient listeners might not have understood this to be poetry at all. 
If you rely on structural markers to identify poetry, you'll be hard pressed 
to understand why the Iliad and Allen Ginsberg's Howl are both labeled 
"poetry." My own "Poetry is like a periscope" metaphor (a somewhat unpoetic one, especially compared with Voltaire's "Poetry is the music of the 
soul") is meant to help you begin to understand poetry apart from obvious 
structural markers such as end rhymes or stanzas, which change from generation to generation. The Iliad and Howl are both self-conscious about language, although in wildly dissimilar fashion; Allen Ginsberg and Homer are 
both present in their works—although in completely different ways. The 
very brief history of poetic practice that follows isn't designed to make you 
into a critic (or a poet). Rather, it assumes a basic grasp of the ancientmedieval-Renaissance-modern-postmodern progression of thought outHned 
1
 The Odyssey of Homer, trans. Richmond Lattimore (New York: Harper Perennial, 1967), book 
I, lines 704-10. 
2
Beowulf, trans. Seamus Heaney (NewYork: W. W. Norton, 2001), lines 2,212-18, p. 151. 
3 i 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
in the previous chapters; against that background, it aims to lay out the most 
common features of self-conscious, poetic language, and to introduce you 
briefly to the changing ways in which poets have thought of their own job. 
A SEVEN-MINUTE HISTORY OF POETS AND THEIR LANGUAGE 
Poets Poetic language 
The Age of Epics 
The earliest Western poetry is that 
of the Greeks, and the earliest Greek 
poetry is epic poetry—sprawling oral 
tales of heroes and battles, finally 
written down by Homer around 
8oo B.C. In the Iliad, the warrior 
Achilles falls out with his commander, Agamemnon, and manages 
to turn Zeus against his own army; 
in the Odyssey, Odysseus tries to 
get home after the Trojan War has 
ended. Incident-filled, plot-driven, 
centered around the failings and 
strengths of men and women: These 
epics seem much more like novels 
than poems. Why, then, are they 
considered the first great poems, 
rather than the first great tales? And 
where is the "personal presence" of 
the poet in these stories of bloodshed and sea adventure? 
Poetry, for the Greeks, was a 
term that covered a much broader 
territory than it does today. 
"Poetry," wrote Aristotle, "is more 
philosophical and more worthwhile than history, for poetry 
speaks in general terms, while history concerns itself with detail." In 
other words, poetry was language 
that sought to demonstrate univerRage—Goddess, sing the rage of Peleus's 
son Achilles, 
murderous, doomed, that cost the Achaeans 
countless losses, 
hurling down to the House of Death so 
many sturdy souls, 
great fighters' souls, but made their bodies 
carrion, 
feasts for the dogs and birds,... 
Begin, Muse, when the two first broke and 
clashed, 
Agamemnon lord of men and brilliant 
Achilles. 
—Homer, The Iliad, translated by Robert 
Fagles (NewYork: Penguin, 1990), book 
I, Unes 1-7. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3^5 
Poets Poetic language 
sal truths; poetry described reality: 
Mimesis, Aristotle's term for the 
poetic process, is the "imitation" or 
depiction of real life in a way that 
brings understanding to the listener. The poet was not at the margins of society, as he tends to be 
today. Rather, he was a combination historian, librarian, and 
philosopher—rather like the "public intellectual" of the twentieth 
century, crossed with an archive. 
This archive function was particularly important in the earliest days 
of Greek civilization, when all 
poetry and history were oral: memorized and passed down from poet 
to poet, repeated around the fire 
weekly, resung at each telling in 
slightly different words. The poet 
was a reshaper of tales. He took the 
details of history that had been 
passed down to him and "recreated" or "made" it for his listeners, 
putting it together with other facts 
into a coherent whole, using his 
own style of language and description. The Iliad begins with a fact, 
probably an actual historical event: 
A warrior kidnapped the daughter 
of a priest and refused to give her 
back when her father arrived with 
the required ransom. Homer takes 
this fact and weaves it into a story, 
so that it becomes the pivotal conflict in a tale about a clash of wills 
between two strong and proud 
men, neither of whom will back 
down and risk public humiliation. 
Then all the soldiers murmured their assent: 
"Behave well to the priest. And take the 
ransom!" 
But Agamemnon would not. It went against 
his desire, 
and brutally he ordered the man away: 
"Let me not find you here by the long ships 
loitering this time or returning later, old 
man; if I do, 
the staff and ribbons of the god will fail 
you. 
Give up the girl? I swear she will grow old 
at home in Argos, far from her own country, 
working my loom and visiting my bed." 
—Homer, The Iliad, translated by Robert 
Fitzgerald (New York: Anchor Books, 
1989), book I, lines 27-37 
3 i 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
Homer, like the ideal poet Aristotle 
describes in his Poetics, is a "maker," 
a creator; he creates not just a story, 
but an entire universal system of 
cause and effect. 
So where is the poet in the Iliad 
and the Odyssey? He is speaking; 
remember that these epics were 
oral for centuries, so that the poet 
was always before the eyes of his 
audience. He wasn't hidden behind 
paper. They could see and hear 
him; they knew that he was the 
maker of the poem, constructing a 
whole theory of human existence 
around the "bare facts" of history. 
The "structural markers" of Greek epic 
poetry come from the demands of oral 
composition. The poet did not write 
his work down and read it; he composed as he spoke, weaving the details 
of his story together into a fresh poem 
each time he performed. But the basic 
series of events remained the same. In 
order to keep his story in order, the 
poet made use of standard, formulaic 
"plot skeletons,"stringing his details 
into an accepted and familiar sequence. 
These sequences included: the hero, far 
from home, struggling to return (a 
structure used not only in the Odyssey 
but also in parts of the older Babylonian epic Gilgamesh)', the withdrawal of a 
hero from a conflict, a resulting devastation, and the hero's return; the death 
of a much-loved friend, followed by a 
search for some way of gaining immortality and defeating death. 
Other memory aids shape the epics 
as well: The poet often began with an 
oral "table of contents," a prologue that 
outlined what he was about to do 
(something which served as a memory 
aid for the audience as well as for himself), and halted occasionally to recap 
the action, to remind himself (and the 
audience) of where he had been before 
he proceeded on. 
Tell me, Muse, of the man of many ways, 
who was driven 
far journeys, after he had sacked Troy's 
sacred citadel. 
Many were they whose cities he saw, whose 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J J 7 
Poets Poetic language 
minds he learned of, 
many the pains he suffered in his spirit on 
the wide sea, 
struggling for his own life and the homecoming of his companions. 
Even so he could not save his companions, 
hard though 
he strove to; they were destroyed by their 
own wild recklessness, 
fools, who devoured the oxen of Helios, the 
Sun God, 
and he took away the day of their homecoming. 
—opening Unes of the Odyssey, translated 
by Lattimore, book I, lines 1-9 
Long speeches, complicated descriptions, and flashbacks were often introduced and concluded with the same 
words; this "ring composition" gave the 
poet a verbal marker for getting back 
into the action. And scenes that occur 
often (feasts, battles, insults, contests of 
arms) were told with the same repetitive structure; if a poet didn't know the 
details of one particular battle, it made 
little difference, since all of his "battle 
scenes" could follow the same pattern. 
The meal being now prepared and all work 
done, 
they feasted royally and put away 
desire for meat and drink 
—The Iliad, translated by Fitzgerald, book 
II, lines 505-7 
When all was done 
and the roast meat apportioned into platters, loaves of 
bread were passed around 
Then each man's hand went out upon the 
meal, 
when they had put their hunger and thirst 
away.... 
—The Iliad, translated by Fitzgerald, book 
IX, lines 260-62,268-69 
[D]ealt loaves with baskets 
on the great board. 
31 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
Then all their hands went out upon the 
supper. 
When thirst and appetite were turned 
away ... 
—The Iliad, translated by Fitzgerald, book 
XXIV, Unes 750-53 
Lest this repetition grow wearisome, 
poets varied it with extended comparisons, or epic similes. In one battle 
scene, a commander might fight like a 
"hill-bred lion, ravenous for meat"; 
another commander in another battle 
will tread "catlike, compact behind his 
shield," and yet another will turn on his 
enemies like a "boar on wild dogs." 
The memory devices of epic poetry 
were supplemented by formulas that 
helped the poet work out the meter of 
each line correctly. Greek meter was 
based on the length of vowels, and the 
poet who needed a particular length of 
vowel to complete his sentence could 
drop a "formula phrase"—one 
designed to fit his meter—into the 
poem whenever needed. These formulas might be two words ("well-built 
hut," "well-found ships," "wine-dark 
sea"), an entire phrase ("Thetis of the 
silvery feet"), or two to three sentences 
in length. The "flowing-haired Achaians" are sometimes "battle-hardened" 
and sometimes just plain "brave," 
depending on how many syllables the 
rest of the line needs. 
The First Lyrics 
Epics were the earliest Greek
 Gree k lY
Tic PoetrY
 wa s
 divided into 
poems, but lyric poetry (all poetry
 m o cate g°" e s : chora l
 P°etry, per-
, j j formed by a chorus, and "monodic" 
that was nonnarrative and nondra- • , , , 1 
poetry, recited by the poet or by a 
matic) reached its peak three cen- * • J i • * /-a. i a. 
'
 r trained soloist. Choral poems, the most 
turies after Homer. Like epic closel y rdate d t o religiou s ritual> len t 
poetry, lyric poetry was written to their names to modern English (a paean 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 1 9 
Poets Poetic language 
be performed; lyric meant "accompanied by the lyre." 
And like the epic poet, the lyric 
poet was seen by his audience. This 
poetry is still primarily oral, not 
written (as a matter of fact, all of 
the Greek lyric poetry that survives 
is in bits and fragments).The lyric 
poet, performing his works on 
stage, was often taking part in a 
religious ritual. In this he was acting not as a historian or archivist, 
but as a spokesman for the gods— 
a votary, expressing his devotion. 
These lyric poems didn't have 
the same sweep as the epic poems, 
but their goal was at once smaller 
and more innovative; they painted 
scenes of private emotion, vignettes 
of personal experience. The individual voices of the poets shone 
through, in the verse itself, for the 
first time. (And eventually, Greek 
lyric poetry became the model for 
the seventeenth-century explosion 
of English "lyric poetry," which 
borrowed both its techniques and 
its technical terms.) 
Greek lyric poetry started to lose 
steam with the invention of writing. Written prose began to gain on 
spoken poetry as the language of 
argumentation, or "rational discourse." At the same time, the 
Greeks were building larger and 
more elaborate amphitheaters for 
was a song of worship to Apollo; a 
humnos a general worship song; an 
enkomion a praise song, a threnos a dirge; 
from these we get the English words 
paen, hymn, encomium, and threnody).The 
Greek elegy was a solo poem with a 
particular type of meter; the iambos, 
from which we derive the English 
meter iambic, was an invective against 
an enemy. 
Then shall I, striving for riches, thrust aside 
all the established worship of the Blessed 
Ones into desolation 
while I hold a great grant elsewhere? 
—Pindar, "Paen for the People of Keos"3 
Like the very gods in my sight is he who 
sits where he can look in your eyes, who 
listens 
close to you, to hear the soft voice, its 
sweetness 
murmur in love and 
laughter, all for him ... 
—Sappho, "Invocation to Aphrodite," a 
monodic poem4 
3Quoted from Greek Lyrics, trans. Richmond Lattimore, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, i960). 
4
Ibid. 
3 2 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
the spoken word, which led to an 
increased emphasis on drama (with 
its spectacle and costume) rather 
than recited poetry. The lyric poet, 
already shoved closer to the edges 
of Greek culture, suffered further 
from Plato's pronouncement in the 
Republic that "all poetical imitations 
are ruinous to the understanding of 
the hearers," and that lyric poetry, 
by inflaming the emotions, drove 
out "law and the reasons of 
mankind." Pressed in on by prose, 
drama, and Plato, the lyric poet 
folded meekly and devoted his time 
to epigrams: the succinct, proselike 
statement of a truth. 
Epigrams, which first appeared as 
inscriptions on tombs, were brief and 
straightforward. (If you have to carve a 
poem on granite, you're likely to make 
a short one.) Greek epigrams soon 
evolved away from tombstone inscriptions toward snappy statements good 
for every occasion: 
Some barbarian is waving my shield, since I 
was obliged to 
leave that perfectly good piece of equipment behind 
under a bush. But I got away, so what does 
it matter? 
Let the shield go; I can buy another one 
equally good. 
—Archilochus of Paros, an epigram5 
Roman Odes 
Roman writers borrowed Greek 
forms of poetry just as they did 
Greek drama. But like Latin drama, 
Latin verse never quite achieved 
Greek heights—except, perhaps, 
for the odes of Horace. 
[S]apias, vina liques, et spatio brevi 
spem longam reseces. dum loquimur, 
fugerit invida 
aetas: carpe diem, quam minimum credula 
postero. 
—Horace, Odes, book I, Ode n6 
5
Ibid. 
6Horace, The Complete Odes and Epodes, trans.W. G. Shepherd (NewYork: Penguin, 1983), book 
I, Ode 11. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J2 J 
Poets Poetic language 
The ode form used by Horace 
follows a fairly standard pattern: It 
describes a scene and then reflects 
on it in the light of life's brevity 
and death's inevitable approach. 
In his odes (which were translated by English poets from John 
Milton to A. E. Housman), Horace 
took the position of the experienced, salty, slightly cynical but 
good-hearted observer of life; he 
is best known for his exhortation 
Carpe diem (generally, and somewhat inaccurately, translated as 
"Seize the day!"), which encapsulates his whole philosophy: Enjoy 
life in the present day, because 
death is on its way. In these odes, 
he brings to maturity the individual, personal voice of the poet that 
first appeared in the Greek lyrics. 
Medieval Poetics 
Medieval poetics, like medieval history, doesn't descend in a straight 
line from ancient times; thanks to 
the barbarian invasion, classical 
poetry (like classical drama) lost its 
place, for a time. Writing faded; 
Greek and Latin lost their immediacy; and the poetry that emerged 
from the Middle Ages owed more 
to Germanic oral tradition than to 
the Latin odes. 
Beowulf, the earliest medieval Like Greek epics, the Old English epic 
epic, feature a beleaguered Christ- Beowulf w^s probably performed orally 
7
Ibid. 
Horace, Odes, trans. James Michie (NewYork: Modern Library, 2002), book I, Ode 11. 
Be wise, decant the wine, prune back 
your long-term hopes. Life ebbs as I 
speak— 
so seize each day, and grant the next no 
credit. 
—Horace, Ode n 7 
Be wise, strain clear the wine 
And prune the rambling vine 
Of expectation. Life's short. Even while 
We talk Time, grudging, runs a mile. 
Don't trust tomorrow's bough 
For fruit. Pluck this, here now. 
—Horace, Ode 118 
3 2 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
ian community living on a hill, in a 
place of light and feasting, while a 
prowling monster—a "God-cursed" 
descendent of Cain—lives in the 
swamps below and storms up the 
hill occasionally to eat the inhabitants, driven by a jealous rage of 
their eternal security. Sir Gawain 
and the Green Knight, a slightly later 
tale of courtly love and honor, also 
has its hero confronting a supernatural being from an earlier time: a 
Green Man who can pick up his 
severed head and walk away with it. 
In both cases, the poet (like the 
Greek epic poet) serves both as 
entertainer and as historian, while 
dutifully glorifying God; in both 
epics, the Christian hero triumphs—but just barely. 
long before it was written down (sometime around A.D. 800). As an oral poem, 
Beowulf uses formulaic phrases ("Godcursed Grendel") along with kennings, 
metaphors that describe an object in 
terms of its characteristics, often using a 
hyphenated phrase to do so: 
Before long 
the batde-dodgers abandoned the wood, 
the ones who had let down their lord earlier, 
the tail-turners, ten of them together. 
—Beowulf, translated by Heaney, Unes 
2845-48 
Each line of Old English poetry was 
divided into two half lines; in each half 
line were two stressed (emphasized) 
syllables which could be alliterated 
(begun with the same opening sound). 
Nor did the creature / keep him waiting 
but struck suddenly / and started in; 
he grabbed and mauled / a man on his 
bench, 
bit into his bone-lappings, / bolted down 
his blood, 
and gorged on him in lumps, / leaving the 
body 
utterly lifeless, / eaten up 
—Beowulf translated by Heaney (stresses 
and Une divisions mine), Unes 738-43 
Beowulf was told (and written) in 
Old English, a Germanic dialect heavily influenced by Icelandic; the next 
major English epic, Sir Gawain and the 
Green Knight, probably originated as a 
written, not an oral, composition. Like 
Old English, this Middle English epic 
uses alliterative formulas ("Guinevere 
the goodly queen," "the most noble 
knights") and a pattern of half lines 
with alliterative syllables. The anonymous author (the "Gawain-poet") allit-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3^ 3 
Poets Poetic language 
erates the first three stressed syllables in 
each Une, and also uses some end 
rhymes; Middle English, influenced by 
Latin, rhymes more easily than Old 
English. 
This combination of alliteration and 
end rhymes is managed through a particular poetic form called the "bob and 
wheel"; a stanza of long, alliterated 
lines is followed by a line with only 
two syllables (the "bob") that connects 
the long-lined stanza with the "wheel," 
a stanza of four short Unes, rhymed 
abab (that is, the first and third lines 
rhyme, as do the second and fourth 
Une). 
And in guise all of green, the gear and the 
man: 
A coat cut close, that clung to his sides, 
And a mantle to match, made with a lining 
Of furs cut and fitted—the fabric was 
noble 
The stout stirrups were green, that steadied 
his feet... 
That gleamed all and ghnted with green 
gems about. 
The steed he bestrides of that same green 
so bright 
A great horse great and thick; 
A headstrong steed of might; 
In broidered bridle quick, 
Mount matched man aright. 
—Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, translated by Marie Boroff (New York: W.W. 
Norton, 1967), part I, Unes 151-78; 
stresses mine 
Later medieval poems—Dante's 
Inferno, Chaucer's Canterbury Tales— 
were also driven by Christian 
themes. Like the epic poet, the late 
medieval poet had a prophetic role: 
He revealed truth, often by teUing a 
tale of pilgrimage, a spiritual quest 
for a great heavenly treasure. 
3 2 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
Medieval poetics inherited from 
Augustine a certain reservation 
about how successful these poetic 
tales could be. After all, language— 
like the rest of creation—was fallen, 
inherently corrupt, and so could 
not come into direct contact with 
the divine. Instead, the poet told 
truths at one remove, as reflected in 
a dream. Language might reveal the 
divine, but at the same time it had 
the potential to obscure it from 
view; as part of the physical realm, 
words could point to falsehood as 
easily as to truth. "The art of rhetoric," Augustine wrote, in his formative On Christian Doctrine, is 
"available for the enforcing either 
of truth or falsehood... .To strive 
about words is not to be careful 
about the way to overcome error 
by truth, but to be anxious that 
your mode of expression should be 
preferred to that of another.... 
[T]he man who cannot speak both 
eloquently and wisely should speak 
wisely without eloquence, rather 
than eloquently without wisdom."9 
This ambivalence about words 
reflects an even deeper suspicion of 
poetry. The self-conscious language 
of poetry seems, inevitably, to imply 
that the poem might be more preoccupied with the language of the 
poem than with the truth that lies 
behind it, and this preoccupation 
9
Saint Augustine, On Christian Doctrine, trans. J. F. Shaw (1873), book IV, chapter 2, section 3, 
and book IV, chapter 28, section 61; available on line at www.ccel.org/a/augustine/doctrine 
/doctrine.html. 
T HE WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 2 ^ 
Poets Poetic language 
with language is the "eloquence" 
that Augustine warns of. So Dante's 
Inferno takes place in a dream, the 
narrator seeing the truth at one 
remove, and Chaucer ends his stories of pilgrimage with a retraction 
of everything he has just said, 
assuming (ironically) the character 
of a pilgrim tempted away from the 
right path by eloquence, turned to 
wrong ends by the wrong use of 
language. 
Medieval theologians suggested 
that words were so malleable that 
they might well contain four levels 
of sense. Every story in Scripture 
bore four meanings: the literal (the 
actual story or surface meaning); the 
allegorical (sometimes also known 
as "typological," an illustration of a 
spiritual truth having to do with 
Christ or the heavenly realm); the 
tropological (the "moral" of the 
story, an application to the actual 
life of the Christian); and the anagogical (which inevitably had to do 
with the last times: death, judgment, 
and eternal destiny).Joshua's conquest of the Promised Land, for 
example, was interpreted as revealing a literal truth about Israel's history; an allegorical truth about 
Christ's leadership of his people in a 
fight against the kingdom of Satan; a 
tropological truth for the believer, 
who needed to destroy "strongholds" of Satan in order to achieve a 
moral life; and an anagogical foreshadowing of the Christian's final 
For our Book says, 'all that is written 
is written for our edification'; and 
that is my intention. Wherefore I 
beseech you meekly for the mercy of 
God to pray for me, that Christ have 
mercy on me and forgive me my sins; 
and especially for my translations of 
worldly vanities, which I revoke ... as 
are ... the Tales of Canterbury, which 
tend towards sin ... and many a song 
and many a lecherous lay, that Christ 
in his great mercy forgive me the sin. 
—Geoffrey Chaucer, "Retraction" 
The Canterbury Tales, translated by Nevill 
Coghill (NewYork: Penguin, 2000) 
In exitu Israhel de Aegypto 
domus Iacob de populo barbaro, 
Facta est Iudaea sanctificatio eius 
Israhel potestas eius.... 
A facie Domini mota est terra 
a facie Dei Iacob. 
—Psalm 113:1-2,7,Vulgate 
When Israel went out of Egypt, 
the house of Jacob from a barbarous people, 
Judea made his sanctuary, 
Israel his dominion 
At the presence of the Lord the earth was 
moved, 
at the presence of the God of Jacob. 
—Psalm 113:1-2,7, Douay translation 
If we consider the letter alone, the 
thing signified to us is the going out 
of the children of Israel from Egypt in 
the time of Moses; if the allegory, our 
redemption through Christ is signified; if the moral sense, the conversion 
of the soul from the sorrow and misery of sin to a state of grace is signified; if the anagogical, the passing of 
the sanctified soul from the bondage 
3 2 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
triumphant entry into heaven (symbolized by the Promised Land). 
This multilevel interpretation— 
based on an Augustinian suspicion 
of the ability of words to convey 
simple unvarnished truth and laid 
out by Thomas Aquinas in his 
Summa Theologica—became not just 
a way of interpreting Scripture, but 
a poetic method. Dante's pilgrim, 
lost in a dark wood, is dreaming; he 
does not claim certainty. He is also 
(allegorically) lost on the way to 
heaven, between the kingdom of 
God and the reign of Satan; he is, 
tropologically, grappling with the 
moral demands of daily life, and 
(anagogically) heading toward his 
final destination—Inferno or Paradise. Chaucer's pilgrims are traveling from London to Canterbury, 
the journey itself (from the city to 
the center of English spirituality) is 
an allegory of the journey toward 
heaven. 
Renaissance Verse 
The Renaissance saw a shift in this 
skepticism about language; the new 
science of the Renaissance saw the 
world (and its language) not as 
essentially flawed, needing to be 
cleansed by fire, but as a puzzle to 
be solved by the intellect. RenaisI0In Epistolae:The Letters of Dante, trans. PageToynbee (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966), 
p. 199. 
11
 The Divine Comedy of Dante Alighieri: Inferno, trans. Allen Mandelbaum (New York: Bantam, 
1980), Canto I, lines 1-6,10-12. 
of the corruption of this world to the 
liberty of everlasting glory. 
—Dante's fourfold interpretation of Psalm 
113, Epistola X, to Can Grande della 
Scala10 
When I had journeyed half of our life's way, 
I found myself within a shadowed forest, 
for I had lost the path that does not stray. 
Ah, it is hard to speak of what it was, 
that savage forest, dense and difficult, 
which even in recall renews my fear 
I cannot clearly say how I had entered 
the wood; I was so full of sleep just at the 
point where I abandoned the true path. 
—Dante, Inferno11 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D ^ 2 J 
Poets Poetic language 
sance and Enlightenment scholarship depended on a post-Augustinian reliance on language as a clear 
means of communication. The poet 
could become, not a mystic, but a 
word scientist; he could reveal truth 
not through ecstatic experience, but 
through the careful, exact choice of 
syllables. 
So Renaissance poetry became 
increasingly precise in metaphor, 
vocabulary, meter, and rhyme. In 
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, poetry was understood to be 
more precise than prose. Because it 
forced its writer to choose words so 
carefully, poetry could be the best 
vehicle for information; Sir Philip 
Sidney, writing his enormously 
influential essay The Defense of Poesy 
around 1580, concludes, "Of all sciences .. . is our poet the monarch. 
. . . He beginneth not with obscure 
definitions, which must blur the 
margin with interpretations and 
load the memory with doubtfulness; but he cometh to you with 
words set in delightful proportion." 
This respect for words had something to do with science, but also 
something to do with Protestantism; new efforts to translate the 
Bible into "reliable prose," rather 
than relying on the interpretation of 
the Holy Spirit in the church, put a 
high premium on the ability of 
plain words to reveal God. "In this 
milieu," writes Barbara Lewalski in 
Protestant Poetics and the SeventeenthWho says that fictions onely and false hair 
Become a verse? Is there in truth no 
beautie? ... 
Must all be veiled, while he that reads, 
divines, 
Catching the sense at two removes? ... 
I envie no man's nightingale or spring, 
Nor let them punish me with losse of rime, 
Who plainly say, My God, My King. 
—George Herbert, "Jordan I" 
In the Renaissance, iambic meter 
(which forces the poet to count every 
syllable) became a default setting for 
much English verse: This pattern is an 
(artificial) alternation of unstressed and 
stressed syllables, so that the voice lays 
weight on every other syllable: 
When IN disGRACE with FORtune 
AND men's EYES 
I ALL aLONE beWEEP my OUTcast 
STATE, 
AndTROUB'L deaf HEAven WITH my 
BOOTless CRIES, 
And LOOK upON mySELF, and CURSE 
my FATE.... 
—William Shakespeare, Sonnet XXIX 
Blank verse is unrhymed "iambic pentameter,"meaning that every line of 
poetry had ten syllables—five pairs, 
each containing one stressed and one 
unstressed syllable. Iambic meter was 
never the only English meter, but it 
soon dominated English poetry. 
Along with iambic pentameter, poets 
of the seventeenth century developed a 
particular type of metaphor known as 
the "metaphysical conceit." The conceit, which draws together two 
328 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
Century Religious Lyric, "the Christian poet is led to relate his work not 
to ineffable and intuited divine revelation, but rather to its written formulation in scripture."12 
The sonnets of Shakespeare and 
other Renaissance poets display this 
faith in the power of words to convince and to demonstrate: A sonnet 
is constructed as an argument. The 
sonnet itself—applied, in Shakespeare's hands, primarily to love— 
brings order to the most unruly of 
all emotions; love can be chronicled 
in a form which demanded close 
attention not only to every word, 
but to each syllable. In the sonnet, 
any problem can be posted in the 
first eight Unes and resolved in the 
last six. 
unlikely objects in order to illustrate an 
unexpected similarity between them, is 
a prime illustration of the new Renaissance belief in the interconnectedness 
of all things; John Donne, the king of 
the metaphysical conceit, famously 
compares sex to a flea and two lovers 
to a compass: 
Our two souls therefore, which are one, 
Though I must go, endure not yet 
A breach, but an expansion. 
Like gold to airy thinness beat. 
If they be two, they are two so 
As stiff twin compasses are two: 
Thy soul, the fixed foot, makes no show 
To move, but doth, if the other do; 
And though it in the center sit, 
Yet when the other far doth roam, 
It leans, and hearkens after it, 
And grows erect, as that comes home. 
Such wilt thou be to me, who must, 
Like the other foot, obliquely run; 
Thy firmness makes my circle just, 
And makes me end where I begun. 
—John Donne, "A Valediction Forbidding 
Mourning" 
The sonnet is a poem of fourteen lines, 
written in iambic pentameter, with a 
very particular rhyme scheme. The 
Petrarchan sonnet (invented by the 
Italian poet Francesco Petrarch and 
known also as the Italian sonnet) consists of eight lines (the octet), rhymed 
abhaahba, which pose a question, an 
idea, or an argument; the last six Unes 
(the sestet), rhymed cdcdcd or occasionally cdecde (other variations are also possible) resolves, responds to, or illustrates 
the idea presented in the first eight 
"Barbara Lewalski, Protestant Poetics and the Seventeenth-Century Religious Lyric (Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1979), p. 6. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3^ 9 
Poets Poetic language 
lines. Between the octet and sestet is a 
volta, or turning point, where the shift 
between problem and resolution 
occurs. 
Death, be not proud, though some have 
called thee 
Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so; 
For those whom thou think st thou dost 
overthrow 
Die not, poor Death, nor yet canst thou kill 
me. 
From rest and sleep, which but thy pictures 
be, 
Much pleasure, then from thee much more 
must flow, 
And soonest our best men with thee do go, 
Rest of their bones, and soul's delivery. 
Thou art slave to fate, chance, kings, and 
desperate men, 
And dost with poison, war, and sickness 
dwell, 
And poppy or charms can make us sleep as 
well 
And better than thy stroke; why swell's thou 
then? 
One short sleep past, we wake eternally 
And death shall be no more; Death, thou 
shalt die. 
—-John Donne, Holy Sonnet 10 
A Petrarchan sonnet; the octet (rhymed 
abbaabba) explains the problem: Death, 
so greatly feared, is actually a version of 
sleep, which all men enjoy. The volta is 
found in "soul's delivery": Sleep delivers the soul from weariness, Death 
delivers the soul from earth. But this 
deliverance is an illusion, since Death 
itself is no great deliverer; rather it is a 
slave to war, sickness, and assassins. The 
sestet, rhymed cddcaa, is a variation that 
emphasizes the final couplet; not only 
is Death a slave, but like a slave Death 
will be executed at the end of time. 
The "Shakespearian"or "English" 
sonnet follows a different pattern: the 
first twelve lines of the poem are 
3 3° SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
divided into three "quatrains" of four 
lines each, with the rhyme scheme abab 
cdcd efef, and the last two lines of the 
poem are a couplet: a rhyming pair of 
lines (gg). Rather than presenting a 
problem and then resolving it, the 
Shakespearian sonnet tends to present 
three parallel ideas in the three quatrains, using the couplet to link them or 
to explain them; or to develop a threepoint argument in the quatrains, with 
the couplet serving as the conclusion. 
Let me not to the marriage of true minds 
Admit impediments; love is not love 
Which alters when it alteration finds, 
Or bends with the remover to remove: 
O, no, it is an ever-fixèd mark, 
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; 
It is the star to every wand'ring bark, 
Whose worth's unknown, although his 
height be taken. 
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and 
cheeks 
Within his bending sickle's compass come; 
Love alters not with his brief hours and 
weeks, 
But bears it out even to the edge of doom. 
If this be error and upon me proved, 
I never writ, nor no man ever loved. 
—William Shakespeare, Sonnet 116 
A Shakespearian sonnet; the three 
quatrains (rhymed abab cdcd efej) 
develop three related ideas: first, the 
unaltering nature of love; second, the 
comparison of love to an unmoving 
star which serves as a navigator's mark; 
third, love's power to resist even time. 
Notice that the sonnet moves out from 
earth to the heavens to the abstract 
realm beyond the heavens. The sonnet 
concludes with a couplet asserting the 
truth of these grand assertions. 
A final sonnet form, the Spenserian 
sonnet, was also used in English; 
Spenserian sonnets contain three quat-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D j j J 
Poets Poetic language 
The Renaissance and Enlightenment also saw a return to classical 
forms, as the West rediscovered classical civilization. The mark of an 
Enlightenment scholar was a familiarity with the classics, and an ability to use classical poetic forms. 
John Milton used Greek conventions to produce what C. S. Lewis 
labeled a "secondary epic"—a form 
that copies the conventions of the 
oral epic, but which has its birth in 
writing, not in speech. Milton's Paradise Lost assures us that it will "justify the ways of God to man'; and 
Milton chronicled an orderly and 
ordered world, neatly hierarchical 
and bound together by a Great 
Chain of being. Milton's story of 
rebellion against God is both theology and social commentary: for 
Milton, order is all important, and 
rebeUion against authority is always 
devastating. 
rains and a couplet, but the rhyming 
scheme is abab bcbc cdcd ee, and the quatrains, more closely linked by rhyme, 
tend to develop each other rather than 
standing parallel in relationship. 
Paradise Lost identifies itself with classical epic in its invocation of the Muse, 
its formal statement of its theme, its 
grand battles between fallen and heavenly angels, and even its cataloguing of 
the demons (parallel to Homer's cataloguing of ships). 
Of man's first disobedience, and the fruit 
Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste 
Brought death into the world, and all our 
woe, 
With loss of Eden, till one Greater Man 
Restore us, and regain the blissful seat, 
Sing Heavenly Muse 
—John Milton, Paradise Lost, book I, lines 
1-6 
Romanticism 
William Blake, the first Romantic 
poet, rebelled. 
Lashing out not only against 
authority (governmental, religious, 
and educational) but against institutions and against the Enlightenment reduction of man to a 
"thinking machine," Blake aimed to 
I went to the Garden of Love, 
And saw what I never had seen: 
A Chapel was built in the midst, 
Where I used to play on the green. 
And the gates of this Chapel were shut, 
And "Thou shalt not" writ over the door; 
So I turned to the Garden of Love 
That so many sweet flowers bore; 
3 3 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
bring humanity's mysterious, inexplicable, spiritual side back into 
focus. He wrote his own mythologies (a long, odd set of poems: The 
Marriage of Heaven and Hell, The 
Book ofUrizen); in Songs of Innocence 
and of Experience he wrote against 
reason and against rational education, which he saw as destroying 
creativity and caging the unfettered 
human soul. 
Blake and the Romantic poets 
who came after him had at least 
two lasting effects on poetry. Rationality certainly didn't disappear, but 
(as in early Greece), it shifted sideways into written prose; the poet 
spoke for the less rational, more 
emotive, more imaginative side of 
humanity—a role poets continue to 
fill today. Regaining their role as 
prophets, the poets reached for 
contact with the divine. 
But this divine was not a godlike 
Muse, separate from humanity and 
greater; it was a Divine that infused 
both humanity and nature, a sublime force that reason could not 
explain away. With the publication 
of their Lyrical Ballads in 1798, 
William Wordsworth and Samuel 
Taylor Coleridge offered a mysticism less "religious" than Blake's, 
little more mainstream; an impersonal Divine Force, a Sublime that 
resided both in the beauties of the 
world and in the human soul. Like 
Blake, Wordsworth and Coleridge 
rebelled against the logical, the 
And I saw it was filled with graves, 
And tomb-stones where flowers should be; 
And Priests in black gowns were walking 
their rounds, 
And binding with briars my joys & desires. 
—William Blake, "The Garden of Love," 
Songs of Experience 
Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: 
The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, 
Hath had elsewhere its setting, 
And cometh from afar: 
Not in entire forgetfulness, 
And not in utter nakedness, 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 3 3 
Poets Poetic language 
orderly, and the hierarchical; they 
were antieducation (education simply quenched the divine spark born 
into each man), seeing men as containing at birth a diverse spark of 
the divine which society did its best 
to flatten into uniformity. 
Ironically, many Romantics 
(Lord Byron being a notable exception) led somewhat stodgy personal 
lives; Wordsworth even ended up as 
Stamp Distributor for his home 
county, a quintessentially bureaucratic position. And although they 
rejected the rules of taste imposed 
by reason, Romantic poets tended 
to retain the classical forms (the 
odes, lyrics, epigrams). But even 
within the limits of these forms, the 
/ in the poem became even more 
present. Sometimes the / is identical 
with the poet, as in Wordsworth's 
"Lines Written in Early Spring 
(quoted above) or Coleridge's 
equally famous "This Lime-Tree 
Bower My Prison," written as he 
sat in the garden with a sprained 
ankle while his guests went off for a 
walk: "Well, they are gone, and here 
must I remain," the poet sighs, conversationally, "This lime-tree bower 
my prison!" Occasionally the "I " is 
an imaginative, mythical persona, 
identified with the poet's imagination. "As I was walking among the 
fires of hell," Blake writes in the 
introduction to his poem "Proverbs 
of Hell," "delighted with the enjoyments of Genius, which to Angels 
But trailing clouds of glory do we come 
From God, who is our home: 
Heaven lies about us in our infancy! 
Shades of the prison-house begin to close 
Upon the growing Boy, 
But He beholds the light, and whence it 
flows, 
He sees it in his joy; 
The Youth, who daily farther from the east 
Must travel, still is Nature's Priest, 
And by the vision splendid 
Is on his way attended; 
At length the Man perceives it die away, 
And fade into the light of common day. 
—From William Wordsworth, "Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood" 
Since the Romantics saw nature and 
the human soul as the two most likely 
locations for the divine, their poems 
tended to begin with natural scenes or 
emotional states, to describe them with 
care, and then to connect this scene or 
the emotion to a larger, more cosmic 
idea. They also made heavy use of the 
monologue, the single-speaker, dramatic 
poem that had the psychology of the 
speaker as its primary focus. 
My genial spirits fail; 
And what can these avail 
To lift the smothering weight from off my 
breast? 
It were a vain endeavour, 
Though I should gaze for ever 
On that green light that lingers in the west: 
I may not hope from outward forms to win 
The passion and the life, whose fountains 
are within. 
—From Samuel Taylor Coleridge, "Dejection: An Ode" 
3 3 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
look like torment and insanity, I 
collected some of their Proverbs." 
Rather than "I think, therefore I 
am," the Romantic poets substituted, "I imagine, therefore I am." 
Sometimes this imagining J was 
active, exercising its creative power 
to produce myth and legend; sometimes it was passive, receiving truth 
from the mystical, infusing Divine. 
American "Romanticism' 
Romanticism, the great flowering 
of English poetry, was in essence a 
European phenomenon. A different 
flowering, some decades later, happened in the United States, just 
after the Civil War. This so-called 
American Renaissance, late in the 
nineteenth century, saw American 
poets incorporating the ideas of the 
Romantic—the divine presence in 
nature, the supremacy of the imaginative, speaking I in poetry, the 
focus on mood and experience 
rather than on argument and reason—but trying to do so within an 
American context. The English 
Romantic tradition, speaking as it 
did with a peculiarly English voice, 
did not suit the Americans; Walt 
Whitman, Emily Dickinson, Edgar 
Allan Poe, and others had their own 
" I " to speak of. 
Given the intense individualism 
of the American democratic experience, it is perhaps inevitable that 
these poetic voices should be selfabsorbed."! sing myself, and celeOne's Self I sing, a simple separate person, 
Yet utter the word Democratic, the word 
En-Masse. 
Of physiology from top to toe I sing, 
Not physiognomy alone nor brain alone is 
worthy for the 
Muse, I say the Form complete is worthier 
far, 
The Female equally with the Male I sing. 
Of Life immense in passion, pulse, and 
power, 
Cheerful, for freest action form'd under the 
laws divine. 
The Modern Man I sing. 
—Walt Whitman, "One's Self I Sing" 
T HE WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 3 5 
Poets 
brate myself," announces Walt 
Whitman, and Emily Dickinson 
asks anxiously, "Why—do they shut 
Me out of Heaven? Did I sing— 
too loud?"This poetry of the 
American Renaissance went one 
step beyond the English Romantics: Se//-discovery (rather than a 
discovery of the world through the 
eyes of the self) became the primary purpose of the poem. Autobiography was its most dominant 
theme; both Whitman's Leaves of 
Grass and Dickinson's poems 
explore the identity of the common, uncelebrated, ordinary American man or woman. The poetry of 
the "American Renaissance" grapples with the implications of English Romanticism: If everyone is 
unique, diverse, bearing a spark 
within him- or herself, then no one 
can give guidance on how we are 
to think of ourselves; we must each 
struggle to an understanding of 
who we are alone. 
Poetic language 
The form of the poetry of the American Renaissance shows a varying 
degree of faith in the ability of language to do its job. Walt Whitman, with 
his sheer confidence that he will be 
heard, writes in free-flowing, verse that 
often possesses neither rhyme nor 
meter: 
This is the city and I am one of the citizens, 
Whatever interests the rest interests me, 
politics, wars, markets, newspapers, 
schools, 
The mayor and councils, banks, tariffs, 
steamships, factories, stocks, stores, real 
estate and personal estate. 
—From "Song of Myself" 
Whitman's poetry is prophetic in its 
biblical cadences and in its borrowing 
of the epic technique of lists. But 
Whitman—egalitarian, devoted to the 
idea of the "common man"—rejects 
specialized meter and rhyme. 
Dickinson, on the other hand, writes 
carefully, formally, finding words barely 
adequate for what she has to say. She is 
careful to maintain meter and rhyme, 
but she uses capital letters and dashes to 
express stresses and pauses that she cannot convey in any other way, and distorts her syntax in an effort to express 
something beyond speech. 
Upon Concluded Lives 
There's nothing cooler falls— 
Than Life's sweet Calculations— 
The mixing Bells and Palls— 
Makes Lacerating Tune— 
To Ears the Dying Side— 
'Tis Coronal—and Funeral— 
Saluting—in the Road— 
—Emily Dickinson, "Upon concluded 
lives" [735] 
3 3 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
Modernism 
The end of the nineteenth century 
and the beginning of the twentieth 
saw the rise of irony in poetry. 
"Irony," in the words of James Kincaid, comes about when "every life 
becomes tragic, and the element of 
the special case is removed.... Catastrophic disillusionment and 
destruction are not the lot of the 
godlike hero, invoking by his 
stature the terrible laws of retribution, but of every ordinary person 
going about the business of common life... .We are all victims."13 
Modern poetry remains autobiographical, exploring the self and the 
self's place in the world, but the 
uneasiness of the American Renaissance has settled into a pervasive 
worry: The self is seen as under 
attack, constantly pushed in upon 
from the outside, looking for a firm 
place to stand in a world where 
cosmic certainties have begun to 
break down and where chaos seems 
more likely than order. 
In this chaos, the poet is consumed by an effort to find some 
sort of harmony among the discords of existence. But as they 
searched for order, modernist poets 
rejected many of the certainties 
held by earlier writers. Logical 
thought was unreliable: "The use of 
logic in place of perception is hosHow our modernity 
Nerve-wracked and broken, turns 
Against time's way and all the way of 
things, 
Crying with weak and egoistic cries! 
—Ezra Pound, "Canzoni" 
In their efforts to show through the 
poetic form their sense of the world's 
essential disorder, the modernists walked 
a fine line between formal expression of 
fragmentation and incoherence; Ezra 
Pound especially falls over on occasion. 
Other modernists maintain a formal 
structure; William BuderYeats makes 
heavy use of "accentual verse," which 
counts only stressed syllables rather than 
the total number of syllables in a line. 
Thus the poetic line keeps its form— 
but the poet can stretch or compress it 
almost at will. Even when Yeats uses a 
regular number of syllables or stressed 
syllables per line, he requires more of 
the reader than a Romantic poet; in his 
famous poem "Easter 1916," for example, he uses a three-beat line with two 
strong stresses and one weak stress per 
Une, and a traditional abab rhyme 
scheme—but in order for the meter to 
sing, the reader must pause before some 
of the stresses and hold other syllables 
out, past what would be natural in 
speech. Try reading W B.Yeats's poem 
"Easter 1916" aloud, stressing each word 
in bold print, allowing your voice to rise 
on the capitalized stresses and drop on 
the lower-case stress: 
I have MET them at CLOSE of day 
Coming with Vivid faces 
I3James R. Kincaid, Tennyson's Major PoemsiThe Comic and Ironic Patterns (New Haven:Yale 
University Press, 1975), p. 1. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 3 7 
Poets Poetic language 
tile to principles," Ezra Pound 
wrote in 1931. "The logician never 
gets to the root." This suspicion of 
logic led naturally to a dismissal of 
cosmic theories produced by 
deduction: Intellectual concepts, 
the great overarching theories that 
gave previous generations a way to 
place themselves within the world, 
were no longer usable. William 
Carlos Williams instead chose to 
find meaning in the physical and 
unique existence of things, their 
"quiddity." "No ideas except in 
things/'Williams wrote, and made it 
his job to immortalize the quiddity 
of things (a red wheelbarrow, a 
plum) on the page.T S. Eliot chose 
to find order by making careful 
connections between experiences— 
experiences in the past and in the 
present, experiences in the poet's 
daily life. The poet, Eliot once 
remarked, is always "amalgamating 
disparate experience; the ordinary 
man's experience is chaotic, irregular, fragmentary. The latter falls in 
love, or reads Spinoza, and these 
two experiences have nothing to 
do with each other, or with the 
noise of the typewriter or the smell 
of cooking; in the mind of the poet 
these experiences are always forming new wholes."14 
From COUNter or DESK among grey 
EIGHTeenth CENtury houses.... 
Being CERtain that THEY and I 
But LIVED where MOTley is worn: 
All CHANGED, CHANGED utterly: 
A TERrible BEAUty is born.15 
Pound,Williams, and other modernists 
were influenced by Japanese haiku, 
which took a strict syllabic structure 
(three lines, the first with five syllables, 
the second with seven, the third with 
five) and combined it with a tight thematic strategy: The poem opens by 
focusing in on a particular detailed 
image and then, after the fifth or 
twelfth syllable, opens out to consider a 
larger, more general idea. Without 
holding to the strict syllables of haiku, 
Pound and others (known, after 1912 
or so, as Imagists) focused in on this the 
careful anchoring of the poem in a 
precise visual picture. Often the picture 
itself stood for the rest of the poem, 
without the subsequent turn to the 
cosmic. The Imagists poets aimed to 
render particular, specific images, not 
vague generalities or cosmic wanderings; to write clear, "hard" poetry, not 
blurred or vague verse; and to concentrate and distill poetry down to its most 
concentrated forms:16 
The apparition of these faces in the crowd; 
Petals on a wet, black bough. 
—Ezra Pound, "In a Station of the Metro" 
I4Quoted in Modernism: 1890-1930, eds. Malcolm Bradbury and James McFarlane (New York: 
Viking, 1991), p. 83. 
I5This is a technique for examining meter, not the proper way to read poetry aloud; to hear 
three accomplished poets read this poem, go to www.theatlantic.com/unbound/poetry 
/soundings/easter.htm. 
l6These are three of the six Imagist goals found in Amy Lowell's Some Imagist Poets (1915). 
3 3 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
Like poets of the Romantic era 
and the American Renaissance, 
modernist poets seemed to believe 
wholeheartedly in the potential of 
the human self. Adrift in anarchy, 
unable to reason its way to a governing explanation of life, the self 
nevertheless possessed the ability to 
find, in some mysterious and halfunderstood way, a firm place (however tiny) to stand in the middle of 
whirling disorder. "Modernism" is 
an enormously broad label for a 
group of poets who saw themselves 
as sui generis, and who often did 
their best to kick each other (or 
themselves) out of the modernist 
fold ("Modernism," T. S. Eliot complained in 1929, is a "mental 
blight"). Nevertheless, these poets 
were linked most strongly by two 
common suspicions. They were suspicious of the human community; 
the speakers of their poems are profoundly alone, alienated from other 
men. And they were skeptical of 
language's capacity to express both 
the reality of chaos and the attempt 
to find order. "You have no cosmos 
until you can order it," Ezra Pound 
wrote, in an early draft of his massive work The Cantos, but as he 
aged he grew less and less convinced that poetic language could 
order anything. The idea of the 
poem as a "place to stand," a solid 
spot in quicksand ("A poem is a 
momentary stay against confusion," 
in Robert Frost's phrase) stood in 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 3 9 
Poets Poetic language 
tension with the growing modernist conviction that language 
itself was distorted and fractured 
beyond any repair. "A rose is a rose 
is a rose," wrote modernist poet 
Gertrude Stein, celebrating the 
quiddity of a thing while stretching 
syntax to its limits in order to 
demonstrate its inadequacy. 
Alienation 
Modernism had its own rebels; in 
England, a group of younger poets 
known as the "Movement" turned 
away from a modernist, fragmented 
poetry, toward a neo-Romantic 
style which returned to plainer syntax and style, to poetic form, to the 
exploration of nature and the acts 
of everyday life. Movement poets 
such as Philip Larkin turned their 
focus away from psychological 
explorations, back toward the physical world and the actual lives of 
real people. 
In America, slightly later, the beat 
poets expressed their own alienation by focusing, not on the insufficiencies of language, but on the 
evils of the military-industrial complex. Beat poets, led by Allen Ginsberg (and also including the writers 
Jack Kerouac and William Burroughs) set out to create a subculture, a neo-Romantic alternative 
society that rejected the conventions that shaped American culture. 
Ginsberg, a homosexual and a cornFree verse? You may as well call sleeping in 
a ditch "free architecture!" 
—G. K. Chesterton 
The trees are coming into leaf 
Like something almost being said; 
The recent buds relax and spread, 
Their greenness is a kind of grief. 
—Philip Larkin, from "The Trees" 
3 4° SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
munist at a time when neither was 
socially acceptable (or even legal) 
strikes out, as Blake did, against the 
authorities. Like Blake, Ginsberg— 
who once had had a vision of 
William Blake talking to him, in his 
Spanish Harlem apartment, in a 
voice that had "all the infinite tenderness and anciency and mortal 
gravity of a living Creator speaking 
to his son"—rejected discipline, 
order, and theology in favor of a 
wild mysticism. 
Meanwhile, modernism was 
dying—but as a poetic movement, 
modernism was almost too fractured to have a coherent "after." 
Modern poetry had been dominated by white, upper-class, welleducated males; now women and 
African American poets attempted 
to find their own path into the 
modern age. African American 
poets, building on the early poetry 
of Paul Laurence Dunbar and later 
on the work of Langston Hughes, 
struggled to find a balance between 
"white" styles of speech and the 
black folk tradition. Women, writing in a poetic tradition that was 
overwhelmingly male; often found 
themselves pigeonholed as "feminist 
poets." 
But there is no sense in which 
women, or African American poets, 
or poets from other cultural groups, 
or white male poets formed a unified literary movement after the 
death of modernism. Modernism's 
legacy had been the intensely 
And Priests in black gowns were walking 
their rounds, 
And binding with briars my joys and 
desires. 
—William Blake, "The Garden of Love" 
The world is holy! The soul is holy! The 
skin 
is holy! The nose is holy! 
—Allen Ginsberg, "Footnote to Howl" 
You will turn back 
And look toward the mountains. 
You will turn back 
And grasp for a straw. 
You will holler, 
Lord-d-d-d-d-ahl 
Save me, Lord! 
Save me! 
—Langston Hughes, from "Sunday Morning Prophecy" 
The pact that we made was the ordinary 
pact 
of men & women in those days 
I don't know who we thought we were 
that our personalities 
could resist the failures of the race 
Like everybody else, we thought of ourselves as special. 
—Adrienne Rich, from "From a Survivor" 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 4 1 
Poets Poetic language 
inward, individualistic character of 
the late-twentieth-century poet; the 
poet, like the madman, was a solitary figure, not following "schools." 
The closest thing to a poetic 
"school" in late twentieth-century 
poetry is Postmodernism—which is 
a "school" only because it is positioned as one by the academics 
who study poetry. 
The struggle today is not between 
competing poetic visions, but 
between poetry written by and for 
poetic specialists, and poetry written 
for the "common reader."The poet 
Vernon Scannel complains that 
"much contemporary poetry seems 
to be written for specialist exegesists 
in the universities in order that they 
may practise their skills in 'deconstruction.' " "I gave up on new 
poetry myself thirty years ago," 
remarked journalist Russell Baker, a 
thirty-year veteran of the New York 
Times op-ed page, "when most of it 
began to read like coded messages 
passing between lonely aliens on a 
hostile world." 
In 1983, Philip Larkin, reflecting 
on the growing abstruseness of 
"academic" poetry, remarked that 
poets—thanks, in part, to the 
impossibility of earning any money 
writing poetry unless they also teach 
and write about writing poetry— 
have become critics and professors, 
and thus pass judgment on poetry 
as well as writing it. The result is 
that poetry is in danger of becomPostmodernism celebrates fragmentation to the point of incoherence. John 
Ashbery, self-declared Postmodernist 
poet illustrates the difficulty of reading 
"postmodern poetry": 
The "second position" 
Conies in the seventeenth year. 
Watching the meaningless gyrations of flies 
above a sill 
Heads in hands, waterfall of simplicity 
The delta of living into everything. 
—-John Ashbery, from "The Skaters" 
Ashbery, a Pulitzer Prize winner, 
became a critic and professor, thus 
(perhaps) illustrating the truth of Philip 
Larkin s remarks. (The Times Literary 
Supplement called his Selected Poems 
"sophisticated, thickly referential and 
almost totally impenetrable"—thus 
showing the ongoing bias of the academy toward abstruse poems that must 
be decoded, rather than coherent 
poems that must be interpreted.) 
"There" is neither—by simply bypassing 
existing—by 
observation occurring at the same time 
(one is) 
outside literally looking, seeing is more 
passive, 
within one's own husk at dye—at the 
moment then— 
is not observation which is sole, itself) 
nor is it experience—as it is occurring 
—Leslie Scalapino, from "As: All Occurrence in Structure, Unseen—(Deer 
Night)" 
3 42 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Poets Poetic language 
ing the province of experts: "It is 
hardly an exaggeration," Larkin 
writes, "to say that the poet has 
gained the happy position wherein 
he can praise his own poetry in the 
press and explain it in the classroom, that the reader has been bullied into giving up the consumer's 
power to say 'I don't like this, bring 
me something different.'"17 
In the last fifteen years, poetry 
has been partially rescued from the 
postmodern; in the United States, 
the Poet Laureate position has 
become more visible; new translations of classic poetry have brought 
poets such as Robert Pinsky and 
Seamus Heaney to a larger audience; Jane Kenyon writes comprehensible poetry, Mark Strand 
incomprehensible poetry with 
strong narrative threads, Adrienne 
Rich poetry that connects with 
political and social issues. Meanwhile, academic honors still seem to 
favor the incomprehensible and 
complicated (which can be deconstructed in the classroom). 
In the meantime, the careful 
reader of poetry should be willing 
to work hard at understanding 
poetry: to take it on its own terms, 
chew it over, reflect on it, and analyze its forms, and then to praise it 
or to conclude, "This is a disorganized mess" and put the book down. 
Between my finger and my thumb 
The squat pen rests; snug as a gun. 
Under my window, a clean rasping sound 
When the spade sinks into gravelly ground: 
My father, digging. I look down 
Till his straining rump among the flowerbeds 
Bends low, comes up twenty years away 
Stooping in rhythm through potato drills 
Where he was digging. 
—Seamus Heaney, from "Digging" 
In Mark Strand's poem "The Tunnel," 
he sees a man standing in front of his 
house. Shouting, screaming, and writing notes does no good; the narrator 
grows so upset that he digs a tunnel to 
get out of his house and comes out in 
front of someone else's house, "too 
tired to / move or even speak: 
I feel I'm being watched 
and sometimes I hear 
a man's voice 
but nothing is done 
and I have been waiting for days. 
—Mark Strand, "The Tunnel" 
He has lost track entirely of his own 
identity. 
I7Philip Larkin, Required Writing: Miscellaneous Pieces, IÇ55-IÇ82 (Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 1999). 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 34 3 
HOW TO READ A POEM 
The First Level of Inquiry: Grammar-Stage Reading 
It's wonderful to discover and read a poem when you know nothing 
about the poet, have never read critical commentary on the work, and 
have to figure out what the poet is doing with language.18 
—HERBERT KOHL 
The first step in reading poetry is to begin reading. 
Poetry is a meeting between reader and the poet. Sometimes, arming yourself ahead of time with too much information on technique, historical milieu, 
and the poet's biographical background can keep you from meeting the poet; 
the background information serves to keep the poet at arm's length. 
Consider the following poem: 
We wear the mask that grins and lies, 
It hides our cheeks and shades our eyes,— 
This debt we pay to human guile; 
With torn and bleeding hearts we smile, 
And mouth with myriad subtleties. 
Why should the world be overwise, 
In counting all our tears and sighs? 
Nay, let them only see us, while 
We wear the mask. 
We smile, but, O great Christ, our cries 
To thee from tortured souls arise. 
We sing, but oh the clay is vile 
Beneath our feet, and long the mile; 
But let the world dream otherwise, 
We wear the mask! 
Now read the poem again, slowly. Make an imaginative effort; put yourself into the place of the one who wears the mask; picture yourself smiling 
and mouthing "subtleties" while you feel the exact opposite of what your 
face shows. Imagine the "world" before which you are putting on this act. 
Who is in it; why are you forced into such false happiness? 
1
 Herbert R. Kohl, A Grain of Poetry: How to Read Contemporary Poems and Make Them a Part 
qfYour Life (NewYork: HarperFlamingo, 1999), p. 3. 
3 4 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Have you exercised your imagination? 
The poem is by Paul Laurence Dunbar, an African American poet who 
wrote "We Wear the Mask" in the late nineteenth century, in the days of Jim 
Crow. Now you know, a little better, why Dunbar chose this image; he is 
writing about the "veil" that W E. B. Du Bois also described, the "double 
vision" forced on African Americans by a world that requires them to view 
their own blackness through white eyes. 
If you're an African American reader, perhaps you immediately identified 
with Dunbar's problem in just the way that he intends. But what if you are 
white, Hispanic, Asian? You should still be able to make the imaginative leap 
into Dunbar's difficulty. At some point in your life, you too have worn a 
mask; perhaps you've had the serious, life-shaping experience of constructing a whole life around someone else's image of who you are; maybe you've 
only had the fleeting experience of behaving one way at a party while 
thinking something else entirely. But even if your "mask" experience seems 
trivial and unimportant, in light of Dunbar's more comprehensive complaint, it is important for you to identify with the problem of the poem. Then you 
can make an emotional identification with Dunbar. That initial jolt of emotional recognition ("Yes! I know what it's like to wear a mask—even if it's 
only for an evening!") connects you to the poet. Without that connection, 
you might as well read a sociological description of the problem of black 
double consciousness; there's no reason for you to read a poem. 
If you know, before reading, that Dunbar is an African American poet of 
the early twentieth century, that he was the only black student at Central 
High School in Dayton, Ohio, that his color kept him from attending college, and that he died an alcoholic at age thirty-three, it may hamper your 
emotional understanding of the lyric. You may feel that your own jolt of 
identification is trivial. (After all, what are your problems in comparison?) 
Or, if you already know something about African American life at the turn 
of the century, you may gloss over the unique experience Dunbar is trying 
to share, putting your own previous knowledge in its place, and missing 
Dunbar's own particular twist on the subject. 
Coming to a poem without background knowledge, then, can actually 
be a plus; it helps you to identify with a familiar emotion or experience, 
before grappling with its difference. The exception to this rule is poetry 
that seems completely foreign in subject or form; if, for example, you tackled the Inferno with no understanding of the Christian distinction between 
heaven and hell, you might legitimately give up before reaching the end. 
But in most cases, you'll find that an initial try at a poem will yield you with 
a surprising level of understanding; even Homer's epics, crammed with 
unfamiliar names and odd conventions, tell a fairly straightforward story full 
of recognizable emotions. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 4 5 
Read 10—30 pages of poetry. So your first step in reading a poem is simply 
to read, without preparation. If the poem is a lengthy epic, try to read at least 
the first section, or "book." If you are reading a number of shorter poems, 
aim to read five to ten poems (anywhere from ten to thirty pages of poetry). 
As you write, jot down your initial reactions in your reading journal. Can 
you find a familiar emotion, experience, or mood? If the poem is a narrative tale, note down the two or three major events that happen in the first 
book, and write a sentence describing the tale's hero. 
Read the title, cover, and table of contents. Now that you've had an initial 
chance to connect with the poet and the poem, go back and do a little bit 
of elementary background work. Read the title page, the copy on the 
book's backcover, and any biographical sketches provided. Jot down in your 
journal the title, the author's name, the span of time over which the poems 
were composed, and any other facts you might find interesting. 
Glance at the table of contents. For a narrative poem, the table of contents 
may read like a list of chapters in a novel, giving you a preview of the plot; 
for a poetry collection, the titles of poems may provide an overview of the 
poet's preoccupations. (The first thing you'll notice about the table of contents in W. H. Auden's Selected Poems, for example, is that none of the poems 
have titles; each is listed by its first line, and those lines are very often directed 
straight at the reader: "Watch any day his nonchalant pauses" "Will you turn 
a deaf ear" "Consider this and in our time," "What's in your mind, my dove" 
Read the preface. In most cases, prefaces to poetry collections give you 
valuable information about the poet's techniques and ideas. In the case of 
modern poems the preface can give you a leg up on understanding the 
poet's preoccupations (you may discover, for example, that Mark Strand is 
particularly interested in absence, and is prone to write about the ways in 
which he is not present; or that Jane Kenyon wrote her last collections of 
poems while ill with leukemia, which adds to the meaning of "Let evening 
come"). In the case of an older work, you may discover information that the 
original audience would already have known: "The stylistic tradition represented by Sir Gawain and the Green Knight" writes Marie Boroffin the preface to her translation, "calls for the frequent use of such explicitly qualitative 
adjectives as noble, worthy, lovely, courteous, and—perhaps most frequent of 
all—good. These adjectives may be used frequently and freely because, 
within the traditional world portrayed in this poetic style, knights are 
inevitably noble and worthy, ladies lovely, servants courteous, and indeed 
everything, aside from monsters and villainous churls, ideally good."19
 The 
I9Marie Boroff, preface to Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, trans. Boroff, p. x. 
3 4^ SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
medieval listener would have known that Gawain inhabited such a fairy-tale 
world, and would have taken this information for granted. 
Finish reading. Now that you've had a chance to make an initial emotional 
identification and then to fill in some background information, go back to 
reading. As you read, follow these steps: 
i. For narrative poems (poems that tell a story), make a quick list of 
major characters as you read, and jot down the main events, just as you did 
when reading the novel. You'll find this particularly helpful in the epic 
poems, which are longer than some novels and boast dozens of characters. 
For a long poem (the Odyssey, Paradise Lost), try to limit yourself to two or 
three major events per section; otherwise you'll end up with an outline so 
long and detailed that it won't serve to jog your memory.You'll also find this 
outline helpful for such works as Frost's "Death of the Hired Man," in 
which the major events are implied through the dialogue. 
2. For nonnarrative poems, simply make notes on the poem's ideas, 
moods, or experiences as you read. Is the poem describing a scene, portraying 
a mood, investigating a thought? Use the process of writing as a way to 
reflect on the poem's content. Don't worry about making these notes complete sentences; poems do not always propose complete, well-rounded 
thoughts for your intellect to grasp. A poem may put evocative words close 
together to create a reaction or build a sense of fear, or exhilaration, or foreboding, or peaceful repose. Write down whatever words or phrases seem to 
capture your response to the poem. 
3. As you read, circle phrases or lines that catch your eye or ear; turn 
down the edge of your page, or write the phrases and lines in your journal. 
You can return to these later. 
4. Mark any section of the poem that you find confusing or obscure— 
but don't give up. Keep reading. 
The Second Level of Inquiry: Logic-Stage Reading 
Now that you've read the poem (or poems) once, you'll need to pay a little 
more attention to the poem's form; remember that the shape of the poem is 
essential to its meaning. Poetry analysis can be a highly technical activity; the 
full analysis of rhythm alone requires you to learn scansion, the graphing out 
of a poem's meter. What follows is a nonspecialist's guide, a broad outline of 
basic poetic techniques meant to increase your appreciation of poetic form. 
If you want to go beyond this simple analysis, consider investing in a poetry 
handbook such as Mary Kinzie's A Poet's Guide to Poetry (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999; ISBN 0-226-43739-6; $16.20) and a guide to 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 4 7 
scansion, such as Derek Attridge's Poetic Rhythm:An Introduction (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996; ISBN 0-521-42369-4; $22.00). 
Look back at the poem; identify its basic narrative strategy. Narrative strategy 
has to do with the way in which the poem presents its ideas. There are five 
distinct "narrative strategies" poets may use: 
Has the poet chosen to tell a story, with a beginning, middle, and end? 
Does the poet make an argument, with premises and a final conclusion? 
Does the poet describe an experience? If so, is this experience physical or 
mental? (Does he walk through a garden, or struggle with guilt?) 
Does the poet describe a physical place, object, or sensation, and allow 
this to stand for some other nonphysical reality? 
Is the poem evocative of a mood, feeling, idea, or emotion? 
Of course, a poet may choose to use a combination of methods, but 
(especially in a short poem) one is likely to be dominant. 
Identify the poems basic form. Form has to do with the way in which a poem 
is put together. A sonnet can make an argument or describe an experience; 
an ode can evoke a mood or recount an event. Of the many basic poetic 
forms, these are the ones you will see most often: 
Ballad: Also a narrative, but on a smaller scale, featuring one main character or a small group of characters. Generally, a ballad has two- or fourline stanzas and a repeating refrain. 
Elegy: A lament. Greek elegies were not necessarily mournful, but all had 
a certain meter; modern elegies tend to be laments for dead people or 
dead times. 
Epic: A long narrative tale featuring the great deeds of legendary 
heroes—deeds with some sort of cosmic significance. 
Haiku: This Japanese form, adapted into English, conveys a single impression. Haiku, used by some modern writers, have seventeen syllables, 
arranged into three lines with the syllable pattern five-seven-five. The 
haiku begins with an image and then widens its focus, after the fifth or 
after the twelfth syllable, to a larger idea or spiritual perception connected to the idea. 
Ode: In English, a poem of exalted character, often addressing the reader 
directly ("apostrophe"). 
Sonnet: A poem of fourteen lines, written in iambic pentameter, with a 
very particular rhyme scheme. 
3 4 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Petrarchan sonnet: The first eight lines (the octet), rhymed abbaabba, 
pose a question, an idea, or an argument; the last six lines (the sestet), 
rhymed cdcdcd (or, occasionally, cdecde; other variations are also possible) resolve, respond to, or illustrate the idea presented in the first 
eight lines. Between the octet and sestet is a volta, or turning point, 
where the shift between problem and resolution occurs. 
"Shakespearian" or "English" sonnet: The first twelve lines of the poem 
are divided into three "quatrains" of four lines each, with the rhyme 
scheme abab cdcd efef, and the last two lines of the poem are a 
rhyming couplet (gg). 
Spenserian sonnet: This form also contains three quatrains and a couplet, but the rhyming scheme is abab bcbc cdcd ee. 
Villanelle: A poem with five three-line stanzas and one last four-line 
stanza. The villanelle only has two rhymes; the first and third lines of 
the first stanza reappear as an alternating refrain in the following stanzas and appear as the last two lines of the final stanza: 
Do not go gentle into that good night, 
Old age should burn and rave at close of day; 
Rage, rage against the dying of the light. 
Though wise men at their end know dark is right 
Because their words had forked no lightening they 
Do not go gentle into that good night. 
Good men, the last wave by, crying how bright 
Their frail deeds might have danced in a green bay, 
Rage, rage against the dying of the light. 
Wild men who caught and sang the sun in flight, 
And learn, too late, they grieved it on its way, 
Do not go gentle into that good night, 
Grave men, near death, who see with blinding sight 
Blind eyes could glaze like meteors and be gay, 
Rage, rage against the dying of the light. 
And you, my father, there on the sad height, 
Curse, bless, me now with your fierce tears, I pray. 
Do not go gentle into that good night, 
Rage, rage against the dying of the light. 
—Dylan Thomas, "Do Not Go Gentle into That Good Night" 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J 4 g 
Examine the poem's syntax. Find the subjects and verbs in each poetic 
sentence. Although this seems like a simple exercise, it will immediately 
show you whether the poet is using natural diction or a heightened, poetic 
form. In Tennyson's Idylls of the King, which uses formal poetic diction, the 
lines 
Saying which she seized, 
And, thro' the casement standing wide for heat, 
Flung them, and down they flash'd, and smote the stream. 
have a subject and verb together ("she seized") but the next verb that goes 
with the subject "she" ("flung") is separated from the subject by an entire 
line, where it would be more natural to say, "She seized and flung them 
through the casement." Separation of subject and verb, or reversal of the 
two, or an understood ("elided") subject or verb, demonstrates "poetic diction"; a more speechlike pattern is found in Carl Sandburg's "Working 
Girls": "The working girls in the morning are going to work." 
Try to identify the poem's meter (or meters). There are two major kinds of 
meter: syllabic meter, which counts the number of syllables in each line, and 
accentual meter, which only counts the stresses, or strong syllables. 
In syllabic meter, each group of syllables is called a. foot. English verse has 
five common feet, or patterns: 
The anapest is two unaccented syllables followed by an accented one (the 
"limerick" meter): 
There ONCE was a MAN of BlackHEATH, 
Who SAT on his SET of false TEETH. 
The dactyl is one accented syllable followed by two unaccented ones: 
KNOW ye the LAND of the CEdar and VINE, 
Where the FLOwers e'er BLOSsom, the BEAMS ever SHINE 
—Byron, "The Bride of Abydos" 
The iamb is an unaccented syllable followed by an accented one. 
The spondee, two accented syllables together, generally occurs as a variation in a line based on another pattern. The spondee often comes before or 
after a pyrrhicfoot (two unaccented syllables). 
The trochee is an accented syllable followed by an unaccented syllable: 
TYger! TYger, BURning BRIGHT 
3 5 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
"Meter" names the number of feet in each line: dimeter (two feet), 
trimeter (three feet), tetrameter (four feet), and so on up: pentameter, hexameter, heptameter, and octameter (eight).The lines from Byron above are in 
dactylic tetrameter; there are four dactyls in each line. (Even though there 
are not four full dactyls in each line, the overall pattern is dactylic.) 
In English verse, the most common foot is iambic, and the most common 
iambic meter is iambic pentameter. Since "iambic" means that the basic 
poetic unit, or foot, is a set of two syllables, the second of which is stressed: 
Of MAN'S first DISoBEd'ence,AND the FRUIT 
Of THAT forBIDdenTREE whose MORtal TASTE 
and "pentameter" means that there are five feet in each fine, iambic pentameter contains five pairs of syllables. "Blank" means that the lines are 
unrhymed. Iambic meter becomes trochaic if the weak and strong stresses 
are reversed, as they are in Edgar Allan Poe's "The Raven": 
ONCE uPON a MIDnight DREAry 
WHILE I PONdered,WEAK andWEARy, 
OVer MANy a QUAINT and CURious ... 
In the first two fines, the voice tends to stress the first (technically 
unstressed) syllables of each foot rather than the second syllable, which in 
terms of meaning is less important; this creates a singsong, more proselike 
meter. 
"Accentual verse," practiced by Gerard Manley Hopkins and William 
Butler Yeats (among others), counts the number of strong or stressed syllables in a line, rather than the total number of syllables. You find a strong syllable by reading the line in a normal voice; you naturally place the accents 
on the strong syllables. Modern verse tends to combine accentual and syllabic meter. 
Examine the lines and stanzas. First, ask yourself, Does each line sound like 
a whole, or does the fine naturally divide into halves (hemistichs)? Then find 
the beginnings and ends of each sentence. Are the sentences and lines identical? Do the sentences run over the ends of the lines (enjambment)'? If they 
do, is the enjambment natural, or does the line break come at an awkward 
place? If the poet chooses a fine length that clashes with his sentence length, 
he has decided to draw attention to one or the other; why? 
Then look for stanzas. Stanzas are sets of lines that impose structure on 
the poet; if she decides to use them, she is making a choice to confine herself; why? How many fines does each stanza have? Does each stanza follow 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J $ 1 
a similar pattern of rhyme and meter, or does the poet relax the technical 
confines of the stanza and vary the pattern? Where do the stanzas fall; do 
they show a change of meaning, a reversal, a further development? 
Examine the rhyme pattern. Poetic notation uses a letter of the alphabet for 
each unique rhyme sound; you can use these to note a rhyme scheme in 
your journal. "End rhyme" is the most common type of poetic rhyme, but 
don't forget to also look for internal rhyme or middle rhyme (a rhyme 
within a line, as in Shelley's poem "The Cloud": "I sift the snow on the 
mountains below." Once you've found the rhymes, you can classify them. A 
feminine rhyme is a rhyme on a last syllable that is unaccented, a masculine 
rhyme is a rhyme on an accented last syllable or a one-syllable word; slant 
rhymes or near rhymes occur when two syllables have a similar but not 
identical sound. 
Examine diction and vocabulary. Does the poet use allusive, abstract, idea 
words, or concrete, particular words? Does he prefer rounded, multisyllabic, 
Latinate vocabulary, or brief, plain monosyllables? What images are present 
in the poem? What do these images stand for? What senses do the images 
appeal to: sight, sound, smell, taste, feel? Does the poet appeal primarily to 
the body, to the emotions, or to the intellect of the reader? If the poem contains explicit similes (using the words like or as), pay particular attention to 
both parts of the image: What two things are being compared? How are 
they alike; how are they different? And is the writer highlighting their 
sameness—or their distinctiveness? 
Look for monologue or dialogue. Is there dialogue between the narrator of 
the poem and another person? If so, how would you characterize it: hostile, 
friendly, kind, interrogative? Does the narrator carry on a dialogue with 
herself? If so, what does this internal dialogue result in—resolution, or a further kind of complication? Does it improve or complicate the poet's relationship with the outside world? Does it improve or complicate the poet's 
relationship with others? 
The Third Level of Inquiry: Rhetoric-Stage Reading 
Now you'll need to finish your examination of the poem by asking: What 
ideas does this poem convey to me—and how is the form of the poem related 
to those ideas? The answers to the following questions will vary tremendously 
from poem to poem, but remember: Resist the urge to reduce the poem to 
a declarative sentence. If the poet had been able to put his ideas into a simple declarative sentence, he'd have had no need to write a poem. 
3 5 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Is there a moment of choice or of change in the poem? Is the poem set in one 
unchanged world? Or does a change take place from the poem's beginning 
to its end? If there is a change, does it happen to the poem, or is there a 
moment of choice for the poet/narrator? (Sometimes this choice is very 
obvious, as in Robert Frost's famous "Two roads diverged in a yellow 
wood"; sometimes it is much more subtle.) 
Is there cause and effect? Does the writer link her state of mind or experience to any particular event or cause? If so, does this link resonate for you? 
Is there causality at all? If there is no causality in the poem, do emotions or 
events arise for no particular reason? 
What is the tension between the physical and the psychological, the earthly and 
the spiritual, the mind and the body? Do the objects and physical settings in 
the poem work for or against the emotions expressed? In the world of the 
poem, does the physical lead to spiritual enlightenment—or block it? Are 
mind and body at war? Are earthly and spiritual aspects of the poem in tension? Or is only one of these aspects present? If so ... where is the other? 
What is the poem's subject? What is the poem about? Remember, this 
doesn't need to be a declarative sentence: you can answer it with a single 
word. "Grief." "Friendship." "Ireland." What word or phrase seems to name 
the core around which the poem resolves? 
Where is the self? Is the poet's "self" in the poem? If so, what is the relationship between that self and the subject of the poem? 
Do you feel sympathy? To ask "Do you feel sympathy with this poem?" is to 
ask, "Do you agree?" Does the poem resonate with you—or is it foreign to 
your experience? Can you identify which parts of the poem you recognize, 
and which seem alien? 
How does the poet relate to those who came before? Where does the poet stand 
in the rhetoric of ideas? In the past, critics have seen younger poets as 
rebelling against their elders, developing their own poetic styles in reaction 
to an older generation; or they have viewed younger poets as taking the 
techniques, themes, and even the language of older poets and incorporating 
them into new poetic works. Do you recognize either of these relationships 
among the poetic works that you have read? 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 353 
THE ANNOTATED POETRY LIST 
In the list that follows, poets are organized in chronological order of their 
birth date. When you read a novel, you read a work; when you read a series 
of poems, you read a life. So in many cases I have recommended a collected 
"greatest works" rather than a particular volume published during the poet's 
lifetime. Because poems are meant not to be read once, but returned to again 
and again, the list of recommended editions is aimed at helping you build a 
poetry library. There are many other editions of most of these poets available; 
I have listed some "Be sure to read" poems so that if you wish to use another 
edition, you can still experience the poet's most characteristic works. 
You can go as far as you please into investigating a poet who seizes your 
fancy; for the collected poems, I have suggested a brief list of poems that 
you should be certain to read. If you find this hard going, you don't necessarily need to read on: A poem, like a spice, is not going to suit every taste. 
The recommended poems are not necessarily the poet's "best" (an impossible judgment by any means), but they are that poet's most commonly 
referred to, criticized, and quoted poems. Reading them will allow you to 
understand the place the poet occupies in the larger world of poetry. 
As with fiction, some of these poem collections are available in much 
cheaper editions, if you're willing to put up with small print and narrow 
margins. For ancient works, I suggest that you use the recommended translations, rather than the out-of-date or anonymous versions often used in 
cheaper paperbacks. 
The Epic of Gilgamesh 
(c. 2000 B.C.) 
Recommended edition: A good poetic rendering is the David Ferry translation 
Gilgamesh: A New Rendering in English Verse (New York: Noonday 
Press, 1993); ISBN 0-3745-2383-5; $11.00. This verse translation puts the story 
into anachronistic heroic couplets that are sometimes difficult to read, and makes 
some imaginative leaps over places where the tablets bearing the Sumerian story 
were broken or missing, but the story reads as a unified whole. A slightly more 
proselike (and thus easier to follow) version is the Benjamin R. Foster translation The Epic of Gilgamesh (New York: W. W. Norton, 2001); ISBN 0-
3939-7516-9; $9.95; this critical edition uses brackets and ellipses for missing 
text, which breaks the story up. 
3 5 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
David Ferry translation Benjamin Foster translation 
There was no withstanding the aura or 
power of the 
Wild 
Ox Gilgamesh. Neither the father's son 
nor the wife of the noble; neither the 
mothers 
daughter 
nor the warriors bride was safe.The 
old men said: 
"Is this the shepherd of the people? Is 
this 
the wise shepherd, protector of the 
people?" 
In the enclosure of Uruk he strode 
back and forth, 
Lording it like a wild bull, his head 
thrust high. 
The onslaught of his weapons had no 
equal. 
His teammates stood forth by his game 
stick, 
He was harrying the young men of 
Uruk beyond reason. 
Gilgamesh would leave no son to his 
father, 
Day and night he would rampage 
fiercely 
Gilgamesh [ .. . ] 
This was the shepherd of ramparted 
Uruk, 
This was the people's shepherd, 
Bold, superb, accomplished, and 
mature! 
Gilgamesh would leave no girl to her 
[mother] ! 
The warrior's daughter, the young 
man's spouse, 
Goddesses kept hearing their plaints. 
Gilgamesh is one of the oldest stories in the world; these collected tales 
about the legendary king Gilgamesh (probably based on a real king who 
lived in modern-day Iraq around 3000 B.C.) were told orally for hundreds 
of years before they were written down. The first written version of the epic 
seems to date from around 2000 B.C, although the version we have is a later 
copy from the library of the Assyrian king Asshurbanipal, who began his 
reign in 669 B.C. Although Asshurbanipal s primary interest was conquest, he 
bears the distinction of being the world's first librarian; he employed a team 
of scholars to collect the history, poetry, religious literature, and medical and 
scientific writings of the surrounding peoples for his library at Nineveh. The 
Gilgamesh we know was translated from some unknown source, probably in 
ancient Sumerian, into the Akkadian language the Assyrians used, and was 
copied onto clay tablets in cuneiform script. Asshurbanipal's library was 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 5 5 
smashed when the Babylonians stormed through the Assyrian capital in 612 
B.C., so although several of the tales ("Gilgamesh and the Land of the Living" and "Gilgamesh and the Bull of Heaven") are complete, others ("The 
Death of Gilgamesh") are fragments of longer texts. "Gilgamesh, Enkidu 
and the Netherworld" is apparently a tale from a separate tradition that was 
copied onto the Assyrian tablets with no attempt to reconcile it with the 
contradictory tales already given. The story of Gilgamesh and the flood 
probably comes from a later tradition as well, since the story has also been 
discovered in the Sumerian language starring another hero named Ziusudra; at some unknown point, it was incorporated into the set of Gilgamesh 
tales as well. 
Gilgamesh, part human and part god and super naturally strong, is the 
king of Uruk. When he oppresses his people, they call out to the sky god 
Anu for relief. Anu creates a wild man, Enkidu, and sends him to challenge 
Gilgamesh's strength. Eventually the two become friends; Enkidu curbs Gilgamesh's excesses, and himself learns how to live among civilized men. The 
two go on an adventure to kill the demon Humbaba the Terrible, who lives 
in the Cedar Forest south of Uruk; later they also fight against the Bull of 
Heaven, who rampages through Gilgamesh's kingdom, killing hundreds of 
his people. The gods, annoyed by the strength of the two, send sickness to 
Enkidu. When he dies, the grief-stricken Gilgamesh goes on a quest to find 
the secret of immortality, held by Utnapishtim, an old and mysterious man 
who survived the great flood that drowned the world long ago. Utnapishtim tells Gilgamesh how to find the magic plant that will make him live forever, but on his way back to Uruk Gilgamesh loses the plant forever: "For 
whom have I labored and taken this journey?" he laments. "I have gained 
absolutely nothing!" Gilgamesh is a tragic hero; although possessing divine 
blood and strength, he is helpless against death and the passage of time, and 
suffers from the loss of his friend like any mortal man. 
HOMER 
the Iliad and the Odyssey 
(c. 800 B.C) 
Recommended edition -.There are three excellent translations of Homer available 
in paperback. The contemporary Robert Fagles translations of The Iliad (New 
York: Penguin Books, 1990; ISBN 0-14-027536-3; $15.95) and The Odyssey 
(NewYork: Penguin Books, 1996; ISBN 0-14-026886-3; $14.95) are energetic, 
straightforward, clear, and easy to understand, with a good narrative flow. The 
Robert Fitzgerald translations, The Iliad (New York: Anchor Books, 1989; 
ISBN 0-385-05941-8; $9.95) and The Odyssey (NewYork: Farrar, Straus 
3 5 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
and Giroux, 1998; ISBN 0-374-52574-9; $11.00), are several decades older; 
these translations are more poetic, with echoes of Shakespearean cadences. And 
yet a third translation, by Richmond Lattimore, has kept its place as a brilliant 
work of English poetry in its own right; The Iliad (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1987; ISBN 0-2264-6940-9; $13.00) and The Odyssey (New 
York: HarperPerennial, 1999; ISBN 0-0609-3195-7; $13.00). 
Since the poems were originally performed orally, you might also consider listening to them; the Robert Fagles translation of the Odyssey is available, 
unabridged, on audiocassette, read by Ian McKellan (New York; Penguin 
Audiobooks, 1996; ISBN 0-14-086430-X; $49.95). The Iliad is available only 
in an abridged edition, also in the Fagles translation, read by Derek Jacobi 
(New York: HighBridge Company, 1992; ISBN 0-45-30077-40; $34.95). 
Compare the opening lines of the Odyssey from each poet below, and choose 
the edition that strikes your ear. 
Richmond Lattimore translation Robert Fitzgerald translation 
Tell me, Muse, of the man of many 
ways, who was driven 
far journeys, after he had sacked Troy's 
sacred citadel. 
Many were they whose cities he saw, 
whose minds he learned of, 
many the pains he suffered in his spirit 
on the wide sea, 
struggling for his own life and the 
homecoming of his 
companions. 
Even so he could not save his companions, hard though 
he strove to; they were destroyed by 
their own wild recklessness, 
fools, who devoured the oxen of 
Helios, the Sun God, 
and he took away the day of their 
homecoming. 
Sing in me, Muse, and through me tell 
the story 
of that man skilled in all ways of contending, 
the wanderer, harried for years on end, 
after he plundered the stronghold 
on the proud height of Troy. 
He saw the townlands 
and learned the minds of many distant 
men, 
and weathered many bitter nights and 
days 
in his deep heart at sea, while he 
fought only 
to save his life, to bring his shipmates 
home. 
But not by will nor valor could he save 
them, 
for their own recklessness destroyed 
them all— 
children and fools, they killed and 
feasted on 
the cattle of Lord Helios, the Sun, and 
he who moves all day through heaven 
took from their eyes the dawn of their 
return. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 5 7 
Robert Fagles translation 
Sing to me of the man, Muse, the man 
of twists and turns 
driven time and again off course, once 
he had plundered 
the hallowed heights of Troy. 
Many cities of men he saw and learned 
their minds, 
many pains he suffered, heartsick on 
the open sea, 
fighting to save his life and bring his 
comrades home. 
But he could not save them from disaster, hard as he strove— 
the recklessness of their own ways 
destroyed them all, 
the blind fools, they devoured the cattle of the Sun 
and the Sungod wiped from sight the 
day of their return. 
Both Achilles, the hero of the Iliad, and Odysseus, hero of the Odyssey, suffer from their own brilliance: Too strong, too influential, too powerful for 
their own good, they cannot yield to even the slightest public humiliation; 
jealously guarding their own reputations, they create havoc in the Hves of 
everyone else. The Iliad is set in the last year of the ten-year Trojan War; the 
Greeks, who have sailed across the Aegean Sea to Troy, are camped around 
Troy in makeshift tents and huts, laying siege to the city. The Greek commander Agamemnon and Achilles, the greatest Greek warrior, quarrel over 
captive women, and Achilles—publicly humiliated by Agamemnon, but 
bound in loyalty to his king by an oath—complains to his mother, the sea 
goddess Thetis.Thetis turns Zeus's wrath against Agamemnon and the other 
Greeks, and Agamemnon is convinced by a dream to make a disastrous 
attack on Troy. But when the gods become involved in the battle, it spirals 
into chaos; eventually Zeus halts the fighting and scolds his divine colleagues for weighing in on the side of the Greeks. When the battle restarts, 
Zeus himself gives instructions to Hector, the son of Troy's king and the 
most powerful Trojan warrior, but the sea god Poseidon throws his weight 
behind the Greek hero Ajax. Hector is wounded and the Trojans are driven 
back. Hector, bandaged, returns to the fighting; Zeus eventually gives all of 
the gods permission to reenter the fighting, and the war turns into a twolevel fight, between the armies of men on the one hand and the quarrehng 
358 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
gods on the other. When Athena, who loves the Greeks, tricks Hector into 
fighting Achilles, Hector is killed, and Achilles drags his body around the 
city; but Zeus intervenes again, telling Thetis to instruct her son Achilles to 
give the body back to Priam, the king of Troy. Priam ransoms his son's 
corpse from Achilles, and the tale ends with a great funeral. 
The Odyssey takes place after the end of the Trojan war. Odysseus, a Greek 
king, sets sail for home; but although the other Greeks return without incident, Odysseus is sidetracked by the hostility of Poseidon, who sends storms 
to wreck Odysseus' ship and maroon him. Meanwhile his wife Penelope is 
under intense pressure to remarry; she has stalled her suitors for ten years, 
but has run out of excuses. Odysseus struggles home; on the way he escapes 
the land of the Lotus-Eaters (where his men are drugged into sloth when 
they eat a magic plant), the cave of the one-eyed Cyclops (Poseidon's son; 
when Odysseus blinds him, Poseidon grows even angrier), the goddess Circe 
(who turns his men into pigs and seduces Odysseus), and a side journey to 
Hades.Then he passes the island of the Sirens (who tempt men to their deaths 
with their song) and survives a journey through a narrow strait between the 
six-headed monster Scylla and the enormous whirlpool Charybdis, only to 
land on the shores of an island owned by the sun god, Helios. When his men 
eat Helios's sacred cows, Zeus kills them all and destroys their ship; Odysseus, 
fleeing, is sucked into Charybdis and spewed out onto the island of the nymph 
Calypso, who tries to marry him. Finally he escapes Calypso and returns 
home just as Penelope is running out of techniques to stall her suitors. When 
he sees his house filled with hostile warriors who hope to marry his wife, 
he disguises himself as a beggar until he is able to arrange a shooting contest, the winner to be awarded Penelope in marriage. Bow in hand, he turns 
on the suitors, kills them all, and reclaims his throne. 
GREEK LYRICISTS 
(C. 600 B.C.) 
Recommended edition: Greek Lyrics, translated by Richmond Lattimore, second edition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, i960); ISBN 0-226-46944-
1; $8.00. 
Be sure to read: The poems of Sappho, pp. 38-42; Pindar, pp. 57-63; and 
Solon, pp. 13—23; this will expose you to a range of poetic styles and themes. 
The Greek lyric poems, which exist now only in fragments, were written to 
be performed onstage to the accompaniment of the lyre. Choral poetry was 
sung in unison by a trained chorus; monodic poetry was recited by the poet. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 5 9 
All Greek lyric poetry was rooted in the worship of the gods, and the poems 
are almost all framed by invocations to deities and pleas for divine favor. But 
within that framework, the Greeks wrote poems that range from the passionate pleadings of Sappho: 
[B]ut it breaks my spirit; 
underneath my breast all the heart is shaken. 
Let me only glance where you are, the voice dies, 
I can say nothing, 
but my lips are stricken to silence, underneath my skin the tenuous flame suffuses; 
nothing shows in front of my eyes, my ears are 
muted in thunder 
—From "Invocation to Aphrodite," translated by Richmond Lattimore 
to the religious, impersonal, hymnlike choral lyrics of Pindar: 
First of all, on a golden chariot beside the well-springs 
of Ocean, the goddesses of Destiny brought the counselor, heavenly 
Themis, to the hallowed stairway 
that leads by a shining way to Olympos.... 
—From the "Ninth Isthmian Ode," translated by Richmond Lattimore 
to the political and philosophical musings of Solon: 
But here is how we men, be we good, be we evil, 
think. Each keeps his own personal notion within 
until he suffers. Then he cries out .. . 
—From "Prayer to the Muses," translated by Richmond Lattimore 
Although the choral lyrics and hymns to the gods are archaic now, the 
Greek monodic lyrics (which paint a particular moment of time or an 
instant of emotional experience with great detail, as Sappho does) were 
startlingly innovative in their day—and remain completely comprehensible 
to us, centuries later. The epigram, a slightly later form of verse, encapsulated a single mood, experience, or conclusion into a compressed, polished 
sentence or two. Later English poets borrowed the Greek terms ode and 
elegy (names that originally referred to different kinds of meter) for their 
own poems—and found, in the Greek ability to capture a single vivid 
impression in verse, a goal for their own poetry. 
3 6 ° SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
HORACE 
Odes 
(65–8 B.C.) 
Recommended edition: Odes, translated by James Michie (NewYork: Modern 
Library, 2002); ISBN 0-375-75902-6; $10.95; a lyrical, readable translation 
that includes the Latin on the facing page. 
Be sure to read: For a sampling of the best-known odes, try book I, Odes 
1-9, 17, and 30; book II, Odes 19-20; book III, Odes 1-6 and 13; book IV, 
Odes 1 and 7. 
Life is brief and death is coming, so enjoy each moment. Horace's odes are 
organized around this philosophy; they tend to begin with a scene from 
nature or from society (a great banquet, a drinking party, a forest at dawn) 
and to progress from this concrete image to a brief argument that explains 
why (and how) the reader should enjoy what each day brings, without 
dreading the future. The odes aren't united by any one subject; Horace 
addresses, in turn, various women, virgin maidens, his friend Septimus, and 
gods ranging from Calliope to Bacchus. He writes of the weather, nature 
("All the farm beasts on the green ground/ Gambol, and with time to 
spare/ The world enjoys the open air"), farm life, the meaning of Roman 
citizenship, festivals, feasts, and love. But his philosophy of carpe diem ("pluck 
the day," seizing whatever it brings without apprehension) shapes every 
poem. This pragmatic advice is given in full knowledge that death is 
inevitable, but Horace doesn't see this as cause for mourning. Rather, the 
unstoppable approach of death becomes a moral center for his work: Accept 
your mortality and always act in the knowledge that time is short. 
Horace's composition of poetry is his own effort to "seize the present 
moment." In his first ode, he describes the various ways that men choose to 
"grasp the day"; the "enthusiastic charioteer . . . Snatches the victor's palm 
and feels 
Lord of the earth, god among men; 
The politician glories when 
The fickle voters designate 
Him three times public magistrate.... 
One man won't decline 
Goblets of vintage Massic wine, 
Or stolen time, a solid chunk 
Of afternoon.... 
Another likes the life at arms, 
The camp's cacophonous alarms.... 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 6 1 
But me the crown of ivy, sign 
Of poets' brows, denotes divine.... 
And if to the great lyric choir 
You add my name, this head, held high 
Will jog the planets in the sky 
—translated by James Michie 
Beowulf 
(c. 1ooo) 
Recommended edition: The Seamus Heaney translation, Beowulf: A New 
Verse Translation (New York: W. W. Norton, 2001); ISBN 0-3933-2097-9; 
S13-95-
Like Homer's epics, this poem was originally performed orally; you can listen to it on the unabridged audio book edition, read by Heaney himself (New 
York: HighBridge Company, 2000); ISBN 1-3631-1427-2; $24.95. 
Beowulf, probably composed orally in the eighth century, was written 
down near the end of the tenth century in West Saxon dialect; it bears marks 
of its oral origin in its alliterative lines, which contain four stressed syllables, 
two or three of which begin with the same sound; and in its use of kenning, 
formulaic hyphenated names that describe people or objects in terms of 
their character qualities and provide extra syllables to fill out the meter (so, 
when necessary, the sea becomes the "whale-road," a ship's sail becomes the 
"sea-shawl," and the monster Grendel is "God-cursed," the "hall-watcher," 
the "shadow-stalker" and "terror-monger"). 
At the poem's beginning, the Danish King Hrothgar has a problem; he 
has built a beautiful mead hall on a high, well-lit hill, but a monster, 
descended from the biblical Cain, stalks through the tangled swamps below, 
forever cut off from God and from man. Grendel attacks at night, eating 
Hrothgar s men and terrifying his subjects, and no one can defeat him— 
until the hero Beowulf travels from Geatland to help. Beowulf fights Grendel with his bare hands and defeats him. But Grendel's mother, thirsting for 
revenge, is twice as evil; Beowulf struggles to defeat her and eventually is 
forced to use a magic sword from the days of the giants to kill her. After his 
victories, Beowulf inherits the kingdom and rules peacefully for fifty 
years—until a thief, stealing a jeweled cup from a dragon's lair, awakens the 
dragon. It roams through Beowulf's land, burning houses and killing his 
subjects, and the old king arms himself for one last battle. He defeats the 
dragon, but dies in the process, and is burned on the shore as his people 
mourn. 
3 6 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Beowulf's battles against the three monsters beg for allegorical interpretation. John Gardner suggests that the three foes represent the malfunction 
of three different parts of the soul (Grendel represents unreason, Grendel's 
mother a lack of moral sense, the dragon a surrender to lust and greed); many 
other critics have pointed out that Beowulf is an obvious Christ figure who 
strides out to meet the Satanic dragon with twelve followers and dies to 
protect his people; Grendel, the monster from the plains, is the pagan soul 
cut off from God.Yet these undeniably Christian elements are mingled with 
a thoroughly un-Christian submission to impersonal fate (wyrd), an uncritical acceptance of the warrior ethic that demands revenge for the death of 
a kinsman, and a fervent belief in spells and ancient demons. Allegorical 
interpretations aside, the story is just plain good reading; you'll hear it in 
phrases stolen by later writers, from Tolkein to Conan Doyle, and in Seamus Heaney's hands, the verse ranges from beautiful to downright creepy: 
A few miles from here 
a frost-stiffened wood waits and keeps watch 
above a mere; the overhanging bank 
is a maze of tree-roots mirrored in its surface. 
At night there, something uncanny happens: 
the water burns. And the mere bottom 
has never been sounded by the sons of men. 
On its banks, the heather-stepper halts: 
the hart in flight from pursuing hounds 
will turn to face them with firm set horns 
and die in the wood rather than dive 
beneath its surface. That is no good place. 
DANTE ALIGHIERI 
Inferno 
(1265–1321) 
Recommended edition: The Inferno of Dante, translated by Robert Pinsky 
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1994); ISBN 0-374-52452-1; $9.00. 
This idiomatic, energetic translation by an American poet has the Italian on facing pages. You can also read the Allen Mandelbaum translation, The Divine 
Comedy of Dante Alighieri: Inferno, which has been a standard for years; 
it is less idiomatic, more formal (NewYork: Bantam Books, 1980; ISBN 0-553-
21339-3; $6.50). Compare the two translations in this excerpt from Canto III, 
in which Dante approaches the gates of hell: 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3^ 3 
Robert Pinsky's translation 
ABANDON ALL HOPE, YOU WHO 
ENTER HERE. 
These words I saw inscribed in some 
dark color 
Over a portal.... 
The sighs, groans, and laments at first 
were so loud, 
Resounding through the starless air, I 
began to weep; 
Strange languages, horrible screams, 
words imbued 
With rage or despair, cries as of troubled sleep 
Or of a tortured shrillness—they rose 
in a coil 
Of tumult, along with noises like the 
slap 
Of beating hands, all fused in a ceaseless flail 
That churns and frenzies that dark and 
timeless air 
Like sand in a whirlwind.... 
On Good Friday, Dante (the narrator of his own poem) becomes lost in 
a dark wood; uncertain as to whether he is sleeping or waking, he tries to 
find his path but instead finds wild animals blocking his way. The ghost of 
the Roman poet Virgil appears, offering to show him the path, which will 
eventually lead Dante to Heaven and to the spirit of Beatrice, Dante's lost 
love—but Virgil warns that the path will lead them through Hell first. 
The journey through Hell reveals it to be made up of concentric circles, 
ranging from an outer belt where the least blameworthy reside (this AnteInferno contains the souls of those who lived "without disgrace and without praise," worthy of neither heaven nor hell) to the innermost Ninth 
Circle, which contains those who betray their families, their countries, and 
their benefactors. At the very center of Hell is Lucifer himself, frozen in ice, 
and chewing on the three greatest sinners of history: Judas, who betrayed 
Christ, and Cassius and Brutus, who betrayed Caesar. (The point is the 
betrayal of a close and trusted friend, not a parallel between Caesar and 
Christ.) From the First to the Ninth Circle, Dante ranks sins from the least 
Allen Mandelbaum's translation 
ABANDON EVERY HOPE,WHO 
ENTER HERE. 
These words—their aspect was 
obscure—I read 
inscribed above a gateway.... 
Here sighs and lamentations and loud 
cries 
were echoing across the starless air 
so that, as soon as I set out, I wept. 
Strange utterances, horrible pronouncements, 
accents of anger, words of suffering, 
and voices shrill and faint, and beating 
hands— 
all went to make a tumult that will 
whirl 
forever through that turbid, timeless 
air, 
like sand that eddies when a whirlwind 
swirls.... 
3 6 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
to the most reprehensible and provides a punishment for each. These punishments offer profound insights into the nature of evil, which is portrayed 
first as a choice, and then as an inevitability that traps its devotees in an eternal, sickening cycle. Sinners in Dante's Inferno spend eternity performing 
acts that they despise, without any hope of an end. 
In writing, Dante had always in mind the fourfold exegesis that Thomas 
Aquinas had prescribed for the interpretation of Scripture. His journey 
through hell is a literal adventure, but also an allegorical journey of a soul 
who glimpses the true nature of Satan's kingdom, and beyond it the beauties of heaven ("My guide and I came on that hidden road," Dante concludes, in Mandelbaum's translation "to make our way back into the bright 
world .. . until I saw, / through a round opening, some of those things / of 
beauty Heaven bears. It was from there/ that we emerged, to see—once 
more—the stars"); a tropological journey, showing the inevitable working 
out of all different varieties of sin; and an eschatological journey as well: it 
yields a glimpse of final judgment. 
Sir Gawain and the 
Green Knight 
(c. 1350) 
Recommended edition: The most elegant translation of this Old English poem 
is the verse translation by Marie Boroff, now available only in the collection Sir 
Gawain and the Green Knight, Patience, Pearl: Verse Translations (New 
York: WW Norton, 2001); ISBN 0-3939-7658-0; $14.55. The stand-alone Sir 
Gawain and the Green Knight volume is out of print but can usually be found 
used (ISBN 0393097544). Slightly more archaic, but great fun to read for Tolkein 
fans (since echoes from The Lord of the Rings haunt the poem) is the J. R. 
R.Tolkein translation (NewYork:DelRey, 1988);ISBN0-3452-7760-0;$6.99. 
Gawain is a member of Arthur's court, that bright, glittering, Hollywoodshiny palace filled with "the most noble knights known under Christ, / And 
the loveliest ladies that lived on earth ever." At Christmas, a central feast of 
the Christian year, a Green Knight rides into Arthur's hall, sneers at the 
knights ("There are about on these benches but beardless children!" he 
scoffs) and throws out a challenge: He will allow any knight to strike him 
with his axe, as long as he can return the blow a year from now. This challenge meets with silence, until Arthur himself stands up to accept it—at 
which point Gawain, his nephew and kinsman, offers to play the "game" 
instead. Gawain cuts off the Green Knight's head, but the Knight picks his 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3^5 
head up and departs, reminding Gawain to meet him at the "Green Chapel" 
in a year and a day 
A year passes, and Gawain—bound by his oath—sets out to find the 
Green Chapel. Lost in a wilderness, he prays to the Virgin Mary for guidance, and immediately sees a castle, where he goes for shelter. The lord and 
lady of the castle offer him hospitality for three days; each morning the lady 
tries to seduce him while her husband is out hunting, but Gawain rejects 
each temptation until the last, when she offers him a green girdle that will 
magically render him invincible. Gawain takes the girdle and keeps it a 
secret from the lord of the castle, even though he has promised to give his 
host anything he acquires during his stay When Gawain finally does meet 
the Green Knight, the Knight flourishes the axe at him twice, nicks him 
once, and then reveals his true identity: He is the lord of the castle, and the 
nick is punishment for Gawain s weakness in accepting the green girdle and 
keeping it secret. "True men pay what they owe," the Green Knight 
remarks, "You lacked, sir, a little in loyalty there." Gawain, ashamed at his 
failing, wears the green girdle afterward as part of his armor; and his fellow 
knights of the Round Table adopt the green belt as well, the "sign .. . of 
cowardice and coveting." The Camelot of the poem is rich in chivalry, that 
set of values which encompasses honesty, courtesy, respect for women, 
unswerving loyalty to leaders, and Christian faith. Yet there is a certain 
uneasiness at Camelot's core, a doubt about whether this chivalry—the 
code that replaced the bloody, primitive warriors code of revenge found in 
Beowulf-—is truly a manly substitute. Gawain is able to resist seduction, but 
in the end his courage fails him. 
GEOFFREY CHAUCER 
The Canterbury Tales 
(c. 1343–1400) 
Recommended edition: The Penguin paperback edition, The Canterbury 
Tales, translated by Nevill Coghill (New York: Penguin Books, 2000); ISBN 
0-1404-4022-4; $10.00. This edition turns the Middle English verse into modern English verse. If you want to make a run at the Middle English, try the 
Norton Critical Edition, The Canterbury Tales: Nine Tales and the General Prologue, edited by VA. Kolve and Glending Olson (NewYork: WW 
Norton, 1989; ISBN 0-3939-5245-2; $12.30); this reader-friendly edition provides plenty of vocabulary notes and explanatory footnotes. 
Be sure to read: The Prologue, the Knight's Tale, the Miller's Tale, the Wife 
of Bath's Prologue and Tale, the Pardoner's Tale, and Chaucer's Retraction. Try 
the excerpt below before deciding which version to use: 
3 à 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Prologue, Norton edition: 
Whan that Aprill with his shoures sote0
 sweet showers 
The droghte0
 of Marche hath perced to the rote, ° dryness/root 
And bathed every veyne0
 in swich licour, ° vein /such moisture 
Of which vertu0
 engendred is the flour; By power of which 
Whan Zephirus0
 eek with his swete breeth the west wind 
Inspired0
 hath in ever holt° and heeth0
 Breathed into/wood/heath 
The tendre croppes,0
 and the yonge sonne sprouts 
Hath in the Ram his halfe cours y-ronne.... 
Compare with the Prologue as translated by Nevill Coghill: 
When in April the sweet showers fall 
And pierce the drought of March to the root, and all 
The veins are bathed in liquor of such power 
As brings about the engendering of the flower, 
When also Zephyrus with his sweet breath 
Exhales an air in every grove and heath 
Upon the tender shoots, and the young sun 
His half-course in the sign of the Ram has run.... 
Chaucer's pilgrims set out from London, that secular city, on a journey to 
Canterbury, the center of the Christian faith in England. The journey has its 
oddities (it is at least a three-day trip, but the pilgrims never seem to sleep) 
and the group of pilgrims is impossibly varied, containing a representative of 
every level of society, from the aristocratic Knight down to the blue-collar 
Miller. Around the fire, each pilgrim tells a story—the Canterbury Tales. For 
these stories, Chaucer uses common medieval literary forms: the estates satire, 
a stereotypical portrait of the vices of a particular social class; the romance, a 
long, serious tale, often historical, told by a serious and trustworthy narrator, 
usually concerning knights, kings, and other aristocratic personages; the fabliaux, a short story featuring low-class characters and obscene humor; the beast 
fable, like Aesop's fables, a moral tale starring talking animals; the exemplum, 
a brief moral tale, a preacher's illustration.Yet he uses each form with a wink 
and a nudge, parodying the conventions of each; the Tales are no more "real" 
than are the pilgrims, who (although on a religious journey) spend their time 
drinking, feasting, singing, and telling dirty jokes. The Knight's Tale, a long 
(and boring) romance between highborn characters, is immediately followed 
by the Miller's Tale, which reverses every single convention of the romance 
by putting lecherous and stupid characters at the center of the plot and which 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 367 
culminates, not in a chaste kiss, but in scatological humor. The Wife of Bath's 
tale, which (she assures us) will reveal what women really want, ends up 
describing what men really want (a wife who is perpetually young and beautiful and entirely submissive). 
At the end of his book, Chaucer primly retracts the Tales along with his 
other "worldly translations," thus shifting the blame for enjoying them onto the 
reader. Scholars argue endlessly about this Retraction. Is it genuine, the product of a deathbed repentance? Was it inserted by later scribes? Is it ironic, a jab 
from the poet at the idea that tales must be "unworldly" to be worthwhile? The 
last explanation seems most likely; the Canterbury Tales, told by pilgrims who 
(theoretically) have their minds on higher things, illustrate the impossibility 
of keeping the imagination on those things rather than on earthly matters. 
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 
Sonnets 
(1564–1616) 
Recommended edition:The Pelican Shakespeare edition, The Sonnets, edited 
by Douglas Bush and Alfred Harbage (New York: Penguin Books, 1970); 
ISBN 0-14-071423-5; $4.95. 
Be sure to read: 3,16,18,19,21,29,30,36,40, 60,98,116,129,130,152. 
Shakespeare's sonnets follow a particular English sonnet form. Each is written in iambic pentameter, a rhythm scheme in which each line has ten syllables; those syllables are divided into pairs, or "feet," known as iambs. Each 
iamb has an unstressed syllable, followed by a stressed syllable; when these 
are scanned,ox written in poetic notation, they are noted as u — 
first foot 
u 1 — 
MyljVlIS 
second foot 
u 1 — 
tress^EYES 
third foot 
are'NO 
fourth foot 
u I — 
thing I LIKE 
fifth foot 
u - — 
the I SUN 
The sonnets contain fourteen lines of iambic pentameter. The first twelve 
lines are divided into three quatrains, each containing four lines with the 
rhyme scheme abab cdcd efef. These quatrains are related in meaning; they 
present three parallel ideas, or build an argument in three points. Or the first 
quatrain presents an idea and then the next two complicate it or explain it. 
The final two lines, a rhymed couplet, have the rhyme scheme gg (they 
rhyme only with each other). Although Shakespeare keeps to this rhyme 
scheme, he occasionally also makes use of the Petrarchan development of 
3 6 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
meaning, in which the first eight lines pose a problem while the next six 
solve or react to it. This sonnet form can begin to guide your reading: The 
sonnets do not convey impressions or moods, or relate stories; they propose 
problems and search for answers. 
Although the sonnets can be read separately (and reams of criticism have 
been written on every aspect of their construction), they have traditionally 
also been read as parts of a whole, as one sequence. Read in this way, the 
poems seem to reveal a "narrator" who is not necessarily Shakespeare himself. The "Poet," as a fictional character, can be discerned behind the sonnets; he is discontented, restless, resisting calmness and repose. Three other 
characters can also be found in the sonnets. The "Dark Lady" is referred to 
in Sonnet 127 as a "black beauty"; "My mistress' eyes are raven-black," the 
Poet explains.The "Dark Lady" is described again in Sonnets 130,131, and 
132, and is referred to elsewhere; a Rival Poet, shows up in nine sonnets 
(21, 78-80, and 82-86); and a Young Man, addressed in the first seventeen 
sonnets, is praised for his youth and (fleeting) beauty and is encouraged to 
marry and pass his beauty on to children: "Then what could death do if 
thou shoudst depart," the Poet asks in Sonnet 6, "Leaving thee living in 
posterity?" 
JOHN DONNE 
(1572–1631) 
Recommended edition:John Donne: The Complete English Poems, edited 
by A.J. Smith (NewYork: Penguin, 1986); ISBN 0-1404-2209-9; $15.00. This 
edition has careful endnotes explaining all of Donne's references and interpreting Donne's conceits. 
Be sure to read: Elegy 1 ("To his Mistress Going to Bed"), Elegy 12 ("Nature's 
lay idiot"), "The Flea," "Song ['Go, and catch a falling star']," "The Sun 
Rising," "The Canonization," "Air and Angels," "Love's Alchemy," "The 
Bait," "A Valediction: Forbidding Mourning," "The Ecstasy," and the sixteensonnet sequence "Holy Sonnets. " 
John Donne's reputation as a dissolute, poetry-spouting rake who miraculously mutated into a devout priest and dean of St. Paul's Cathedral isn't 
entirely deserved. True, Donne did spend the first part of his life as a 
courtier and man about town, and he did carry on an affair with his 
employer's sixteen-year-old niece, Anne More, when he was himself 
nearly thirty. But he married Anne (after her father had him jailed) and 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3^ 9 
lived with her faithfully afterward. And although Donne's poetry is traditionally divided into two parts—the earthy love poetry written in the first 
part of his life, and the poetry of devotion to God produced during his 
later years—he actually began writing religious poetry years before he 
became a priest, and was still producing amorous verses two years after his 
ordination. 
John Donne's poetry is marked by the use of the "metaphysical conceit," 
a device that drags together two unlikely images or ideas. Probably the most 
notorious of Donne's conceits appears in "The Flea," which compares sex 
to a blood-swollen flea which has bitten the two lovers; sex and the flea 
both mingle the blood of the two into one body. "Mark but this flea," the 
impatient lover tells his reluctant mistress, "and mark in this,/ How little 
that which thou deny'st me is." She won't sleep with him out of her sense 
of honor, but—he points out—the flea is already combining their bodily 
fluids, and no one is suffering from shame. (It is, he adds pathetically, more 
fortunate than he.) 
Donne's Holy Sonnets, written later in his life, are Petrarchan sonnets 
(combining an eight-line octet, rhymed abbaabba with a six-line sestet; the 
sestet's rhyme scheme varies, but the last two lines usually rhyme and provide a conclusion). They make use of less grotesque conceits. "I am a little 
world made cunningly / Of elements, and an angelic sprite," begins the fifth 
meditation, continuing on to describe the little world's betrayal to sin and 
the judgment of fire that must consume it. And Donne's heart becomes first 
a besieged castle, then an occupied village, and finally a captive maiden in 
"Batter my heart, three-personed God," which concludes, 
Take me to you, imprison me, for I 
Except you enthral me, never shall be free, 
Nor ever chaste, except you ravish me. 
Throughout the Sonnets, Donne's poetic persona is capable of no good 
on his own; he is a helpless slave of sin and Satan, needing violent action on 
the part of God to rescue him. "Not one hour I can myself sustain," he 
writes, and concludes "Meditation 2 " with a desperate appeal to Christ the 
Warrior: 
Except thou rise and for thine own work fight, 
Oh I shall soon despair, when I do see 
That thou lov'st mankind well, yet wilt not choose me, 
And Satan hates me, yet is loth to lose me. 
3 7 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
KING JAMES BIBLE 
Psalms 
(1611) 
Recommended edition:You can read the Psalms from any "Authorized Text" 
but be careful that you're not reading from the Revised Standard Version, which 
is a twentieth-century revision of a British revision of the Authorized Version, 
or from a "New King James," which is also a contemporary revision. A good, 
affordable, hard-cover 1611 version with updated spelling is the Cambridge 
Standard Text Edition, Holy Bible: King James Version (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998); ISBN 0-321-30882-7; $17.99;for a 1611 version 
that preserves the spelling, original marginal notes, and translators' preface, look 
for The Holy Bible, 1611 Edition (Nashville,Tenn. '.Thomas Nelson, 1982); 
ISBN 0-840-70041-3; $34.99. 
Be sure to read: Psalms 1,2, 3, 23, 27, 31, 37, 89, 90, 91, 103, 109, 119, 121, 
132, 136, 148, 130. 
The "Authorized Version" of the Bible, a translation sponsored by King 
James of England, affected the English language for centuries afterwards, and 
the Psalms—the Bible's book of poems—has colored the language of poets 
right through the twentieth century. The translators of this 1611 Englishlanguage version of the Bible intended to make a Bible that was accessible 
to all readers.Translation, they wrote in their preface,"openeth the window, 
to let in the light... breaketh the shell, that we may eat the kernel ... putteth aside the curtain, that we may look into the most Holy place . . . 
removeth the cover of the well, that we may come by the water." In their 
attempt to make the Psalms "open" to seventeenth-century English readers, 
the translators rendered Hebrew poetry into good English, keeping some 
Hebrew conventions and doing enormous violence to others. They faithfully retained the typical Hebrew structure of a poetic line as involving two 
(and less frequently, three) parallel phrases, a structure evident in Psalm 
2:1-4. 
Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? 
The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, 
against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, 
Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. 
He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision. 
In each line of Hebrew poetry, the first phrase is followed by a second parallel phrase. The second phrase may restate the first in different words (syn-
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 7 1 
onymous parallelism); it may contradict the first (antithetic parallelism); it 
may repeat the first phrase but add to it (repetitive parallelism), or the second phrase may expresses an effect, of which the first phrase is the cause 
(causative parallelism): 
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. 
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures, he leadeth me beside the still waters. 
He restoreth my soul, he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake. 
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, 
For thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. 
—Psalm 23:1-4 
The singsong parallelism of the King James version of the Psalms shows 
up in the work of later poets, Milton not the least: 
By sudden onset, either with Hell fire 
To waste his whole creation, or possess 
All as our own, and drive as we were driven, 
The puny habitants, or if not drive, 
Seduce them to our party, that their God 
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand.... 
—Paradise Lost, book II 
The connecting "ands" of the King James Bible, a faithful translation of 
the Hebrew "waw consecutive" which strings Hebrew sentences together, 
also show up again and again in later poetry, particularly poetry written in 
a self-consciously biblical mode: 
And are there other sorrows beside the sorrows of poverty? 
And are there other joys beside the joys of riches and ease? 
And is there not one law for both the lion and the ox? 
And is there not eternal fire and eternal chains, 
To bind the phantoms of existence from eternal life? 
—William Blake, "The Vision of the Daughters of Albion" 
JOHN MILTON 
Paradise Lost 
(1608–1674) 
Recommended edition: The Signet Classic paperback, Paradise Lost & Paradise Regained, edited by Christopher Ricks (New York: Signet Books, 
3 7 ^ SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
1968); ISBN 0-451-52792-5; $7.95. This edition has the explanatory footnotes 
(extremely helpful, since Milton uses archaic expressions and hundreds of 
obscure classical references) at the bottom of the page; the Penguin paperback 
Paradise Lost, edited by John Leonard (New York: Penguin Books, 2000; 
ISBN 0-14-042426-1; $10.00) has more white space and is a little easier on the 
eye, but all of the notes are at the back, which makes reading awkward. 
Be sure to read: Paradise Lost. No one but Milton scholars ever tackles Paradise Regained. 
Milton's fascination with all things classical is partly a manifestation of his 
love for order and symmetry; in Paradise Lost, Milton's retelling of the Genesis 1—3 story of the Fall, Hell is characterized by chaos and pandemonium 
(a word invented by Milton); Heaven is a place where everyone speaks in 
calm voices and moves in preordained patterns. But his sympathy for the 
ancient epics also stems from his sympathy for the ancient view of man as 
essentially helpless to change history, able only to act nobly in the face of 
forces beyond his comprehension or control. In Paradise Lost, a "secondary 
epic" (a written poem that copies the conventions of oral epic), these forces 
are Christianized; they are represented by God and by Christ, who have a 
plan, set into place before the foundation of the world, which even includes 
Satan's temptation and Adam's fall.This plan acts as the organizing backbone 
of history; Milton promises, in his prologue, that Paradise Lost will "justify 
the ways of God to man," and indeed the poem seems to organize all of 
existence into a flow chart that accounts for every aspect of the universe. 
Milton's God is reasonable; his Satan is driven by envy and the lust for 
revenge, two unreasonable emotions; Eve falls because she allows her sense 
to triumph over her reason. As the poem progresses, the reader finds much 
more interest in Satan than in any of the rational, sinless "good guys"; it is 
difficult to make an emotional connection with Christ's sinless perfection, 
but relatively easy to identify with gnawing jealousy. 
And this, as Stanley Fish notes in his classic study Surprised by Sin, is 
exactly Milton's aim; the poem seduces the reader into reenacting the Fall, 
allowing emotion and sympathy to triumph over reason and judgment. The 
true Fall, in Milton's Paradise Lost, happens not when Eve chooses to eat the 
apple—Eve, after all, is a vain creature, driven by sensation, who spends 
more time gazing at her reflection than working in the garden. It happens 
when Adam, realizing that Eve's sin will cause God to destroy her, decides to 
eat as well so that they can remain together. Milton (in Fish's words) aims to 
"re-create in the mind of the reader .. . the drama of the Fall, to make him 
fall again exactly as Adam did and with Adam's troubled clarity, that is to say, 
'not deceived.' " In this, Milton demonstrates that for all his love of reason, 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 373 
he too knows its limits; it is perfectly possible to reason one's way to a logical but devastating conclusion. 
WILLIAM BLAKE 
Songs of Innocence and of Experience 
(1757–1827) 
Recommended edition: Songs of Innocence and of Experience, with 
Blake's full-color illustrations—absolutely essential to the poems, which were 
originally published as companion pieces to Blake's mystical paintings (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1989); ISBN 0-19-281089-8; $15.95. 
The poems in Blake's Songs of Innocence have darker parallels in Songs of 
Experience; the enlightened, natural, pure state depicted in the Innocence 
poems is vulnerable to the corruptions of government, society, and organized religion. "Nurse's Song" in Songs of Innocence tells of children playing, 
unfettered by parental or school authority: The children cry out to their 
nurse at bedtime, 
"No, no, let us play, for it is yet day 
And we cannot go to sleep; 
Besides, in the sky the litde birds fly 
And the hills are all cover'd with sheep." 
"Well, well, go & play till the light fades away 
And then go home to bed." 
The little ones leaped & shouted & laugh'd 
And all the hills ecchoed. 
But the companion piece in Songs of Experience shows a warped and distorted adult, looking back on those children with scorn. 
When the voices of children are heard on the green 
And whisp'rings are in the dale, 
The days of my youth rise fresh in my mind, 
My face turns green and pale. 
Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down, 
And the dews of night arise; 
Your spring & your day are wasted in play, 
And your winter and night in disguise. 
3 7 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
In Blake's poems, rationality is the straitjacket that reduces the energetic, 
creative child to a dull, passive adult. An authentic existence is one in which 
we are free to act on impulse; Energy is Blake's God, and the God of the 
church (the one whom, as Blake writes, inscribes "Do Not" on the doors of 
his chapels) is actually the Devil, out to destroy humanity. "Energy is the 
only life," Blake writes, in The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, "and is from 
the Body; and Reason is the bound or outward circumference of Energy. 
Energy is Eternal Delight. Those who restrain desire, do so because theirs is 
weak enough to be restrained. And being restrain'd, it by degrees became 
passive." Blake's poetry, written in a wild and unfettered mix of rhyme and 
meter, is exhortation; it aims to set that desire free again. 
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH 
(1770–1850) 
Recommended edition: The Modern Library paperback, Selected Poetry of 
William Wordsworth, edited by Mark Van Doren (New York: Random 
House, 2002); ISBN 0-373-73941-7; S11.93. 
Be sure to read: "Composed upon Westminster Bridge," "The Idiot Boy," "It 
Is a Beauteous Evening, Calm and Free," "I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud," 
"Lines Composed a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey" "Lines Left upon a Seat 
in a Yew-tree," "Lines Written in Early Spring," "London, 1802," "Lucy 
Gray" "Ode: Intimations of Immortality," "The Prelude," "She Dwelt Among 
the Untrodden Ways," "Simon Lee," "The World Is Too Much With Us. " 
In 1798, Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge published together a 
volume called Lyrical Ballads—a collection of Wordsworth's lyrical poems 
along with Coleridge's mystical Rime of the Ancient Mariner. These poems 
mark, for most critics, the formal beginning of Romantic poetry as a movement. Wordsworth shares Blake's suspicion of rationality, and his conviction 
that a divine force exists in humans; but, unlike Blake, Wordsworth interprets the divine not as a wild mystic force, but as a gentle enlightening presence that infuses both man and nature. "I have felt," Wordsworth wrote, in 
"Lines Composed a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey," 
a presence that disturbs me with the joy 
Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime 
Of something far more deeply interfused, 
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns, 
And the round ocean and the living air, 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 7 5 
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man; 
A motion and a spirit, that impels 
All thinking things, all objects of all thought, 
And rolls through all things. 
For Wordsworth, the pastoral poem (the poem of nature) is a device 
which gives him a glimpse of the Sublime, the divine creative force. He can 
sense the Sublime in "fleeting moods/ Of shadowy exaltation" (to quote his 
long autobiographical poem The Prelude). But Wordsworth, like all men, 
constantly struggles for that sense of the Sublime; it is quickly blotted out 
by the artificial world, by cities, conventional rules of manners, education, 
the patter of social conversation. Wordsworth longs to shake free from all of 
this. He is fond of individuals, but not enthusiastic about society; his heroine is Lucy Gray, who disappears from the middle of a snow-covered bridge, 
leaving no tracks, and is afterwards seen singing a "solitary song" alone on 
the heath; in "Lines Composed upon Westminster Bridge," he finds the city 
most majestic when it is empty and sleeping. 
In his search for the Sublime, Wordsworth celebrates childhood (a time 
when man can remember the "clouds of glory" that accompanied his birth, 
when the "prison house" of education has not yet closed around him) and 
the natural world; for Wordsworth, the pastoral ("nature") poem is a window into the divine. Yet his musings on nature have an overtone of the 
tragic; he is constantly aware of his own separation from the glory that 
infuses the natural world. At best, he can get only a sideways glimpse of 
truth; he only sees the glory darkly. In Book I of The Prelude, he describes 
such a revelation, which comes after he gazes at a mountain, towering over 
a lake at sunset: 
[A]fter I had seen 
That spectacle, for many days my brain 
Worked with a dim and undetermined sense 
Of unknown modes of being. In my thoughts 
There was a darkness—call it solitude 
Or blank desertion—no familiar shapes 
Of hourly objects, images of trees, 
Of sea or sky, no colours of green fields, 
But huge and mighty forms that do not live 
Like living men moved slowly through my mind. 
3 7 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE 
(1772–1834) 
Recommended edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, Selected Poems 
(NewYork: Penguin, 1996); ISBN 0-14-042429-6; $12.00. 
Be sure to read: "Christabel," "Dejection: An Ode," "The Eolian Harp," 
"Kubla Khan," "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner," "This Lime-Tree Bower 
My Prison. " 
Coleridge, Wordsworth's partner in poetry shares Wordsworth's view of 
nature as a place where the divine lives; in "This Lime-Tree Bower My 
Prison," he writes of the "deep joy" that comes when, "silent with swimming sense," he gazes at sunset "on the wide landscape ... of such hues / As 
veil the Almighty Spirit, when yet he makes / Spirits perceive his presence." 
But while Wordsworth believed that the poet can serve as a prophet, crafting poems that—in their appeal to the imagination—reveal some kind of 
truth about human existence, Coleridge was less certain. 
In his narrative poems ("Kubla Khan," "The Rime of the Ancient 
Mariner") Coleridge makes myths, like Blake; but he lacks Blake's sublime 
confidence in his own ability to communicate. The "prophet" of "The 
Rime of the Ancient Mariner" is unbalanced, if not insane; in "Kubla 
Khan," the narrator recalls a mythical city with walls and towers; he hears a 
maid singing verses, and mourns, "Could I revive within me / Her symphony and song .. . I would build that dome in air . . . And all who heard 
should see them there." But the poem breaks off; the poet cannot construct 
the dome again; the maid's verses are lost, and so is the city. As Coleridge 
aged, he had (in Jerome McGann's words) "nightmares: that the love, the 
knowledge, and the imagination which he has believed in are chimeras, at 
best momentary defenses against the world's ancestral violence and darkness."20
 Coleridge himself writes, in "Dejection: An Ode," "Afflictions bow 
me down to earth. . . . Hence,viper thoughts, that coil around my mind, / 
Reality's dark dream!" He turns to the imaginative faculty, hoping to find 
relief from the darkness of reality: "There was a time, when ... Fancy made 
me dreams of happiness: / For hope grew round me, like the twining vine." 
But the vine imagery is itself disturbing, implying an ominous stranglehold 
related to the idea of "hope"; and as the mythical poems reveal, Coleridge's 
imagination provided him with little relief. 
20Jerome J. McGann, The Romantic Ideology: A Critical Investigation (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1983)^. 99. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 377 
All in a hot and copper sky, 
The bloody Sun, at noon, 
Right up above the mast did stand, 
No bigger than the Moon. 
Day after day, day after day, 
We stuck, nor breath nor motion, 
As idle as a painted ship 
Upon a painted ocean. 
Water, water every where, 
And all the boards did shrink; 
Water, water, every where, 
Nor any drop to drink. 
—From "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner" 
JOHN KEATS 
(1795–1821) 
Recommended edition: John Keats: Complete Poems, edited by Jack Stillinger (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press, 1982); ISBN 0-67413-431-2; $18.50. 
Be sure to read: "Endymion," The Eve of St. Agnes," "Hyperion: A Fragment," "La Belle Dame sans Merci," "Ode on a Grecian Urn," "Ode to a 
Nightingale," "To Autumn. " 
Keats, writing a generation after Coleridge and Wordsworth, saw both of 
these "elder statesmen" of the Romantic movement as hampered by the 
necessity of explanation. The poet's job, Keats wrote, is not to explain; rather, 
the poet is marked by "negative capability," the ability to hold "uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts" in the mind, without any "irritable reaching after 
fact & reason." The purpose of the poem is not to search for solutions; the 
purpose of the poem is beauty. 
When old age shall this generation waste, 
Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe 
Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou say'st, 
"Beauty is truth, truth beauty,—that is all 
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know. 
—From "Ode on a Grecian Urn" 
378 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
The poetry of Keats—and his condemnation of the older Romantics for 
their "irritable reaching"—reveals the ongoing development of Romantic 
thought.Where Coleridge and Wordsworth were trying to demonstrate the 
ways in which man could come into direct contact with the Sublime, Keats 
took it for granted that the depiction of perfect beauty would reveal the 
Sublime to man, whether or not he was bothering to search for it. Furthermore, Keats's definition of "beauty" did not have primarily to do with 
the imagination; it had to do with the senses. Keats's poetry is full of sound, 
sight, warmth and cold, smell. Physical sensation, not the imagination (which 
originates in the mind) was the path to the sublime. When Keats accused 
Coleridge and Wordsworth of laboring too hard over their poetry, he saw 
them with furrowed brows, trying to think their way to the Sublime. Instead, 
Keats suggested, the poet should cultivate a passive receptiveness to the 
senses. 
[L]oad and bless 
With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eaves run; 
To bend with apples the mossed cottage-trees, 
And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core; 
To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells 
With a sweet kernel.... 
Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn 
Among the river shallows, borne aloft 
Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies.... 
And gathering swallows twitter in the skies. 
—From "To Autumn" 
HENR Y WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW 
(1807–1882) 
Recommended edition: The Penguin Classics paperback, Selected Poems, 
edited by Lawrence Buell (New York: Penguin, 1988); ISBN 0-14-039064-2; 
$14.00. 
Be sure to read: "The Courtship of Miles Standish," "Hiawatha's Childhood," "Paul Revere's Ride," "The Village Blacksmith" "The Wreck of the 
Hesperus. " 
Longfellow, a staple of school readers, tends to be short-shrifted by critics. 
Writing at the same time as Dickinson and Whitman, he told stories about 
the American past while they struggled with the American identity. But 
those stories are, like Frost's poems, a "momentary stay against confusion"; 
Longfellow is a poetic conservative, reacting to the uncertainties of the 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 7 9 
present by building a nostalgic American past. He is the American Milton, 
finding patterns and writing them overtop of chaos; pouring an orderly 
foundation underneath a building that already stands. Longfellow has 
largely been booted out of the academy, partly because he (unlike John 
Keats) had no interest in literary theory Longfellow was widely known as a 
"fireside poet" (which is to say, a poet read for enjoyment). His absence from 
academic writing on poetry and his ongoing popularity with "regular readers" illustrates the beginning of that split between academic and popular 
audiences which grew impossibly broad in the early 1990s. 
Longfellow's narrative poems use meter to reinforce the spoken, "epic" 
quality of his stories, and he matches form to content; the triple rhythms of 
"Paul Revere's Ride": 
ONE if by LAND, and TWO if by SEA, 
and I on the OPposite SHOM will BE 
are reminiscent of galloping hooves. In the Song of Hiawatha Longfellow 
uses a "trochaic meter," in which the stress falls on the first syllable of each 
syllable pair, rather than on the second: 
ON the MOUNtains OF the PRArie, 
ON the GREAT red PIPE-stone QUARry, 
GITche ManiTO, the MIGHty, 
HE the MAST'R of LIFE, deSCENding, 
ON the RED crags OF the QUARry.... 
This reversal of iambic meter sounds like an Indian drum. 
ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON 
(1809–1883) 
Recommended edition: To read the recommended poems unabridged, you need 
two editions: the Norton Critical Edition, Tennyson's Poetry, edited by 
Robert W. Hill, Jr. (New York: W. W. Norton, 1999; ISBN 0-3939-7279-8; 
S16.25); and the Penguin Classics paperback, Idylls of the King, edited by 
J. M. Gray (New York: Penguin, 1996; ISBN 0-14-042253-6; $11.00). The 
Norton edition has only selections from the Idylls; an additional option, the 
Signet Classic paperback, Idylls of the King and a Selection of Poems 
(New York: Signet, 1961; ISBN 0-451-52470-5; $5.95) has all of the Idylls 
but has only selections from In Memoriam. 
Be sure to read: "The Dying Swan," "The Idylls of the King," "In Memoriam," "The Lady of Shalott," "The Lotos-Eaters." 
3 8 o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Tennyson, like Longfellow, is an orderly poet. In the long literary epic The 
Idylls of the King,Tennyson does for the English past what Longfellow does 
for the American past: He creates a myth for it, retelling the story of 
Camelot in blank verse (and creating, almost singlehandedly, the romantic 
tournaments-and-ladies Camelot that governed English and American 
imaginations for a hundred years). The Idylls of the King lays out an orderly, 
Miltonic universe, in which Arthur is determined to make his country work 
by reasonable regulation: "The old order changeth," Arthur declares, as he is 
crowned king, "yielding place to the new." In Arthur's new Round Table 
(which he describes, tellingly, as the "Order" which "lives to crush / All 
wrongers of the realm") every knight who follows the rules is rewarded, and 
knights who break the rules are punished. 
At least until Lancelot comes along. Passion wrecks this Order; good 
knights die, evil knights triumph, Arthur himself weeps, before the final 
battle, 
I found Him in the shining of the stars, 
I mark'd Him in the flowering of His fields, 
But in His ways with men I find Him not. 
I waged His wars, and now I pass and die. 
The Table has failed; Arthur kills his own son and is borne off into the 
West, and the order disintegrates into chaos. Was this disintegration 
inevitable? Tennyson never makes a final judgment; this resistance to a final 
conclusion marks some of his most famous poetry. 
Flower in the crannied wall, 
I pluck you out of the crannies, 
I hold you here, root and all, in my hand, 
Little flower—but if I could understand 
What you are, root and all, and all in all, 
I should know what God and man is. 
— "Flower in the Crannied Wall" 
This seems to express a faith in an order that starts with the smallest element 
of creation and extends unbroken to the greatest; an Enlightenmentinspired confidence in the ultimate rationality of the universe. Yet the poem 
does contain an if, Tennyson's understanding of God and man depends on 
his understanding of the flower,* and the poem makes no prediction about 
whether he will ever reach this understanding. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 8 1 
WALT WHITMAN 
(1819–1892) 
Recommended edition: Leaves of Grass, edited by Sculley Bradley and Harold 
W.Blodgett (NewYork: WW. Norton, 1973); ISBN 0-39309-388-3; $18.15. 
Leaves of Grass was first published in 1855 and was continually revised and 
republished by Whitman during his lifetime; the Norton edition is the final 
"deathbed" version of the poem, published in 1892. 
Be sure to read: "Leaves of Grass" is less like a book of poems than like one 
massive poem with multiple parts. However, certain sections of this huge work 
are more often cited: They are (listed in order of occurrence within Leaves of 
Grassj "I Hear America Singing," "Song of Myself," "I Sing the Body Electric," "Song of the Open Road," "Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking," "As 
lEbb'd with the Ocean of Life" "The Wound-Dresser" "When Lilacs Last in 
the Dooryard Bloom'd," "O Captain, My Captain. " 
Whitman isn't the first modern poet; he's the last Romantic. Like the English Romantics, he celebrates the immense diversity of human existence; he 
is convinced that each of us can find sublime knowledge through experiencing the world ("You shall possess the good of the earth and sun," he 
writes, in "Song of Myself," "You shall no longer take things at second or 
third hand ... nor feed on the spectres in books A morning-glory at my 
window satisfies me more than the metaphysics of books"). 
The Romantic poets put themselves squarely into their own poetry, 
attempting to show readers the Sublime by chronicling their own experiences with it. Whitman takes this Romantic strategy even further. He 
chronicles not simply his experiences, but himself: "I dote on myself," he 
writes, "there is that lot of me and all so luscious." (Yes, he's serious; Whitman's celebrations of his own body occasionally go over the top.) Like an 
autobiographer, Whitman creates himself in Leaves of Grass, in a compelling 
and oddly contradictory manner. His purpose is to represent himself, simply, as an American—a "common man" who is, paradoxically, both common 
and unique. He is both "one of a kind" and representative of all mankind; 
he is both individual and all men: 
Walt Whitman, a kosmos, of Manhattan the son, 
Turbulent, fleshy, sensual, eating, drinking and breeding, 
No sentimentalist, no stander above men and women or apart from them, 
No more modest than immodest. 
3 S 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Unscrew the locks from the doors! 
Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs! 
—From "Song of Myself" 
Busy breaking down barriers and opening doors, insisting on the complete equality of all humans, Whitman removes the door of traditional 
poetic form from its jambs and refuses to walk through it. Leaves of Grass, 
which attempts to capture the natural rhythms of American speech, is 
mostly without meter or rhythm. (The most notable exception is "O Captain, My Captain," the elegy for Lincoln, which has a more traditional 
form.) This confident rejection of formal poetics reveals Whitman's complete and total confidence in his own poetry. No Coleridgean dejection for 
Whitman; he is Blake minus God, confidently sure that poetry serve as a 
kind of new Scripture for a new kind of American, set free from superstition and able to shape his or her own life. Whitman never seems to doubt 
his own authority, and Leaves of Grass continually announces its own status 
as a book of truth for all. 
I speak the pass-word primeval, I give the sign of democracy.... 
Through me many long dumb voices, 
Voices of the interminable generations of prisoners and slaves.... 
Through me forbidden voices, 
Voices of sexes and lusts, voices veil'd and I remove the veil, 
Voice indecent by me clarified and transfigured.... 
I believe in the flesh and the appetites, 
Seeing, hearing, feeling are miracles, and each part and tag of me is a miracle. 
Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy whatever I touch or am touch'd from, 
The scent of these arm-pits aroma finer than prayer, 
This head more than churches, bibles, and all the creeds. 
—From "Song of Myself" 
EMILY DICKINSON 
(1830–1886) 
Recommended edition: Final Harvest: Emily Dickinson's Poems, edited by 
Thomas Johnson (New York: Little, Brown, 1997); ISBN 0-316-18415-2; 
$14.95. Dickinson's poems have been published in many different editions, but 
this is one of the few to maintain Dickinson's own punctuation and capitalization, which make up part of her poetic strategy. 
Be sure to read: "A bird came down the walk," "A narrow fellow in the 
grass," 'A word is dead," "Because I could not stop for Death," "Before I got 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 383 
my eye put out," "Each life converges to some center," "Hope is the thing with 
feathers," "I died for beauty," "I felt a funeral in my brain," "I had been hungry all the years," "I heard a fly buzz when I died," "I never saw a moor," "I 
took my power in my hand," "Ym nobody? Who are you?" "Much madness is 
divinest sense," "Safe in their alabaster chambers," "There is a pain so utter," 
"The soul selects her own society," "'Twasjust this time last year I died. " 
Dickinson, not Whitman, is the first American modernist. Where Whitman 
overflows with boundless confidence in the power of poetry, Dickinson 
remains skeptical; where Whitman sees an America filled with the energetic 
enthusiasm of the common man, Dickinson sees the inevitability of chaos 
and decay. She did not deny the possibility of ecstatic experience, but she 
had no hope that any glory would linger: 
Did Our Best Moment last— 
'Twould supersede the Heaven 
These Heavenly moments are— 
A Grant of the Divine— 
That Certain as it Comes— 
Withdraws—and leaves the dazzled Soul 
In her unfurnished Rooms 
—From "Did our best moment last"[393] 
In her poems, Dickinson (famously remaining in her home in Massachusetts almost all of her life) turns away from the Romantic preoccupation with 
"encountering the Sublime" and instead attempts to account for a world in 
which she is constantly confronted with the reality of approaching death. 
Dickinson's poems have flashes of delight, but joy is not her natural home: 
I can wade Grief— 
Whole Pools of it— 
I'm used to that— 
But the least push of Joy 
Breaks up my feet— 
—From "I can wade grief "[252] 
She is not, in the end, on good terms with the world; her experiences in 
it are always marked by discomfort, by doubt, and by the inability to settle 
on a definite interpretation of her experiences, one that makes sense of the 
different part of her lives according to some overall plan. This alienation 
becomes one of the characteristic marks of modern poetry. 
384 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
In her poetry, Dickinson seems to battle with the constraints of language—not to rejoice in its expressiveness, as Whitman does. She retains a 
careful poetic meter, often using a "hymn rhythm" (an alternation of fourbeat and three-beat lines) : 
Not knowing when the Dawn will come, 
I open every Door 
—[1619] 
Because I could not stop for Death— 
He kindly stopped for me— 
-[712] 
or a similar four-line pattern of three/three/four/three beats: 
The Bustle in a House, 
The Morning after Death 
Is solemnest of industries 
Enacted upon Earth— 
—[1078] 
But the regular meters are complicated by her tendency to use irregular 
stresses, lengthy pauses noted by dashes, and distorted syntax—as though 
normal English syntax were inadequate for her thoughts. As Dickinson 
grew older, her use of poetic form became less and less regular; she began to 
refuse to choose among words, sometimes writing three and four choices in 
a row without crossing any out. Before her death, she was writing poems in 
fragments, sideways, on scraps, upside down—straining for a form of expression unbounded by print. 
CHRISTINA ROSSETTI 
(1830–1894) 
Recommended edition:The Everyman Paperback Classics edition, Poems and 
Prose, edited by Jan Marsh (NewYork: Knopf, 1997); ISBN 0-4608-7820-4; 
$3.50. 
Be sure to read: "A Better Resurrection," "A Birthday," "After Death," 'A 
Christmas Carol," "The Convent Threshold," "De Profundis," "Dream Land," 
"Goblin Market," "Good Friday," "Maude Clare," "Monna Innominata," 
"The Prince's Progress," "Remember," "Sister Maude," "The Three Enemies," 
"Up-Hill," "When I am dead, my dearest. " 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 & 5 
While only eleven of Dickinson's poems were published during her lifetime, Christina Rossetti gained a fair degree of fame. Rossetti's poetry is 
preoccupied with the problem of different passions existing side by side: 
poetry and love, the love of God and the love of men, the love of men and 
friendship with women, poetry and God. Exploring these tensions, Rossetti 
always seems to conclude that one passion will have to be renounced so that 
the other can flourish. In most cases, it is earthly love that proves flawed, or 
destructive; in her most famous narrative poem,"Goblin Market," she writes 
of a young (virgin) girl tempted away by goblins who offer her luscious 
"goblin fruits." She eats them and is immediately addicted. Her innocence 
and creativity diminish into an obsession with physical satisfaction: 
While with sunken eyes and faded mouth 
She dreamed of melons, as a traveller sees, 
False waves in desert drouth.... 
But in other poems, Rossetti writes of the equally frightening possibility 
that no "goblin" will ever offer fruit at all: 
You took my heart in your hand 
With a friendly smile, 
With a critical eye you scanned, 
Then set it down, 
And said: It is still unripe, 
Better wait awhile. 
—From "Twice" 
These poems are full, not only of disappointment, but of betrayal; in both 
the lyric poems and the narrative poems, those who hope to find true fulfillment in love always end up disillusioned. 
Rossetti, like her brother Dante Gabriel Rossetti, the poet Charles Swinburne, and the painter William Morris, belonged to an informal circle of 
artists known as "Pre-Raphaelites," who thought that art and poetry (which 
they saw as two methods of expressing the same ideas) had been distorted 
by the Romantics into a preoccupation with beauty instead of a discovery 
of truth. With the detailed works of medieval artists (those who came before 
Raphael) as their models, the Pre-Raphaelites set out to discover a new 
simplicity in the portrayal of people and landscapes. In poetry, this PreRaphaelite emphasis appears as close attention to detail and to the senses: 
sight, sound, color, and taste. In its glorification of the past, Pre-Raphaelite 
3 S 6 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
poetry also made heavy use of medieval (or at least medieval-sounding) 
myths and tales; Rossetti's poetry is a mix of lyric explorations of renunciation and rich, detailed, sensuous narrative fables. Her attention to detail 
extends to the form of her poems as well; Rossetti pays close attention to 
meter and rhyme, never writing "free verse" or conversational verse as 
Whitman does, but often juggling the stresses of her lines, cutting them 
short or changing her meter unexpectedly: 
"We must not look at goblin men, 
We must not buy their fruits; 
Who knows upon what soil they fed 
Their hungry thirsty roots?" 
"Come buy," call the goblins.... 
The customary cry, 
"Come, buy, come, buy," 
With its iterated jingle, 
Of sugar-baited words... 
That goblin cry. 
GERARD MANLEY HOPKINS 
(1844–1889) 
Recommended edition: The Everyman's Library Pocket Poets edition, Hopkins: Poems and Prose (New York: Knopf, 1995); ISBN 0-679-4446-96; 
$12.50. 
Be sure to read: "God's Grandeur," uPied Beauty," "The Caged Skylark," 
"The Windhover," "Carrion Comfort," "No worst," and "The Wreck of the 
Deutschland. " 
Hopkins's poems are remarkable for two reasons: in them, a genuine and 
deep religious faith coexists with an equally genuine and deep despair; and 
he manages to express this contradiction in entirely original meters, rhymes, 
and even words. Attempting to explain an impossible relationship between 
belief and anguish, one which could not be contained within accepted religious language, he did violence to language itself. 
Hopkins's poetry is governed by his theory of "individuation": Each created thing has a beauty that "inheres" in it and makes it distinct. He coined 
two terms to help him express this principle: "inscape," the individual, distinct, "oneness" of each natural thing; and "instress," the force or unique 
energy which maintains this individuality. Instress keeps objects together, 
but it also makes them distinct to the looker:"Instress," to quote W. H. Gardner, is "a sudden perception of that deeper pattern, order, and unity which 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 # 7 
gives meaning to external forms."21
 For Hopkins, instress keeps him from 
final despair; it shows him, if only fleetingly, the "deeper pattern" behind the 
dis-order that threatens to overwhelm him. The "beauty of inscape," Hopkins wrote in his journal, is "near at hand.... if [we] had eyes to see it and 
it could be called out everywhere again." In poetry, he attempts to make this 
beauty clear. 
To do so, Hopkins makes the poems themselves into unique objects with 
their own "inscape." His innovative "sprung rhythm," which he first used in 
"The Wreck of the Deutschland" is a complicated meter that (in Hopkins's 
own words) counts "accents or stresses alone, without any account of the 
number of syllables, so that a foot may be one strong syllable or it may be 
many light and one strong." Each Une of the poetry may be a different 
length, but each contains the correct number of "strong" syllables. (It's very 
difficult to find these syllables without help; Hopkins used to mark the 
strong syllables in his poems, but most modern editions of his poetry eliminate the marks.) He also used nontraditional rhyming schemes (alliteration, 
assonance, internal rhymes) along with traditional end rhymes, and makes up 
his own adjectives (and nouns) whenever existing words seem inadequate: 
I kiss my hand 
To the stars, lovely-asunder 
Starlight, wafting him out of it; and 
Glow, glory in thunder; 
Kiss my hand to the dappled-with-damson west; 
Since, tho' he is under the world's splendour and wonder, 
His mystery must be instressed, stressed; 
For I greet him the days I meet him, and bless when I understand. 
—From "The Wreck of the Deutschland" 
Hopkins became a Catholic priest, entering a theological world in which 
the physical always gives witness to God; his days are never "just" days, birds 
never "just" birds, a field never "just" dirt; God inheres in all of creation. 
All things counter, original, spare, strange; 
Whatever is fickle, freckled (who knows how?) 
With swift, slow; sweet, sour, adazzle, dim; 
He fathers-forth whose beauty is past change: 
Praise him. 
—From "Pied Beauty" 
21W. H. Gardner, introduction to Gerard Manley Hopkins: Poems and Prose (New York: Penguin, 1985), p. xxi. 
3 8 8 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS 
(1865–1939) 
Recommended edition: The Collected Poems ofW. B.Yeats, second revised 
edition, edited by Richard J. Finneran (New York: Scribner's, 1996); ISBN 0-
6848-0731-9); $20.00. 
Be sure to read: "A Prayer for My Daughter," "The Cap and Bells," "Down 
by the Salley Gardens," "Easter 1916," "The Coming of Wisdom with Time," 
"The Lake Isle of Innisfree," "Lapis Lazuli," "Leda and the Swan," "The 
Magi," "Memory," "Sailing to Byzantium," "The Second Coming," "The 
Secret Rose," "September 1913," "Three Things," "The Wheel," "When You 
Are Old," "The Wild Swans at Coole. " 
Yeats, an Irish Protestant with a mystical bent, constructed his own cosmology; he saw the world as progressing through two-thousand-year cycles, 
each cycle dominated by one particular civilization and that civilization's set 
of myths.The close of each cycle is marked by disintegration, chaos, and disorder; this disorder in turn leads to the birth of a new cycle. "The Second 
Coming" describes the end of the cycle before the corning of Christ, which 
led in turn to the beginning ofYeats's own age: 
Turning and turning in the widening gyre 
The falcon cannot hear the falconer; 
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; 
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.... 
The darkness drops again; but now I know 
That twenty centuries of stony sleep 
Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle, 
And what rough beast, its hour come round at last, 
Slouches toward Bethlehem to be born? 
Yeats, like the other great Modernists, sees chaos, dissolution, and violence in his own age—but unlike later poets, he finds a pattern behind the 
chaos.The current age, he suggested, was even now decaying downwards to 
its end, but its death would lead to rebirth. He pictures each two-thousandyear cycle as a "gyre," a spiraling cone of time; each gyre rotates completely 
around, and as it draws to an end, a new beginning emerges. 
What matter though numb nightmare ride on top.... 
What matter? Heave no sigh, let no tear drop, 
A greater, a more gracious time has gone.... 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 8 Q 
What matter? Out of cavern comes a voice, 
And all it knows is that one word "Rejoice!" 
—From "The Gyres" 
These "gyres" reappear, consistently, throughout Yeats's poetry and prose. 
They represent the connected nature of all time; each cycle appears separate, but if viewed from above (from a God's-eye perspective), they all prove 
to be part of a single pattern. Disorder always leads to order, death to life, 
chaos to a new pattern. 
Yeats, Irish by birth, made himself into a poet of Ireland and a 
spokesman for "Irish folk culture"; sympathetic to Ireland's wish for independence from Britain, he became a senator of the Irish Free State at the 
age of fifty-seven. "Easter 1916," one of his most enduring poems, commemorates the defeat of Irish nationalists by British troops in an Easter 
uprising in Dublin, and ascribes to the uprising itself a "terrible beauty." 
But the Protestant Yeats did not share the faith of the Irish Catholic nationalists, and as he grew older he seems to have become increasingly discontented with the violence of the nationalist movement. As the great 
contemporary Irish poet Seamus Heaney puts it, he was plagued by "selfdivisions." "He famously declared," Heaney writes, "that the man who sat 
down to breakfast was a bundle of accident and incoherence, whereas the 
man reborn in a poem was 'intended' and 'complete'; one way to see his 
life's work is as a pursuit of that intention of completeness."22
 Yeats's poetry 
shows a keen awareness of the struggle between opposing forces that 
seemed to mark every aspect of life at the beginning of the twentieth century—and also a longing for this struggle to give birth, finally, to peace. 
I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree, 
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made.... 
And I shall have some peace there, for peace comes dropping slow. .. . 
—From "The Lake Isle of Innisfree" 
PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 
(1872–1906) 
Recommended edition: The Collected Poetry of Paul Laurence Dunbar, 
edited by Joanne M. Braxton (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 
1993); ISBN 0-8139-1438-8; $18.95. 
Be sure to read: "A Negro Love Song," "AnAnte-Bellum Sermon" "At the 
22Seamus Heaney, "All Ireland's Bard," Atlantic, vol. 280, no. 5 (November 1997): 157. 
3 9 0 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
Tavern/' "Colored Band," "The Debt," "Douglass," "Little Brown Baby," 
"Ode to Ethiopia," "The Old Front Gate," "The Poet and His Song," "The 
Seedling," "Signs of the Times," "Sympathy," "We Wear the Mask," "When 
Malindy Sings," "When de Co'n Pone's Hot," "When Dey 'Listed Colored 
Soldiers." 
Dunbar's poetry speaks in voices borrowed both from black folk culture and 
from the educated, white culture of American poetry. Dunbar finds himself 
balancing between the two, adopting the voice of the poetic mainstream 
when he writes of ideas: 
I am no priest of crooks nor creeds, 
For human wants and human needs 
Are more to me than prophets' deeds 
Go, cease your wail, lugubrious saint! 
You fret high Heaven with your plaint. 
—From "A Creed and not a Creed" 
and the African American folk voice when he writes of experience. 
Fol' yo' han's an' bow yo' haid— 
Wait ontwell de blessin's said; 
"Lawd, have mussy on ouah souls—" 
(Don' you daih to tech dem rolls—) 
"Bless de food we gwine to eat—" 
(You set still—I see yo' feet; 
You jes' try dat trick agin!) 
"Gin us peace an'joy Amen!" 
—From "In the Morning" 
To appreciate Dunbar, you need to make a serious attempt to read his 
dialect poetry out loud. My own attempts to teach Dunbar to undergraduates have been hampered by the reluctance of readers (particularly white 
readers) to do this; in the highly politicized university classroom, "mimicking" black speech seems like a risky thing to do. But if you can, do this in 
private, without worrying about listeners.23 
Any tension you might feel in reading this dialect out loud would have 
23To hear the poems read by an expert, go to www.plethoreum.org/dunbar/gallery.asp, which 
contains audio files of the Dunbar scholar Herbert Woodward Martin performing Dunbar's 
dialect and nondialect poems. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D J Ç 1 
been fully appreciated by Dunbar himself. In "The Poet," he fretted about 
his own career: 
He sang of life, serenely sweet, 
With, now and then, a deeper note.... 
He sang of love when earth was young, 
And Love, itself, was in his lays. 
But ah, the world, it turned to praise 
A jingle in a broken tongue. 
Dunbar divided his own poetic work into "Major Books" and "Minor 
Books," assigning his dialect poetry to the "Minors," yet critics as prominent 
as William Dean Howells preferred the dialect: "It is when we come to Mr. 
Dunbar's Minors that we feel ourselves in the presence of a man with a 
direct and a fresh authority." "Mr. Howells has done me irrevocable harm in 
the dictum he laid down regarding my dialect verse," Dunbar retorted, bitterly.24
 He felt trapped not so much by Howell's preference as by the white 
critic's insistence that this dialect verse displayed "vistas into the simple, sensuous, joyous nature of his race." Dunbar—like Dickinson and Hopkins— 
struggles with the limitations of language; when he writes in a "black voice," 
other readers see simple joyousness and are unable to peer past their own 
ideas about the dialect to the more complex experience from which it rises. 
ROBERT FROST 
(1874–1963) 
Recommended edition:The Poetry of Robert Frost, edited by Edward Connery Lathem (NewYork: Henry Holt, 1979); ISBN 0-8050-6986-0; $18.00. 
Be sure to read: "A Boy's Will," "After Apple-Picking," "Birches," "The 
Death of the Hired Man," "Departmental," "Design," "Fire and Ice," "Home 
Burial," "Mending Wall," "Mowing," "The Need of Being Versed in Country 
Things," "Nothing Gold Can Stay," "The Pasture," "Putting In the Seed," 
"The Road Not Taken," "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening," "To 
Earthward," "Trespass," "The Wood-Pile. " 
"There are two types of realists," Robert Frost once remarked, "the one 
who offers a good deal of dirt with his potato to show that it is a real one, 
24A fuller account of this exchange between poet and critic can be found in Gregory L. Candela,"We Wear the Mask: Irony in Dunbar s The Sport of the Gods," American Literature, vol. 
48, no. 1 (March 1976): 60-72. 
3 9 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
and the one who is satisfied with the potato brushed clean. I'm inclined to 
be the second kind. To me, the thing that art does for life is to clean it, to 
strip it to form." Where William Butler Yeats used his poetry to express an 
order which he could sense beyond the apparent chaos of the world, Frost 
uses the poetry to create order. He writes straightforward scenes: a bird balancing on a weed, a traveler stopping at a crossroad, a man kneeling and 
staring down into a well. In many of the poems, his characters are solitary: 
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, 
And sorry I could not travel both 
And be one traveler, long I stood 
And looked down one as far as I could 
To where it bent in the undergrowth; 
Then took the other 
—From "The Road Not Taken" 
But the straightforward forms of these stories conceal a deeper purpose. 
The carefully painted scenes have blurred edges; much is left unsaid. William 
H. Pritchard writes that the proper way to analyze Frost is to say, "We know 
what this poem is about, we know how it sounds, just so long as you don't 
ask us to say exactly."25
 Frost himself called his poetry "synecdochic," with 
synecdoche meaning "small points of entry to larger significance."26
 He follows an almost Augustinian poetic, providing a literal meaning (a traveler 
standing in the wood, a man mending a wall) that serves as a door into 
another, mystical layer of meaning. This deeper meaning resists being put 
into words. Frost himself used religious terms to describe it: The first layer 
of meaning in a poem, he told a group of poets in 1954, is like the hem of a 
garment; touching the hem of the garment (the reference is to a miracle of 
Jesus' in the Gospels) leads to a mystical understanding of the whole. The 
reader can "get the meaning by touch ... the way the woman did from Jesus. 
. . . [T]he virtue went out of him.... [TJouching the hem is enough."27 
So how should you read Frost? Not by reducing the poems to allegory 
("The two woods are two kinds of careers, and he chose one instead of the 
other and always regretted it") but rather by imagining yourself into the 
scene. What happens then? 
Some mysterious and fleeting connection that Frost himself could not 
quite describe. In "For Once,Then, Something," the poet is staring down at 
25
 William H. Pritchard, "Wildness of Logic in Modern Lyric,"in Forms of Lyric, ed. Reuben 
A. Brower (NewYork: Columbia University Press, 1970), p. 132. 
2<5In Gerard Quinn, "Frost's Synecdochic Allusions," Resources for American Literary Study, vol. 
25, no. 2 (1999): 254-64. 
27Ibid.,p.255. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 393 
the water, looking for the picture reflected back at him: 
Once, when trying with chin against a well-curb 
I discerned, as I thought, beyond the picture, 
Through the picture, a something white, uncertain, 
Something more of the depths—and then I lost it 
[A] ripple 
Shook whatever it was lay there at bottom, 
Blurred it, blotted it out. What was that whiteness? 
Truth? A pebble of quartz? For once, then, something. 
CARL SANDBURG 
(1878–1967) 
Recommended edition: Carl Sandburg: Selected Poems, edited by George 
and Willene Hendrick (San Diego: Harvest Books, 1996); ISBN 0-15-600396-
1; $15.00. 
Be sure to read: "Chicago/' "Cool Tombs," "Elizabeth Umpstead," "Fog," 
"Grass," "I am the People, the Mob" "Nocturne in a Deserted Brickyard," 
"The People, Yes (No. 57)," "Planked Whitefish," "Skyscraper," "Smoke and 
Steel," "Window." 
Sandburg is best known for his "Chicago poems," which celebrate America 
with a wince. Like Whitman, Sandburg was a journalist before he was a 
poet, and like Whitman he describes the people of America in careful, journalistic detail: 
The working girls in the morning are going to work— 
long lines of them afoot amid the downtown stores 
and factories, thousands with little brick-shaped 
lunches wrapped in newspapers under their arms. 
Each morning as I move through this river of youngwoman life I feel a wonder about where it is all 
going, so many with a peach bloom of young years 
on them and laughter of red lips and memories in 
their eyes of dances the night before and plays and 
walks 
—From "Working Girls" 
But unlike Whitman, Sandburg admires America with reservations. All that 
boundless American energy turned Chicago into an enormous city—but 
also built the factories and offices that blot every consideration but profit 
3 9 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
from the minds of Americans. Sandburg is a common-man prophet, avoiding "technique" and refusing to display poetic expertise in favor of run-on 
lines and the natural rhythms of speech. He protests the shape America has 
begun to take: 
She and her man crossed the ocean and the years that 
marked their faces saw them haggling with landlords 
and grocers while six children played on the stones 
and prowled in the garbage cans. 
One child coughed its lungs away.... 
one is in jail, two have jobs in a box factory 
And as they fold the pasteboard, they wonder what the 
wishing is and the wistful glory in them that flutters 
faintly when the glimmer of spring comes on 
the air.... 
—From "Population Drifts" 
Sandburg does sometimes find a sort of stately beauty in industrialism, but 
the "Chicago Poems" are alarmed more often than celebratory. Where 
Whitman found immense diversity, Sandburg found an increasing and disturbing sameness—a factory-run country where a colorful, heterogeneous 
American people was becoming standardized into uniformity. 
WILLIAM CARLO S WILLIAMS 
(1883–1963) 
Recommended edition: Selected Poems, edited by Charles Tomlinson (New 
York: New Directions, 1985); ISBN 0-8112-0958-X; $9.95. 
Be sure to read: "Asphodel, That Greeny Flower," "The Descent of Winter," 
"Landscape with the Fall of Icarus," "The Last Words of My English Grandmother" "Proletarian Portrait" "The Red Wheelbarrow" "Self-Portrait," 
"Sonnet in Search of an Author," "Spring and All," "This is Just to Say," 
"Tract," "To Elsie." 
Williams avoids the stance of prophet as well as the position of storyteller. 
His lyrics are, instead, influenced by Japanese haiku, which describe a small, 
vivid physical object and then turn to open out from that object to a larger, 
cosmic idea. But unlike the haiku, Williams s lyrics don't open out. Williams 
was skeptical of the mind's ability either to find meaning, or to create it; he 
was suspicious of logic, which he saw as creating an illusory relationship 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 Ç 5 
between cause and effect where none existed; he was suspicious (therefore) 
of traditional English syntax, since syntax makes rules about the logical connections between parts of speech. "Kill the explicit sentence," he wrote, suggesting instead that poetry should use "verbal sequences. Sentences, but not 
grammatical sentences." This sort of "verbal sequence" appears at the 
beginning of "Asphodel, That Greeny Flower," one of his best-known 
poems: 
Of asphodel, that greeny flower, 
like a buttercup 
upon its branching stem— 
save that it's green and wooden— 
I come, my sweet, 
to sing to you. 
Williams was willing to accept that words themselves had some kind of 
value; he saw language itself (although not the rules that govern language) 
as a kind of material object. For Williams, words are things, superior to the 
untrustworthy and elusive ideas that they are supposed to represent. In his 
essay "The Embodiment of Knowledge" (1929), he calls words "materials" 
that "supersede in themselves all ideas, facts, movements which they may 
under other circumstances be asked to signify." Even the "spaces between 
the words" are important, as important as words themselves—they are physical objects. Williams writes, famously, 
so much depends 
upon 
a red wheel 
barrow 
—From "The Red Wheelbarrow" 
but does not then tell us what depends (or why, or how)."A poem is a small 
(or large) machine made out of words "Williams wrote. "Prose may carry a 
load of ill-defined matter like a ship. But poetry is a machine which drives 
it, pruned to a perfect economy. As in all machines, its movement is intrinsic, undulant, a physical more than a literary character."28 
28William Carlos Williams, "The Embodiment of Knowledge," in Selected Essays of William 
Carlos Williams (NewYork: New Directions, 1969), p. 256. 
3 96 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
EZRA POUND 
(1885–1972) 
Recommended edition: Selected Poems of Ezra Pound (New York: New 
Directions, 1957); ISBN 0-8112-0162-7; $8.gy This text contains excerpts from 
The Cantos, along with other Pound poems; the entire text of The Cantos, 
an enormous epic poem, can be read in The Cantos of Ezra Pound (New 
York: New Directions, 1998); ISBN 0-8112- 1326-9; $22.95. 
Be sure to read: "Canto One,""CantoTwo" "Exile's Letter" "In a Station 
of the Metro," "Mauberly," "The Return," "The River-Merchant's Wife," 
"The Sea-Farer," "Sestina:Altaforte," "The White Stag. " 
Pound combines Imagist tendencies (commitment to exactness, to particularity, to "distilled" poetry that avoided cosmic generalities) with classical 
learning (which lent Greek rhythms and allusions to his lines) and antiAmerican sentiment. Writing in 1912, he accused the country of wallowing 
in a spiritual "Dark Age," with all beauty and sensitivity wiped out by the 
loud, raw, crass, rising tide of capitalism. "Nine out of every ten Americans," 
Pound sneered, "have sold their soul for a [stock] quotation." Pound's earlier 
poetry is almost Pre-Raphaelite, borrowing medieval images and archaic 
language and combining it with precise images: 
See, they return, one, and by one, 
With fear, as half-awakened; 
As if the snow should hesitate 
And murmur in the wind, 
and half turn back; 
These were the "Wing'd-with-Awe," 
Inviolable. 
Gods of the winged shoe! 
With them the silver hounds, sniffing the trace of air! 
—From "The Return" (1912) 
But Pound's later work breaks away from this Romantic influence; the Greek 
influences remain, but The Cantos, his most massive work, moves away from 
any coherent narrative line, toward a fragmentized assembly of pieces: 
Zeus lies in Ceres' bosom 
Taishan is attend of loves 
under Cythera, before sunrise 
and he said: "Hay aui mucho 
catolicisomo—(sounded catolithismo) 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 g 7 
y muy poco reliHion" 
and he said: "Yo creo que los reyes desaparaen" 
(Kings will, I think, disappear) 
That was Padre Jose Elizondo 
in 1906 and 1917 
or about 1917 
and Dolores said "Com pan, nino," "eat bread, me 
lad" 
Sargent had painted her 
before he descended.... 
—From Canto LXXXI 
The reader hardly knows what to make of this; understanding the references would require hard labor with an encyclopedia and thesaurus. This 
poetic technique abandons, as Williams does, grammatical syntax; it too 
views words as physical "things" and places them in the poem as objects, 
without attempting to make any logical connection between them. It also 
abandons any attempt to make contact with the "common reader." It is an 
elitist poetics, one which dazzles the reader with allusion but conveys no 
impression. 
Pound's other poems tend to fall between these two extremes. The earlier Cantos also retell bits of legends and assemble pieces of Pound's reading 
together into a whole, but the sentences have a more familiar shape; readers 
can find their way, even without a dictionary of Greek mythology. 
And then went down to the ship, 
Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly sea, and 
We set up mast and sail on tha swart ship, 
Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also, 
Heavy with weeping, so winds from sternward 
Bore us out onward with bellying canvas, 
Circe's this craft, the trim-coifed goddess. 
—From Canto I 
Even here, Pound continually halts the reader's eye with "rapid switches in 
language and contexts, exclusive private musing, obscure references, multiple allusions"—all techniques to "impede reading."29
 Even as we read, he 
reminds us that reading is not likely to yield anything like truth—or even 
simple coherence. 
29Margaret Dickie, "The Cantos: Slow Reading," ELH: English Literary History, vol. 51, no. 4 
(Winter 1984): 819. 
398 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
T. S. ELIOT 
(1888–1965) 
Recommended edition: The Waste Land and Other Poems (San Diego: 
Harvest Books, 1955); ISBN 0-15-694877-X; $8.00. 
Be sure to read: "The Love Song of J.Alfred Prufrock," "The Waste Land," 
"Ash Wednesday," "The Journey of the Magi. " 
Eliot, Williams, and Pound are the "high modernists" of poetry, marked by 
their conviction that the world is chaotic and fragmented and their skepticism over the ability of language to convey any truth, in such a disordered 
universe. The poems of the "high modernists" tend to be more interested in 
themselves than in the world; the focus of the poetry is often not what is 
being described but just exactly how the poem is describing it. But while 
Pound's poetry becomes increasingly more inward focused, commenting on 
itself rather than on anything outside of its own lines, T. S. Eliot still holds 
out the possibility of describing the chaos of the world in some meaningful 
fashion. This may have something to do with EUot's Anglicanism; his poetry 
shows a groping for the "still point" of a spiritual life, where the self can 
make sense out of everything that surrounds it: 
At the still point of the turning world. Neither flesh nor fleshless; 
Neither from nor toward; at the still point, there the dance is 
... Except for the point, the still point, 
There would be not dance, and there is only the dance.... 
—From Quartet 1: "Burnt Norton" 
Eliot's poetry, like Pound's, is still difficult, still self-referential ("The Waste 
Land" carries with it an apparatus of footnotes almost as long as the poem 
itself, although the footnotes themselves are a sly, tongue-in-cheek wink at 
the reader's expectations). But the Four Quartets, written later in Eliot's life, 
suggest that the disorder of this life may someday resolve itself into a different existence, outside of time, where we might find the "inner freedom 
from the practical desire, / The release from action and suffering, release 
from the inner / And the outer compulsion...."). 
In Eliot's poetry, it is still possible to glimpse the eternal—and those 
glimpses are frightening, not (as for the Romantics) warm and glorious. 
"This Birth," says one of the Magi, after visiting the Christ Child in "The 
Journey of the Magi," "was" 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 3 9 9 
Hard and bitter agony for us, like Death, our death, 
We returned to our places, these Kingdoms, 
But no longer at east here, in the old dispensation, 
With an alien people clutching their gods. 
I should be glad of another death. 
When the eternal and the earthbound intersect (the rose garden in the Four 
Quartets is another example), we get a glimpse of truth—and are terrified by 
it. 
Although you might expect an Anglican poet to insist that language has 
some sort of relationship to truth (or at least can make a stab at communicating truth), Eliot isn't quite ready to admit this: 
Words strain, 
Crack, and sometimes break, under the burden, 
Under the tension, slip, slid, perish, 
Decay with imprecision, will not stay in place 
—From Quartet i: "Burnt Norton" 
But his willingness to put at least a provisional, tentative trust in language 
appears in the syntax of his poems; even Eliot's obscure sentences tend to 
have subjects and verbs. 
LANGSTON HUGHES 
(1902–1967) 
Recommended edition: Selected Poems of Langston Hughes (New York: 
Vintage Classics, 1990); ISBN o-67g-728i8-X; $13.00. 
Be sure to read: "The Negro Speaks of Rivers," "The Weary Blues," "Montage of a Dream Deferred," "Dream Variations," "I, Too, Sing America" "The 
South," "Still Here," "Interne at Provident," "Dream Boogie," "Democracy," 
"The Negro Mother. " 
Like Dunbar, Langston Hughes struggled with two languages and with a 
philosophical dilemma: He wrote of the black experience for black readers, 
yet knew that many of his intended readers would not have the education 
to understand his more formal verse. "Hughes's poetic practice of social 
portraiture was one almost entirely unrestricted, imaginatively speaking," 
writes Helen Vendler. "But this wonderfully inclusive inventory was 
4 o o SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
restricted in another way.... [I]t limited itself to language that the most uneducated person could hear and understand. For a man of Hughes's farranging mind and reading, that linguistic self-restriction was a sign of 
unquestioned moral commitment to the black reader."30
 Committed to 
making his poems accessible to all readers, Hughes has tended to be ignored 
by critics. And he stands out of the poetic mainstream; in 1929, Hughes 
wrote in his journal that his "ultimate hope" was to "create a Negro culture 
in America—a real, solid, sane, racial something growing out of the folk life, 
not copied from another, even though surrounding race."31 
So rather than using modernist conventions or lyric forms, Hughes's 
poems draw from folktales and hymns: 
At the feet o'Jesus 
Sorrow like a sea. 
Lordy, let yo' mercy 
Come driftin' down on me 
From "Feet o'Jesus" 
or from songs and ballads: 
I hope my child'll 
Never love a man. 
I say I hope my child'll 
Never love a man. 
Love can hurt you 
Mon anything else can. 
—From "Lament over Love" 
He located his poems not in a rural setting, but in Harlem, and consciously 
avoided any techniques which might fit into a European, modernist pattern: "The mountain standing in the way of any true Negro art in America," he wrote in the essay "The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain" is 
the "urge within the race toward whiteness, the desire to pour racial individuality into the mold of American standardization, and to be as little 
Negro and as much American as possible."32 
3
°HelenVendler,"Rita Dove: Identity Markers," Callaloo, vol. 17, no. 2 (Spring 1994): 381-98. 
3IQuoted in David R.Jarraway, "Montage of an Otherness Deferred: Dreaming Subjectivity 
in Langston Hughes," American Literature, vol. 68, no. 4 (December 1996): 821. 
32Langston Hughes, "The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain," The Nation, June 23,1926. 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 4 0 1 
W. H.AUDEN 
(1907–1973) 
Recommended edition: Selected Poems, edited by Edward Mendelson (New 
York: Vintage Books, 1990); ISBN 0-6797-2483-4; $13.00. 
Be sure to read: "As I Walked Out One Evening," "The Common Life," 
"Compline," "Epitaph on a Tyrant," "The Fall of Rome," "In Memory o/Sigmund Freud," "In Memory ofW.B. Yeats," "Lay Your Sleeping Head, My 
Love," "Lullaby," "The More Loving One," "On the Circuit," "Prospero to 
Ariel," "September 1, 1939," "The Shield of Achilles," "Under Which Lyre," 
"The Unknown Citizen," "Walk After Dark." 
Auden's earlier poetry, like Imagist verse, is concise, condensed and clipped; 
but the center of his poetic work are four long poems: "For the Time 
Being" (a Christmas poem), "New Year Letter" (a reflective poem), "The 
Age of Anxiety" (an alliterative poem), and "The Sea and the Mirror" (a 
commentary on Shakespeare's Tempest) .This reflects Auden's immense range 
of both technique and topic; he is a political poet, a social poet, a philosophical poet. If there is a unifying theme in his work, it is the possibility 
that friendship and love can provide that "still place" in the chaotic world 
that the modernist poets so often seek. Auden's "September 1, 1939," written at the beginning ofWorldWar II, reflects this preoccupation.This poem 
reappeared written on walls and sidewalks after September 11, 2001. 
The unmentionable odour of death 
Offends the September night.. .. 
I and the public know 
What all schoolchildren learn, 
Those to whom evil is done 
Do evil in return.. . . 
We must love one another or die. 
As he aged, Auden developed an interest in Christianity, which he saw 
both as the embodiment of his ideal of friendship and as a philosophy which 
promised equality between all men. You can listen to Auden's own reading 
of his poems (in New York, March 27,1972), at an audio archive site archived 
by the NewYorkTimes: http://nytimes.com/books/01/02/11/specials/auden 
.html). 
4 0 2 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
After the Modernists 
After the modernists, the number of "must-read" poets swells exponentially; 
time has not yet sorted out the great from the good.The following poets are 
worth your further exploration: 
PHILIP LARKIN 
(1922–1985) 
Recommended edition: Collected Poems, edited by Anthony Thwaite (New 
York: Noonday Press, 1991); ISBN 0-374-32273-8); $17.00. 
Be sure to read: "Annus Mirabilis," "Aubade," "Deceptions," "Essential 
Beauty," "Far Out," "High Windows," "I Remember, I Remember," "The 
Importance of Elsewhere," "Is It for Now or for Always," "Long Sight in Age," 
"Modesties," "The Old Fools," "Story," "Since the Majority of Me," "This Be 
the Verse," "To Put One Brick upon Another," "Toads," "Why Did I Dream 
ofYou Last Night?" 
ALLEN GINSBERG 
(1926–1997) 
Recommended edition: For the "minimal Ginsberg experience," read the Pocket 
Poets Series edition of his most famous volume, Howl and Other Poems 
(San Francisco: City Lights Books, 2002); ISBN 0-87286-017-3; $6.93; for 
more Ginsberg, invest in the much larger Selected Poems 1947-1995 (New 
York: HarperCollins, 2001); ISBN 0-06-093376-3; $18.00. 
Be sure to read: All of Howl and Other Poems; or, in Selected Poems 
1947-1995, "Metaphysics," "Love Poem on Theme by Whitman," "Howl," 
"Footnote to Howl," "America," "Kaddish," "Elegy for Neal Cassady," "New 
York Blues," "Manhattan May Day Midnight," "Do the Meditation Rock," 
"The Ballad of the Skeletons. " 
SYLVIA PLATH 
(1932–1963) 
Recommended edition: The Everyman's Library Pocket Poets edition, Plath: 
Poems, edited by Diane Wood Middlebrook (NewYork: Knopf, 1998); ISBN 
0-373-40464-3; $12.30. This volume contains all ofPlath's best-known poems. 
The more extensive Collected Poems, edited and annotated by Ted Hughes, 
contains fifty poems written before 1936 along with all of Plath's work after 
T H E WELL-EDUCATE D MIN D 4 0 3 
1956, including previously unpublished poems (New York: HarperCollins, 
1992); ISBN 0-06-090900-3; $17.95. 
Be sure to read: "Two Sisters of Persephone," "Suicide off Egg Rock," 
"Poem for a Birthday," "Zoo Keeper's Wife," "Barren Woman," "Crossing the 
Water," "The Bee Meeting," "The Arrival of the Bee Box," "Stings," "The 
Swarm," "Wintering," "Nick and the Candlestick," "Event," "Ariel," 
"Child," "Edge." 
MARK STRAND 
(1934– ) 
Recommended edition: Mark Strand: Selected Poems (New York: Knopf, 
2000); ISBN 0-679-73301-9; $18.00. 
Be sure to read: "The Accident," "The Coming of Light," "Eating Poetry," 
"From the Long Sad Party," "Giving Myself Up," "Keeping Things Whole," 
"The Mailman," "My Mother on an Evening in Late Summer," "Sleeping 
With One Eye Open," "The Tunnel," "The Way It Is. " 
ADRIENNE RICH 
(1929– ) 
Recommended edition: Adrienne Rich's Poetry and Prose, edited by Barbara Charlesworth Gelpi and Albert Gelpi (New York: WW Norton, 1975); 
ISBN 0-393-96147-8; $14.20. Since Rich's poetry has been published in many 
small volumes, this collection is the best way to read a collection of her most 
important poems. Since it doesn't include more recent poems, you may also want 
to consider An Atlas of the Difficult Wo rid: Poems, 1988-1991 (NewYork: 
WW Norton, 1991; ISBN 0-393-30831-6; $10.00). 
Be sure to read: "Aunt Jennifer's Tigers," "Burning of Paper Instead of Children," "Diving into the Wreck," "I Am in Danger—Sir—/' "The Necessities 
of Life," "Living in Sin," "The Phenomenology of Anger," "Planetarium," 
"Power," "Shooting Script," "Snapshots of a Daughter-in-Law" "Sources," 
"Trying to Talk with a Man," "Twenty-One Love Poems." 
SEAMUS HEANEY 
(1939– ) 
Recommended edition: Opened Ground: Selected Poems 1966-1996 
(NewYork: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1998); ISBN 0-374-52678-8; $15.00. 
Be sure to read: "Blackberry-Picking," "Bogland," "Casualty," "Digging," 
4 0 4 SUSA N WIS E BAUE R 
"Death of a Naturalist;' "Field Work," "Hailstones," "The Haw Lantern," 
"Lightenings," "The Ministry of Fear" "Mossbawn: Two Poems in Dedication," "Personal Helicon," "'Poet's Chair,'" "Squarings," "Tollund." 
ROBERT PINSKY 
(1940– ) 
Recommended edition: The Figured Wheel: New and Collected Poems, 
1966-1996 (New York: The Noonday Press, 1996); ISBN 0-374-32306-4; 
$13.00. 
Be sure to read: "Everywhere I Go, There I Am," "The Figured Wheel," 
"The Ice Storm," "Impossible to Tell," "The Night Game," "Poem with 
Refrains," "The Refinery," "Shirt," "The Unseen. " 
JANE KENYON 
(I947–1995) 
Recommended edition: Otherwise (St. Paul, Minn.: Graywolf Press, 1996); 
ISBN 1-33397-266-7; $16.00. 
Be sure to read: "Briefly It Enters, And Briefly Speaks," "Depression," 
"Dutch Interiors," "Eating the Cookies," "February: Thinking of Flowers," 
"Happiness" "Having it Out with Melancholy," "Let Evening Come," "Otherwise," "Rain in January. " 
RITA DOVE 
(1952– ) 
Recommended edition: Selected Poems (New York: Vintage Books, 1993); 
ISBN 0-679-73080-0; $13.00. 
Be sure to read: "Small Town," "Upon Meeting Don L. Lee, In a Dream," 
"Agosta the Winged Man and Rasha the Black Dove," "Primer for the 
Nuclear Age," "Thomas and Beulah." 
£2refrrn4d<uo<n<i' 
"Und Drang: SectionV" by Ezra Pound, from Collected Early Poems, © 1926, 
1935, 1954, 1965, 1967, 1976 by the Ezra Pound Literary Property Trust. 
Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp. 
"In a Station of the Metro" and "The Return" by Ezra Pound, from Personae, © 1926 by Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions 
Publishing Corp. 
"Canto I" and "Canto LXXXI" by Ezra Pound, from The Cantos of Ezra 
Pound,© 1934,1937,1940,1948,1956,1959,1962,1963,1966,and 1968 by 
Ezra Pound. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp. 
"The Red Wheelbarrow" by William Carlos Williams, from Collected Poems: 
1909-1939,Vo\ume II, © 1938 by New Directions Publishing Corp. 
Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp. 
"Asphodel, That Greeney Flower" by William Carlos Williams, from Collected Poems: 1939-1962, Volume II, © 1944 by William Carlos Williams. 
Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp. 
Lines from Sir Gawain and the Green Knight: A New Verse Translation, translated by Marie Boroff. Copyright © 1967 by WW. Norton & Company, 
Inc. Used by permission ofWW Norton & Company, Inc. 
Lines from Beowulf, translated by Seamus Heaney. Copyright © 2000 by 
Seamus Heaney. Used by permission ofWW Norton & Company, Inc. 
Excerpt from "Digging" from Opened Ground: Selected Poems 1966-1996by 
Seamus Heaney. Copyright © 1998 by Seamus Heaney. Excerpt from "The 
Trees" from Collected Poems by Philip Larkin. Copyright © 1988,1989 by the 
Estate of Philip Larkin. Excerpt from "Canto I" from The Inferno of Dante: 
A New Verse Translation by Robert Pinsky Translation copyright © 1994 by 
Robert Pinsky. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, LLC. 
4 o 6 PERMISSION S 
Excerpt from The Divine Comedy of Dante Alighieri: Inferno by Allen Mandelbaum, copyright © 1980 by Allen Mendelbaum. Used by permission of 
Bantam Books, a division of Random House, Inc. 
Excerpt from Murder in the Cathedral byT. S. Eliot, copyright © 1935 by 
Harcourt, Inc. and renewed 1963 byT. S. Eliot, reprinted by permission of 
the publisher. 
Excerpts from The Poems of Emily Dickinson, edited by Thomas H.Johnson, 
Cambridge, MA:The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Copyright © 
1951,1955,1979 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College, reprinted 
by permission of the publishers and the Trustees of Amherst College. 
Lines from The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer, translated by Nevill 
Coghill (Penguin Classics 1951, fourth revised edition 1977). Copyright 
1951 by Nevill Coghill, copyright © the Estate of Nevill Coghill, 1958, 
1960,1975,1977. 
Lines from "From a Survivor." Copyright © 2002 by Adrienne Rich. Copyright © 1973 by WW Norton & Company, Inc., from The Fact of a Doorframe: Selected Poems 1950-2001 by Adrienne Rich. Used by permission of 
the author and WW Norton & Company, Inc. 
Excerpt from Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead by Tom Stoppard, copyright © 1967, by Grove Press. Used by permission of the Publisher. 
Excerpt from Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett, copyright © 1997 by 
Grove Press. Used by permission of the Publisher. 
