The United States Education System
Avatar
ApplyBoard
February 2 , 2021
Image of two students walking down the hallway of a school

The US education system consists of 12 years of elementary and secondary education before students can advance to post-secondary education . 

In the US , the school calendar begins in August or September and continues through to May or June . The majority of students begin school in autumn . The academic year is composed of three terms also known as semesters . The first semester is from September to December followed by a short holiday break between semesters . The second semester is from January to May . The last semester is a summer holiday break . Post-secondary students can be on summer break from June to August . 

Elementary and Secondary ( K-12 ) Education
Elementary and secondary school is similar across the US . However , there are minor variations from state to state . Elementary and secondary education is divided into : 

Elementary School : Runs for 6-7 years starting in Kindergarten through to Grade 5 or 6
Middle School : Runs for 2-3 years starting in Grade 6 or 7 through to Grade 8
High School : Runs for 4 years starting in Grade 9 through to Grade 12
Once a student has completed Grade 12 , they will receive a high school diploma . Students must complete secondary school ( high school ) to qualify for post-secondary education . Public education in the US is generally free , however , students may come across some fees including field trips , uniforms , books , etc . 

Post-Secondary Education
The US has more than 4 , 500 post-secondary institutions . The US is unique as their institutions are not centrally organized but are accredited on a national or regional level . There are many different types of post-secondary education systems within the US . They include : 

State College or University
Private College or University
Community College
Institute of Technology
Each type of institution provides students with a unique schooling experience , giving students the flexibility to choose the path that works best for them and their career . 

Public and Private
Public or state institutions are supported by state or local governments . Each state has a minimum of one state university and college . With support from the government , students are provided with an affordable post secondary option . 

Private institutions are privately run and receive no funding from the government . Notoriously , private institutions have higher tuition rates . They are also smaller in size and can have religious affiliations than their public school counterparts . 

Types of Post-Secondary Institutions
State College or University
State colleges offer a more affordable post-secondary route . They have often have a wide range of degree programs available . Students also have access to a vibrant campus life , extra-curricular activities , and state of the art teaching facilities . The largest public colleges in the US have over 60 , 000 students enrolled . Some state colleges available include : 

University of Michigan
University of California - Los Angeles ( UCLA ) 
University of Virginia
University of California - Berkeley
Private College and University
Private colleges offer students with smaller class sizes , that helps the students build a relationship with their professors and advisors . They have a smaller list of the degree programs they offer but students have the option to customize their degrees and will be part of more discussion based classes . Among the private colleges are the prestigious Ivy League . 

Ivy League
The Ivy League is one of the most well-known groups of universities in the world . It consists of a group of eight historic universities . They are all located in the northeast region of the US . The Ivy League was originally formed in the 1950s as an athletic association . To this day it remains an athletic association , as well as leaders on the intellectual side . The eight schools include : 

Brown University
Columbia University
Cornell University
Dartmouth University
Harvard University
Princeton University
The University of Pennsylvania
Yale University
Community College
Community colleges are two -year associate degree programs / certifications . Throughout the years , community colleges have begun to adopt vocational oriented programs . There are two associate degrees students can take in community college . Students can enroll in an academic transfer program or direct to the workforce program . ESL or intensive english language programs are available to help prepare international students for university-level courses . Some community colleges available include : 

Green River College
Miami Dade College
Northern Virginia Community College
Santa Monica College
Institute of Technology
Institutes of technology are universities that specialize in engineering , technology , applied sciences , and natural sciences . Students can attend a four year program to receive a bachelor ’ s degree . Some institutions have graduate programs and also offer short-term courses . Some institutes available include :  : 

Illinois Institute of Technology
Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) 
New York Institute of Technology
Levels of Education Qualifications
The US has various qualifications students can achieve while they study stateside . They are grouped into associate degree , bachelor degree , masters , and doctoral . 

Associate Degrees : Typically 2-year programs designed to provide students with basic knowledge on subjects . They prepare students for entry-level positions in fields including nursing , designing , and education . 

Bachelor Degree : Taking 4 years to complete , these programs provide students with education and preparation for most careers paths . Students are able to accept full-time work in their respective field right after graduation . 

There are five types of bachelor degrees : 

Bachelor of Arts ( BA ) 
Bachelor of Science ( BS ) 
Bachelor of Fine Arts ( BFA ) 
Bachelor of Business Administration ( BBA ) 
Bachelor of Architecture ( BArch ) 
Masters : Can take 1-2 years to obtain with students specializing in one area of study . Masters can be thesis or research-based depending on the student ' s specialization . 

Doctoral ( PhD )  : There are different types of doctoral degrees that students can obtain . All are typically research-based and require students to have found a research supervisor at the university they ' re applying to . Students looking to get into the medical field will need to obtain a Doctor of Medicine designation , which is different from other doctoral streams . 