NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
Ray Bolam is Professor of Educational Management at the University of
Cardiff and a visiting Professor of Educational Management at the
University of Leicester . 
Mark Brundrett is Academic Director for Master ’ s Degree programmes at
the Centre for Educational Leadership and Management at the University
of Leicester . 
Neil Burton was formerly Strand Leader for the campus-based MBA in
Educational Management at the Educational Management Development
Unit of the University of Leicester . Dr Burton now teaches in the
Secondary Sector . 
Marianne Coleman was formerly the Deputy Director of the Educational
Management Development Unit ( the predecessor to CELM ) at the
University of Leicester where she held special responsibility for research
and publications . Dr Coleman is now Senior Lecturer in Educational
Management at the Institute of Education in London . 
Lynn Davies is Professor of International Education and Director of the
Centre for International Education at the University of Birmingham . 
Clive Dimmock was formerly Associate Professor of Education at the
University of Western Australia in Perth . He is now Director of the Centre
for Educational Leadership and Management and Professor of Educational
Management at the University of Leicester . 
Peter Gronn is Professor of Education at Monash University , Victoria . He
edits the influential journal , Leading and Managing . 
Helen M . Gunter is Reader in Educational Leadership and Management
in the School of Education at the University of Birmingham . 
Clive Harber was formerly Dean of Education at the University of Natal , 
Durban ; he is currently Reader in International Educational Management
at the University of Birmingham . 
Kenneth Leithwood is Professor of Education within the Centre for
Leadership Development , Ontario Institute for Studies in Education , 
University of Toronto . 
Peter Newton was formerly Director of Courses at the National College for
School Leadership , which is in Nottingham . 
xvii
prelims q Lead 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page xvii
xviii Leadership in Education
Graham Peeke is a member of the senior management team at the Learning
and Skills Development Agency . 
Peter Ribbins is Professor of Educational Management at the University
of Birmingham and was formerly Dean of the Faculty of Education and
Continuing Studies . He is a former editor of the leading journal , 
Educational Management and Administration . 
Robert Smith is Programme Leader for the MSc in Educational Leadership
and takes special responsibility for international students undertaking the
MBA in Educational Management at the Centre for Educational Leadership
and Management , University of Leicester . 
Professor Sir David Watson is Director of the University of Brighton . He
was a member of the National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education 
( the Dearing Committee ) and is a leading member of ‘ Universities UK ’  . 
prelims q Lead 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page xviii
ABBREVIATIONS
AST advanced skills teachers
BELMAS British Educational Leadership , Management and
Administration Society
CEO chief executive officer
CLD Centre for Leadership Development
CoVE Centre for Vocational Excellence
DES Department of Education and Science
DfEE Department for Education and Employment
DfES Department for Education and Skills
EPPI Evidence for Policy and Practice
FE further education
FEDA Further Education Development Agency
FEFC Further Education Funding Council
FENTO Further Education National Training Organisation
HEADLAMP Headteachers ’ Leadership and Management Programme
HE higher education
HEFCE Higher Education Funding Council for England
HEI Higher Education Institution
HESDA Higher Education Staff Development Agency
ICT information and communication technology
LEA Local Education Authority
LLSC Local Learning and Skills Council
LMS Local Management of Schools
LPSH Leadership Programme for Serving Headteachers
LRC Learner Representative Council
LSC Learning and Skills Council
LSDA Learning and Skills Development Agency
NCSL National College for School Leadership
NFER National Foundation for Educational Research
NPQH National Professional Qualification for Headship
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OFSTED Office for Standards in Education
PC personal computer
xix
prelims q Lead 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page xix
PHIP Professional Headship Induction Programme
RDA Regional Development Agency
RQA Raising Quality and Achievement
SCRELM Standing Conference for Research in Educational
Leadership and Management
SCOP Standing Committee of Principals
SMT Senior Management Team
TTA Teacher Training Agency
UAE United Arab Emirates
UCET Universities ’ Council for the Education and Training of
Teachers
UUK Universities United Kingdom
VET vocational and educational training
xx Leadership in Education
prelims q Lead 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page xx
Section A : Conceptualising Leadership
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 1
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 2
1
LEADERSHIP IN LEARNING-CENTRED
SCHOOLS : CULTURAL CONTEXT , 
FUNCTIONS AND QUALITIES
Clive Dimmock
INTRODUCTION
A renewed drive to develop and improve school leadership is currently
under way , and has been so for some time in many countries . Initiatives
aimed at improving school leadership have taken place in previous decades , 
especially in the USA and the UK . What is novel about the current drive
is its more global and international nature on the one hand , and the broader approach being taken to the concept of leadership , on the other . 
In relation to the globalising and internationalising of leadership development , governments as far apart as the Australian states , Hong Kong , 
China , Singapore , the UK and the USA are not only promoting models of
principal development for similar purposes , namely school improvement , 
but are also encouraging reciprocal visitations and exchanges between
principals . In regard to the broadening of the concept of leadership development , at least three new aspects warrant consideration . The first concerns the stronger conception than hitherto , being given to the connectivity between leadership and other key processes , activities and goals of
schools , such as learning and teaching ( Dimmock , 2000 )  . The second
relates to the recognition being given to leadership as a distributed phenomenon in schools and its emergence at teacher and middle management
levels , alongside more traditional conceptions centring on senior management and the principalship . The third distinguishes senior or principal
leadership in terms of phases , identifying at least three – aspiring , newly
appointed / induction and experienced . 
The first years of the new millennium have continued the trends of the
previous century in being characterised by turbulence in educational
policy-making . Continuous and evolving change , it seems , is endemic to
policy and practice on an international scale . Leadership lies at the centre
3
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 3
of such change in education , both as a key component of educational
organisations in its own right and as a catalyst for the successful
reorganisation of other activities . Studies have consistently revealed the
centrality of leadership to school improvement and quality schools 
( Hallinger and Heck , 1997 )  . For some time , governments , and others , have
accepted and embedded this realisation in their policy-making . 
That leadership has assumed such high importance in the minds and
values of policy-makers , as well as researchers and practitioners , creates
a problem in two respects . First , if leadership is so important , it behoves
clarification as to what are its key qualities . Secondly , what kind of
philosophical and values base underpins such qualities to provide their
justification ? 
This chapter addresses both of these questions . It presents a set of leadership functions and a set of qualities seen as appropriate for contemporary school leaders in diverse cultural contexts , and a justification for
them . Accordingly , the chapter is structured into four parts . The first outlines the complex context in which leadership is exercised and highlights
some perennial problems confronting its development . The second presents a rationale and justification for the view of leadership endorsed . The
third outlines a set of contemporary leader functions appropriate for successful schools , both present and future . The fourth and final part refers
to these functions to generate a set of leadership qualities which , it is
argued , form part of a framework for conceptualising leadership , and for
planning its future growth and development . 
A broad canvas of leadership is thus covered . Implicit is the realisation
that current turbulent policy-making environments , with changes
advocated to most aspects of schools and schooling – curriculum , learning , 
teaching , assessment , standards and accountability – place a premium on
coherent and synergistic approaches to leadership . Such a view endorses
the connectivity between leadership and other school activities , such as
learning and teaching , it being no longer sufficient to see leadership as a
discrete entity . Moreover , leadership should relate to the wider issue of
the type of schools and educational organisations society needs . That
being the case , leadership reflects the prevailing social and cultural
condition . Hence , different societies may well have culturally different
expectations of their schools and thus of leadership , despite powerful
global forces towards convergence . 
EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP : CONTEMPORARY 
CONTEXT AND PERENNIAL ISSUES
Some of the more clearly distinguishable trends in leadership thinking
and practice have already been alluded to in the introduction to this
chapter . They , along with other important developments in the field , 
4 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 4
justify further discussion in this section . Some are perennial issues
revisited ; others , however , are markedly new . These developments are
structured into five aspects : global and cultural issues ; leadership
connectivity ; leadership as a distributed concept ; leadership phases ; and
training and preparation for leadership . 
Leadership Betwixt Global and Cultural Forces
Powerful global and international trends in education policy are creating
leadership contexts that are increasingly alike . School-based management , 
outcomes-oriented curricula , market forces and competition , a need to
forge united school communities and a focus on standards and
accountability are commonplace environments within which school
leaders are expected to function . 
A consequence of globalisation is the emergence of generic or
ubiquitous expectations of leaders . For example , there is now a crosscultural expectation that leaders be more proactive in leading and
managing school resources to secure improved performance of staff and
students . While they are increasingly held accountable for their schools ’ 
performance , they are also urged to consider their schools in relation to
the outside world . This externalising includes almost everything , from
local to international and global levels , taking in the school community , 
the local and business community , the national society and citizenship , 
and even the broader international and global issues of world
environmental , political and economic concerns . 
Global and international trends are also discernible in other aspects of
leadership . Many education systems are joining the USA in expecting a
professionally accredited cadre of school leaders . It is intended that
initiatives such as this will create a true profession of the principalship . 
England , for example , plans for all new headteachers to have , or be taking , 
the National Professional Qualification for Headship ( NPQH ) by 2004 . 
Hong Kong is planning the same for its new principals . 
That powerful forces are at work to internationalise and globalise the
principalship , is beyond dispute ( Dimmock and Walker , 2000 )  . They
include the Internet , jet travel , and international media and publishing . 
Opportunities abound for principals , academics and policy-makers to
travel abroad to conferences , to undertake international consultancies , and
to gain leadership training through study visits and projects conducted
overseas . Part of the professional development of Hong Kong principals , 
for example , includes study visits to Beijing and Shanghai to study
practices in mainland China . The National College for School Leadership
in England sponsors programmes of study visits by overseas principals to
disseminate international best practice . There are countless examples of
this type . 
Leadership in learning-centred schools 5
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 5
Despite all this , the indomitable fact is that leadership is culture-bound
to an extent that cannot or should not , be ignored ( Dimmock and Walker , 
2000 )  . Yet , it has been largely ignored in education . For some years , the
present author has argued that concepts , theories , research findings , 
policies and practices conceived in the Anglo-American world may not
apply , or may need adaptation , in other societies ( Dimmock , 1998 ; 
Dimmock and Walker , 1998a ; 1998b )  . For example , we know that the
distribution of power and influence varies cross-culturally , so that in some
societies , such as the USA and the UK , power tends to be more evenly
distributed , whereas in others , such as Asia , it is more concentrated . In
addition , some societies tend to be more individualistic , such as the USA
and the UK , while others are more collectivist , as in Asia . There are other
cultural differences , too , but consideration of these two alone has
important implications for leadership . The Chinese principal , for example , 
experiences a much greater respect and deference for her / his authority
than her / his ‘ western ’ counterpart . Equally , she / he is less inclined to 
 ‘ confront ’ difficult interpersonal conflicts for fear of ‘ losing face ’ and
disturbing apparent harmonious relations , than is the English or American
principal . More weight is given to conformity and to hierarchy and
seniority in Chinese schools than is the case in British or American
schools . Leadership styles and expectations thus differ cross-culturally 
( Walker and Dimmock , 1999a ; 1999b )  . 
Globalising and internationalising forces are tending to lead to
convergence of educational policies and practices , including leadership . 
However , while some aspects of culture are susceptible to change , other
more deep-seated cultural characteristics , forged over centuries , remain
stubbornly in place . The resultant tension helps explain many of the
world ’ s present problems . They are no less applicable to leadership . The
implications for educational leadership are profound . They are likely to
affect how leaders are prepared and trained , what emphasis leadership is
given in particular societies , what are the societal expectations of leaders , 
and so on . Few ubiquitous solutions to leadership issues can be assumed . 
Differences in societal values and thus in leadership practices and
expectations , abound . It is abundantly clear that more research is needed
on how societal cultural impacts on leadership . 
Leadership connectivity 
In earlier work ( Dimmock , 2000 )  , the present author described at some
length the idea of leadership as a connected concept . He argued that it
was a failure to see it in such terms that partly allowed Weick ’ s ( 1976 ) 
conception of schools as ‘ loosely-coupled ’ organisations to continue to
survive . It also helps explain why so many system and school restructuring
initiatives fail to penetrate beyond the principal ’ s door into classrooms . 
6 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 6
Essentially , in the context of school improvement and student learning , 
it is important to understand the links between all elements that comprise
the school and schooling , including leadership , and to do so in a
backward-mapping way ( Dimmock , 2000 )  . This entails identifying , and
then relating , student learning outcomes derived from the curriculum , 
learning processes , teaching methods , use of computer technology , 
organisational structures , human and financial resource management , and
culture building . All of these are linked to each other and to leadership . 
Thinking connectedly is important strategically in securing school
improvement and in micro-managing the daily work of schools ( Dimmock , 
2000 )  . Leaders who think connectedly are more likely to foresee the
consequences of their actions . A decision to change curriculum content , 
for example , might well relay on to imply new ways of learning , which
in turn indicate new ways of teaching , the need for professional
development , different organisational structures and patterns of resource
allocation , and the building of a new culture . Any or all of these are
possible consequences and spread effects of an initial idea for change . 
Developing the skills of connected thinking will hopefully become a
central part of the study and practice of leadership in future , since it is
an integral part of strategic and micro-leadership . 
Leadership as a distributed concept
It used to be the case that leadership was thought of wholly in terms of
the headteacher or principal . This is not so nowadays , with the prevailing
view that leadership is a permeable process that is widely distributed
throughout the school . Indeed , many talk about it as an empowering
process enabling others in the school to exercise leadership . Behind such
notions is the rationale that a high-performing organisation can only be
achieved if all of its sections and departments are ‘ full-on ’  , and that any
slack or underperformance is eradicated . Leadership as a distributed rather
than monopolistic concept is more likely to achieve this , it is contended , 
through its capacity to apply pressure and motivation more successfully
throughout the organisation . 
Leadership as a distributed concept is increasingly being incorporated
into professional development initiatives . For example , the National
College for School Leadership ( NCSL ) in England , has developed a
programme called Leading from the Middle , specifically aimed at middle
managers such as department heads and year co-ordinators . Furthermore , 
a growing number of scholars in the field are propagating ideas and
practices based on the notion of teacher leadership . Still others conceive
of student leadership . Behind all this is a view of leadership as an
influence process rather than a set of tasks associated with a particular
position . In reality , leadership is both . It is an influence process , and that
Leadership in learning-centred schools 7
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 7
is what makes it generic across levels of an organisation . However , 
incumbents of different positions also need to apply the influence
processes to particular spheres of responsibility , and those are often , and
likely to be , different . The interconnection between leadership as a process
and a set of tasks connected to position is likely to be of interest to those
charged with designing leadership courses . They will need to consider
how the content of such programmes will differ between teacher , middle
manager and senior leadership . 
Phases of leadership
Scholars in the field of educational leadership have given relatively scant
attention to developing theories of career progression in the profession . 
This is particularly the case for empirically supported theories . Recent
interest has focused on identifying leadership stages and a number of
schema have resulted . These originate , however , more from a conceptual
than an empirical base . Consequently , this aspect of leadership remains a 
 ‘ hot topic ’ for future empirical research . As the following paragraphs
reveal , there is as yet no universally agreed , unequivocal consensus on a
stage theory of leadership . 
Many of the conceptual schema proposed recognise stages or phases of
leadership , and have been conjured by policy-makers and professional
developers seeking to improve the training and preparation of school
leaders . In Hong Kong , for example , the government has based its policy
of needs assessment and school leader professional development on a
three-stage structure of aspiring , newly appointed and experienced
principals ( Education Department , Hong Kong , 2002 )  . There are problems
of terminology with this taxonomy . For example , the term ‘ aspiring ’ is
condescending , especially when many such candidates already occupy
senior leadership positions . Likewise , some ‘ newly appointed ’ principals
may have already been principals , but in other schools . 
In England , the NCSL has published a five-stage model of career
leadership as follows ( NCSL , 2001 )  . The first stage is recognised as 
 ‘ emergent leadership ’  , which is meant to apply to teachers who begin to
take on management and leadership responsibilities and perhaps aspire
to become headteachers . There is some equivocation here , because subject
or specialist teachers are distinguished from emergent leaders and are
regarded as ‘ middle ’ leaders . Clearly , the membership of both groups will
overlap , even if the purpose of their tasks is ostensibly different . A second
stage of ‘ established leadership ’ comprises assistant and deputy heads , 
who are experienced leaders , but who do not intend to pursue headship . 
A third stage is recognised as ‘ entry to headship ’ and this stage combines
the professional preparation for headship with the induction of new heads , 
a process seen as continuous and seamless . A fourth stage of ‘ advanced
8 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 8
leadership ’ applies to mature leaders who are looking to refresh and
update and widen their experience . Finally , a fifth stage , known as 
 ‘ consultant leaders ’  , are those who are sufficiently able and experienced
to act in the capacity of trainer , mentor or inspector and to put something
back into the profession . 
This is not the place to critically review the above stages . Suffice to say
that it is not an easy task to conjure a stage theory or framework . However , 
the NCSL stages raise many issues . For example , while the sequence is
indisputable , dependent as it is on the length of time people are in
leadership , how valid is it to equate experience and expertise with
maturity or length of service ? How useful is the terminology with labels
such as ‘ advanced ’ and ‘ consultant ’  ? Does it imply that leaders who are
not in the ‘ consultant ’ stage are not sufficiently mature or expert to advise , 
mentor or inspect ? Is it not possible for a leader to occupy stage 4 and 5
at the same time ? 
Leader preparation and training 
In the UK , as in many other education systems , leadership training has
attracted a large share of the professional development budget during the
late 1990s and early part of the twenty-first century . However , while such
initiatives have generally been greeted favourably , they have resurrected
some perennial conundrums . Brundrett ’ s ( 2001 ) account comparing the
development of leadership preparation programmes in England and the
USA ably demonstrates this . For our purposes , these issues can be grouped
as follows : central versus dispersed ; academic / liberal versus
practical / instrumental ; and business versus education orientation . It is
worth briefly elaborating on each . 
• Centralist versus dispersed : this issue centres on the extent to which
central government rather than local agencies , and higher education , 
should control the agenda for leadership training . Brundrett ( 2001 )  , for
example , when comparing the relatively long history of leadership
preparation in the USA with that of England , notes that America has
a tradition of federal and state governments as well as higher education all working closely together . He argues that despite long periods
of harsh controversy and conflict , the American leadership agenda has
benefited from ‘ a sophisticated academic critique ’  , while by contrast , 
in England ,  ‘ central governmental organisations have interjected
national programmes .  .  . which present the dangers of arrogating training ’  ( ibid .  , p . 229 )  . 
The point at issue is that a number of sectors have vested interests
in leadership training – national and state governments , universities
and higher education , industry and business – each of which is
competing for influence . And this excludes the voice of the profession
Leadership in learning-centred schools 9
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 9
itself , which is often drowned out . Nonetheless , Brundrett claims that
in the move to licensure in the USA , the place of higher education has
been preserved . This remains to be settled in England , where strong
central government initiatives in the mid and late 1990s have seen the
introduction of the National Professional Qualification for Headship 
( NPQH )  , the Headteachers ’ Leadership and Management Programme 
( HEADLAMP ) and the Leadership Programme for Serving Headteachers 
( LPSH )  . The place of universities in this framework and the
relationship between NPQH and masters ’ degrees in educational
leadership and management remain somewhat ambivalent ( Bush , 
1998 )  . 
A recent development in the central versus local tension in England
is the move to establish a number of regional affiliated centres to the
National College through which the national programmes will be run . 
The affiliated centres will likely be conglomerates of local education
authorities , independent agents , and institutions of higher education . 
• Academic / liberal versus practical / instrumental : the argument here
revolves around the general aim and approach taken to training and
development , namely , whether it should be academic and liberal or
practical and instrumental in nature . Some advocate a knowledge for
understanding approach , implying a more liberal academic orientation , 
whereas others espouse a knowledge for action approach , grounded in
the practical and instrumental . This dispute surfaced in England in the
1980s when courses spawned under the aegis of the National
Development Centre , with little or no central control from the
government , were often attacked for their limited instrumental aims
and content . A more recent criticism has focused on the compilation
of daunting lists of standards and competences used in the assessment
of leaders , and the consequent elevation of expectations well beyond
the capabilities of most . 
• Education versus industry / business orientation : a similar tension to the
academic / practical dichotomy has characterised leadership preparation
and development , namely , whether it should be exclusively
educational in its orientation , or whether it would benefit from
influence and values associated with the world of business and
industry . Those favouring the exclusivity of education appeal to the
fundamental differences in aims , values and cultures between the two
sectors , while those supporting the inclusion of business stress the
generic nature of leadership and management , believing that
educational leadership would benefit from such broadening . The
debate surfaced in England in the 1980s , when individuals and
organisations representing industrial leadership played a prominent
role in headteacher training . It has lingered on since with debates about
10 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 10
the relevance of industrial content to educational leadership courses
and , more recently , with the notion of business mentors for
headteachers as part of the LPSH programme . 
It is against these complex issues and trends that the landscape of leader
functions and qualities continues to be mapped . The following sections
present a framework of leader functions and qualities , which is preceded
by a justification . 
IDENTIFYING AND JUSTIFYING LEADER FUNCTIONS
AND QUALITIES
Contemporary thinking about leadership espouses the importance of
leaders developing a values base on which to build their strategies , 
priorities and styles . Attempts to explicate the type of leadership
appropriate for contemporary schools need to provide an underpinning
rationale , philosophy or justification . The perspective adopted by this
author views leadership as a highly connected phenomenon ( to other
processes and activities ) and one which is largely derived from them . 
Accordingly , in advocating a perspective of leadership , there is need to
look at its purposes , aims and ends . As Covey ( 1990 ) aptly reminds us , it
is wise to start with the end in mind . It follows that since the purposes
and aims may change with time , so may the preferred versions of
leadership . 
To what purposes and aims is leadership geared ? There can be no more
important answer to this than the connection it enjoys to the organisation
– the school or college – being led . Thus , in espousing a view on the nature
of leadership , it is necessary to envision the type of school we , that is , 
society , wants . Murphy ( 1992 ) recognised this important tenet more than
a decade ago . Thus , the problematic issue of what should be the nature
of leadership can be addressed through the following questions : how do
we want our future schools to look ? What is expected of our future
schools ? What kind of education do we want schools to provide ? What
values , knowledge and skills do we expect students to acquire ? In short , 
what kind of graduate ( s ) do we advocate for our schools ? 
Answers to these questions provide some powerful insights into the
type of leadership required of our schools . Hence the claim that leadership
is a connected and derived concept , being dependent on the bigger and
more crucial issue of what is meant by successful , quality schools for the
present and for the future and what type of leadership is necessary to their
materialisation . The importance of values , and their influence on
leadership , is central to this approach , since values undergird our visions
of future schools and schooling . It is to these visions and their associated
leader functions that the following section turns . 
Leadership in learning-centred schools 11
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 11
LEADER FUNCTIONS IN 
LEARNING-FOCUSED SCHOOLS
A number of the key characteristics of future schools are predictable . They
will be increasingly self-managed , with responsibility for their own
planning , but within system frameworks . Pressure to make them
accountable for their performance and standards will likely intensify . 
Performance will be largely judged , as at present , by student scores on
examinations and tests . Concerns for equity will continue , manifesting in
such initiatives as more individualised curricula . Greater effort will be
given to raising the learning performances of the underprivileged , of
minority groups and of the disabled . Increased store will be placed on
improving teachers and teaching . Greater emphasis on the use of computer
technology in the classroom , for purposes of enhancing both learning and
teaching , will reflect past failures in this respect . As the multicultural
nature of societies continues to generate problems , more prominence will
be placed on the school as a microcosm of multiculturalism , as a possible
palliative for addressing the multicultural problems of the wider society . 
This brief and partial picture distils into schools as learning-focused
organisations . Whether it be an emphasis on individualised learning , 
computer-driven learning , improving examination scores , or acquiring
more tolerant and enlightened attitudes towards diverse cultures , the
generic and underlying theme is learning . Academic , social , ethical , 
ethnic , liberal ; cognitive , affective or psychomotor – they all reduce to the
school as an effective learning environment . The issue can be posed in
two questions : How can schools cope with such challenges ? How can they
become better learning-focused organisations ? 
An earlier study of the future-orientated , learning-centred school 
( Dimmock , 2000 ) presented a description of how schools , if appropriately
designed , might address both of the above questions . The study
systematically profiled key elements of curricula , teaching , learning , use
of computer technology , organisational structures , evaluation and
appraisal , personnel and resources , and leadership , in order to arrive at a
redesigned notion of what a truly learning-centred school looked like . The
same process – backward mapping – not only portrayed leadership as a
peremptory part of attaining and maintaining such schools , but generated
a perspective of the functions of leaders in such schools derived from the
key elements of design . It is to these functions that the discussion now
turns . 
Building on earlier analyses ( Dimmock , 1995a ; 1995b ; 2000 )  , a
conception of leadership is derived that emphasises ten components , each
of which dovetails and overlaps . Leadership of the learning-centred
school , it is argued , emphasises : 
1 a strategic capacity based on a holistic conceptualisation of
12 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 12
organisational change and innovation towards a vision of the learning-centred school ; 
2 goal orientation in regard to student learning outcomes ; 
3 a focus on teaching and learning ; 
4 practice based on research evidence of ‘ what works ’ and ‘ informed
practice ’ in respect of teaching and learning , school effectiveness and
school improvement ; 
5 commitment to embedding computer technology ; 
6 building of supportive organisational structures that promote effective
teaching and learning and decision-making ; 
7 creation of an organisational culture that values learning for all and
a positive , collaborative climate of human relations ; 
8 allocation of human , financial and physical resources that supports
learning for all , coupled with a performance monitoring and
reviewing process that provides feedback and positive reinforcement ; 
9 ability to model desired behaviours and values ; 
10 capacity to mould multicultural schools into harmonious
communities which benefit and learn from diversity . 
Each of these roles is now briefly discussed . 
It is fitting to start with the importance of vision , the ability to think
holistically and conceptually , and the capacity to develop strategy and to
oversee change . These are multiple functions which enjoy a close
interrelationship . A vision provides the leader with a sense of purpose , 
aim and direction , which can then be shared with others and used as a
basis for prioritising and decision-making . Vision is realised through
strategies geared to change , a process requiring an ability to conceptualise
and to see the school as a whole , as well as the interconnections between
the parts . Implicit in all of this is a group of leadership functions variously
defined as visionary , strategic and transformational ( Leithwood and Jantzi , 
1990 )  . 
Learning-centred schools prompt a major shift in the mind-set of leaders
away from business matters to the centrality of students and learning . They
become goal-oriented in respect of improving student learning outcomes , 
interpreting their work roles and judging their performance in terms of
the contribution they make to enhancing learning ( Levine and Lezotte , 
1990 )  . Above all , they hold students ’ welfare uppermost in their values , 
believing that they are in school primarily to serve the interests of all
students . 
Leading the learning-centred school demands a close knowledge of
learning , teaching and curriculum ( Leithwood and Steinbach , 1993 )  , or
what is traditionally termed the instructional core . Equipped with
knowledge and expertise of the core instructional processes , teachers can
be led in a truly professional way ( Duke , 1987 )  . Possession of such
technical knowledge enables leaders to relate to teachers and students on
Leadership in learning-centred schools 13
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 13
classroom-level issues as well as provide whole-school perspectives on
curricular and pedagogical issues . 
Leaders promote practices in their schools that are based on evidenceinformed , research-validated approaches . They also respect and value
intuition and experience . As learners themselves , leaders demonstrate that
they value the importance of research findings as guides to informed
practice and future innovation . They encourage teachers to be cognisant
of research on effective teaching and learning by obtaining and
disseminating relevant literature and by resourcing and arranging staff
development to keep staff informed ( Duke , 1987 )  . In addition , they
familiarise themselves with research on principal effectiveness , school
effectiveness and school improvement , and seek appropriate opportunities
to apply important findings . In regard to research , they demonstrate
through their own behaviour the value they place on reading , 
understanding , reflecting , conceptualising and transforming ideas into
practice . 
A key feature of contemporary leadership is a commitment to computer
technology as an integral and embedded part of learning and teaching , and
of school decision-making . Leaders need to be conversant with the
capabilities and potentialities of technology . They aim to achieve the twin
goals of access for all , and integration across the whole curriculum . 
Computer technology is central to the delivery of the curriculum
programme and the attainment of student outcomes in the learningcentred school . Its intrusiveness into the classroom means that traditional
notions of teaching and learning have to be reconfigured . Leaders have a
responsibility to ensure the visions , goals and policies concerning
technology are adopted and implemented across all faculties . 
If leadership is focused on core processes of learning and teaching , it
has also to be concerned with the organisational structures that enable the
processes . The configuration of structures should support , not hinder , the
delivery of a quality curriculum to all students . In traditional schools , 
structures such as standard lesson times , inflexible standardised curricula , 
regimented timetables and school routines have come to govern decisions
about core technology . Leaders may thus need to dismantle existing
dysfunctional structures . This calls for an understanding of alternative
structures and their likely impact on , and ability to allow flexibility in
furthering , the cause of promoting learning ( Murphy et al .  , 1985 )  . 
Concern for culture is acknowledged as one of the key roles leaders
play . Tight coupling and synergy is achieved when all parts of a school
share common values , goals and practices . A strong , tightly knit
organisational culture helps dismantle the barriers and internal divisions
which often characterise schools ( Wilson and Firestone , 1987 )  . New
configurations of teaching and learning are dependent on building a
culture that supports learning for all and values productive human
relations . Effective school leaders recognise the multiple and mutually
14 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 14
reinforcing strategies available to them in building supportive learning and
collegial cultures . These range from more explicit forms of verbal
communication with all groups in the school community , to modelling
and demonstrating through their own behaviours , as well as more subtle
uses of symbols , ceremonies and rituals . High but realistic learning
expectations are conveyed , rewards , recognition and resources for learning
are provided and learning time protected ( Smith and Piele , 1989 )  . 
Effective leadership of human resources is likely to be supportive of
improved levels of learning productivity in schools . Such leadership
motivates effective teaching and learning , enthusing people to capitalise
on the virtues of working collaboratively . Leaders provide teachers with
the opportunity to develop collaboratively and individually as reflective
practitioners . Human resources are used to maximum effect , securing
synergy of effort through collaboration ( Moore Johnson , 1990 ; Rosenholtz , 
1989 )  . Good leaders connect school-based management with school
improvement and core technology . Thus , financial management is
conceived more in terms of how it can influence resource allocation to
enhance the core technology and student outcomes than for its intrinsic
importance ( Duke , 1987 )  . Resource levels are carefully considered in
relation to student need and learning outcomes ( Knight , 1993 )  . Schools
perform well when leaders recognise the need for agreement on goals , 
when resources are allocated to support goal achievement and when all
parts of the school work consistently and collaboratively towards the same
ends . Purposeful professional development is accorded a key role in
resource allocation . 
Effective leaders monitor and review performance at whole-school and
sub-school levels ( Cuttance , 1993 )  . They realise the importance of
monitoring and reviewing as prerequisites for providing feedback and
positive reinforcement , both of which are consistently found among the
factors contributing highly to learning ( Fraser et al .  , 1987 )  . In their capacity
as leaders , they give abundant feedback and positive reinforcement to
teachers and students , and at the same time build the culture for these
behaviours to permeate all levels and members of the school community . 
In the learning-centred school , leaders deliberately and consciously
demonstrate in their own professional work the core values and
behaviours they wish to promulgate in others . They model the behaviours
and values they advocate for teachers and students ( Dimmock , 1995a ; 
1995b )  . With the leader as role model , desirable values and practices are
deliberately replicated at different levels . In advocating a school focus on
student learning , effective principals and teachers approach their own
professional work with a learning orientation ( Barth , 1990 )  . 
Finally , due recognition should be given to leadership capacity to mould
multicultural school communities into harmonious learning
environments . Most of the aforementioned functions are involved in this , 
especially the building of learning cultures , the modelling of certain
Leadership in learning-centred schools 15
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 15
behaviours and the focus on the learning of all . Increasingly in future , 
leadership will involve a cultural sensitivity and appreciation such that
the cultural diversity of school communities is seen as a rich resource to
be tapped rather than a problem to be concealed . Leaders will need to
ensure that their schools engage cultural diversity through the curriculum , 
in teaching and learning , and in the social , spiritual and aesthetic life of
the school . 
For most leaders , the above functions present not only a formidable
challenge , but a requirement to undergo training and to develop
knowledge and skills in new directions . Hence the task of mapping
contemporary leadership involves more than identifying a set of functions . 
Account also needs to be taken of the qualities needed to fulfil the
functions . Accordingly , these are the focus of the next section . 
LEADER QUALITIES
In earlier work on school leadership , Walker and Dimmock ( 2000 )  , in
concert with an assembled panel of experienced principals , professional
developers , policy-makers and academics identified four interrelated
components of what they termed ‘ key qualities ’ for leadership . These were
values , knowledge , skills and attributes . All four , it was argued , needed
to be meaningful and professionally relevant . The ‘ expert ’ panel was then
charged with identifying particular core values , professional knowledge , 
skills and attributes deemed to be central to contemporary school leaders . 
The results of their deliberations are given below . While these are not
claimed to be exclusive , they provide a useful framework for
conceptualising essential leader qualities . A key question is the extent to
which the values , knowledge , skills and attributes are thought to be
generic and cross-cultural , given the tensions discussed in the earlier part
of this chapter . The panel assumed that they were mostly generic , since
they are responses to the needs for school improvement more than
particularities of culture . They thought , however , that cultural difference
would be more likely to affect how all four components were expressed
and exercised . 
EDUCATIONAL VALUES
Essential to leaders is the development of a coherent set of educational
values on which to base leadership for school improvement . These values
serve as fundamental principles on which to develop and design their
schools and to provide consistency across all aspects of their leadership . 
Eight pivotal values were identified : 
• Learning-centred : a belief in the primacy of learning as the focus of all
that happens in the school . 
16 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 16
• Innovation : a belief in experimentation with new ideas and with
change as a means of school improvement . 
• Lifelong learning : a belief that a major goal of the school is to develop
among its community a view of learning as a continuous and ongoing
process . 
• Education-for-all : a conviction that all students have a right to a
relevant and meaningful education . 
• Service-orientation : a belief that the school be flexible and responsive
in meeting the diverse needs of its community . 
• Empowerment : a commitment to the meaningful involvement and
participation of school community members in the life of the school . 
• Equity and fairness : a belief that the rights of all in the school
community are duly recognised and that individuals be treated with
justice and integrity . 
• Whole-person development : a commitment to producing students with
a well-rounded , balanced education . 
It is a substantial challenge for the present preparation and development
of educational leaders to fully embrace these values . Yet to do so is
axiomatic if leaders are to be successful school innovators and improvers . 
Professional knowledge
Leadership for school improvement and student achievement depends on
a clearly conceptualised and shared body of knowledge which , together
with a set of educational values , guides and informs professional practice . 
This body of knowledge relates to the roles identified earlier , or , expressed
in a different way , to each of the following : 
• strategic direction and policy environment
• teaching , learning and curriculum
• leader and teacher growth and development
• staff and resource management
• quality assurance and accountability
• external communication and connection . 
The challenge is to ensure that leaders possess a balanced and comprehensive knowledge across the six domains . In practice , leaders tend to
possess strengths and weaknesses in some only , according to their
preferred areas of focus . There may be a substantial lack of knowledge in
other domains , with an overreliance on experience and intuition . Hence
the recent attention in the UK given to evidence-informed practice and
research-based knowledge of ‘ what works ’  . 
Leadership in learning-centred schools 17
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 17
Skills
Leadership skills are grounded in educational values and professional
knowledge . The skills of leadership for school and student improvement
are exercised in relation to the leader functions identified earlier . Skills
may be grouped into the following three categories : 
• Personal : these relate to how leaders manage their own behaviours and
thoughts in their professional lives . 
• Communicative and influence : these relate to how leaders interact at
an interpersonal level with colleagues and other members of the
community , and how they mobilise colleagues and other school
community members towards sustained commitment to school
improvement . 
• Organisational and technical : these skills concern the tasks and
techniques that are associated with running the whole school and
securing school improvement . 
The key skills essential to running good schools and colleges are personal
and interpersonal on the one side , and technical and task-oriented on the
other . It is the achievement of high levels of both , and a balance between
the two , that distinguishes effective leaders . 
Attributes
Educational values , professional knowledge , and skills are integral parts
of leadership qualities . However , they are not sufficient . There is a fourth
element , namely personal attributes , that leaders bring to the role . In the
context of school-based management and school improvement , certain
attributes , in particular , seem to assume prime importance . The expert
panel selected the following : 
• Adaptability and responsiveness in school decision-making and in
managing people while retaining commitment to core values , such as
student needs and learning outcomes . 
• Courage of conviction with regard to their values , principles and
actions and resilience in times of adversity and opposition . 
• Self-confidence in their abilities and actions , while maintaining
modesty in their interactions and dealings with others in and outside
their school communities . 
• Tough-mindedness in regard to the best interests of staff and students
while showing benevolence and respect in all their interactions . 
• Collaboration as team members coupled with individual
resourcefulness and decisiveness . 
18 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 18
• Integrity in their dealings with others combined with political
astuteness . 
The noteworthy feature of these attributes – as conceived by the expert
panel and highlighted in italics – is their arrangement in pairs . With the
exception of the second attribute , which combines two similar qualities , 
namely , courage and resilience , they are subtle combinations of opposites , 
constituting checks and balances that provide the range of responses
demanded of leaders in complex situations . They permit leaders the range
and flexibility to make appropriate responses to given situations . For
example , leaders are expected to display self-confidence while at the same
time remaining modest . They are expected to be collaborative while
maintaining individual resourcefulness . They are expected to act with
integrity and honesty , yet be politically astute . They need to be toughminded , yet benevolent and respectful . While displaying courage , 
resilience and commitment , they need adaptability and responsiveness . 
These attributes , along with leader values , professional knowledge and
skills provide a framework for understanding the complexities of leader
qualities . As always in dynamic , interactive situations , it is the mix and
combination of all elements that determines the efficacy and effectiveness
of the leader . 
It may well be that these four elements of leader qualities are relevant
and applicable to different societal cultures . In other words , in addressing
the same policy agenda of school improvement , they are generic and thus
applicable to leaders in many cultural settings . However , how particular
values , knowledge , skills and attributes are displayed and exercised , and
what combinations of them are considered appropriate , are likely to be
culturally sensitive . 
CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has painted a broad canvas of the landscape of educational
leadership . It has argued that the importance of leadership to school
improvement is no longer in doubt . Policy-makers , academics , 
administrators and practitioners have come to accept its centrality to the
process of reform and improvement . Consequently , this places high
responsibility on those groups to provide answers to such questions as , 
what constitutes leadership ? How should leaders be prepared and trained ? 
What is the relationship to teaching , learning and other organisational
elements ? How , at its most effective , does leadership connect with them
to exert positive influence for student and school improvement ? While a
chapter such as this cannot possibly do justice to all these , it has begun
to address them conceptually . 
There is much to be done to improve the knowledge base . There are
relatively few empirical studies detailing how leadership connects to
Leadership in learning-centred schools 19
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 19
influence teaching and learning . Many scholars and practitioners have
criticised the quality of professional preparation and training for
educational leaders . Improvements are being made in this respect , but
there is still some way to go . Perhaps one of the most telling points is that
as the roles and functions of leaders have generally extended with the
increasing turbulence in educational policy-making , the methods of
studying leaders have generally failed to keep pace ( Dimmock and
O ’ Donoghue , 1997 )  . There is a need for more innovative methodological
approaches , such as life history , to enrich contemporary research on
educational leadership and leaders . 
Equally , in response to the ethnocentric , largely Anglo-American bias
of much of the literature on school leadership , there is an urgent need for
more culturally sensitive and cross-cultural studies :  ‘ One size does not fit
all .  ’ We need culturally based theories of leadership that are generated
from , and inform , practice in different parts of the world , such as China , 
Africa , India , Russia and South America . 
Within societies , we need to realise that leaders of multicultural schools
are asked to make decisions about complex cultural matters for which they
have little training or expertise . Inadequate preparation and knowledge of
intercultural relations may result in an incomplete understanding of the
values and interests of those entrusted to their care ( Corson , 1998 )  . Schools
can easily become islands of alienation in the very communities they are
meant to serve . In all of these ways , much remains to be done in the theory , 
research , and practice of leadership and the development of school
leaders . 
REFERENCES
Barth , R . S .  ( 1990 ) Improving Schools from Within : Teachers , Parents and
Principals can Make the Difference , San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Brundrett , M .  ( 2001 )  ‘ The development of school leadership preparation
programmes in England and the USA ’  , Educational Management and
Administration , 29 ( 2 )  , 229–45 . 
Bush , T .  ( 1998 )  ‘ The National Professional Qualification for Headship : the key to
effective school leadership ?  ’  , School Leadership and Management , 18 ( 3 )  , 
321–33 . 
Corson , D .  ( 1998 ) Changing Education for Diversity , Buckingham . Open University
Press . 
Covey , S .  ( 1990 ) The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People , New York : Simon & 
Schuster . 
Cuttance , P .  ( 1993 )  ‘ School development and review in an Australian state
education system ’  , in C . Dimmock ( ed .  )  , School-Based Management and
School Effectiveness , London : Routledge ,  ( pp . 142–64 )  .  . 
Dimmock , C .  ( 1995a )  ‘ Restructuring for school effectiveness : leading , organising
and teaching for effective learning ’  , Educational Management and
Administration , 23 ( 1 )  , 1–13 . 
20 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 20
Dimmock , C .  ( 1995b )  ‘ Reconceptualising restructuring for school effectiveness and
school improvement ’  , International Journal of Educational Reform , 4 ( 3 )  , 
285–300 . 
Dimmock , C .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Restructuring Hong Kong ’ s schools : the applicability of
Western theories , policies and practices to an Asian culture ’  , Educational
Management and Administration , 26 ( 4 )  , 363–77 . 
Dimmock , C .  ( 2000 ) Designing the Learning-Centred School : A Cross-Cultural
Perspective , London : Falmer Press . 
Dimmock , C . and O ’ Donoghue T .  ( 1997 )  ‘ The edited topical life history approach : 
a new methodology to inform the study of school leadership ’  , Leading and
Managing , 3 ( 1 )  , 48–70 . 
Dimmock , C . and Walker , A .  ( 1998a )  ‘ Towards comparative educational
administration : Building the case for a cross-cultural , school-based approach ’  , 
Journal of Educational Administration , 36 ( 4 )  , 379–401 . 
Dimmock , C . and Walker , A .  ( 1998b )  ‘ Comparative educational administration : 
developing a cross-cultural comparative framework ’  , Educational
Administration Quarterly , 34 ( 4 )  , 558–95 . 
Dimmock , C . and Walker , A .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Globalization and societal culture : re-defining
schooling and school leadership in the 21st century ’  , Compare , 30 ( 3 )  , 303–12 . 
Duke , D . L .  ( 1987 ) School Leadership and Instructional Improvement , New York : 
Random House . 
Education Department , Hong Kong ( 2002 ) Continuing Professional Development
for School Excellence , Hong Kong : Education Department . 
Fraser , B . J .  , Walberg , H . J .  , Welch , W . W . and Hattie , J . A .  ( 1987 )  ‘ Syntheses of
educational productivity research ’  , International Journal of Educational
Research , 11 ( 2 )  , 147–247 . 
Hallinger , P . and Heck , R .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Exploring the principal ’ s contribution to school
effectiveness ’  , School Effectiveness and School Improvement , 8 ( 4 )  , 1–35 . 
Knight , B .  ( 1993 )  ‘ Delegated financial management and school effectiveness ’  , in C . 
Dimmock ( ed .  )  , School-Based Management and School Effectiveness , London : 
Routledge ,  ( pp . 114–41 )  . 
Leithwood , K . and Jantzi , D .  ( 1990 )  ‘ Transformational leadership : how principals
can help reform school cultures ’  , School Effectiveness and School
Improvement , 1 ( 4 )  , 249–80 . 
Leithwood , K . and Steinbach , R .  ( 1993 )  ‘ The consequences for school improvement
of differences in principals ’ problem-solving processes ’  , in C . Dimmock ( ed .  )  , 
School-Based Management and School Effectiveness , London : Routledge ,  
( pp . 41–64 )  . 
Levine , D . U . and Lezotte , L . W .  ( 1990 ) Unusually Effective Schools : A Review and
Analysis of Research and Practice , Madison , WI : National Centre for Effective
Schools Research and Development . 
Moore Johnson , S .  ( 1990 ) Teachers at Work : Achieving Success in our Schools , 
New York : Basic Books . 
Murphy , J .  ( 1992 ) The Landscape of Leader Preparation : Reframing the Education
of School Administrators , Newbury Park , CA : Corwin Press . 
Murphy , J .  , Weil , M .  , Hallinger , P . and Mitman , A .  ( 1985 )  ‘ School effectiveness : a
conceptual framework ’  , The Educational Forum , 49 ( 3 )  , 361–74 . 
National College for School leadership ( NCSL )  ( 2001 ) Leadership Development
Framework , Nottingham : NCSL . 
Rosenholtz , S .  ( 1989 ) Teachers ’ Workplace : The Social Organisation of Schools , 
Leadership in learning-centred schools 21
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 21
New York : Longman . 
Smith , S . C . and Piele , P . K .  ( eds )  .  ( 1989 ) School Leadership : Handbook for
Excellence 2nd edn , Eugene , OR : ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational
Management . 
Walker , A . and Dimmock , C .  ( 1999a )  ‘ Exploring principals ’ dilemmas in Hong
Kong : increasing cross-cultural understanding of school leadership ’  , 
International Journal of Educational Reform , 8 ( 1 )  , 15–24 . 
Walker , A . and Dimmock , C .  ( 1999b )  ‘ A cross-cultural approach to the study of
educational leadership : an emerging framework ’  , Journal of School Leadership , 
9 ( 4 )  , 321–48 . 
Walker , A . and Dimmock , C .  ( 2000 ) Key Qualities of Newly Appointed Principals
in Hong Kong , Hong Kong : Hong Kong Centre for the Development of
Educational Leadership , The Chinese University of Hong Kong . 
Weick , K . E .  ( 1976 )  ‘ Educational organizations as loosely-coupled systems ’  , 
Administrative Science Quarterly , 21 , 1–19 . 
Wilson , B . L . and Firestone , W . A .  ( 1987 )  ‘ The principal and instruction : combining
bureaucratic and cultural linkages ’  , Educational Leadership , 45 ( 1 )  , 18–23 . 
FURTHER READING
Dimmock , C .  ( 2000 ) Designing the Learning-Centred School : A Cross-Cultural
Perspective , London : Falmer Press . 
Dimmock , C .  ( 2002 )  .  ‘ Cross-cultural differences in the understanding and conduct
of research ’  , in M . Coleman and A . Briggs ( eds )  , Researching in Educational
Management and Leadership , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Dimmock , C .  ( in press )  .  ‘ Effective schooling in the Asia-Pacific region ’  , in J . Keeves
and R . Watanabe ( eds )  , The Handbook on Educational Research in the AsiaPacific Region , Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic . 
Dimmock , C . and Walker , A .  ( 2002 )  .  ‘ School leadership in context : societal and
organisational cultures ’  . In T . Bush and L . Bell ( eds )  , Educational Management , 
Principles and Practice , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Dimmock , C . and Walker , A .  ( in press )  .  ‘ Connecting school leadership with
teaching , learning and parenting in diverse cultural contexts : Western and
Asian perspectives ’  , in K . Leithwood and P . Hallinger ( eds )  , Second
International Handbook of Educational Leadership and Administration , 
Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic
Walker , A . and Dimmock , C .  ( eds )  ( 2002 )  . Educational Administration and
Leadership : The Cultural Context , New York : Routledge Falmer . 
Walker , A . and Dimmock , C .  ( in press )  .  ‘ Moving school leadership beyond its
narrow boundaries : developing a cross-cultural approach ’  , in K . Leithwood
and P . Hallinger ( eds )  , Second International Handbook of Educational
Leadership and Administration , Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic . 
22 Leadership in Education
chapter 1 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 22
2
LEADERSHIP ’ S PLACE IN A COMMUNITY 
OF PRACTICE
Peter Gronn
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter , I hope to show that the idea of leadership , at least as it is
conventionally understood , is in trouble . The reasoning behind this claim
is that the construct ‘ leadership ’  , and the closely associated and wellrehearsed constructs ‘ leader ’  ,  ‘ follower ’ and ‘ followership ’ have ceased to
provide adequate ways of representing the work activities of organisations . 
Typically , leadership commentators commit three grievous errors when
they undertake organisational analyses . First , they tend to take for granted
the presence of leadership in the work practices of various educational
contexts . That is , the existence of leadership is assumed to be
incontestable , and the only matters in dispute concern its texture , 
specifically the amount and the quality of leadership . Second , 
commentators also tend to assume that leadership will be manifest in a
stylised , bifurcated relationship between two abstract categories of
persons : i . e .  , a leader ( although sometimes leaders ) and her or his
followers , into either of which categories an organisation ’ s entire
membership may be grouped . Sometimes , the membership composition
of these categories may change – so that followers may occasionally
display leadership and leaders become followers on some issues – but the
commitment to the leader–follower binary is pretty much immutable . 
Third , and finally , leadership theorists also assume that among the various
ingredients which might be invoked to account for organisational
outcomes and achievements , leadership is more significant than any other
factor . But why might this be ? Why , for example , should leadership be
paramount and not something else ? And why , more importantly , is it that
23
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 23
leadership finds its way into the explanatory equation in the first place ? 
These three assumptions underpin a view of leadership as a kind of
organisational elixir . That is , similar to the way in which , for an alchemist , 
an elixir was a preparation for transforming metal into gold or , from the
point of view of those who quested after the magic formula for immortality , 
a substance for the prolonging of life , for many people leadership has
become the prescription for the cure of organisational ills . How often , for
example , does one hear the bleating of critics of the government of the
day that ,  ‘ The Prime Minister has to provide some leadership on this
issue !  ’ In this example , the shorthand symbol ‘ leadership ’ is intended to
signal a number of things , such as the prime minister is not doing her or
his job properly in the view of critics , or that the opponents of a
government do not like the policies to which it is committed . The
pervasiveness of this elixir view of leadership may be taken as evidence
of the kind of mental maps which commentators typically bring to , and
utilise for the construction of , leadership discourse . That is ,  ‘ leader ’  ,  
 ‘ follower ’ and the like are abstract cognitive categories which observers
impose on reality , procrustean-like , to account for what they believe they
see or what they prefer to see . To construe the accomplishment of those
actions which form part of organisational practice in terms of a
leader–follower binary , however , is not merely to engage in a game of
pinning labels on organisational members , but also to impose a crude
cause and effect model on social reality . Thus , in the elixir view , causal
agency is typically assumed to be the property of an individual , with the
causal effects of the individual manifest in the changed behavioural
responses of follower agents . 
In the present discussion I shall let pass the question of whether ‘ leader ’ 
and ‘ follower ’ have really ever been helpful constructs . Instead , I shall
argue that , whatever their previous utility , they have long since passed
their use by date . Part of my reasoning will be that leadership , per the
agency of leaders , is incorrectly positioned at the front or input end of the
explanatory template normally used to account for the flow of action . That
is , with very few exceptions , leaders are conventionally constructed as
agents or triggers of initiation . A more helpful alternative starting point
for understanding the place of leadership , I want to suggest , might be to
begin the analysis and explanation at the opposite rear or back end . That
is , a different approach would be to focus on the outcomes of workplace
practices to be accounted for and then to comb back through the universe
of explanatory possibilities , of which leadership may ( or may not ) turn
out to be just one . This strategy is similar to what Kerr and Jermier ( 1978 ) 
originally proposed with their idea of substitutes for leadership , although , 
as they have more recently acknowledged ( Jermier and Kerr , 1997 )  , their
proposal met with mostly muted enthusiasm from their fellow
commentators . From the perspective of action outcomes , two alternative
questions about the work of organisations which are likely to provide a
24 Leadership in Education
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 24
much more accurate understanding of the place of leadership alongside
other potential causal explanations are : for any period of time under
review or consideration , what is the totality of the work that is to be
performed by an organisation ? Within that time frame , what does it take
as part of an organisation ’ s totality of work practices , to accomplish that
body of work ? 
As a helpful means of answering these questions , I consider the merits
of conceptualising workplaces in educational and non-educational settings
as communities of practice . The idea of a ‘ community of practice ’ is a
recent phenomenon . The recency of a concept or construct , of course , 
brings with it its own inherent difficulties . For one thing , the
straightforward substitution of an existing set of well-rehearsed categories
for framing reality with another which might be presumed to be superior
leaves the latter open , potentially , to accusations of trendiness . Such a
difficulty highlights the need for a carefully argued exposition outlining
both the possibilities and potential pitfalls inherent in the preferred
alternative . With this consideration in mind , the purpose of this chapter
is to discuss the recent endorsement of the idea of a community of
practice , with a view to its substitution for the ailing leader–follower
binary . The discussion begins with a short explanation for the strength
and endurance of the prevailing elixir view of leadership . This is followed
by a review of some of the main problems and shortcomings associated
with elixir assumptions . Finally , the chapter examines the claims of
proponents of communities of practice and the consequences of this idea
for a dramatically revised and scaled down view of leadership practice . 
BEFORE AND AFTER THE FLOOD
The Shorter Oxford Dictionary devotes almost an entire three-column page
of definitions and etymological detail to ‘ lead ’ and its various derivatives :  
 ‘ leader ’  ,  ‘ leading ’  , etc . To ‘ follow the leader ’  , for example , is said to date
from 1863 and ‘ to give a lead ’  , as when the front rider in a hunt leaps a
fence , originated in 1859 . The point of these and the numerous other
examples cited in the dictionary is that they illustrate perfectly Calder ’ s 
( 1977 , p . 181 ) point that leadership is a lay , everyday knowledge term , 
rather than a scientific construct . Precisely when words such as leader , 
follower , leadership and followership became part of common usage is
impossible to be certain about . On the other hand , the uptake of such
terms within the scholarly community , which were veneered as ‘ science ’  
( Calder , 1977 )  , increased dramatically during the twentieth century . 
Indeed , the amount of scholarly attention accorded leadership has been
extraordinary . As an illustration , one need look no further than the third
edition of Bass and Stogdill ’ s Handbook of Leadership ( Bass , 1990 )  . 
Surprisingly , however , despite the 7 , 500 or so studies reviewed in that
1 , 200-page tome , the focus on the leadership of organisations , in the sense
Leadership ’ s place in a community of practice 25
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 25
of organisations as a whole , as opposed to the parts of organisations , has
been of fairly recent origin . A significant proportion of traditional
leadership research , for example , was concerned with small group
processes in natural and experimental groups . 
There can be no doubt that the study of leadership in a whole-oforganisation sense really boomed during the last two decades of the second
millennium . On this point the evidence of Rost ’ s ( 1993 ) exhaustive review
is incontestable : a sample of 312 books , chapters and journal articles
written in the 1980s , along with an estimated 200 textbook chapters he
did not manage to read , probably 50 other chapters and articles he missed , 
with allowance made for another 300 popular magazine articles and 200
unpublished papers . This is an output reflecting a burgeoning of interest
which is ‘ staggering by any standard ’  ( Rost , 1993 , p . 10 )  . Yet , things were
not always so , for immediately before these fat years there had been a thin
period in the late 1970s , when a cacophony of voices of ‘ calamity ’  , as Hunt 
( 1999 , p . 134 ) termed them , were heard , including those of Calder ( 1977 ) 
and Kerr and Jermier ( 1978 )  . So what happened to change things ? The
short answer is that , for US commentators ( who constitute the significant , 
perhaps overwhelming , proportion of scholars in the leadership field )  , the
US economy was seen to be languishing in increasingly competitive global
markets and the main culprit for this disaster was the vast army of US
organisation managers . The demonisation of the twentieth-century
manager , whose rise and rise had been so ably depicted by James Burnham 
( 1962 ; first published in 1942 ) in The Managerial Revolution , began with
William H . Whyte ’ s ( 1963 ; first published in 1956 ) The Organization Man . 
In his rather spirited polemic , Whyte had launched a scathing attack on
the human relations movement in industry which , at the time of his
writing in the 1950s was at its apotheosis , as legitimating a numbing social
ethic of groupism that was corrosive of the traditional work ethic of
entrepreneurialism . The aspirations of typical ‘ organisation man ’ 
managers were not to be rapacious , hard-driving buccaneer capitalists , but
to be a faithful , conforming and earnest bureaucrats who hankered after
the good life . 
It was two decades after the publication of Whyte ’ s book that Zaleznik 
( 1977 ) again took up this theme . He crafted it with a very carefully chosen
title ,  ‘ Managers and leaders : are they different ?  ’  , thereby introducing
another highly influential binary which , to this day , has been pervasive
and , with a handful of exceptions , virtually unquestioned throughout
leadership circles . The most highly publicised instance of this
leader–manager dichotomy was Bennis and Nanus ’ s ( 1985 , p . 21 , original
italicised ) slick marketing gimmickry :  ‘ Managers are people who do things
right and leaders are people who do the right thing .  ’ A similar
leader–manager dichotomy lay at the heart of Bass ’ s ( 1985 ) distinction
between leaders who were deemed to be transformational rather than
transactional . In the most recent version of Bass ’ s ( 1998 ) approach to
26 Leadership in Education
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 26
leadership , the behaviour traditionally associated with managerialism , 
which formed part of transactional leadership ( e . g .  , rewarding employees
in exchange for effort and output , rather than seeking to motivate them
by appealing to norms of exceptionalism )  , has now been incorporated into
a full-range spectrum of leadership possibilities ( Bass , 1998 )  . This overall
process of demonising management was driven by the insistence that US
firms had to change . The scope of the change deemed necessary was root
and branch transformation , rather than incrementalism , which meant that , 
given their apparently inherently conservative instincts , most managers
were discursively positioned as thoroughly inadequate agents of change . 
It was in this kind of economic context that leadership was discursively
constructed as qualitatively different from , and superior to , management . 
Those of us working in education , witnessed a similar kind of
transposition and borrowing of this corporate sector reasoning . Thus , as
part of the reform movement which swept the school sector during the
late-1980s and 1990s , the role of principals was subjected to a visionary , 
transformational role reconstruction paralleling that of corporate chief
executive officers ( CEOs )  . 
SPENT CATEGORIES
The obverse process of demonisation is canonisation . The canonisation of
change-oriented leadership over the last two decades has drawn extensively for its justification on the historically robust archetypes of greatness
and heroism ( Gronn , 1995 ; Yukl , 1999 )  . In retrospect , one of the key pressures on company management in the 1980s to shrug off its stuffy conformity came from return-hungry shareholders and investors . Entrusting a
company ’ s market fortunes to a high-profile change agent quickly came to
be thought of as the surest guarantee of securing ‘ value-added ’ profitability . If recent writings on leadership are any guide , then commentators ’ 
confidence in both this particular paradigm and in the distinctiveness of
leadership as a construct may well be beginning to wane ( e . g .  , Lakomski , 
1999 )  . After his long and extensive experience as a consultant , Nicholls 
( 2002 )  , for example , has recently called for the abandonment of leadership
as a behavioural category and its substitution by management . Nicholls ’ 
disillusionment rests partly on his claim that describing some of what
managers do as ‘ leadership ’ merely serves to confuse an understanding of
their actions . Why try to arbitrate between two words ( leadership and
management ) when one will do ? If it is deemed necessary to focus attention on the significance and prominence of the deeds of some managers as
somehow adding value , so the argument runs , then why not simply refer
to this phenomenon as ‘ high profile ’ management ? 
Nicholls ’ arguments aside , the inherent weakness of such shorthand
categories as ‘ leader ’ and ‘ follower ’ is that they rest on a number of highly
Leadership ’ s place in a community of practice 27
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 27
questionable assumptions . Part of the appeal of the words themselves is
that they have become a convenient means of simplifying complex reality . 
In this sense , they are no different from the well-known media typecasting
of public figures and celebrities into ‘ good ’ vs ‘ bad ’ and ‘ hero ’ vs ‘ villain ’ 
categories . The problem with this particular binary , however , is that it is
not always clear who is doing the leading and who the following , nor in
relation to what it is that each group can be said to be leading or following . 
And what if the membership of the categories changes , as foreshadowed
at the beginning of the chapter ? Of what use are the two terms then , if
their meaning can be blurred by the possibility that leaders can become
followers and followers leaders ? As an alternative mode of representation , 
why not simply refer to various colleagues who behave differently in
relation to particular events and issues from time to time ? The confusion
created by this blurred , dualistic reductionism is compounded by the
presumption that particular role incumbents are worthy of either one or
the other attribution according to where they are positioned on a hierarchy
of role relations . How often , for example , is the leader–follower distinction
overlaid on a superior–subordinate binary ( notwithstanding the above
discussion of demonised managers )  , so that it becomes taken for granted
that senior managerial role incumbents automatically do the leading while
everyone else does the following ? No doubt this pattern of usage accounts
for the recent currency accorded the expectation that senior positionholders will , by definition , perform ‘ leadership roles ’  . 
These difficulties could be multiplied . The point about them as
illustrations , however , is that they are clumsy and crude ways of depicting
the performance of organisational work . In short , they are an inadequate
means of describing a division of labour because they presume the form
that a division takes rather than being able to demonstrate its form . My
point is similar to that made by Brown and Duguid ( 1991 , p . 41 ) in relation
to canonical and non-canonical ways of understanding work practices . 
Canonical ( or prescriptive ) ways of representing how work gets done rely
on formal job descriptions ,  ‘ despite the fact that daily evidence points to
the contrary ’  . Non-canonical practices , on the other hand , refer to the
reality of work improvisation and what it takes to get a body of work done . 
The force of this distinction equates to the difference between what
organisations espouse about themselves and what they actually do . 
Moreover , such a distinction matters in a whole host of ways . Careful
analyses of workplace divisions of labour , for example , are important in
yielding accurate understandings of job demands , job designs and job
redesign , and in particular the articulation of work and workplace
infrastructure ( Star , 1999 )  . A central concern of research into the division
of labour will always be the simultaneous processes of work visibilisation
and invisibilisation . That is , changing modes of work articulation will
bring a variety of new occupational needs and roles to the surface , while
at the same time suppressing or containing others by expanding the duties
28 Leadership in Education
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 28
captured by existing categories ( e . g .  , by ‘ add-ons ’  )  . Both positive and
negative consequences ensue from either the surfacing or suppressing of
work . A good example of the latter is what I have referred to elsewhere
as ‘ designer-leadership ’  ( Gronn , 2003 ) in which , as a result of the adoption
of national standards-based designs for accrediting school leaders , growing
accountability expectations of school principals and senior teachers to
perform as ‘ super leaders ’  , coupled with the reality of work intensification
associated with their dramatically expanded roles , are fuelling a culture
of disengagement from leadership among teachers . 
WHAT IS A COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE ?  
 ‘ Community of practice ’ is one of a number of current vogue terms for
designating lateral , semi-informal , quasi-autonomous work formations . 
Other popular formations include hot groups , networks , cells , project
teams , self-managing and self-leading work teams . A common feature of
each of these formations is their de-emphasis on hierarchy . Far from
suggesting a jettisoning of control and co-ordination , however , this
apparent ‘ hands-off ’ dimension reflects a renewed awareness of workplace
interdependence and the way in which work is a conjoint , rather than an
a merely aggregated , accomplishment . This emphasis is particularly
evident in the writings of Wenger ( 1999 , p . 45 )  , a prominent advocate of
the idea of a community of practice , when he notes that ‘ collective
learning results in practices that reflect both the pursuit of our enterprises
and attendant social relations ’ and that these practices are ‘ the property
of a kind of community created over time by the sustained pursuit of a
shared enterprise ’  . 
This recent resurgence of awareness of lateral work formations is part
of the growing significance attached to the theme of organisational
intelligence . Implicit in Wenger ’ s point about collective learning , for
example , is a recognition of the inherently dispersed , tacit nature of much
workplace knowledge ( Orlikowski , 2002 )  . There is also a parallel
awareness among commentators of the significant potential for a loss of
collective memory through the downsizing of middle managers ( Grey , 
1999 )  , and a willingness to tolerate new synergies ( Goold and Campbell , 
1998 ) in the pursuit of enhanced competitive capabilities ( Loasby , 1998 )  . 
No doubt these developments have arisen partly as a response to some of
the unintended consequences of workplace reform . The renewed emphasis
on laterality also reflects how organisations are attempting to grapple with
the problem of employee homelessness . That is , if the kinds of traditional
workplace groupings associated with allegedly outmoded practices ( e . g .  , 
bounded divisions , departments , branches , unions ) have suddenly been
de-legitimated after all of the recent restructuring and de-layering of
organisations , the introduction of fluid processes and the flexibilisation
Leadership ’ s place in a community of practice 29
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 29
of work , then where is ‘ home ’  ? This theme of home also lay at the heart
of Whyte ’ s ( 1963 ) discussion in The Organization Man where he
highlighted the way in which the disciples of human relations in industry
sought to engineer a sense of ‘ belongingness ’ and ‘ togetherness ’ in a
workforce . From the perspective of ‘ home ’  , there can be few more enduring
and powerful symbols of connectedness , membership and anchorage than 
 ‘ community ’  . As a vehicle for integrating a workforce , imbuing it with a
sense of overriding common purpose , instilling in it a collective sense of
identity and providing it with a means of personal self-enhancement , the
idea of a community of practice has a strong discursive appeal among
managers and workplace reformers . 
This potential has been acknowledged in a recent consultant ’ s report to
the Australian National Training Authority which , while it recognises
some of the inherent limitations of communities of practice , nevertheless
promotes them as previously ‘ hidden [ i . e .  , invisible ] assets ’ in contributing
to ‘ the ongoing construction of a multi-dimensional national training
system ’  , particularly within the vocational and educational training ( VET ) 
sector ( Mitchell , 2002 , p . 97 )  . This kind of endorsement tinged with
wariness is understandable , for there are problems with the notion of a
community of practice . One is that a community of practice does not have
an exclusive claim on the allegiance of its members . Most employees have
at least dual points of reference : they are members of both a community 
( or communities ) of practice as well as occupational communities . 
Socialisation through recruitment and training into the norms , values , 
skills and vocabularies of an occupational community ( e . g .  , plumbing , 
accountancy , teaching ) is an equally important source of individual and
collective identification and membership ( Van Maanen and Barley , 1984 )  . 
For employees , therefore , there exist potentially rival communities of
interest , a point which is sometimes lost on advocates of communities of
practice . In their discussion of the attainment of mastery through
apprenticeship in situated learning contexts , for example , Lave and
Wenger ( 1991 , p . 95 ) seem to conflate these different senses of community
in their use of ‘ the enterprise ’ as the locale for apprentices ’ learning . 
Another problem is that the unbounded fluidity of communities of
practice can prove both a strength and a weakness . What counts as a
community as opposed to a network configuration ? It is claimed , for
example , that communities are emergent and self-organising , that their
members often self-select spontaneously , that community membership
fluctuates and invariably sprawls across formal organisational units ( and
even entire organisations )  , and that in some cases the links between
community members may be entirely virtual ( Mitchell , Wood and Young , 
2001 ; Wenger and Snyder , 2000 )  . Such attributes raise questions about the
strength of unity , shared history and identity between community
members , as well as questions about their entitive status , from the point
of view of communities of practice as units of analysis . 
30 Leadership in Education
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 30
LEADING COMMUNITIES AND THE ACCOMPLISHMENT
OF WORK 
This recent recognition accorded the significance of non-canonical
patterns of work , or the ‘ road conditions ’ rather than ‘ the map ’  , as Brown
and Duguid ( 1991 , p . 41 ) term it , may amount to nothing more than a
formalisation of previously hidden ( or invisible ) informal work practices . 
Recognition of the informal side of organisational life forms part of a long
and venerable tradition in organisation theory extending as far back as
Barnard ( 1982 ; first published in 1938 , p . 115 ) who , while acknowledging
them as ‘ indefinite and rather structureless ’  , saw that without informal
relations – contacts , habits of action , interactions , groupings etc . – there
could be no formal organisation , no legitimation of authority and no
effective system of communication . 
Unlike Barnard , however , for whom the leadership of organisations was
a purely executive function , institutionalised through an implicit
hierarchical contract entailing assent of the lower ranks to their cooperative engagement ( secured through an economy of incentives and
inducements ) with morally purposeful activities as determined by their
superiors , the leadership of communities of practice is much more
spontaneous , fleeting and evanescent . Here , the visibilisation of leadership
in informal sets of relations comprises a diversity of emergent , fluctuating
roles . In one of the few explicit statements about leadership by community
of practice proponents , Wenger ( 2000 , p . 231 ) suggests that : 
Communities of practice depend on internal leadership , and enabling
leaders to play their role is a way to help the community develop . The
role of ‘ community co-ordinator ’ who takes care of the day-to-day work
is crucial , but a community needs multiple forms of leadership : thought
leaders , networkers , people who document the practice , pioneers , etc . 
These forms of leadership may be concentrated on one or two members
or widely distributed and will change over time . 
This passage attempts to provide a non-reified view of leadership , in the
sense that it disavows the kind of direction-setting influence normally
associated with formally defined organisational roles ( Rost , 1993 , p . 79 )  . 
While allowing for the possibility of leadership being focused on just one
or two individuals , it is mainly a distributed view in that it also conceives
of leadership as encompassing a diversity of forms of behaviour , numerous
people and constantly changing requirements . 
Clearly , the potential for reification when theorising communities of
practices is a headache for their proponents . Yet , avoidance or
minimisation of discursive rigidities and shorthand abstractions is one
thing for , as communities of practice prove to be successful ( i . e .  , as they
achieve their self-proclaimed goals of mutual engagement , and sustained , 
productive and useful social learning )  , their members and their managers
Leadership ’ s place in a community of practice 31
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 31
have to confront the issue of whether to capitalise on that improvised
success .  ( After all , the whole idea of ‘ leveraging ’  , as it has become known , 
takes for granted such an imperative in which improvisation , 
inventiveness and serendipity attain a more permanent official status by
first being identified and then woven into the existing stock of overall
capabilities in order to bolster market competitiveness .  ) Reification of
practices through their institutionalisation opens up a whole terrain of
issues associated with organisational design , work visibilisation and
invisibilisation . An important dilemma with informal sets of working
arrangements , as Star ( 1999 , p . 386 ) notes in a study of nurses ’ work
practices , is whether to live and let live or to reveal them .  ‘ Leave the work
tacit , and it fades into the wallpaper ( in one respondent ’ s words ,  “ we are
thrown in with the price of the room ”  )  ’  , whereas ‘ make it explicit , and it
will become a target for hospital cost accounting ’  . The irony is not lost on
Wenger ( 1999 , pp . 261–62 )  , for example , who , in an attempt to resist the
commodification of learning and its institutional solidification wrestles
with what he sees as the trade-off between privileging particular forms of
localised knowlegeability and their incorporation into organisational
features , and a potential loss of engagement and imagination through
formalisation . 
Leaving to one side for the moment any caveats concerning the adequacy with which these theorists have addressed the tensions between
organisational design and emergence , community of practice theory has
some important implications for leadership . First , the focus of theorists on
informal practices exposes the extent to which conventional dyadic leadership discourse , with its fixed leader–follower dichotomy , renders actual work practices invisible . One of the virtues of community of practice
studies , unlike many leadership commentaries , is that ( through detailed
ethnographies of work ) they are in tune with , and tracking changes in , the
division of labour . Second , this brief review of work on communities of
practice has been sufficient to highlight the reciprocal and negotiated
character of the exchanges through which work colleagues accomplish
their joint endeavours . This pattern stands in bold contrast to that body of
leadership commentary which champions the deeds of high-profile , heroic figures in which the influence flows are either presumed to be one-way 
( i . e .  , from leader to follower ) or are significantly undertheorised ( Yukl , 
1999 , p . 287 )  . On the other hand , while it allows for the possibility of distributed , as opposed to focused , leadership practice , community of practice research by no means exhausts the range of distributed leadership
alternatives . It tends be restricted to what I have termed elsewhere ( Gronn , 
2002 ) multiple leadership behaviour , or the aggregated influence of plural
individual leaders , as opposed to concertively performed actions in which
couples and threesomes , for example , strive to achieve conjointly defined
ends through intuitive working partnerships . Third , and finally , with its
emphasis on collaborative learning , and knowledge generation and
32 Leadership in Education
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 32
utilisation , community of practice research suggests that community members share co-equal work status as co-learners while performing a variety
of changing informal roles . If so , then while this fluidity need not negate
the periodic need for emergent and transient patterns of leadership , it does
call into question the entire validity of followership . That is , if work communities facilitate the potential exercise of influence by all of their members , however briefly , then ‘ colleague ’ would appear to be a far more
appropriate category for capturing this possibility than ‘ follower ’  . 
CONCLUSION
In this chapter I have considered some recent developments in studies of
communities of practice and their implications for current understandings
of leadership . Methodologically , the main thrust of this area of academic
endeavour has been to substitute understanding of ‘ community ’ for 
 ‘ organisation ’ as the principal unit of analysis and , theoretically , to
foreground the analysis of work practices as participatory learning
systems . These strategies have positioned this work within the antecedent
traditions of research into autonomous work group formations , informal
organisation and workplace ethnographies . The epistemological
significance of this broad line of inquiry has been its capacity to document
changes in the division of labour , with the implication that emergent role
relations in communities of practice render existing leadership constructs
problematic . 
The prevailing leader-centric , elixir orthodoxy of the field of leadership
studies has been under challenge for some time . The reception accorded
some of this new thinking has not always been one of unalloyed joy . In
response to a number of recent attacks on leader-centrism , Shamir ( 1999 , 
p . 51 )  , for instance , has resisted alternative understandings such as
distributed leadership , and the substitution of mutuality and reciprocity
for ‘ leader ’ and ‘ follower ’  , as discussed in this chapter and in recent
theoretical revisions .  ‘ Mutual and reciprocal influence processes ,  ’ Shamir
suggests ,  ‘ do not necessarily imply symmetric processes .  ’ For this reason ,  
 ‘ leadership ’ remains an appropriate way in which to characterise
asymmetrical influence processes and situations in which individuals
exercise preponderant or disproportionate levels of influence . Maybe so , 
but one obvious problem with this line of defence , apart from the various
difficulties identified throughout the chapter , is that while it might help
sustain a case for retaining the category of ‘ leadership ’  , it does not provide
a robust default argument for the residual construct of ‘ follower .  ’ Another
larger problem , of course , is that Shamir ’ s argument begs the whole
question of why it is , if leadership reduces to a form of influence , that
commentators do not simply construct and represent workplace and
organisational relations in terms of levels and patterns of influence , and
Leadership ’ s place in a community of practice 33
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 33
leave matters at that . On the other hand , that is not just a problem for
Shamir , but for the entire scholarly leadership community , and it is also
the subject of another , future chapter . 
REFERENCES
Barnard , C . I .  ( 1982 ) The Functions of the Executive , Cambridge , MA : Harvard
University Press . 
Bass , B . M .  ( 1985 ) Leadership and Performance Beyond Expectations , New York : 
Free Press . 
Bass , B . M .  ( 1990 ) Bass and Stogdill ’ s Handbook of Leadership : Theory , Research
and Managerial Applications , 3rd edn , New York : Free Press . 
Bass , B . M .  ( 1998 ) Transformational Leadership : Industrial , Military , and
Educational Impact , Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 
Bennis , W . and Nanus , B .  ( 1985 ) Leaders , New York : Harper and Row . 
Brown , J . S . and Duguid , P .  ( 1991 )  ‘ Organizational learning and communities-ofpractice : toward a unified view of working , learning and innovation ’  , 
Organization Science , 2 ( 1 )  , 40–57 . 
Burnham , J .  ( 1962 ) The Managerial Revolution , Harmondsworth : Penguin . 
Calder , B . J .  ( 1977 )  ‘ An attribution theory of leadership ’  , in B . M . Staw and G . R . 
Salancik ( eds )  , New Directions in Organizational Behavior , Chicago , IL : St . 
Clair , pp . 179–204 . 
Goold , M . and Campbell , A .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Desperately seeking synergy ’  , Harvard Business
Review , 76 ( 5 )  , 131–43 . 
Grey , C .  ( 1999 )  ‘  “ We are all managers now ”  ;  “ we always were ”  : On the development and demise of management ’  , Journal of Management Studies , 36 ( 5 )  , 
561–85 . 
Gronn , P .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Greatness re-visited : the current obsession with transformational
leadership ’  , Leading & Managing , 1 ( 1 )  , 13–27 . 
Gronn , P .  ( 2003 ) The New Work of Educational Leaders : Changing Leadership
Practice in an Era of School Reform , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Hunt , J . G .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Transformational / charismatic leadership ’ s transformation of the
field : an historical essay , Leadership Quarterly , 10 ( 2 )  , 129–44 . 
Jermier , J . and Kerr , S .  ( 1997 )  ‘  “ Substitutes for leadership : their meaning and
measurement ”  : contextual recollections and current observations ’  , Leadership
Quarterly , 8 ( 1 )  , 95–101 . 
Kerr , S . and Jermier , J .  ( 1978 )  ‘ Substitutes for leadership : their meaning and measurement , Organization and Human Performance , 22 , 374–403 . 
Lakomski , G .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Against leadership : a concept without a cause ’  , in P . T . Begley
and P . E . Leonard ( eds )  , The Values of Educational Administration , London : 
Falmer Press , pp . 36–50 . 
Lave , J . and Wenger , E .  ( 1991 ) Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral
Participation , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
Loasby , B . J .  ( 1998 )  ‘ The concept of capabilities ’  , in N . J . Foss and B . J . Loasby ( eds )  , 
Economic Organization , Capabilities and Co-ordination : Essays in Honour of
G . B . Richardson , London : Routledge , pp . 163–82 . 
Mitchell , J .  ( 2002 ) The Potential for Communities of Practice to Underpin the
34 Leadership in Education
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 34
National Training Framework , Melbourne : Australian National Training
Authority . 
Mitchell , J .  , Wood , S . and Young , S .  ( 2001 ) Communities of Practice : Reshaping
Professional Practice and Improving Organisational Productivity in the
Vocational Education and Training ( VET ) Sector : Resources for Practitioners , 
Melbourne : Australian National Training Authority . 
Nicholls , J .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Escape the leadership jungle : try high-profile management ’  , 
Journal of General Management , 27 ( 3 )  , 14–35 . 
Orlikowski , W . J .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Knowing in practice : enacting a collective capability in
distributed organizing ’  , Organization Science , 13 ( 3 )  , 249–73 . 
Rost , J . C .  ( 1993 ) Leadership for the Twenty-first Century , Westport , CT : Praeger . 
Shamir , B .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Leadership in boundaryless organizations : disposable or indispensable ?  ’  , European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 8 ( 1 )  , pp . 
49–71 . 
Star , S . L .  ( 1999 )  ‘ The ethnography of infrastructure , American Behavioral Scientist , 
43 ( 3 )  , 377–91 . 
Van Maanen , J . and Barley , S .  ( 1984 )  ‘ Occupational communities : culture and control in organizations ’  , in B . M . Staw and L . L . Cummings ( eds )  , Research in
Organizational Behavior , vol . 6 , Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , pp . 287–365 . 
Wenger , E .  ( 1999 ) Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning , and Identity , 
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
Wenger , E .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Communities of practice and social learning systems ’  , 
Organization , 7 ( 2 )  , 225–46 . 
Wenger , E . and Snyder , W .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Communities of practice : the organisational
frontier ’  , Harvard Business Review , 78 ( 1 )  , 139–45 . 
Whyte , W . H .  ( 1963 ) The Organization Man , Harmondsworth : Penguin . 
Yukl , G .  ( 1999 )  ‘ An evaluation of conceptual weaknesses in transformational and
charismatic leadership theories ’  , Leadership Quarterly , 10 ( 2 )  , 285–305 . 
Zaleznik , A .  ( 1977 )  ‘ Managers and leaders : are they different ?  ’  , Harvard Business
Review , 55 ( 3 )  , 67–78 . 
FURTHER READING
Gronn , P .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Greatness re-visited : the current obsession with transformational
leadership ’  , Leading and Managing , 1 ( 1 )  , 13–27 . 
Gronn , P .  ( 1999 ) The Making of Educational Leaders , London : Cassell . 
Gronn , P .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Distributed properties : a new architecture for leadership ’  , 
Educational Management and Administration , 28 ( 3 )  , 317–38 . 
Gronn , P .  ( 2003 ) The New Work of Educational Leaders : Changing Leadership
Practice in an Era of School Reform , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Leadership ’ s place in a community of practice 35
Chapter 2 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 35
3
GENDER IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP
Marianne Coleman
INTRODUCTION
Most leadership positions in education and elsewhere are held by men . 
Although the proportion of women managers and leaders is gradually
increasing ( DfEE , 2000 )  , there has been no radical change in England and
Wales as a result of the equal opportunities legislation of the late twentieth
century . In most countries , Western , developed and developing , men are
more likely to be leaders in education and elsewhere ( Coleman , 2002 ; 
Davies , 1998 )  . Gender proportions are more balanced in a few countries
where particular circumstances such as affirmative action apply or have
applied , but the underlying gender–power relationships still tend to
prevail . Blackmore ( 1994 ; 1999 ) claims that in Australia where affirmative
action was tried , the increase in the number of women principals was
accompanied by a change in the locus of power to a higher level of
administration dominated by men , a situation she compares to that of
Israel where the majority of secondary principals are women but where
power has tended to shift out of the school towards the male-dominated
ranks of senior local administrators ( Goldring and Chen , 1994 )  . 
Affirmative action policies to promote women are now being used in
Africa , for example , in South Africa and Zimbabwe , but numbers of
women in leadership in education remain very low ( Kotecha , 1994 )  . In
countries where there is a tradition of domestic help , such as Singapore 
( Morriss , Coleman and Low , 1999 )  , the proportion of women reaching
management positions is relatively high . However , it is doubtful that
traditional gender–power relations are breaking down . Even where help
at home may be available and where there is wide provision of nurseries , 
as in China , women are seldom regarded as suitable for a leadership role 
( Coleman , Quiang and Li , 1998 )  . 
Outside education , the difficulties of women in breaking through the
glass ceiling are well documented ( for example , Davidson and Cooper , 
36
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 36
1992 )  . In the UK , a national management survey in 1998 indicated that
only 3 . 6 per cent of all directors were women ( Vinnicombe , 2000 )  . Sinclair 
( 1998 ) reports that around 10 per cent of director positions among the
largest 500 companies in the USA are held by women but that this is only
true for 2 . 7 per cent of the directors of the top 596 Australian companies . 
In respect of gender and leadership it would therefore appear that despite
equal opportunities legislation and a general awareness of concepts such
as the glass ceiling , the chances of women obtaining leadership positions
continue to be considerably less than those of their male peers . 
The disproportionate dominance of leadership positions by men
provides the context for this chapter which considers gender in relation
to leadership and management theory and practice , rather than specifically
focusing on issues of equal opportunities . Leadership tends to be defined
as a male characteristic ( Schein , 1994 ) although current views on leadership in education and elsewhere ( Kouzes and Posner , 1990 ; Leithwood , 
Jantzi and Steinbach , 1999 ) favour a style that is far removed from
stereotypical masculine leadership and has more in common with styles
that could be termed feminine . The stereotypical masculine style is
relatively authoritarian and ‘ heroic ’  , while the feminine equivalent is seen
as nurturing and collaborative . This chapter considers the ‘ maleness ’ of
leadership and reviews the feminine and masculine stereotypes in the
context of current models of leadership . The question of whether men and
women do tend to operate as leaders in distinctly different ways and the
impact of gender on being an educational leader are also considered . 
THE LEADER IS MALE
Leadership is a very ‘ gendered ’ concept . In a wide variety of cultural
contexts , leadership continues to be identified with the male . Even though
women occupy positions of leadership and responsibility , there is a
tendency to assume that the ‘ rightful ’ leader is male . Schmuck ( 1996 , p . 
356 ) sums this up in relation to women superintendents and high school
principals in the USA , who could be considered as ‘ insiders ’ since they
have designated senior status , but remain ‘ outsiders ’ as women leaders . 
For example , on a mundane level , women headteachers report that 
they are commonly taken to be the secretary by parents visiting the school
or that , if accompanied by their male deputy to a meeting , he is assumed
to be the head and she the deputy ( Coleman , 2002 )  . These are
commonplace misunderstandings which are brushed aside by the women
who mentioned them , but they still have to be regularly overcome and are
indicative of an underlying assumption that the leader is male and that
women as leaders are ‘ outsiders ’  . Research undertaken by Schein ( 1973 , 
1994 ) has consistently shown that the qualities that are identified as those
of a leader or manager are also the qualities that are quite independently
assessed by both men and women as being those of men . Our unthinking
Gender in educational leadership 37
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 37
identification of maleness with leadership has a counterpoint which is an
equally unthinking reduction of women and ‘ women ’ s work ’ to a lesser
status :  ‘ Even if sexism was eliminated and both sexes participated fully , 
the patriarchal nature of structures and value systems would still ensure
that men and women were placed in unequal positions of power , and that
female activity was defined as marginal and of lesser significance than
male experience ’  ( Usher , 1996 , p . 124 )  . 
The identification of leadership with men is deeply ingrained in our
understanding of society and the family ( Sinclair , 1998 ) and this continues
even though considerable changes have been taking place in terms of work
participation . For example , 69 per cent of women of working age in the
UK were working in paid employment in 1999 in comparison with 47 per
cent in 1959 ( ONS , 2001 )  . However , there is still an automatic association
of women with the domestic and private sphere and with roles associated
with support and nurturing , and an association of men with work in the
public sphere .  
 ‘ FEMININE ’ AND ‘ MASCULINE ’ STYLES
There is an element of duality in many management and leadership
theories . Two seminal models illustrate this : the first conceptualises the
options open to managers in terms of decision-making , ranging from the
authoritarian to the consultative ( Tannenbaum and Schmidt , 1973 )  ; the
second identifies the extent to which a manager or leader may be either
task oriented or people oriented ( Blake and Mouton , 1964 )  . These two
basic models can be related to the diametrically opposed ideal types of
feminine and masculine leadership styles . The masculine stereotype is
authoritarian and target oriented while the feminine stereotype is
collaborative and people oriented . 
One of the best known identifications of masculine and feminine
characteristics is that of Bem ( 1974 ) whose juxtaposed lists illustrate the
feminine and masculine stereotypes in some detail . A briefer but similar
range of masculine and feminine qualities has been used by Gray ( 1993 ) 
in his work in the training of female and male headteachers . The qualities
are presented as gender paradigms ( Table 3 . 1 )  , and have been used by him
to open up discussion about gender and self-awareness among headteachers as leaders . 
Just as in the Tannenbaum and Schmidt and Blake and Mouton models
there is room for a range of behaviours between the extremes , so a model
identifying polar opposites of gender-related characteristics provides the
potential for a range of behaviours incorporating elements of both
masculine and feminine styles . Before discussing this further , current
ideals of leadership in education and their relevance to the feminine and
masculine stereotypes will be considered . 
38 Leadership in Education
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 38
CONCEPTUALISATIONS OF LEADERSHIP IN EDUCATION
One of the most influential conceptualisations of approaches to leadership
is that of Leithwood , Jantzi and Steinbach ( 1999 , pp . 8–20 ) who drew on
a review of American and UK educational administration journals to
identify six major categories of leadership models : 
• instructional
• moral
• participative
• managerial 
• contingent
• transformational . 
The instructional style is one which focuses on student learning . Moral
leadership encompasses the ideas that there are particular duties
incumbent on those who have care for the young and that values should
predominate in matters of leadership . In addition , moral leadership is
often identified with the development of democracy . Participative
leadership focuses on shared decision-making . Managerial leadership can
be identified with managerialism and the rather ‘ cold ’ achievement of
targets , while contingent leadership means that the leader adapts his or
her style to the particular demands of their context . Of these styles , it is
transformational leadership that Leithwood , Jantzi and Steinbach ( 1999 . 
p . 21 ) identity as being the one most likely to :  ‘ offer a comprehensive
approach to leadership that will help those in , and served by , current and
future schools respond productively to the significant challenges facing
them ’  . 
The concept of transformational leadership is sometimes defined as
being diametrically opposed to transactional leadership ( Burns , 1978 )  . 
Gender in educational leadership 39
Table 3 . 1 Gender paradigms 
The nurturing / feminine paradigm The defensive / aggressive
masculine paradigm
Caring Highly regulated
Creative Conformist
Intuitive Normative
Aware of individual differences Competitive
Non-competitive Evaluative
Tolerant Disciplined
Subjective Objective
Informal Formal
Source :  ( Gray ( 1993 , p . 111 ) 
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 39
Transactional leadership is a contractual relationship between the leader
and followers , where ‘ the leader rewards or disciplines the follower
depending on the adequacy of the follower ’ s performance ’  ( Bass and
Avolio , 1994 , p . 4 )  . In contrast , transformational leadership , which , as a
predominant style of leadership , can be used in combination with
transactional leadership ( Bass and Avolio , 1994 )  , is thought to bring about
superior results by the use of what is termed the four Is : 
1 Idealised influence – the leader models behaviour and acts as a role
model . 
2 Inspirational motivation . 
3 Intellectual stimulation . 
4 Individualised consideration – the leader encourages the development
of each person and acts as a coach or mentor . 
In relation to the contrasting transformational and transactional styles it
is also possible to identify that there is one that aligns more obviously
with masculine and one with feminine stereotypes of leadership . The
feminine paradigm of nurturing and individual consideration is clearly
more allied to transformational leadership ( Rosener , 1990 )  , and the
masculine paradigm of regulation and formality is more aligned to
transactional leadership and to the managerial ( Leithwood , Jantzi and
Steinbach , 1999 ) or managerialist style ( Collinson and Hearn , 2000 )  . 
There is a positive stereotype of women that identifies them as
nurturing , caring and people orientated ( Noddings , 1984 )  . At a time when
emotional intelligence is being recognised as an essential component of
leadership and management ( Goleman , 1996 )  , women may be seen to have
the advantage in terms of management style . The identification of
transformational leadership as essentially based on relationships ( Burns , 
1978 ) would also seem to favour the style of women . In fact it is now
possible to build a whole body of theory and evidence to establish a
counter-claim about leadership ; that women are actually more suited for
leadership than men . 
WOMEN MANAGE DIFFERENTLY
In an attempt to remedy the neglect of gender in leadership ( Hall , 1997 )  , 
much of the empirical work on women in educational leadership and
management considers women separately from men , and documents what
appear to be a number of dominant characteristics in the management and
leadership style of women . 
1 A collaborative style coupled with an empowering attitude and preference for teamwork ( Adler , Laney and Packer , 1993 ; Blackmore , 1989 ; 
Coleman , 1996a ; Hall , 1996 ; Jirasinghe and Lyons , 1996 )  . This style
would certainly equate to the participative model and elements of the
40 Leadership in Education
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 40
transformational model of Leithwood , Jantzi and Steinbach ,  ( 1999 )  . 
2 An emphasis on communications ( Schick-Case , 1994 ; Shakeshaft , 
1989 )  . Again this could be seen to relate to both the transformational
and participative models . 
3 The importance of educational or instructional leadership ( Coleman , 
1996a ; Grogan , 1996 ; Gross and Trask , 1976 ; Hill and Ragland , 1995 ; 
Shakeshaft , 1989 )  . Empirical work indicates that women are strongly
identified with this particular model identified by Leithwood , Jantzi
and Steinbach ,  ( 1999 )  . 
Some of the trends are interrelated , for example a collaborative style of
management may be linked to a particular attitude to power and the
likelihood of having good communication skills . This interrelationship is
exemplified by the research findings of Shakeshaft who claims that the
effectiveness of women as leaders has much to do with their socialisation
as women : 
I also believe that it is socialisation that accounts for women ’ s greater
ability to provide an environment that is empowering for teachers . 
Because women have been taught to pay attention to relationships , to
be polite , to give technical and specific feedback , and to use power
with rather than power over , they are more likely to use language that
helps achieve these ends .  
( Shakeshaft , 1989 , p . 21 ) 
As is evident from this quotation , research that has concentrated on the
leadership style of women does tend towards the conclusion that women
are better educational leaders than their male colleagues . The evidence
seems to show that they are likely to have styles that are normatively
considered superior : participative , instructional and transformational . 
Very little work has been done specifically on men as leaders ,  ( Collinson
and Hearn , 2000 ; Mac an Ghaill , 1994 ) but the main stereotype attached
to them is of being managerial , a relatively negative concept in comparison
with the leadership qualities more often associated with women leaders . 
WOMEN DO NOT MANAGE DIFFERENTLY
Alongside the evidence that indicates differences between the ways that
men and women manage , there are findings that seem to indicate there is
no difference . There are a range of studies in general management that
show :  ‘ that few actual gender differences in personal factors and behaviour
have been consistently and empirically confirmed ’  ( Vinkenburg , Jansen
and Koopman , 2000 , p . 130 )  . However , the authors do concede that this
may be due to both men and women aspiring to the accepted ‘ prototype ’ 
of manager and that the evaluation of women as managers is biased by
Gender in educational leadership 41
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 41
social expectations that mean that the identical behaviour of men and
women managers may be judged differently . In education , research with
98 heads in the Netherlands , although showing some distinct gender
differences , found that there was no difference in the decision-making
styles of the female and male heads :  ‘ women seemed to include others in
decision-making processes as much as men and used relatively democratic
styles ’  ( Kruger , 1996 , p . 453 )  . 
The findings of Jirasinghe and Lyons ( 1996 ) are that male and female
headteachers may be more like each other in style than like managers
outside education . In particular , both men and women headteachers may
be fairly directive while also maintaining a consultative mode . My own
research on the self-perceptions of men and women headteachers 
( Coleman , 2002 ) shows that most of both sexes believe that they are
operating in consultative and people-oriented ways and that neither
correspond to their gender stereotypes . When asked to describe their style
in three adjectives there was little difference between the men and the
women . Their wide choice of words was analysed into the five groupings
indicated in Table 3 . 2 . 
Although there was little difference , the women tended to be more likely
to choose words relating to people than the men , something that is in
keeping with both existing stereotypes and empirical findings . However , 
in contrast the women were also more likely to choose words that can be
defined as ‘ autocratic ’  . For example a woman head styled herself :  ‘ bloodyminded , belligerent and aggressive ’  . The men were slightly more likely to
choose words that are related to collaboration , efficiency and values . 
Collaboration is more often associated with women and feminine
management styles , although efficiency would be identified with the
managerial stance more closely associated with masculinity . However , the
single most popular group of words indicating a style of management for
both men and women was the one I termed collaborative . The potentially
overlapping ‘ people-oriented ’ style of management was also strongly
42 Leadership in Education
Table 3 . 2 Styles of management identified by choice of adjectives
Women Men
No . of % of No . of % of
words total words total
Collaborative 458 38 . 5 401 40 . 0
People oriented 283 23 . 8 212 21 . 3
Autocratic / directive 177 14 . 9 119 11 . 9
Efficient 139 11 . 6 126 12 . 7
Values 132 11 . 1 138 13 . 9
Source : Coleman ( 2002 ) 
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 42
indicated by the choice of adjectives that could be grouped within that
theme . Judging from these two broad categories , there is a clear indication
of a favoured style of management for both men and women , which is
similar for both and which aligns more with the participative and possibly
even the transformational styles of Leithwood , Jantzi and Steinbach ,  
( 1999 )  . 
This finding was corroborated elsewhere in the survey , since when
choosing the ideal type adjectives of Gray ( 1993 ) quoted above , most of
the male and female headteachers in my survey saw themselves as
operating in a way that is more like the feminine stereotype . The styles
most often chosen do not conform to the gender stereotypes and show
very little difference between the self-concepts of the male and female
headteachers ( Tables 3 . 3 and 3 . 4 )  . The actual qualities identified by more
than 50 per cent of the men and the women are the same , with relatively
small differences between the sexes . Even where the difference between
women and men is in the region of 10 per cent , as with ‘ tolerant ’ identified
by 68 . 7 per cent of the women and 79 . 6 per cent of the men , this seems
to be tempered by another concept , e . g .  ,  ‘ aware of individual differences ’ 
which was identified by 86 . 0 per cent of the women and just slightly less
of the men . 
Research undertaken by Evetts with 10 female and 10 male heads led
to the conclusion that leadership and management behaviour were not
necessarily gender based : 
some of the male heads emphasised collegial relations and
participatory forms of management in schools while some of the female
heads were inclined towards hierarchy and authority in management . 
Gender in educational leadership 43
Table 3 . 3 Qualities identified by 50 per cent or more of the women
headteachers
%
Aware of individual differences ( f ) 86 . 0
Caring ( f ) 79 . 4
Intuitive ( f ) 76 . 2
Tolerant ( f ) 68 . 7
Creative ( f ) 63 . 0
Evaluative ( m ) 61 . 1
Disciplined ( m ) 60 . 4
Informal ( f ) 59 . 4
Competitive ( m ) 50 . 6
Objective ( m ) 50 . 6
Note :  ( f )  = feminine ( m )  = masculine
Source : Coleman ( 2002 ) 
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 43
Significant differences in styles of leadership are not difficult to
demonstrate in general .  .  . although the clear linkage of style with
gender is more problematic .  
( Evetts , 1994 , p . 88 ) 
However , Evetts does agree that :  ‘ it is not difficult to show gender
differences in the experience of headship ’  ( ibid .  , p . 89 original italics )  . 
While a range of styles may be expected from both men and women , there
is agreement that the perceptions of the ways in which men and women
operate may be different and that the social experience of being a leader
is different for men and women . In addition , self-reported findings such
as those reported in Tables 3 . 3 and 3 . 4 , are limited in their validity , and
an alternative research approach , for example observation and in-depth
interviews ( see Hall , 1996 ) may reveal more grounded insights into the
ways in which women and men actually manage and lead . 
A RANGE OF STYLES
Models provide useful analytical tools , but it is not expected that
individuals will fit any one model exactly . This applies to the six
Leithwood models and also to the feminine and masculine stereotypes . It
has already been shown in Tables 3 . 3 and 3 . 4 that self-reported
characteristics of male and female headteachers indicate a range of
feminine and masculine leadership characteristics for both . Use of the Bem
scale showed that some individuals score high on both masculine and
feminine characteristics leading them to be termed androgynous leaders : 
44 Leadership in Education
Table 3 . 4 Qualities identified by 50 per cent or more of the men
headteachers
%
Caring ( f ) 84 . 2
Aware of individual differences ( f ) 84 . 0
Tolerant ( f ) 79 . 6
Evaluative ( m ) 70 . 0
Intuitive ( f ) 66 . 0
Objective ( m ) 61 . 7
Informal ( f ) 60 . 4
Competitive ( m ) 57 . 3
Creative ( f ) 54 . 1
Disciplined ( m ) 51 . 0
Note :  ( f )  = feminine ( m )  = masculine
Source : Coleman ( 2002 ) 
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 44
The concept of psychological androgyny implies that it is possible for
an individual to be both assertive and compassionate , both
instrumental and expressive , both masculine and feminine , depending
upon the situational appropriateness of these various modalities ; and
it further implies that an individual may even blend these
complementary modalities in a single act , being able , for example , to
fire an employee if the circumstances warrant it but with sensitivity
for the human emotion that such an act inevitably produces .  
( Bem , 1977 , p . 196 ) 
Those rated as androgynous , i . e .  , scoring higher on both masculine and
feminine ratings , showed greater independence , ability to nurture and selfesteem than those who scored low on both . Ferrario reports that such 
 ‘ androgynous ’ individuals :  ‘ are able to respond more effectively than
either masculine or feminine individuals to a wide variety of situations ’  
( Ferrario , 1994 , p . 116 )  . 
It would be unduly deterministic to hold to an idea that all men operate
in a certain way and all women in another . Women and men cannot be
regarded as two coherent groups that lead and manage in different ways : 
As our understanding of gender issues has developed , we have moved
from considering men and women as two great , opposed sexual blocks
to realising that differences within each sex are much greater than those
between the sexes and that a simple view that all men or all women
fall into one category of behaviour is quite false .  
( Gray , 1993 , p . 107 ) 
Gold ( 1996 , p . 422 ) points out that profiles of management style linked to
men and women are unhelpful , since they make no allowance :  ‘ for any
notion that some men manage sensitively and some women manage in a
dominating and authoritarian fashion ’  . However ,  ‘ what is not disputable
is that organizational and leadership theory neglects the significance of
gender ’  ( Blackmore , 1989 , p . 104 )  . 
THE IMPACT OF GENDER ON THE PRACTICE OF
LEADERSHIP IN EDUCATION
We can accept on a rational level that men and women are equally
equipped to manage and lead . However , as indicated at the start of the
chapter , stereotypes prevail throughout societies that link males with
leadership and women with supportive and subordinate roles . Even a
recognition that the more ‘ feminine ’ models of transformational and
participative leadership are normatively best to meet the challenges for
leaders in education does not mean that women are more readily seen as
suitable leaders . One interpretation of the espousal of a more
Gender in educational leadership 45
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 45
transformational model on the part of men is that they are recognising the
benefits and popularity of the more feminine style and annexing it in order
to maintain their pre-eminence as leaders . Another may be that education
as an environment is one which predisposes its leaders , both male and
female , towards a more democratic and participative style . Blackmore 
( 1999 , p . 207 ) claims that :  ‘ Women ’ s stated preferences for more
democratic styles of management and collegiality are discursively
produced practices arising from being located in a particular array of
communities ’  ( work , home , community ) practices and discourses . 
Education is a community of practice located in a feminised and highly
gender-segmented occupation centred around children .  .  .  ’  . 
Despite this context , there is an awareness on the part of women leaders
in education of how being a woman impinges on their leadership 
( Blackmore , 1994 ; 1999 ; Coleman , 2002 ; Grogan , 1996 ; Hall , 1996 ; Restine , 
1993 )  . Drawing on my empirical work ( Coleman , 2000 ; 2001 ; 2002 ) 
although the men and women headteachers surveyed saw themselves as
operating almost entirely similar management styles , there is no doubt that
being a woman and a headteacher is a very different experience from being
a man and a headteacher . Generally , men have no cause to question their
status , and are accepted in it , whereas a woman is likely to have to explain
her position . The majority of women headteachers I surveyed and
interviewed felt that they had to justify their existence as managers and
leaders , both at the time of application for headship and while serving as
heads . Two-thirds of the women reported experiencing some form of
discrimination on the basis of their sex and the majority of them thought
that they had to be better than a man to get the job ( Coleman , 2001 )  . 
Since the dominant image of the leader and manager is of a male , 
women who take on the role of headteacher are constantly dealing with
the inherent contradiction of being in a powerful position but at the same
time not being what is expected . One area in particular on which the
women heads commented ( Coleman , 2000 ) was their isolation as women
in an environment where men remained the norm . Another aspect of being
a female leader seems to be the way that they are judged physically as
well as in terms of how they carry out their job . Hall ( 1996 , p . 100 ) 
observes that female headteachers are judged as school leaders but seen
also as :  ‘ a woman on show ’  . Selectors and governors seem to feel free to
remark on the physical appearance of the female candidates for headship , 
particularly on their stature in relation to disciplining boys , but also on
their attractiveness ( Coleman , 2001 )  . The responses of men show very little
of equivalence : when asked about sexism , most of the men related the
question to the difficulties faced by women . However , there is an
impression among a minority of men that schools prefer to have both a
male and a female deputy head and that therefore certain deputy posts
are held open for women in a way that may be unfair to male candidates 
( Coleman , 2002 )  . The figures show that although there is a larger
46 Leadership in Education
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 46
proportion of women deputies than women heads , men still outnumber
women at the deputy level in England and Wales by more than two to one 
( DfEE , 2000 )  . 
There is a further important and practical difference between men and
women in leadership positions in education and this is the apparent
impact of their jobs on family life . In the surveys I conducted , virtually all
of the men had wives , many of whom had subsumed their career to that
of their husband , and 92 per cent had a child or children . Only two-thirds
of the women were married , and divorce and separation was much more
common among the women . Very few could rely on their partners to take
responsibility for domestic support . Only about a half of the women had
a child or children , and childlessness was more common among the
younger 40–50 age group than it was among those over 50 ( Coleman , 2001 ; 
2002 )  . It does appear that a large proportion of the younger women , in particular , were making a choice to remain childless in view of the demands
of the job , something that it was not necessary for the men to do . 
Despite the obvious disadvantages of being a woman when it comes to
achieving headship , and the negative impact of the job on family life , the
women headteachers I surveyed and interviewed did indicate that they
perceived some advantages in being a woman educational leader . They
felt that they are seen as being more approachable by other women : staff
and parents and by girl pupils , and are more likely to be able to ‘ defuse ’ 
an angry male student , teacher or parent . The women headteachers felt
able to share emotion in unhappy circumstances and empathise with
families where tragedies had occurred , in a way that men might find more
difficult . They also felt that they could conduct themselves in ways that
are free of the expectations held of their male colleagues . The cultural and
social expectations surrounding the leadership of schools and other
organisations continues to endorse a very ‘ male ’ idea of a formal and
autocratic leader . Although male headteachers may not see themselves in
this way , they may be trapped in a stereotype from which their female
colleagues recognise that they are free . A very small number of men
headteachers did comment on their dislike of the constraints imposed on
them by the stereotypical expectations of male leaders ; a hint of the
masculinities debate raised by , among others , Collinson and Hearn ( 2000 )  . 
CONCLUSION
Leadership in education , as in most fields , is identified with men . 
Although there is a gradual increase in the numbers of women who are
reaching leadership positions , the basic social assumptions , based on the
distribution of power in society , endorse men as leaders and identify
women in subordinate roles . The normatively ‘ approved ’ trend of
leadership towards a participative and transformational style might appear
Gender in educational leadership 47
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 47
to favour women , but it seems that these styles are now being equally
adopted by men , at least in education . Despite the apparent endorsement
of softer styles of management , masculine stereotypes relating to
leadership seem to survive , endorsing men as leaders but trapping some
of them in a stereotype they find uncomfortable . 
The lively debate on whether men and women manage and lead
differently has accrued evidence that is equivocal . It is claimed that most
leadership studies were carried out on the assumption that there is no
difference between the sexes and that research undertaken on a mainly
male population can be generalised to women ( Shakeshaft , 1989 )  . 
However , more recently there has been considerable research of a
qualitative nature that has focused exclusively on women ( Adler , Laney
and Packer , 1993 ; Ouston , 1993 ; Ozga , 1993 )  . This research seems to
indicate that the style of leadership most associated with women is more
like the current ideals of leadership than is the male stereotype of
leadership ( Shakeshaft , 1989 )  . In-depth studies have indicated the range
of behaviours and the modelling of ‘ idealised influence ’  ( Bass and Avolio , 
1994 ; Hall , 1996 )  . Equally , other qualitative work has shown the range of
styles that women might use including some styles that could be termed
masculine ( Reay and Ball , 2000 )  . There have been few equivalent
qualitative studies of men . My research has been both qualitative , 
comprising in-depth interviews with women secondary heads ( Coleman , 
1996a ; 1996b ) and quantitative , surveys on all the women secondary heads 
( Coleman , 2000 ; 2001 ) and a sample of male heads ( Coleman , 2002 ) and
has provided a ‘ snapshot ’ of some of the main dimensions of the life and
leadership experience of headteachers , based on their gender . This has
shown that there are only small differences between the women and men
headteachers in their perceptions of their own leadership styles . At the
same time there is considerable difference in how they view their
acquisition and occupation of the role of senior manager . There is need
for research that would look more deeply at the impact of life experience
on the leadership of both women and men and examine in more detail
how their gendered experience affects their leadership and management
of educational institutions . 
REFERENCES
Adler , S .  , Laney , J . and Packer M .  ( 1993 ) Managing Women : Feminism and Power
in Educational Management , Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Bass , B . M . and Avolio , B .  ( 1994 ) Improving Organizational Effectiveness through
Transformational Leadership , Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . 
Bem , S . L .  ( 1974 )  ‘ The measurement of psychological androgyny ’  , Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 42 ( 2 )  , 155–62 . 
Bem , S . L .  ( 1977 )  ‘ On the utility of alternative procedures for assessing psychological androgyny ’  , Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 45 ( 2 )  , 196–205 . 
48 Leadership in Education
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 48
Blackmore , J .  ( 1989 )  ‘ Educational leadership : a feminist critique and reconstruction ’  , in I . Smyth , and W . John ( eds )  , Critical Perspectives on
Educational Leadership , Deakin Studies in Education Series 2 , Lewes : Falmer
Press . 
Blackmore , J .  ( 1994 )  ‘ Leadership in “ crisis ”  : feminist insights into change in an era
of educational restructuring ’  , paper presented at the conference of the American
Educational Research Association , New Orleans , April . 
Blackmore , J .  ( 1999 ) Troubling Women : Feminism , Leadership and Educational
Change , Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Blake , R . R . and Mouton , J . S .  ( 1964 ) The Managerial Grid , Houston , TX : Gulf
Publishing Co . 
Burns , J . M .  ( 1978 ) Leadership , New York : Harper & Row . 
Coleman , M .  ( 1996a )  ‘ Management style of female headteachers ’  , Educational
Management and Administration , 24 ( 2 )  , 317–32 . 
Coleman , M .  ( 1996b )  ‘ Barriers to career progress for women in education : the perceptions of female headteachers ’  , Educational Research , 38 ( 3 )  , 163–74 . 
Coleman , M .  ( 2000 )  ‘ The female secondary headteacher in England and Wales : 
leadership and management styles ’  , Educational Research , 42 ( 1 )  , 13–27 . 
Coleman , M .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Achievement Against the Odds : the female secondary headteachers in England and Wales ’  , School Leadership and Management , 21 ( 1 )  , 
75–100 . 
Coleman , M .  ( 2002 ) Women as Headteachers : Striking the Balance , Stoke-on-Trent : 
Trentham Books . 
Coleman , M .  , Qiang , H . and Li , Yp ( 1998 )  ‘ Women in educational management in
China : experience in Shaanxi Province ’  , Compare , 8 ( 2 )  , 141–54 . 
Collinson , D . and Hearn , J .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Critical studies on men , masculinities and managements ’  , in M . Davidson , and R . Burke ( eds )  , Women in Management : Current
Research Issues Volume II , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Davidson , M . J . and Cooper , C . L .  ( 1992 ) Shattering the Glass Ceiling : The Woman
Manager , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Davies , L .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Democratic practice , gender and school management ’  , in P . 
Drake and P . Owen ( eds )  , Gender and Management Issues in Education : An
International Perspective , Stoke-on-Trent : Trentham Books . 
Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  ( 2000 ) Statistics of Education
Teachers in England and Wales , London : Government Statistical Service . 
Evetts , J .  ( 1994 ) Becoming a Secondary Headteacher , London : Cassell . 
Ferrario , M .  ( 1994 )  ‘ Women as managerial leaders ’  , in M . J . Davidson and R . J . Burke 
( eds )  , Women in Management : Current Research Issues , London : Paul Chapman
Publishing . 
Gold , A .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Women into educational management ’  , European Journal of
Education , 31 ( 4 )  , 419–33 . 
Goldring , E . and Chen , M .  ( 1994 )  ‘ The feminization of the principalship in Israel : 
the trade-off between political power and cooperative leadership ’  , in C . Marshall 
( ed .  )  , The New Politics of Race and Gender , London : Falmer Press . 
Goleman , D .  ( 1996 ) Emotional Intelligence : Why It Can Matter More Than IQ , 
London : Bloomsbury . 
Gray , H . L .  ( 1993 )  ‘ Gender issues in management training ’  , in J . Ozga ( ed )  , Women
in Educational Management , Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Grogan , M .  ( 1996 ) Voices of Women Aspiring to the Superintendency , Albany , NY : 
Gender in educational leadership 49
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 49
State University of New York Press . 
Gross , N . and Trask , A .  ( 1976 ) The Sex Factor and the Management of Schools , 
New York : John Wiley and Sons . 
Hall , V .  ( 1996 ) Dancing on the Ceiling : A Study of Women Managers in Education , 
London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Hall , V .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Dusting off the phoenix : gender and educational leadership revisited ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 25 ( 3 )  , 309–24 . 
Hill , M . S . and Ragland , J . C .  ( 1995 ) Women as Educational Leaders : Opening
Windows , Pushing Ceilings , Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Jirasinghe , D . and Lyons , G .  ( 1996 ) The Competent Head : A Job Analysis of Heads ’ 
Tasks and Personality Factors , London : Falmer Press . 
Kotecha , P .  ( 1994 )  ‘ The position of women teachers ’  , Agenda ( 21 ) 134–57 . 
Kouzes , J . M . and Posner , B . Z .  ( 1990 ) The Leadership Challenge : How to Get
Extraordinary Things Done in Organizations , San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Kruger , M . L .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Gender issues in school headship : quality versus power ?  ’ 
European Journal of Education , 31 ( 4 )  , 447–61 . 
Leithwood , K .  , Jantzi , D . and Steinbach , R .  ( 1999 ) Changing Leadership for Changing
Times , Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Mac an Ghaill , M .  ( 1994 ) The Making of Men : Masculinities , Sexualities and
Schooling , Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Morriss , S . B .  , Coleman , M . and Low , G . T .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Leadership stereotypes and
female Singaporean principals ’  , Compare , 29 ( 2 )  , 191–202 . 
Noddings , N .  ( 1984 ) Caring : A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education , 
Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . 
Office for National Statistics ( ONS ) Social Trends 2001 , London : The Stationery
Office . 
Ouston , J .  ( ed )  ( 1993 ) Women in Education Management , Harlow : Longman . 
Ozga , J .  ( ed )  ( 1993 ) Women in Educational Management , Buckingham : Open
University Press . 
Reay , D . and Ball , S .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Essentials of female management ’  , Educational
Management and Administration , 28 ( 2 )  , 145–60 . 
Restine , L . Nan ,  ( 1993 )  , Women in Administration : Facilitators for Change , Newbury
Park , CA , Corwin Press . 
Rosener , J . B .  ( 1990 )  ,  ‘ Ways women lead ’  , Harvard Business Review , 68 ( 6 )  , 119–25 . 
Schein , V . E .  ( 1973 )  ‘ The relationship between sex role stereotypes and requisite
management characteristics ’  , Journal of Applied Psychology , 57 ( 2 )  , 95–100 . 
Schein , V . E .  ( 1994 )  ‘ Managerial sex typing : a persistent and pervasive barrier to
women ’ s opportunities ’  , in M . Davidson and R . Burke ( eds )  , Women in
Management : Current Research Issues , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Schick-Case , S .  ( 1994 )  ,  ‘ Gender differences in communication and behaviour in
organizations ’  , in M . J . Davidson and R . J . Burke ( eds )  , Women in Management : 
Current Research Issues , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Schmuck , P . A .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Women ’ s place in educational administration : past , present , 
and future ’  , in K . Leithwood , J . Chapman , D . Corson , P . Hallinger and A . Hart 
( eds )  , International Handbook of Educational Leadership and Administration , 
Boston : Kluwer Academic . 
Shakeshaft , C .  ( 1989 ) Women in Educational Administration , Newbury Park , CA : 
Sage Publications . 
Shakeshaft , C .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Gendered leadership styles in educational organizations ’  , in
50 Leadership in Education
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 50
B . Limerick and B . Lingard ( eds )  , Gender and Changing Educational
Management , Rydalmere , NSW : Hodder Education . 
Sinclair , A .  ( 1998 ) Doing Leadership Differently : Gender , Power and Sexuality in a
Changing Business Culture , Melbourne : Melbourne University Press . 
Tannenbaum R . and Schmidt , W . J .  ( 1973 )  ‘ How to choose a leadership pattern ’  , 
Harvard Business Review , May–June , 162–80 . 
Usher , P .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Feminist approaches to research ’  , in D . Scott and R . Usher ( eds )  , 
Understanding Educational Research , London : Routledge . 
Vinkenburg , C .  , Jansen , P . and Koopman , P .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Feminine leadership–a review
of gender differences in managerial behaviour and effectiveness ’  , in M . Davidson
and R . Burke ( eds )  , Women in Management : Current Research Issues Volume
II , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Vinnicombe , S .  ( 2000 )  ‘ The position of women in management in Europe ’  , in M . 
Davidson and R . Burke ( eds )  , Women in Management : Current Research Issues
Volume II , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
FURTHER READING
Blackmore , J .  ( 1999 ) Troubling Women : Feminism , Leadership and Educational
Change , Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Coleman , M .  ( 2002 ) Women as Headteachers : Striking the Balance , Stoke-on-Trent : 
Trentham Books . 
Hall , V .  ( 1996 ) Dancing on the Ceiling : A Study of Women Managers in Education , 
London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Hall , V .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Dusting off the phoenix : gender and educational leadership revisited ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 25 ( 3 )  , 309–24 . 
Gender in educational leadership 51
chapter 3 LeadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 51
Section B : Developing Leaders , 
Developing Leadership
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 53
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 148
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 54
4
BIOGRAPHY AND THE STUDY OF SCHOOL
LEADER CAREERS : TOWARDS A
HUMANISTIC APPROACH
Peter Ribbins
INTRODUCTION
Meeting the needs of school leaders , and especially headteachers , for
preparation and development has become a substantial industry and big
business . Elaborate and expensive programmes of training , assessment and
certification have mushroomed in country after country . Whatever the
merits of this phenomenon , regarded as an innovation a number of
generalisations might be made with some confidence about it . 
First , it has been introduced as an ‘ act of faith ’ rather than as the result
of a substantial , comprehensive and critical examination of such empirical
evidence and theoretical discussion as might be available . This is so
especially of those countries that have sought to follow where they
perceive others to have led . But it is all too often also true of those
countries , such as the UK , that have done the leading . Secondly , the
debates on this innovation , in so far as these can be said to have taken
place at all , have tended to be both constricted and more than a little
confused by a lack of clear and shared definitions and understandings of
the key concepts and practices involved . Thirdly , the actual functioning
and effects of this innovation are by no means always what its advocates
have claimed for it and , as some maintain , may be as likely to defeat its
stated purposes , in so far as these are made explicit , as to achieve them . 
Fourthly , the kinds of claims and counter-claims that have been noted
above are in part encouraged by the fact that this innovation has rarely
been the subject of rigorous and independent review . Furthermore , too
often when such a review has taken place , as in the case of a major
evaluation of the National Professional Qualification for Headship ( NPQH ) 
undertaken by the National Foundation for Educational Research ( NFER ) 
55
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 55
for the Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  , it has not been
made publicly available . 
It is not my purpose to attempt to address this formidable agenda of
issues as a whole . Rather , I shall focus mainly on the first of the
generalisations listed above and in doing so will relate what we know of
the careers of school leaders to what this might mean for their
development . This will entail a discussion of biography , life history and
story , and , most especially , the notion of career . In undertaking this I will
make a case for a humanistic approach to the study of leadership careers
and preparation of school leaders as against the narrowly instrumental
orientation that has dominated a good deal of government-led thinking in
this and in related areas . 
TOWARDS A HUMANISTIC APPROACH
In a recent paper that seeks to develop a comprehensive map of the field
of studies in leaders , leading and leadership in education , Helen Gunter
and I have argued for a classification around six major knowledge
provinces ( the conceptual , the descriptive , the critical , the humanistic , the
evaluative and the instrumental ) differentiated in terms of seven key
groupings of work ( purpose , focus , context , method , audience , 
communication and impact )  ( Gunter and Ribbins , 2002 ; Gunter and
Ribbins , 2002a ; Ribbins and Gunter , 2002 )  . For the purposes of this chapter
I will focus upon the humanistic and instrumental provinces . I do so
because it seems to me that in contemporary education the world over too
much thinking about leadership and too much of the practice of leadership
development has overstressed the possibilities of the instrumental and
underrated that of the humanistic . 
In this context instrumental research can be seen as concerned
essentially with providing leaders and others with effective strategies and
tactics for the delivery of group , organisational and system level goals . It
is to this form of research and to the suggestions it can offer for the
improvement of practice that hard-pressed and sometimes impatient
policy-makers and leaders can seem most to yearn for . For some , it appears
to be the only truly worthwhile purpose for research . At its best , it must
be acknowledged that such research can offer practical assistance about
what works and what does not . At its worst , it can contribute to the
establishment of a narrowly managerialist outlook and a ‘ quick fix ’ 
mentality in which the people who actually do the leading and those who
are led seem to be of little interest . 
In contrast , humanistic research in leadership in education , in so far as
its primary purpose is to seek to gather and theorise from the experiences
of those who are leaders and those who are led , is unlikely to lose sight
of the people who are engaged in organisational and other forms of social
56 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 56
life . It can take a variety of related forms including life history , life story , 
prosopography , autobiography and biography . Much of this chapter will
deal with the notions of biography and career , as a prelude to this it is
worth spending a little time on such associated concepts as life history
and life story and of biography and case study . 
Usher ( 1998 , p . 18 ) makes an important distinction in ‘ the story of the
self ’ between a life lived and a life told . The former ‘ is what actually
happens ’  . It consists of ‘ the images , feelings , sentiments , desires , thoughts , 
and meanings known to the person whose life it is ’  . A life as told , a life
history ,  ‘ is a narrative , influenced by the cultural conventions of telling , 
by the audience , and by the social context ’  ( ibid .  )  . For others the key
distinction in the story of the self is that between a life history and a life
story . For Miller ( 2000 , pp . 139–40 )  : 
Unlike the life history which can be said to be a ( hopefully accurate
and reasonably complete ) passive reconstruction of a core of factual
events , the life story is an active construction of the respondent ’ s view
of their life . There is no single ‘ best ’ or ‘ correct ’ construction . The
content of a life story that a respondent will give in an interview will
be dependent upon how they see their life at that particular moment
and how they choose to depict that life view to the person carrying out
the interview .  .  . the life story is ‘ true ’ in that the story the respondent
chooses to give at the moment of the interview is , at that place and
time , the one they have selected as a genuine depiction of their life . 
For Bullough case study research ( especially when its focus is upon the
depiction of a lived life ) and biographical research have much in common . 
Both : 
are narratives , and both face the challenge of untangling , telling and
emplotting a life .  .  . Both require the creation of a story line that
connects the threads of one ’ s life events into a single narrative .  .  . Both
biographers and case study researchers ask the question , What is the
story ? The story gives meaning and invites meaning making . As part
of its appeal , biography encourages boundary crossing . When we read
biographies written and lived stories often connect and we ‘ realise that
we are not alone ; we can identify with another human being in another
age ; we can identify with his or her journey through the vicissitudes
of life ’  .  
( Oates , 1991 , p . 7 , cited in Bullough , 1998 , p . 25 ) 
What all these forms of research share , and this is especially apparent in
the quote from Oates , is ‘ a strong humanistic impetus ’  ( Miller , 2000 , p . 8 )  . 
As such they have a deep concern for locating individuals within their
social , cultural and historical settings . But this can have positive and
negative connotations . In an account of the social function of life stories
that stress the former Atkinson ( 1998 , p . 10 ) suggests that they ‘ can affirm , 
Biography and the study of school leader careers 57
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 57
validate , and support our own experience in relation to those around us . 
They enforce the norms of a moral order and shape the individual to the
requirements of the society . Stories help us understand our commonalties
with others , as well as our differences . Stories help create bonds , while
fostering a sense of community , by helping us understand the established
order around us . Stories clarify and maintain our place in the social order
of things ’  . 
But such stories can have a different effect , particularly when regarded
from the perspective of an alternative research approach to the
instrumental and humanistic as described above . In this , critical research
is distinguished by a desire to reveal and emancipate social actors from
the various forms that social injustice can take and from the oppression
of established but unjustifiable structures of social relationship and power 
( see Ribbins and Gunter , 2002 )  . In terms of purpose , whilst the first may
be said to regard biography as socialisation , the latter seems to see it in
terms of its contribution to social emancipation . What else can be said of
biography and its purposes ? 
BIOGRAPHY AND ITS PURPOSES AND FORMS
Biography can have a number of purposes . For Erben ( 1998 , p . 4 )  , at its
most general , it seeks ‘ to provide greater insight than hitherto into the
nature and meaning of individual lives or groups of lives . Given that
individual lives are part of a cultural network , information gained through
biographical research will relate to an understanding of the wider society ’  . 
As such , from an ontological perspective , the biographical researcher may
be seen as ‘ adding to the study of groups a sociology of the individual . 
The formulation ,  “ a sociology of the individual ” may seem tautologous
but as William Dilthey earlier observed , socio-historical reality can be
captured and interpreted through an account of that highly singular and
complex repository of the cultural – the single person ’  ( ibid .  , p . 14 )  . 
So much for its general aims , what of the specific purposes of biography
and biographical research ? On this Erben offers a warning and makes a
suggestion in pointing out that ‘ biographical research data do not claim , 
or seek the impossibility of the exact replication of a life the requirements
is that the research refer to lives in such a way as to illuminate them in
relation to a research object ’  ( ibid .  , p . 12 )  . In stressing that biographical
research needs to be clear about what it is seeking to understand , Erben
is making a point that has special importance for those who wish to use
such an approach to study leadership careers in education . In developing
this argument , he stresses that from ‘ an analysis of a particular life or lives
for some designated reason – for example in examining the world of work
– it may be appropriate to look at the biographical routes by which
individuals become teachers , nurses , prostitutes ’  ( ibid .  , p . 4 )  . 
58 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 58
He could also have argued that such an analysis might enlighten us
about the lives of teachers , nurses , prostitutes and the like as they pursue
their careers . It might well tell us much about these professions or
occupations . Before turning to a discussion of these possibilities and to
how they might contribute to an enhanced understanding of the careers
of school leaders , let us summarise the three main kinds of biographical
research : that which is concerned primarily with seeking to offer an
account of the personal life of an individual ; that which focuses on the
interpersonal life of an individual as he or she relates with other
individuals located within the particular social settings which they all
interact ; and , the life of an individual regarded as one case of a whole set
of individuals ( such as school teacher ) who , while they may never interact
socially , nevertheless share a role in common ( such as headteacher ) or a
type of career experience ( such as school leader )  . What , then , can we learn
of leadership and leadership careers from biography ? 
BIOGRAPHY , LEADERSHIP AND CAREERS
In a paper published some years ago , Peter Gronn and I identified three
main ways in which biographies can facilitate theorising about leadership . 
First , as detailed case histories , they may be inspected for evidence of the
development and learning of leadership attributes . Second , they can
provide what might be described as analytical balance sheets on the ends
to which leaders have directed their attributes throughout their careers
within the shifting demands on them , and options available to them . 
Third , a comparative analysis of the career paths of leaders as revealed in
biographies can answer broader system and institutional level questions , 
such as whether ‘ particular sets of leaders , sanctioned by their societies
and organisations as worthy to lead them , share common attributes and
whether those same societies and organisations screen their leadership
cohorts in any way to guarantee conformity to preferred cultural types or
models ’  ( Gronn and Ribbins , 1996 , p . 464 )  . 
Each of the three ways described above , two explicitly , refer to the
notion of a career . In doing so , following Goffmann ( 1976 )  , like most theorists , we take the view that the concept of career can be used to refer ‘ to
any social strand of any person ’ s course through life ’  ( ibid .  , p . 119 )  . 
Applying this to leadership , Gronn ( 1999 , p . 25 ) suggests ‘ the notion of a
career communicates more than the straightforward idea of task performance .  .  .  [ it ] has usually signalled the idea of a possibility of , sequenced
and planned movement , and therefore , some sense of anticipated trajectory .  .  . There is also an implied notion of commitment to a course of life ’  . 
Given this ,  ‘ Career progression is understood generally as a desired , vertical , ladder-like movement through age-related and time-phased stages . 
The various locations occupied by individuals at any one time generate
Biography and the study of school leader careers 59
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 59
corresponding expectations and perspectives of career trajectories ’  ( ibid .  , 
p . 27 )  . 
This may be so , but as others have argued , these expectations and
perspectives are shaped by considerations of gender , class and race . Thus
while Osler ( 1997 )  , in a study of The Education and Careers of Black
Teachers , acknowledges that ‘ The concept of “ career ” is often interpreted
to mean progression up a hierarchical pyramid ’  ( ibid .  , p . 125 )  , she also
stresses that it ‘ has been seen as problematic since most people will not
reach the top of the pyramid ’  ( ibid .  )  . In addition , she argues ‘ that men and
women often have different understandings of career ’ and that ‘ the ways
in which individual senior Black educators perceive their careers may
enable us to identify how individuals manage the particular structural
barriers they are likely to encounter ’  ( ibid .  )  . 
Despite their apparent difference , there is a good deal of common ground
in terms of the influence of aspects of individual agency and social structure as between the accounts that Gronn and Osler offer of the careers of
educational leaders . Thus if Osler ( 1997 )  , in the quote above , appears to
stress the significance of structural considerations , in her concluding
remarks she also notes that ‘ We have seen a variety of approaches to 
 “ career ” among the ten senior managers ’  ( ibid .  , p . 127 )  . This would seem
to give a greater prominence to aspects of agency . In so far as it does , this
resonates with Gronn ’ s ( 1999 , p . 26 ) view that ‘ Individuals ’ careers , as I
shall demonstrate in the case of leaders , are indeed structured for them , 
but those same individuals are still able to negotiate particular identities
and pathways of their own choosing from within those structured options
available to them ’  . But what do we know of the careers of educational
leaders ? 
THE CAREERS OF EDUCATIONAL LEADERS
Until comparatively recently we knew little about key aspects of
leadership careers in education . As Gronn and Ribbins ( 1996 , p . 465 ) note 
 ‘ there is .  .  . an absence of any systematic understanding in the literature
of how individuals get to be leaders , an ignorance of culturally diverse
patterns of defining leadership and knowledge of the culturally different
ways prospective leaders learn their leadership remains in its infancy ’  . 
Without such an understanding , there is little possibility of a
satisfactory answer to Kets de Vries ( 1993 , p . 3 ) questions ,  ‘ What
determines who will become a leader and who will not ?  ’ A possible
response would be to devise a framework that would enable an ordering
of the biographical details of leaders ’ lives . This would have a number of
advantages including enabling a comparative analysis of individuals over
and against the systems or cultural traditions of leadership that nurture
careers given that the latter would offer an appropriate analytical construct
60 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 60
on which to build such a framework . It would also allow the kind of
longitudinal , comparative analysis of leaders ’ careers in a variety of
cultural and national settings that would go some way to answering the
questions from Kets de Vries noted above . In addition , as Gronn and I
argued in our paper , 
with ‘ leadership career ’ – essentially a mobility pathway or status
passage through time – as the conceptual anchorage , there is the 
added advantage of being able to pinpoint the dialectical interplay
between a leader ’ s own sense of agency ( fashioned in part by her or
him ) and the social structure ( enabling or constraining possibilities for
her or him ) in which that agency is embedded .  
( Gronn and Ribbins , 1996 , p . 465 , original emphases )  . 
If in educational contexts we are comparatively ignorant about who
become leaders and why and how prospective leaders prepare for
leadership , we also know relatively little about the lives , careers and
continuing developmental needs of those who are school leaders . Gronn 
( 1999 , p . 32 ) believes that
the field of leadership studies lacks a sound comparative point of
reference against which to map leaders ’ biographical experiences and
activities . It is one thing to scrutinise leaders as individuals in isolation , 
but the field has remarkably few useful benchmarks or parameters for
examining the circumstances of leaders ’ lives in relation to one and
another , and also in respect of the cultures and societies from which
they emerge . Yet , from the perspective of globalisation and the better
appreciation of different , deeply entrenched cultural approaches .  .  . 
the provision of such a scheme is timely . 
For Gronn any scheme that can claim satisfactorily to account for the 
 ‘ microcosmic details of each individual leader ’ s life ’ will need to have
regard to ‘ the broad parameters of history , society and culture ’ within
which it is located ( ibid .  )  . Taken together , these requirements constitute a
demanding agenda . Even so , they do not prevent Gronn from advocating
a general leadership career framework ; one that is made up of four
sequential phases that he term ’ s formation , accession , incumbency and
divestiture ( ibid .  )  . 
In what follows I will consider this and a variety of other frameworks . 
Drawing upon my own research into the leadership careers of
headteachers in England and Wales and principals in a number of other
countries , I will outline my own preferred model . Finally , I will attempt
to relate all this to ongoing attempts in this country and in other parts of
the world to develop a strategic approach to meeting the continuing needs
of school teachers and school leaders for professional development . 
Weindling ( 1999 , p . 90 ) in a paper entitled ‘ Stages of Headship ’  ,  ‘ uses
socialisation theory to re-examine the NFER ( National Foundation for
Biography and the study of school leader careers 61
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 61
Educational Research ) study of headteachers ( Weindling and Earley , 1987 ; 
Earley et al .  , 1990 ) in order to study the stages of headship transition ’  . In
this he helpfully reviews and summarises the large body of work that has
drawn upon stage theories of socialisation in the USA and elsewhere . 
Much of this reports on research undertaken within a variety of noneducational contexts . Following Hart ( 1993 ) he identifies three
characteristic periods of organisational socialisation through which
leaders commonly pass . In stage one the newly arriving leader must engage
in considerable learning as she or he first encounters the people and the
organisation . Stage two ‘ involves the task of attempting to fit in . New
leaders must reach accommodation with the work role , the people with
whom they interact and the .  .  . culture ( of the institution )  . They look for
role clarity in this new setting and may face resistance from established
group members ’  ( ibid .  , p . 91 )  . In stage three ,  ‘ stable patterns emerge but
this is only visible in data from longitudinal studies ’  ( ibid .  )  . There is some
evidence that not all leaders achieve this stage before they move on to
their next post . 
Drawing on this model along with the research reported by Gabarro 
( 1987 )  , Parkay and Hall ( 1992 )  , Day and Bakioglu ( 1996 )  , Gronn ( 1993 ; 
1999 ) and some of my own work ( Ribbins , 1997b )  , Weindling ( 1999 , pp . 
98–100 ) proposes a six-stage model with approximate timings mapping
the stages of headship transition / preparation prior to headship as follows : 
entry and encounter ( first months )  , taking hold ( three to 12 months )  , 
reshaping ( second year )  , refinement ( years three to four )  , consolidation 
( years five to seven ) and plateau ( years eight and onwards )  . 
Most models , especially those that attribute a time dimension , are
underpinned by shared assumptions . Parkay and Hall ( 1992 ) in a fivestage developmental model ( survival , control , stability , educational
leadership , professional actualisation ) of new high school principals in
the USA identify four . First , that principals can begin at different stages
and not all do so at stage one . This is especially the case with those not
taking up a first principalship . Second , that principals can pass through
the stages at different rates . In particular , experienced principals coming
to a new principalship , can , but by no means always do , pass through the
early stages very quickly . Third , that no single factor , such as their personal
characteristics at the time of their succession or the condition of the school
at the point at which they take over , determines a principal ’ s stage of
development . Fourth , that principals may operate at more than one stage
at the same time . Attributing a particular stage in such a case may mean
little more than identifying a predominant orientation . 
From my research I would make three further assumptions . First , that
principals can operate at more than one stage in different aspects of their
role and with regard to their relationships with relevant others . Second , 
that it is possible for a principal to slip back one or more stages or progress
by more than one stage in general or in aspects of her or his role or her
62 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 62
or his relationship with relevant others . Third , that some principals may
never progress to the final stage or even stages , as these have been
described above , of principalship . In my search for a career map of
headship , I have encountered cases in which each of the seven
assumptions has seemed relevant . 
A CAREER MAP OF HEADSHIP
In undertaking and interpreting my own research into headteachers and
headship , I have found an approach based upon two models helpful . The
first , and more general model , developed by Gronn ( 1993 ) in part from a
biographical study of Sir James Darling , the distinguished headmaster of
Geelong Grammar in Melbourne , identifies four main phases ( formation , 
accession , incumbency , divestiture ) in the lives of leaders . The second
model , from Day and Bakioglu ( 1996 )  , is derived from study of
headteachers in England ( 196 questionnaires and 34 interviews )  . From this
the authors identify four phases ( initiation , development , autonomy , 
disenchantment ) in the career of headteachers . As a means of studying
and describing the lives and careers of teachers and headteachers , I have
found it helpful , with qualification , to combine the two models into a
single framework . A comprehensive illustration of the merits and
possibilities of this framework is beyond the scope of this chapter and is , 
in any case , available elsewhere ( Pascal and Ribbins , 1998 ; Rayner and
Ribbins , 1999 ; Pashiardis and Ribbins 2003 )  . In what follows I will outline
some of its key features . In doing so it may be helpful to rehearse what I
have come to think of as two ideal typical pathways or routes to and
through headship as follows : 
• Formation , accession , incumbency ( initiation , development , autonomy , 
disenchantment )  , moving on ( divestiture )  . 
• Formation , accession , incumbency ( initiation , development , autonomy , 
enchantment )  , moving on ( reinvention )  . 
1 Formation : making headteachers
The process of formation is made up of the influences which , taken as a
whole , shape the kinds of people that prospective headteachers become . 
In this process the headteachers of the future are socialised into deeprooted norms and values by the action and interaction of such key agencies
as the family , school , peer groups , the local community and other reference
groups . These agencies , particularly those that exert their influence during
the early years ( for the importance of these to prospective leaders , see
Gardner , 1995 ; Kets de Vries , 1995 )  , shape the personality of a future
headteacher by generating a conception of self , along with the rudiments
of a work style , attitude and outlook . 
Biography and the study of school leader careers 63
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 63
2 Accession : achieving headship
Following formation , those who are to become candidates for headship
must first become teachers . They then look for advancement within the
profession , seeking experience in one or more leadership roles and , in due
course , begin to prepare for promotion to headship . All this means
developing their capacity and testing their readiness in comparison with
existing headteachers and likely rivals . In doing so , they develop networks
of peers , mentors and patrons , and learn to present themselves and jockey
for position in the competition for preferment . 
I am particularly interested in determining how heads regard their
earlier careers and the extent to which they see this as a preparation , 
planned or otherwise , for headship . In reflecting upon the almost 100
interviews with heads and principals with which I have been engaged in
six countries , I have found two things especially remarkable . First , how
few British headteachers and to a lesser extent principals elsewhere have
enjoyed deputy headship or have seen it as a useful preparation for
headship ( Ribbins , 1997a )  . Second how very few see themselves as having
deliberately pursued a planned course leading to headship ( Gronn and
Ribbins , 2003 )  . This can be so even among those who like Valerie Bragg
knew that she wanted to be a headteacher ‘ almost as soon as I started
teaching ’  . She sees herself as having taken
a very traditional route . I obtained an early promotion to head of
department , went on to be head of a sixth form which gave me plenty
of pastoral contact , then on to a deputy headship and then to a
headship . I attended carefully selected courses on timetabling , pastoral
care , curriculum development .  .  . I suppose the whole thing looks
carefully planned but I did not have a conscious checklist .  
( Ribbins and Marland , 1994 : p . 64 ) 
In this her account reflects the view expressed so forcefully by Franklyn 
( 1974 , p . x ) that
There is no plot in this story because there have been none in my life
or in any other life which has come under my notice . I am one of a
class of the individuals which have not the time for plots in their life
but have all they can do getting their work done without indulging in
such a luxury . 
3 Incumbency : enacting headship
Incumbency marks the period or periods of actual headship and runs from
the time a head is first appointed to headship to the time he / she finally 
64 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 64
leaves headship . There are , of course , many headteachers who have
experienced a second , a third or even further headships . In doing so they
may face each time starting again on the first of the four phases of
incumbency described below . With this caveat in mind , over the whole
course of a headship career , from my research it seems to me that
incumbency can take one of two main routes , each with four successive
sub-phases . Following the Day and Bakioglu ( 1996 ) model , the first three
sub-phases common to both routes may be entitled initiation , development
and autonomy . The fourth sub-phase of a headship career can take one or
other of two directions , one negative ( disenchantment ) the other positive 
( enchantment )  . 
• Initiation : following appointment there is an immediate period of
induction or initiation . During this time new heads become familiar
with the organisational and workplace norms of their new school and
its community and of the roles they will be expected to fulfil . The evidence suggests that this first phase normally takes at least three years
before a new head feels fully initiated in post . During this phase most
heads experience a broadly similar range of emotions – beginning with
feelings of initial elation and enthusiasm quickly followed by a growing sense of realism and adjustment to what the real parameters of the
job will be . More generally new heads felt ill prepared and uncertain
about what was expected of them . Unsurprisingly , they view these first
years as exhausting and demanding . Some claim to have enjoyed a relatively smooth transition into post ; others faced great difficulties . The
quality of this experience seems to be influenced by factors such as : 
self-belief , depth and breadth of previous experience , relevance of previous experience , the ability to transfer previous experience , the
breadth and relevance of prior-preparation and training , the ability to
transfer prior-preparation and training ; learning from working with
appropriate and inappropriate role models ; ability to learn on the job , 
and the quality of the institutional and local support structures in
place . 
• Development : this phase is characterised by enthusiasm and growth
and normally takes some four to eight years . By this time the head feels
in control , has the measure of the job and has made good progress in
developing the wide range of capacities and competencies that it
requires . Such heads have developed confidence in their ability to
manage their schools . This allows them to maintain self-belief in the
face of the stress and pressure which is a head ’ s lot today . A growing
sense of assurance is often expressed in a new vision for the school
and / or the development of novel ways of working . This tends to be the
phase that heads recall as the period of their careers in which they
were most effective and made the most progress . 
Biography and the study of school leader careers 65
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 65
• Autonomy : this phase usually comes into play after eight years or more
in the job . By this time such heads are generally very confident and
competent . A combination of experience and survival has given them
a sense of control and the knowledge that they have largely mastered
the demands of headship . They have learnt a variety of strategies to
cope with the stresses and strains of the job and can take a more open
and longer-term perspective on the problems they face . Some believe
this can make them even more effective as leaders . Their day-to-day
professional life is usually much easier than it was . They regard
themselves as ‘ management experts ’  . Having put in place appropriate
management posts and teams , and delegated responsibilities to them , 
the school may appear to run smoothly without much apparent handson management from the head . Such headteachers tend to advocate a
collegial or teamwork approach to managing the school as both right
and good . Of course , not all heads in post for eight years and more
achieve all of this . Furthermore , there is evidence that even among
those who do , some may take very different routes in the final phase
of headship . 
• Disenchantment : the final phase of incumbency , as has been described
by Day and Bakioglu ( 1996 )  , is a transitional time for the mainly longserving and highly experienced heads who come into this category . For
some there is the prospect of disenchantment ; the seeds of disillusion
and loss of commitment may stem back to the previous phase . They
may seem to be at the very height of their power and authority , but it
is at just such a time that feelings of stagnation and loss of enthusiasm
can set in . This can be a point at which heads reassess their life goals . 
If they have not achieved much of what they had wished , they might
begin to feel trapped in post with nowhere to go . Day and Bakioglu 
( 1996 ) depict a downwardly spiralling process leading finally towards
disillusion and , in Gronn ’ s term , divestiture . In passing , I should
perhaps note that Gronn , in response to the above suggestions , has
claimed that ‘ If indeed Day and Bakioglu ’ s notion of disenchantment
does imply “ a pattern of creeping negativism ” the same cannot be said
for divestiture ’  ( Gronn , 1999 : 41 )  . For my part , I cannot see what
positive meaning can be given to ‘ disenchantment ’  . In addition , while
I accept that Gronn did not wish ‘ divestiture ’ necessarily to be
construed in negative terms , such an interpretation would surely be
usual . Thus , for example , in defining what it is to ‘ divest ’ the Oxford
English Dictionary does so in such terms as ‘ strip ’  ,  ‘ deprive ’  ,  
 ‘ dispossess ’ and ‘ rid ’  . Furthermore , in his account of the reasons why
divestiture takes place , Gronn ( 1999 , p . 39 ) notes that ‘ At some point
in their lives , due to factors associated with ageing , illness , lack of
66 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 66
fulfilment or incapacity , leaders have to divest themselves of leadership
by releasing their psychological grip ’  . And while he goes on to
distinguish between voluntary and involuntary departure and their
potentially very different meanings for those involved , it is hard to see
any of the factors identified above in positive terms . Gronn may need
a more appropriate term for this final phase of a leader ’ s career . I
certainly felt this need , and while he has reservations ( ibid .  , p . 41 ) 
about the notion of ‘ moving on ’ that Christine Pascal and I have
resorted to , it could be that in his reference to the concept of ‘ letting
go ’  , Gronn may perhaps have identified just such a term ( ibid .  )  . 
However that may be , Day and Bakioglu ( 1996 ) in their account of
disenchantment describe such headteachers as increasingly autocratic
in style and reluctant to respond to any kind of demand for change , 
especially where externally mediated . There were hints of this among
one or two of the longest-serving of the headteachers I have been
involved in interviewing but , as I shall argue below , most remain much
more positive . 
• Enchantment : some long serving heads do seem discouraged and
disenchanted , but others are not . We spoke to several who despite their
long years in post remain enchanted with headship . If anything they
appear even more confident and optimistic about what is possible than
some of those in the previous phase . As such they express feelings of
having much left to do , of new challenges to face , of looking forward
to this . They still see their work as focusing on children and their
achievements and they still speak with a passionate commitment about
the profession of teaching and of the life of the headteacher . Huberman 
( 1993 ) identifies four conditions for sustaining high levels of
continuing professional satisfaction : enduring commitment ; 
manageable job expectations ; good relations with colleagues ; and , a
balanced home and school life . I would add two more : a balance
between leisure and work-related activities ; and , worthwhile
opportunities for continuing professional development . 
Not all heads enjoy all these conditions . Among those with long
experience and who continue to value and enjoy the post , by no means
all are happy with every aspect of contemporary headship . Two
examples must suffice to illustrate this view . First , John Evans , head
of a large comprehensive in Cornwall , notes that ‘ Some of my best
headteacher friends have retired because of illness or stress . I am
talking about people I rate highly who are not just looking for a way
out . To survive you ’ ve got to be much tougher than in the past . I ’ m
diabetic with serious stomach problems and think this is stress related . 
It ’ s part of the job ’  . Second , Sir David Winkley , at the time head of a
primary school in Birmingham , on being asked if he still enjoyed
Biography and the study of school leader careers 67
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 67
headship , responded with some caution :  ‘ I don ’ t know . In a sort of way
I must enjoy it , or I wouldn ’ t do it .  .  . whether I ’ d come back to do it
again , I ’ m not sure . At the moment I think that the stresses involved
are enormous .  .  . there is no question about its “ worthwhileness ”  , but
I think it ’ s a terribly difficult job to do ’  . 
Whatever their reservations , John Evans and David Winkley regard
headship as worthwhile and even exciting . Others were less reserved . 
The following brief quotations are all from headteachers who had been
in post for 16 years or more :  ‘ it ( being a headteacher ) still gives me a
buzz ’  ( Michael Marland )  ;  ‘ I feel very good about it ( the prospect of
several more years of headship )  .  .  . There is plenty to look forward to
with excitement ’  ( Brian Sherratt )  ;  ‘ it ’ s a superb job .  .  . It ’ s still the most
rewarding job there is ’  ( John Evans )  ;  ‘ I love my job . I ’ m a very happy
headteacher .  .  . I love it . It ’ s been a marvellous joy to me to have been
appointed to this job at Ash Field . There has been , and there still is , 
so much to do ’  ( Anne Hinchcliffe )  ; and ,  ‘ It ’ s good to be a head .  .  . There
is nothing that has happened in my life as a head that has made me
think I really shouldn ’ t have come into this line of work ’  ( Liz Paver )  . 
4 Moving on : leaving headship
This final phase focuses on leaving headship . It deals with how heads
anticipate and divest themselves of office , whether to a new occupation
or to retire . The manner of this transition can depend on the way in which
they experienced the final phase of incumbency . The disenchanted face
the prospect of divestiture while the enchanted can look forward to
reinvention . 
Michael Ashford , a primary school headteacher of long experience , 
expresses what I mean by the latter possibility : 
When I came here I told the governors I ’ d give them ten years , because
it is such a big job . Last year I started to think about what I would do
when I became 55 .  .  . I probably thought I ought to move on and let
somebody else have a go at this job . But there is so much to do still 
.  .  . when I am 55 , I will say ‘ Right , thank you , I have got 30-odd years
in . I ’ ve got a reasonable pension , a nice home , things are OK .  ’ I ’ ll go
into some form of management training , if anybody wants me . If they
don ’ t I ’ ll be a gardener . Can you think of a better second occupation
for an educator ? 
Earlier in our discussion I had asked Ashford how he had prepared for
headship . He responded : 
I was an effective deputy .  .  . I worked incredibly hard , had a good
classroom and good relationships with the children , and tried to
68 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 68
manage things in a way which made sure everybody could operate
effectively . I attended the professional development course I thought
relevant to the curriculum I was working in but was never schooled
for headship in a formal course . 
By this he meant a degree , perhaps an MBA . Those seeking headship in
England and Wales today would be as likely to consider the programme
of courses currently offered through the National College for School
Leadership . It is with the attempt to develop a strategic programme of
courses for school leaders and with the contribution that this has made
to our understanding of the careers of school leaders that I will now turn . 
TOWARDS A STRATEGIC PROGRAMME FOR THE
DEVELOPMENT OF SCHOOL LEADERS
Many of the frameworks that have been proposed , especially within the
UK , have been related directly to ongoing attempts to devise a worthwhile
and comprehensive strategic approach to meeting the continuing
professional and management development needs of school teachers and
leaders . Achieving this has not been straightforward . The James
Committee as long ago as 1972 was the first public body to suggest that
an effective teaching profession would require initial and substantial
ongoing in-service training ( James Report , 1972 )  . Although , its ideas were
at the time largely ignored , they did exercise a significant influence upon
subsequent thinking and policy . 
Thus in 1974 the Advisory Committee on the Supply and Training of
Teachers put forward a five-phase , career-long , approach that was designed
to meet the continuing in-service needs of teachers ( induction , 
consolidation , reorientation , advanced training and refreshment )  . In the
late 1980s a School Management Task Force was set up to improve school
management in England and Wales . It also advocated a career-long
approach from initial training to retirement , with all teachers entitled to
be treated as managers and encouraged to widen their experience and
deepen their understanding of management at every stage . This entailed
a commitment to the provision of preparation and induction for all those
who were preparing to assume major new managerial responsibilities
rather than restricting this just to those who had already been appointed
to a headship ( Stayn , 1992 )  . 
After 1995 , under the leadership of the Teacher Training Agency ( TTA )  , 
things began to change . In its Initial Advice to the Secretary of State on
the Continuing Professional Development of Teachers the TTA ( 1995 ) 
proposed the development of agreed national standards setting targets for
career progression designed to establish clear and explicit expectations of
teachers in key roles . It wished to develop criteria for four key points in
the profession defined as Newly Qualified Teachers ; Expert Teachers ; 
Experts in Subject Leadership ; Experts in School Leadership . Whatever its
Biography and the study of school leader careers 69
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 69
limitations , the development and implementation of this framework is an
impressive effort . However that may be , this effort , impressive or not , did
not prevent the government from extracting responsibility for these
programmes from the TTA and passing them to the National College for
School Leadership . The ‘ Foreword ’ to the initial prospectus for the
proposed National College , signed by Tony Blair and David Blunkett , 
contains two paragraphs that seem dismissive of the efforts of the TTA , 
and earlier attempts , to produce an effective and comprehensive strategic
programme for the development of school leaders : 
The National College is among the most radical and innovative
proposals in our Teachers Green Paper . Rooted in outstanding practice , 
it will offer heads , deputies and other school leaders for the first time
the professional support and recognition they deserve .  .  . 
Up to now leadership development has lacked coherence , direction
and status . For the first time the college will provide a single national
focus for leadership development and research , offering school leaders
the quality support other professions take for granted .  
( DfEE , 1999 , p . 2 , emphases added )  . 
During its brief existence , the College has striven to produce a
comprehensive theoretical framework for leadership development ( NCSL , 
2001 )  . In doing so , it has proposed a model based upon five stages in a
school leader ’ s career . Around this model it intends to plan its future
provision : the stages are made up of emergent leadership , established
leadership , entry to headship , advanced leadership and consultant
leadership ( ibid .  , pp . 9–10 )  . It will be interesting to see how this ‘ new ’ 
approach will be interpreted and evaluated in practice . 
TOWARDS THE FUTURE
In this chapter I have attempted to consider the possibilities of
biographical and associated methods for enabling the development of a
better understanding of the careers of school leaders in general and of
headteachers in particular . In doing so I have examined a number of
models , including one of my own , that seek to identify the key stages
involved . In the previous part of the chapter I considered the role of a
number of national agencies and bodies in determining and seeking to
provide for the developmental needs of school leaders . In bringing my
remarks to a conclusion , I will focus upon the latest of these agencies , the
National College for School Leadership , and with some thoughts on the
possibilities and limitations of its efforts to date . 
Among its achievements over the last year , the college has as noted
above produced a five-stage model representing the career of a typical
schools leader . Although it is not evident how these stages were generated
70 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 70
or how they build upon the extant literature , in one important respect , 
the college does seem to have shown itself to be more willing than some
of its predecessors sometimes appeared to be to consider the place of
research in shaping how it thinks and in determining what it does . In
particular , it has supported financially and practically recent attempts to
develop a comprehensive map of the field of leadership ( Southworth , 
2002 ) against which it would be able , presumably , to locate its future
endeavours . Indeed , its five-stage framework may well represent an
attempt to play an active role in the development of such a map . All this
is to be welcomed , especially if , in interpreting its efforts , it shows a
sustained willingness to go beyond the narrowly instrumental and to
embrace the possibilities of the kinds of critical and humanistic
approaches that were discussed earlier ( see Ribbins and Gunter , 2003 )  . 
REFERENCES
Atkinson , R .  ( 1998 ) The Life Story Interview , London : Sage Publications . 
Bullough , R .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Musing on life writing : biography and case studies in teacher
education ’  , in C . Kridel ( ed .  )  , Writing Educational Biography , New York : 
Garland , pp . 9–33 . 
Day , C . and Bakioglu , A .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Development and disenchantment in the professional lives of headteachers ’  , in I . Goodson and A . Hargreaves ( eds )  , Teachers ’ 
Professional Lives , London : Falmer Press . 
Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  ( 1999 )  , National College for
School Leadership , London : DfEE . 
Earley , P .  , Baker , L . and Weindling , D .  ( 1990 ) Keeping the Raft Afloat : Secondary
Headship Five Years On , Slough : NFER . 
Erben , M .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Biography and research method ’  , in M . Erben ( ed .  )  , Biography
and Education : A Reader , London : Falmer Press , pp . 4–18 . 
Franklyn , M .  ( 1974 ) My Brilliant Career , Sydney : Angus and Robinson . 
Gabarro , J .  ( 1987 ) The Dynamics of Taking Charge , Boston : Harvard Business
School . 
Gardner , H .  ( 1995 ) Leading Minds : An Anatomy of Leadership , New York : Basic
Books . 
Goffman , E .  ( 1976 ) Asylums , Harmondsworth : Penguin . 
Gronn , P .  ( 1993 )  ‘ Psychobiography on the couch : character , biography and the
comparative study of leaders ’  , Journal of Applied Behavioural Science , 29 ( 3 )  , 
41–62 . 
Gronn , P .  ( 1999 ) The Making of Educational Leaders , London : Cassell . 
Gronn , P . and Ribbins , P .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Leaders in context ’  , Educational Administration
Quarterly , 32 ( 2 )  , 452–73 . 
Gronn , P . and Ribbins , P .  ( 2003 )  ‘ Evolving Formations ’ in International Studies in
Educational Administration , 31 ( 2 )  , forthcoming . 
Gunter , H . and Ribbins , P .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Leadership studies in education : towards a 
map of the field ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 31 ( 1 ) 
387–417 . 
Gunter , H . and Ribbins , P .  ( 2002a )  ‘ Challenging orthodoxy in school leadership
Biography and the study of school leader careers 71
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 71
studies : old maps for new directions ?  ’ Opening keynote given at the first meeting on ESRC seminar series on Challenging the Orthodoxy of School Leadership : 
Towards a new Theoretical Perspective , November , Warwick University . 
Hart , A .  ( 1993 ) Principal Succession : Establishing Leadership in Schools , New
York : SUNY Press . 
Hubermann , M .  ( 1993 ) The Lives of Teachers , London : Cassell . 
James Report ( 1972 ) Teacher Education and Training , London : HMSO . 
Kets de Vries , M .  ( 1993 ) Leaders , Fools and Impostors : Essays on the Psychology
of Leadership , San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Kets de Vries , M .  ( 1995 )  ‘ The leadership mystique , Leading and Managing , 1 ( 3 )  , 
193–211 . 
Miller , R .  ( 2000 ) Researching Life Stories and Family Histories , London : Sage
Publications . 
National College for School Leadership ( NCSL )  ( 2001 ) Leadership Development
Framework , Nottingham : NSCL . 
Oates , S .  ( 1991 ) Biography as History , Waco , TX : Mankham Press Fund . 
Osler , A .  ( 1997 ) The Education and Careers of Black Teachers , Buckingham : Open
University Press . 
Parkay , F . and Hall , G .  ( eds )  ( 1992 ) Becoming a Principal , Boston : Allyn 
& Bacon . 
Pashiardis , P . and Ribbins , P .  ( eds )  ( 2003 ) The Making of Secondary School
Principals on Selected Small Islands , a special edition of International Studies
in Educational Administration , 31 ( 2 )  . 
Pascal , C . and Ribbins , P .  ( 1998 ) Understanding Primary Headteachers , London : 
Cassell . 
Rayner , S . and Ribbins , P .  ( 1999 ) Headteachers and Leadership in Special
Education , London : Cassell . 
Ribbins , P .  ( 1997a )  ( ed .  ) Leaders and Leadership in the School , College and
University , London : Cassell . 
Ribbins , P .  ( 1997b )  ‘ Heads on deputy headship ’  , Educational Management and
Administration , 25 ( 3 )  , 295–308 . 
Ribbins , P . and Gunter , H .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Mapping leadership in education : towards a 
typology of knowledge domains ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 
30 ( 4 )  , 359–87 . 
Ribbins , P . and Gunter , H .  ( 2003 )  ‘ Leadership studies in education : maps for EPPI
reviews ?  ’  , in L . Anderson and N . Bennett ( eds ) Evidence Informed Policy and
Practice in Educational Leadership , London : Paul Chapman Publishing , in
press . 
Ribbins , P . and Marland , M .  ( 1994 ) Headship Matters , London : Longman . 
Southworth , G .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Mapping the field of school leadership ’  , draft paper from a
Seminar organised by the Standing Conference for Research in Educational
Leadership and Management , held at the University of Reading in December
2001 . 
Stayn , D .  ( 1991 )  ‘ Developing educational managers ’  , in P . Ribbins , R . Glatter , 
T . Simkins and L . Watson ( eds .  )  , Developing Educational Leaders , London : 
Longman , pp . 330–45 . 
Teacher Training Agency ( 1995 ) Initial Advice to the Secretary of State on the
Continuing Professional Development of Teachers , London : TTA . 
Usher , R .  ( 1998 )  ‘ The story of the self : education , experience and autobiography , 
72 Leadership in Education
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 72
in M . Erben ( ed .  )  , Biography and Education : A Reader , London : Falmer Press , 
pp . 18–32 . 
Weindling , D .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Stages of headship ’  , in T . Bush , L . Bell , R . Bolam , R . Glatter
and P . Ribbins ( eds )  , Educational Management : Redefining Theory , Policy and
Practice , London : Paul Chapman Publishing , pp . 90–102 . 
Weindling , D . and Earley , P .  ( 1987 ) Secondary Headship : The First Years , Windsor : 
NFER-Nelson . 
FURTHER READING . 
Bush , T .  , Bell , L .  , Bolam , R .  , Glatter , R . and Ribbins , P .  ( eds )  ( 1999 ) Educational
Management : Redefining Theory , Policy and Practice . London : Paul Chapman
Publishing . 
Gronn , P .  ( 1999 ) The Making of Educational Leaders , London : Cassell . 
Gunter , H . and Ribbins , P .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Leadership studies in education : towards a map
of the field ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 31 ( 1 )  , 387–417 . 
Pascal , C . and Ribbins , P .  ( 1998 ) Understanding Primary Headteachers , London : 
Cassell . 
Rayner , S . and Ribbins , P .  ( 1999 ) Headteachers and Leadership in Special
Education , London : Cassell . 
Ribbins , P . and Gunter , H .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Mapping leadership in education : towards a
typology of knowledge domains ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 
30 ( 4 )  , 359–387 . 
Pashiardis , P . and Ribbins , P .  ,  ( eds )  ( 2003 ) The Making of Secondary School
Principals , on Selected Small Islands , a special edition of International Studies
in Educational Administration , 31 ( 2 )  . 
Biography and the study of school leader careers 73
chap ter 4 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 10 : 16 pm Page 73
5
MODELS OF LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT : 
LEARNING FROM INTERNATIONAL
EXPERIENCE AND RESEARCH
Ray Bolam
INTRODUCTION
In many countries around the world , headteachers are widely perceived
to be critically important in achieving school effectiveness and
improvement and , as reforms designed to raise standards are introduced , 
their roles are changing significantly . As a result , policy-makers are
compelled to develop and modify their national training strategies to equip
headteachers and other school leaders with the knowledge and skills
required to carry out these changed roles . The relative commonality of
these trends raises the obvious question : are there any emerging national
models of how best to organise and deliver leadership development and
training from which policy-makers and practitioners in other countries
can learn ? 
The purpose of this chapter is to explore possible answers to this
question , and to clarify some of the underlying policy and professional
issues , by reviewing selected research and practical experience . It focuses
initially on the changing roles of school leaders and on the consequential
changes in leadership development programmes , using two detailed
vignettes – of Poland and of England and Wales – to demonstrate the
uniqueness of such programmes . The final section proposes a provisional , 
typological framework for the comparative analysis of international
models of leadership development and considers the relative difficulty of
adapting selected sub-models , using training methodology and needs
assessment as examples , from other countries . It concludes with some
suggestions for policy , practice and research . 
A few words about the chapter ’ s terminology and parameters are worth
stating at the outset . First , the terms principal and headteacher are used
74
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 74
more or less interchangeably and , second , with respect to the terms
leadership and management :  ‘ I take “ educational leadership ” to have at
its core the responsibility for policy formulation and , where appropriate , 
organisational transformation ; I take “ educational management ” to refer
to an executive function for carrying out agreed policy ; finally , I assume
that leaders normally also have some management responsibilities ’  
( Bolam , 1997 )  . Third , the working definition of leadership development
used here is that it is : 
• an ongoing process of education , training , learning and support activities
• taking place in either external or work-based settings
• proactively engaged in by qualified , professional teachers , headteachers
and other school leaders
• aimed primarily at promoting the learning and development of
professionally appropriate knowledge , skills and values
• to help school leaders to decide on and implement valued changes in
their leadership and management behaviour
• so that they can promote high quality education for their students more
effectively
• thus achieving an agreed balance between individual , school and
national needs . 
As we shall see in the final section , this definition is by no means
unproblematic or one that is widely adopted in practice . 
Fourth , the term ‘ model ’ is used somewhat loosely to refer primarily to
the overall national leadership development strategies and policies
adopted in any one country and the term sub-model to the components
of that model .  ‘ Model ’ is , thus , not intended to denote quality of an
exemplary nature and so , in principle , it can be either effective or
ineffective for achieving its purposes . Finally , space does not permit
consideration of several important issues , for example the training needs
of middle managers ( see Bush and Jackson , 2002 ; Turner , 2002 )  , leadership
development for particular types of school ( e . g .  , special schools – see
Rayner , Gunter and Powers , 2002 ) or gender and school management ( see
Hall , 1999 )  . 
CHANGING LEADERSHIP ROLES AND 
DEVELOPMENT NEEDS
There is now an extensive research literature on school effectiveness and
improvement within which , of the various factors cited as correlating with
educational achievement , strong leadership always figures prominently 
( e . g .  , Gray and Wilcox , 1995 ; Stoll and Mortimore , 1995 )  . However , given
that the concept of ‘ effectiveness ’ is problematic , not least because it is
Models of leadership development 75
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 75
rooted in specific national and cultural values , there can be no single
answer to the question : what is effective school leadership and
management ? Nevertheless , a considerable amount of research has been
published on the roles , tasks and training needs of headteachers , on school
culture and on strategies for school improvement , and there is broad
agreement about some main conclusions . For example , one study , based
on a sample of 57 schools in England and Wales ( Bolam et al .  , 1993 )  , 
concluded that effective schools are likely to display certain common
management features , including strong , purposive leadership by
headteachers ; broad agreement and consistency between headteachers and
teachers on school goals , values , mission and policy ; headteachers and
their deputies working as cohesive management teams ; a collaborative
professional and technical sub-culture ; norms of continuous improvement
for staff and students ; a leadership strategy which promotes the
maintenance and development of these and related features of the school ’ s
culture . In their essentials , these conclusions are consistent with those
from other developed countries ( e . g .  , van Wieringen , 1992 )  . However , by
way of caution , it is important to recognise that recent studies have also
concluded that the impact of principals and headteachers on student
outcomes , although positive , is indirect ( Hallinger and Heck , 1999 )  , being
mediated through a range of complex factors ( Silins and Mulford , in press )  . 
Moreover , some scholars ( e . g .  , Ouston , 1999 ) are doubtful about whether
the emphasis on the role of the headteacher in school effectiveness and
school improvement is warranted . 
There is considerable evidence that national reforms in many countries
have resulted in substantial changes in the roles of school principals . For
example , an Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
( OECD ) study of school management in nine countries – Belgium , Greece , 
Hungary , Japan , Mexico , Netherlands , Sweden , the UK and the USA –
argued that : 
Schools everywhere are being asked to do more than ever before . They
face a complex world and a seemingly endless set of pressures . Those
who manage schools must take responsibility for an arduous task .  [ This
can lead to a ]  .  .  . sense of crisis and despair that can easily affect
educational management .  .  . yet .  .  . school systems and individual
schools are experimenting with management .  
( CERI , 2001 , p . 13 ) 
Experience elsewhere is similar . For instance , in the United Arab Emirates 
( UAE )  , Al-Araj ( 1999 ) conducted a survey of 164 secondary headteachers
and interviewed a sub-sample which included deputy heads . Within a
highly centralised system the headteachers had limited power and
authority , acting mainly in an executive capacity to implement central
directives on work with a dominant administrative core . She concluded
that methods of headteacher selection were inappropriate , that deputies
76 Leadership in Education
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 76
were not being adequately prepared for headship and that headteachers
received inadequate in-service training . Wen-haur Shieh ( 2001 ) predicted
that the Integrated Curriculum Project , to be implemented in all schools
in Taiwan , would have huge impact on schools , on principals ’ role in the
change process and , therefore , on their training needs . 
Also writing from an Asian perspective , Cheng ( in press ) argued that
the changing role of education in national development has created serious
challenges for school leaders who must respond positively to changes in
the aims , content , process and practice of their schools . Two examples –
school-based management and community involvement – illustrate his
argument . In Hong Kong , Korea , Malaysia , Singapore and mainland China , 
there have been powerful moves towards varying degrees and forms of decentralisation and school-based management to facilitate school
development and effectiveness . School autonomy and the participation of
local community are now being encouraged and , although there is a
tradition of parental involvement in some developed countries , Cheng
argued that this tradition was largely absent in most Asian countries . 
A comparative study of the roles and training needs of a sample of new
headteachers in five European countries – Hungary , the Netherlands , 
Norway , Spain and Wales – produced findings in the same vein ( Bolam , 
Dunning and Karstanje , 2000 )  . About 700 new headteachers , all in their
first three years of service , responded to the survey in the mid-1990s . Their
evidence indicated that new headteachers everywhere in the ‘ new ’  , post1989 , Europe faced difficult challenges . Of course , some issues were
undoubtedly specific to each individual country , and even to each Spanish
region , in part because of differing political and cultural values , 
institutions and policy trends . Thus , in Hungary , the inheritance of
communism was still evident ; in Spain , the tradition of democratic
elections for school leaders and strong regional identities were powerfully
influential ; the Welsh language and culture were increasingly important
in Wales ; rurality and remoteness were major issues in Norway ; and the
increasing size and organisational complexity of schools , as well as
immigration , were particular factors in the Netherlands . 
Notwithstanding these national variations , three overall explanations
accounted for the majority of difficulties identified by the heads : the
complexity of their roles and tasks ; changing external pressures and
demands ; poor access to professional training , development and support , 
both before and after appointment . A clear picture of needs emerged . It
was evident that internal problems had greater impact than external
problems . Although ‘ consequences of national policy ’ was perceived as
having a high level of impact , in reality this issue tended to be an
underlying cause of a cluster of internal problems , since national policy
was promoting a package of changes in policy and practice . Interestingly , 
headteachers in all countries ( with the exception of two Spanish regions ) 
reported the most marked difference between their task priorities and
Models of leadership development 77
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 77
those of their predecessors as being a shift from ‘ concern for
administration ’ to ‘ concern for achievement of school goals ’ or the ‘ wellbeing of teachers and students ’  . This shift was interpreted as reflecting the
greater responsibility for educational developments now devolved to the
school level , usually as a consequence of greater school autonomy . This
was also the most likely explanation for the preponderance of selfmanagement problems in the lists of the highest-ranking internal
problems , notably ‘ managing own time ’ and ‘ coping with a wide range of
tasks ’  . 
Compared to most OECD countries , the approach in England and Wales
was noteworthy for the scale and scope of the post-1988 reform
programme , which covered all 27 , 000 schools , and for the shift towards
centralisation at a time when many other countries were introducing decentralising measures ( Karstanje , 1999 )  . The reforms inevitably resulted
in extensive and radical changes in the roles and responsibilities of
headteachers and other senior staff . From 1988 , headteachers were
required to have strategic leadership , planning , marketing , evaluation and
development skills ; to focus much more directly than hitherto on student
learning and assessment targets ; to operate as a quasi-chief executive in
relation to school governors ; to deal with and respond to external
inspections ; and to co-operate , as well as compete , with neighbouring
schools . 
These developments and issues were the focus of considerable research 
( Wallace and Weindling , 1999 )  . For instance , a unique , ten-year , 
longitudinal study ( see Weindling , 1999 ) offered insights into the
cumulative impact of the reform process on a cohort of British secondary
headteachers . In 1987 , 80 per cent of the sample said their role was very
different from when they had started the job in 1982 and , in 1993 , 90 per
cent said their role had continued to change significantly over the previous
five years . The main areas of difference concerned the introduction of local
management of schools , which had pushed finance-related issues up their
list of concerns , together with the other mandated changes . Interestingly , 
the European study found that Welsh heads were much more likely than
their counterparts in the Netherlands , Norway and Spain to see
government reforms as causing them substantial problems ( Dunning , 
2000 )  . 
Some commentators ( e . g .  , Clarke and Newman , 1997 ; Levac˘ic´ , 1999 ) 
have argued that the policies summarised above were adopted by many
governments across the public sector . Thus , reforms in health , social
services and housing , as well as education , have a common
technical / ideological core , often referred to as managerialism , rational
management or new public management . A comparative study of school
leadership in Denmark , Scotland , England and Australia ( Moos and
Dempster , 1998 ) concluded that , although the precise configuration and
the degree of implementation of such managerialist reforms had varied
78 Leadership in Education
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 78
from country to country , they had undoubtedly impacted , albeit
differentially , on school leadership in all four countries . 
THE IMPACT ON LEADERSHIP TRAINING AND
DEVELOPMENT
There is widespread acceptance that these , often radical and extensive , 
policy and role changes also impacted considerably on the training needs
of school principals , which in turn produced strategic shifts in national
policies for leadership development and training . Often , the rationale was
the one referred to by the Commonwealth Secretariat ( 1996 )  , with respect
to Africa , that ‘ the head plays .  .  . the most crucial role in ensuring school
effectiveness ’  . Responses to these changes were varied . The OECD study 
( CERI , 2001 , p . 21 ) concluded that there was a wide diversity of
approaches to leadership and management development in terms of
content , delivery mode , timing and institutional framework . Some
leadership preparation programmes were dominated by universities , 
notably in the USA , whereas others , for example in the UK , were
significantly influenced by practitioners , with considerable consequences
for the university sector ( Furlong , 2000 )  . Indeed , a comparative study of
preparation programmes in the UK and the USA concluded that there
were , in effect two parallel systems operating in England and Wales – in
universities and in the nationally funded programmes ( Brundrett , 2001 )  . 
Other countries have adopted a more balanced strategy . Supported by
Dutch government funding , the University of Amsterdam has pioneered a
method of integrating theory and practice , first in Hungary and the Czech
Republic , which was adapted in Romania ( NSO , 2001 )  . A consortium of
the Romanian principals ’ professional association and six universities put
together a team of trainers made up equally of practitioners and academics . 
They offer a nation-wide masters programme , aimed at enhancing
professional knowledge and skills , which will be 25 per cent field-based , 
including on-the-job coaching , and 25 per cent applied work within an
academic course framework . The Hungarian and Czech approaches had
been broadly similar . Interestingly , policy in China has also apparently
sought to integrate theory and practice by involving universities in
principal training ( Wenchang and Daming , 2002 )  . 
The dilemmas and challenges in formulating a national strategy for
leadership development are considerable and , inevitably , vary from
country to country , as do the solutions . Moreover , these features are
dynamic and thus change over time , as the following two detailed
examples illustrate . First , in Poland , the year 1989 was the crucial turning
point for the nation and , consequently , for headteacher training and
development . After 1989 , most of the many headteachers who had
previously been selected and trained according to Communist Party rules
Models of leadership development 79
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 79
were replaced . This posed two major problems : quantitatively , how to
organise and pay for the training of the 50 , 000 new heads and deputy
heads across the country ; qualitatively , how to develop the right
programme . Four important contextual factors were among the changes : 
from the role of headteacher as bureaucrat to autonomous professional ; 
from a national curriculum for headteacher training to regional curricula ; 
from theoretical to practical courses ; from top-down to bottom-up needs
assessment . 
In 1990 , 49 regional centres for teacher and headteacher training were
established , taking as their starting points the earlier external in-service
courses , which had led to a diploma : 
• for new heads and deputies – two , one-week courses , interspersed with
10 days ’ shadowing of experienced heads , and assessed by a written
essay
• for experienced heads and deputies – 30 days of lectures over one year
culminating in a written examination and a thesis . 
Elsner ’ s account is based on one of them , the Katowice Centre , of which
she was director and where alternative approaches were developed in
response to the criticism that the diploma programme was too theoretical . 
The centre set up a Headteachers ’ Club where experienced heads held
monthly meetings for their own self-development and to help new
colleagues . A newsletter on school management issues was circulated to
over 2 , 000 schools in Upper Silesia and a prestigious competition was
held to find the most creative approaches to the management of change , 
as judged by a panel of experts . By 1991 , this club had evolved into a
formally recognised professional association for primary and secondary
headteachers . 
Ekiert-Grabowska and Elsner ( 1993 ) referred to the continuing lack of
trust between professional educators , including headteachers and
teachers , which was a legacy of the totalitarian regime . As a result , 
headteachers were very reluctant to be open about their own training and
development needs and new ways of encouraging them to be frank had
to be devised , trialled and modified . They reported on a survey of 34
headteachers , based on 27 competency statements , in which the selfperceived weaknesses were seen as time management , creative problemsolving , budgeting and managing change and the strengths as being
negotiation and conflict resolution , collaboration with parents and
creating a positive climate . 
These findings were then used as the basis for programme design
although the writers said that , in reality , they learned little that was new . 
Even though the response rate was higher than hitherto , the headteachers
did not display any initiatives and appeared to want to be told what to
learn and even how to learn it . Similar behaviour patterns were revealed
for lecturers and trainers . The writers concluded that this was to be
80 Leadership in Education
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 80
expected , given the long history of totalitarian rule and the continuing
hierarchical structures within which schools continued to operate , and
that it would take time to change people ’ s beliefs and behaviour . 
Accordingly , they decided to train the lecturers and trainers on their own , 
using technology and distance learning materials adapted from abroad , 
especially from England . 
Oldroyd ( 1993 ) described these materials and their underlying rationale . 
He argued that intermediate technology is more appropriate than high
technology in former communist countries where resources are in short
supply and there is a weak infrastructure to support training across the
country . Furthermore , what schools need in such circumstances is a
support strategy that will enable them to create and sustain change from
within . He saw low cost , distance learning materials that promote action
learning and collaborative reflection , via purpose-designed academic
materials , as the way forward . 
The second example concerns England and Wales where a distinctive
leadership development system now operates . This system is best
understood in the context of wider policy developments over a period of
about 20 years . During this time there was research and experimentation
with different forms of organisation , funding and provision for in-service
training for teachers in general and for school management training in
particular ( see Bolam , 1997 ) and a distinctive and supportive professional
infrastructure emerged , key features of which are as follows . Two
headteachers ’ unions ( the National Association for Headteachers and the
Secondary Heads Association ) have , for many years , been active in
promoting and delivering training and development programmes for
headteachers . The Universities ’ Council for the Education and Training of
Teachers ( UCET ) has also been active in this field for many years . The
National Foundation for Educational Research has carried out numerous
relevant studies . The British Educational Research Association has
published and disseminated relevant research . The British Educational
Leadership , Management and Administration Society ( BELMAS ) has
actively promoted networking and the dissemination of information , 
sought to influence government policy , organised national and
international conferences for policy-makers , headteachers , academics , 
consultants and researchers , promoted research and published articles and
books in this field . Most recently , a General Teaching Council was
established in each of England and Wales , the equivalent one for Scotland
having been in place for some years , to strengthen the professionalism of
teachers and headteachers . 
Against this background , in the mid-1990s , the Teacher Training Agency
introduced a comprehensive structure for leadership development with
three components – preparation , induction and in-service training . The
first is covered by the National Professional Qualification for Headship 
( NPQH ) and the third by the Leadership Programme for Serving
Models of leadership development 81
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 81
Headteachers ( LPSH )  . The second is covered by the recently reviewed
HEADLAMP Programme in England and by the Professional Headship
Induction Programme ( PHIP ) in Wales . All three are now co-ordinated by
the National College for School Leadership ( NCSL ) which has formulated
a Leadership Development Framework ( NCSL , 2002 ; Newton , Chapter 6
in this volume ) encompassing five stages : 
• emergent leadership , which includes subject and specialist leadership
roles
• established leadership , comprising experienced deputy and assistant
heads who do not wish to be headteachers
• entry into headship , which embraces the revised HEADLAMP
programme and NPQH
• advanced leadership , for heads with four or more years ’ experience
• consultant leadership . 
Thus , over a generation , what is possibly the most comprehensive and
sophisticated school leadership development model in the world has been
gradually , and incrementally , developed in the unique circumstances of
England and Wales . In sharp contrast to the Polish experience , this system
is a high cost one : for example , the NCSL ’ s annual budget is £60 million 
( NCSL , 2002 , p . 26 )  . 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter ’ s central argument is that the roles of school leaders and
models of preparatory training , certification , selection , evaluation and
professional development are necessarily rooted in the particular context
of a single country . They are the product of unique , and dynamically
changing , sets of circumstances – political , economic , social , cultural , 
historical , professional and technical – in that country . It follows that those
of us seeking to learn and adapt from international experience must be
cautious . This is also true when trying to learn from international theory
and research , as two Hong Kong-based writers ( Walker and Dimmock , in
press ) argue : 
The field is also constrained by an overreliance on theories and
practices predominantly developed by a relatively culturally
homogeneous cadre of scholars from English-speaking backgrounds . 
Our salient argument .  .  . is that societal culture is a significant
influence on school organization and leadership in different societies
because it helps shape school leaders ’ thoughts about concepts such as
leadership , followership , communication and learning and teaching . 
As well as , one might add , leadership development . 
Attempts to promote international understanding about such matters
82 Leadership in Education
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 82
must take seriously what we know from experience and research about
complex innovations across cultures ( Hallinger , 2001 )  . The process of
devising , adapting and implementing new models of leadership
development may usefully be conceptualised as a complex innovation
consisting of several components and , thus , it may be more productive to
recognise that national leadership training and development models
actually are each made up of several sub-models . Building on earlier
approaches ( e . g .  , Bolam , 1992 ; Bush and Jackson , 2002 ; CERI , 1982 ; 2001 )  , 
the following list of key issues and questions provides the basis of a
typological framework to analyse the main sub-models within any national
model : 
• Does leadership development for headteachers include preparatory , 
induction and in-service components ? Are other leadership roles covered ( e . g .  , subject leaders )  ? What are their broad features ( e . g .  , how
many hours / weeks do they take )  ?  ( The scope sub-model ) 
• Are the programmes compulsory ? Do they carry accreditation and , if
so , from whom ( e . g .  , university , government , professional associations )  ?  
( The regulatory framework sub-model ) 
• How are they funded ( e . g .  , nationally , locally , by individual grants or
loans to principals , by requiring principals to contribute money or
time )  ? How large is the budget ?  ( The funding sub-model ) 
• How are they co-ordinated ( e . g .  , by government , by a national college , 
by universities )  ?  ( The organisational sub-model ) 
• How are development and training needs established ? Is the process
linked to performance management and / or national standards ? What
concept of professional leadership underpins these procedures ?  ( The
needs identification sub-model ) 
• How are programmes evaluated and held accountable ?  ( The evaluation
and accountability sub-models ) 
• Who are the providers or suppliers ( e . g .  , national and local
administrators and inspectors , consortia , universities , professional
associations ,  ‘ privatised ’ agencies and consultants )  ? Do they have the
capacity to ‘ deliver ’  ?  ( The suppliers sub-model ) 
• What are the main content areas of training programmes ( e . g .  , 
leadership , communication , curriculum )  ? What part does theory play ?  
( The curriculum sub–model ) 
• What methods do they use ( e . g .  , course-based training , work-based
training , mentoring , internships , industrial attachments )  ? What role is
played by information and communications technology and e-learning ?  
( The methodology sub-models ) 
Space does not permit detailed consideration of each of these sub-models
but it is surely the case that some are easier to adapt than others , as can
be illustrated in relation to two of them . The methodology sub-model is
Models of leadership development 83
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 83
made up of components that provoke relatively few of those resistance
problems which are based on conflicts of values and attitudes and which
can be critical barriers to successful implementation . Thus , mentoring can
be relatively easily adapted from one setting – England and Wales ( Bolam
et al .  , 1995 ) – to another – Singapore ( Low , 2001 ) – and e-learning is being
used in leadership programmes across the world ( NCSL website ; 
Tomlinson 2001 )  . On the other hand , the needs identification sub-model
is highly complex and generates difficult issues that are often culture
specific , as demonstrated below . 
One fundamental issue concerns the underlying rationale and goals of
national programmes . It is clear from earlier parts of this chapter that
models of leadership development are often being devised in political
contexts in which external ,  ‘ restructuring ’ changes , initiated by national , 
state or local authorities to raise standards of achievement , exert priority
over school leaders ’ own vision of needed improvements . Moreover , many
developed countries use the same broad ‘ steering ’ strategies , often based
on dedicated or categorical funding , to couple leadership development
tightly to the implementation of their reform policies in what is now the
dominant paradigm for systemic change in OECD member countries 
( Halasz , 2000 )  . The implications for needs identification are evident . 
A second issue concerns the underlying concept , or theory , of
leadership that informs needs identification . My own position is that
contingency , situational or pluralist theories of leadership ( see Bush , 1995 , 
p . 154 ) are the most useful for describing and explaining the behaviour of
leaders . Essentially these argue that , empirically , there appears to be no
single or ‘ correct ’ way either to lead or structure an organisation since the 
 ‘ leaders ’  , the ‘ led ’ and the organisation itself each have distinctive , even
unique , characteristics , as do the tasks of leadership and management , in
what is invariably a changing , turbulent environment . Given the
unavoidably contingent and unpredictable nature of their work , effective
leaders and managers must necessarily , therefore , adopt strategies and
methods consistent with their own knowledge and skills , and appropriate
to their particular organisations , tasks , staff and contexts – institutional , 
local and national . The practical consequence is that they must learn and
use a repertoire of styles and techniques and exercise informed
professional judgement to operate effectively within the constraints and
opportunities of their unique situation ( see Bolman and Deal , 1997 )  . The
implications for a training and development programme are obvious . 
However , if the quite different position is taken that headteachers must
behave according to external prescription , for example , that they should
lead and manage their schools to implement centrally determined policies
and programmes or , alternatively , that they should aim to be 
 ‘ transformational ’ or ‘ instructional ’ leaders or to promote ‘ distributed ’ 
leadership , then quite different implications follow for needs
identification and thus , of course , for programme design and content . 
84 Leadership in Education
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 84
A third key issue concerns the extent to which the definition of
leadership development either implicit or explicit in a programme or
model is linked to a notion of being a professional educator . An important
rider to the working definition presented in the Introduction is that : 
The notion of appropriateness must itself be based on shared and
public value judgements about the needs and best interests of their
clients .  .  . The essence of professional development for educators must
surely involve the learning of an independent , evidence-informed and
constructively critical approach to practice within a public framework
of professional values and accountability , also open to critical scrutiny .  
( Bolam , 2000 , p . 272 ) 
The position taken on professional values in any overall model of
leadership development can have profound practical consequences for
needs identification . For example , it is notable that the Scottish national
scheme , unlike the English NPQH , takes professional values as its starting
point . The first standard is called ‘ Professional Values ’ and requires
headteachers :  ‘ to hold , articulate and argue for professionally defensible
educational values .  .  . based on the professional obligations of
headteachers to serve the interests of children and young people in
schools ’  .  ( SQH Development Unit , 1998 , p . 4 )  . The implications for the
implementation of a work-based training programme for school leaders in
Scotland are well described by Reeves et al .  ( 2001 ) 
A fourth issue concerns the extent to which an overall model is based
on national standards , as has been the case in England ( TTA , 1998 ) where
they are integrated closely with a wider system of national standards for
all teachers and , most recently , with a new system of performance
management and performance-related pay . The latter is based on five key
career milestones : preparation for initial qualification , induction for
beginning teachers , a career stage reaching a performance threshold for
most teachers , advanced skills teachers who must first pass the
performance threshold and headship . Each stage uses competency-style
standards and various forms of appraisal or assessment to measure
performance and is linked to the pay structure ( DfEE , 2000 )  . These
developments are by no means unique to Britain . Thus , the USA has
developed inter-state standards for principals ( Murphy , Yff and Shipman , 
2000 ) but these are far from being controversial even in one country ( see
Waite , 2002 )  . A needs identification process tied closely to such standards
and performance management structures will obviously take on a different
character to one that is not . 
In conclusion , what broad lessons can be drawn from this analysis ? For
policy-makers and practitioners the main one is to be cautious and
circumspect in seeking to adapt from international experience . More
specifically , it is to support the approach of those who seek to adapt
selectively from international experience . Assessing the relevance of subModels of leadership development 85
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 85
models will almost certainly be of greater potential value than assessing
the overall model operating in any particular country . The reason is both
simple and common sense : the more complex overall model is much more
likely to be the product of the specific culture in which it operates , as
illustrated by the Polish and British vignettes , and , therefore , much less
easy to import , or indeed adapt , to another country . However , as the case
of needs identification illustrates , even sub-models can be highly
problematic . The most difficult task is to assess the value of the precise
configuration of sub-components which go to make up the overall model
of leadership development in any one country . In England these include
the National College , the three main stages of training – preparatory , 
induction and in-service – the national standards and the emphasis on elearning . One important potential contribution for researchers is to
conduct comparative research and development studies designed to
address these issues and to produce practical guidelines to illustrate the
strengths and weaknesses of the overall model , and the possibilities for
adaptation of their associated training strategies , approaches and methods . 
A more refined typological framework , perhaps building on the one
outlined above , would be an important first step in this process . 
REFERENCES
Al-Araj , F . M . S .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Selection and training of secondary school headteachers in
the UAE ’  , unpublished PhD thesis , Cardiff University : School of Social Sciences . 
Bolam , R .  ( 1992 )  ‘ Curricula in educational management ’  , in A . M . L . van Wieringen 
( ed .  )  , Training for Educational Management in Europe , Die Lier : Academic
Book Centre . 
Bolam , R .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Management development for headteachers : retrospect and
prospect ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 25 ( 3 )  , 265–83 . 
Bolam , R .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Emerging policy trends : some implications for continuing professional development ’  , Journal of In-service Education , 26 ( 2 )  , 267–79 . 
Bolam , R .  , Dunning , G . and Karstanje , P .  ( eds )  ( 2000 ) New Headteachers in the New
Europe , Munster and New York : Waxman Verlag . 
Bolam , R .  , McMahon , A .  , Pocklington , K . and Weindling , R .  ( 1993 ) Effective
Management in Schools , London : HMSO . 
Bolam , R .  , McMahon , A .  , Pocklington , K . and Weindling , R .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Mentoring for
new headteachers : the British experience ’  , Journal of Educational
Administration , 33 ( 5 )  , 29–44 . 
Bolman , L , G .  , and Deal , T . E .  ( 1997 )  . Reframing Organizations : Artistry , Choice , and
Leadership ,  ( 2nd ed ,  )  , San Francisco , CA : Jossey-Bass . 
Brundrett , M .  ( 2001 )  ‘ The development of school leadership preparation programmes in England and the USA ’  , Educational Management and
Administration , 29 ( 2 )  , 229–45 . 
Bush , T .  ( 1995 ) Theories of Educational Management ,  ( 2nd edn )  , London : Paul
Chapman Publishing . 
Bush , T . and Jackson , D .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Preparation for school leadership : international
86 Leadership in Education
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 86
perspectives ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 30 ( 4 )  , 417–30 . 
Centre for Educational Research and Innovation ( CERI )  ( 1982 ) In-service Education
and Training of Teachers : A Condition for Educational Change , Paris : OECD . 
Centre for Educational Research and Innovation ( CERI )  ( 2001 ) New School
Management Approaches , Paris : OECD . 
Cheng , Y . C .  ( in press )  ‘ The changing context of school leadership : implications for
a paradigm shift ’  , in K . Leithwood and P . Hallinger ( eds )  , The Second
International Handbook of Research on Educational Leadership and
Administration , Dordrecht : Kluwer . 
Clarke , J . and Newman , J .  ( 1997 ) The Managerial State , London : Sage Publications . 
Commonwealth Secretariat ( 1996 ) Better Schools : Resource Materials for Heads : 
Introductory Module , London : Commonwealth Secretariat . 
Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  ( 2000 ) Professional
Development : Support for Teaching and Learning , London : DfEE . 
Dunning , G .  ( 2000 )  ‘ New heads in Wales ’  , in R . Bolam , G . Dunning and P . Karstanje 
( eds )  , New Headteachers in the New Europe , Munster and New York : Waxman
Verlag . 
Ekiert-Grabowska , D . and Elsner , D .  ( 1993 )  ‘ Barriers to effective headteacher development ’  , in K . Hamalainen and F . van Wieringen ( eds )  , Reforming Educational
Management in Europe , Die Lier : Academisch Boeken Centrum . 
Furlong , J .  ( 2000 ) Higher Education and the New Professionalism for Teachers : 
Realising the Potential of Partnership , London : CVCP . 
Gray , J . and Wilcox , B .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Good School , Bad School ’  : Evaluating Performance
and Encouraging Improvement , Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Halasz , G .  ( 2000 )  ‘ System regulation changes in education and their implications
for management development ’  , unpublished keynote paper for the Annual
Conference of the European Network for the Improvement of Research and
Development in Educational Management ( ENIRDEM )  , 23 September , Tilburg
University , Netherlands . 
Hall , V .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Gender and education management : dual or dialogue ?  ’  , in T . Bush , 
L . Bell , R . Bolam , R . Glatter and P . Ribbins ( eds )  , Educational Management : Redefining Theory , Policy and Practice , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Hallinger , P .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Leading educational change in East Asian schools ’  , 
International Studies in Educational Administration , 29 ( 2 )  , 61–72 . 
Hallinger , P . and Heck , R .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Can leadership enhance school effectiveness ?  ’  , 
in T . Bush , L . Bell , R . Bolam , R . Glatter and P . Ribbins ( eds )  , Educational
Management : Re-defining Theory , Policy and Practice , London : Paul Chapman
Publishing . 
Karstanje , P .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Decentralisation and deregulation in Europe : towards a conceptual framework ’  , in T . Bush , L . Bell , R . Bolam , R . Glatter and P . Ribbins 
( eds )  , Educational Management : Re-defining Theory , Policy and Practice , 
London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Levac˘ic´ , R .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Managing resources for school effectiveness in England and
Wales : institutionalising a rational approach ’  , in R . Bolam and A . M . L . van
Wieringen ( eds )  , Research on Educational Management in Europe , Munster
and New York : Waxmann . 
Low , G . T .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Preparation of aspiring principals in Singapore ; a partnership
model ’  , International Studies in Educational Administration , 29 ( 2 )  , 30–37 . 
Moos , L . and Dempster , N .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Some comparative learnings from the study ’  , in
Models of leadership development 87
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 87
J . MacBeath ( ed )  , Effective School Leadership : Responding to Change , London : 
Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Murphy , J .  , Yff , J . and Shipman , N .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Implementation of the inter-state 
leaders ’ licensure consortium standards ’  , International Journal in Educational
Leadership in Education , 3 ( 1 )  , 17–39 . 
National College for School Leadership website :  . 
National College for School Leadership ( NCSL )  ( 2002 ) Corporate Plan 2002 / 06 , 
Nottingham : NCSL . 
Netherlands School of Educational Management ( NSO )  ( 2001 )  ‘ Transformation of
educational management in Romania : School Managers Training Programme ’  , 
Amsterdam : NSO , University of Amsterdam ( mimeo )  . 
Oldroyd , D .  ( 1993 )  ‘ School-based management development : an “ intermediate
technology ” for the self-managing school ’  , in R . Bolam and A . M . L . van
Wieringen ( eds )  , Educational Management across Europe , Die Lier : Academisch
Boeken Centrum . 
Ouston , J .  ( 1999 )  ‘ School effectiveness and school improvement : critique of a
movement ’  , in T . Bush , L . Bell , R . Bolam , R . Glatter and P . Ribbins ( eds )  , 
Educational Management : Re-defining Theory , Policy and Practice , London : 
Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Rayner , S .  , Gunter , H . and Powers , S .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Professional development needs for
leaders in special education ’  , Journal of In-service Education , 28 ( 1 )  , 79–94 . 
Reeves , J .  , Casteel , V .  , Morris , B . and Barry , P .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Testing a standard for headship : outcomes from the initial evaluation of the Scottish Qualification for
Headship Programme ’  , International Studies in Educational Administration , 
29 ( 2 )  , 38–49 . 
SQH Development Unit ( 1998 ) The Standard for Headship in Scotland , Stirling : 
University of Stirling , Institute of Education . 
Silins , H . and Mulford , B .  ( in press )  ‘ Leadership and school results ’  , in K . Leithwood
and P . Hallinger ( eds )  , Second International Handbook of Research on
Educational Leadership and Administration , Dordrecht : Kluwer . 
Stoll , L . and Mortimore , P .  ( 1995 )  ‘ School effectiveness and school improvement : 
viewpoint 2 ’  , London : Institute of Education , University of London ( mimeo )  . 
Teacher Training Agency ( TTA )  ( 1998 ) National Standards for Headteachers , 
London : TTA . 
Tomlinson , H .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Leadership development and e-learning ’  , Management in
Education , 15 ( 5 )  , 6–10 . 
Turner , C .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Subject heads of department in secondary schools in Wales : 
improving the standards of teaching and learning ’  , unpublished PhD thesis , 
Cardiff : Cardiff University , School of Social Sciences . 
van Wieringen , A . M . L .  ( ed )  ( 1992 ) Training for Educational Management in Europe , 
Die Lier : Academic Book Centre . 
Waite , D .  ( 2002 )  ‘ The “ Paradigm Wars ” in educational administration : an attempt
at transcendence ’  , International Studies in Educational Administration , 301 ( 1 )  , 
66–81 . 
Walker , A . and Dimmock , C .  ( in press )  ‘ Moving school leadership beyond its narrow boundaries : developing a cross-cultural approach ’  , in K . Leithwood and P . 
Hallinger ( eds )  , The Second International Handbook of Research on Educational
Leadership and Administration , Dordrecht : Kluwer . 
Wallace , M . and Weindling , D .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Overview of a group of research projects
with relevance to school management ’  , in T . Bush , L . Bell , R . Bolam , R . Glatter
88 Leadership in Education
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 88
and P . Ribbins ( eds )  , Educational Management : Re-defining Theory , Policy and
Practice , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Weindling , D .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Stages of headship ’  , in T . Bush , L . Bell , R . Bolam , R . Glatter
and P . Ribbins ( eds )  , Educational Management : Re-defining Theory , Policy and
Practice , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Wenchang , L . and Daming , F .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Principal training in China : models , problems
and prospects ’  , International Studies in Educational Administration , 29 ( 2 )  , 
13–19 . 
Wen-haur , Shieh ( 2001 )  ‘ Implications of site-based curriculum reform for principals ’ change leadership development ’  , in L . Wen-liuh Lin ( ed ) International
Conference on School Leader , Preparation , Licensure / Certification , Selection , 
Evaluation and Professional Development , Taipeh : National Taipeh Teachers ’ 
College . 
FURTHER READING . 
Bolam , R .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Management development for headteachers : retrospect and
prospect ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 25 ( 3 )  , 265–83 . 
Bolam , R .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Emerging policy trends : some implications for continuing professional development ’  , Journal of In-service Education , 26 ( 2 )  : 267–79 . 
Bolam , R .  , Dunning , G . and Karstanje , P .  ( eds )  ( 2000 ) New Headteachers in the New
Europe , Munster and New York : Waxman Verlag . 
Bolam , R .  , McMahon , A .  , Pocklington , K . and Weindling , R .  ( 1993 ) Effective
Management in Schools , London : HMSO . 
Bolam , R .  , McMahon , A .  , Pocklington , K . and Weindling , R .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Mentoring for
new headteachers : the British experience ’  , Journal of Educational
Administration , 33 ( 5 )  : 29–44 . 
Bolman , L , G .  , and Deal , T . E .  ( 1997 ) Reframing organizations : Artistry , choice , and
leadership , 2nd edn , San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Brundrett , M .  ( 2001 )  ‘ The development of school leadership preparation programmes in England and the USA ’  , Educational Management and
Administration , 29 ( 2 )  , 229–45 . 
Brundrett , M .  ( 1999 ) Beyond Competence : the Challenge for Educational
Management , Dereham : Peter Francis . 
Murphy , J .  ( 1992 ) The Landscape of Leadership Preparation : Reframing the
Education of School Administrators , Newbury Park , CA : Corwin Press . 
Murphy , J . and Forsyth , P . B .  ( eds )  ( 1999 ) Educational Administration : A Decade of
Reform , Thousand Oaks , CA : Corwin Press . 
Models of leadership development 89
chapter 5 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 89
6
THE NATIONAL COLLEGE FOR SCHOOL 
LEADERSHIP : ITS ROLE IN DEVELOPING 
LEADERS
Peter Newton
INTRODUCTION
Unlike the USA , systematic leadership and management development for
schools in the UK has a comparatively short history . It was , nonetheless , 
as long ago as the 1960s when the first calls were made for the provision
of more systematic training of headteachers . The intervening years have
seen the construction and elaboration of school leadership programmes
by higher education institutions and , more recently ,  ‘ national programmes ’ 
under the direction of government organisations . It was , however , only in
the late 1990s that the decision was made by the UK government to
establish a National College for School Leadership that would take a
strategic overview of leadership training and would seek to develop a 
 ‘ coherent national framework ’  ( DfEE , 1999 , p . 4 ) for school leadership
programmes . 
This chapter outlines briefly the growing calls for a more synchronous
and planned approach to leadership training and development , 
culminating in the creation of the National College itself . The chapter then
proceeds to elucidate the vision that now underpins the college ’ s plans
for future developments in the field . 
THE CALL FOR MORE SYSTEMATIC TRAINING AND
DEVELOPMENT OF HEADTEACHERS AND THE CREATION
OF THE NATIONAL COLLEGE FOR SCHOOL LEADERSHIP
The Plowden Report ( 1967 )  , which influenced so much of the English
education system for the period of a generation , was one of the first
90
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 90
governmentally inspired documents to state that there was inadequate
provision of training courses to prepare either prospective headteachers
or deputy headteachers for their future duties . The importance of the
availability of in-service training to teachers in schools throughout their
careers in order to produce a high-performance teaching force was
subsequently recognised in the James Report ( DES , 1972 )  . 
Almost coterminous with these developments , the idea of management
development was probably first applied to education in this country by
Glatter ( 1972 )  , and by the mid-1970s Lyons ( 1976 ) began to provide an
accurate picture of the various aspects of school management . By the early
1980s two key studies by Lloyd ( 1981 ) and Nias ( 1981 ) revealed that
schools could be managed successfully using very divergent styles of
leadership and made plain the pivotal role of headteachers in developing
the ‘ ethos ’ of a school . With this growing body of knowledge about the
nature of headship and its centrality in developing the very nature of the
school as an organisation it is perhaps not surprising that it was at this
juncture that the largely ignored recommendations of the Plowden Report
about the need for systematic training of school leaders were taken up
once again . For instance Wood ( 1982 ) made a strong case for such
enhanced training opportunities to be created and , in particular , he
advised that a ‘ training college ’ for heads should be created . Wood argued
for a course which was ‘ something unique , and new , and explicitly
designed to meet an identified need ’  ( ibid .  , p . 288 )  . 
An exegesis of the subsequent progress in school leadership training
and development in agencies including higher education , local education
authorities ( LEAs ) and by national government has been offered by a
number of scholars ( see , for instance , Bolam , 1997 ; Brundrett , 1999 )  . The
arrival of the first ‘ national programmes ’ that found specific government
imprimatur came with the Headteachers ’ Leadership and Management
Programme ( HEADLAMP )  ( TTA , 1995 )  ; soon to be followed by the
National Professional Qualification for Headship ( NPQH )  ( TTA , 1997a ) 
and the Leadership Programme for Serving Headteachers ( LPSH )  ( TTA , 
1998 )  . With the construction of these three programmes , originally under
the aegis of the Teacher Training Agency , England and Wales had , for the
first time , a clear set of systematic training programmes for the
development of school leaders from aspirant to highly experienced
headteachers . 
It was not , however , until the White Paper , Teachers Meeting the
Challenge of Change ( HMSO , 1998 ) that the government expressed its
intention of taking the step of establishing a national college to address
the development needs of school leaders , the vision for which was set out
in an ensuing initial prospectus ( DfEE , 1999 )  . 
In November 2002 the Prime Minister , Tony Blair , subsequently
launched the National College for School Leadership . The creation of the
college demonstrates the government ’ s commitment to improving
The National College for School Leadership 91
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 91
leadership in education . This commitment has grown from an increasing
recognition that the quality of leadership in schools is directly responsible
for the quality of educational outcomes for pupils . The evidence for what
is now taken as common sense can be found scattered liberally throughout
the educational press . The government challenged the college to make
itself :  ‘ a driving force for world class leadership in our schools ’  ( DfEE , 
1999 , p . 3 )  . To this end the college has been set four main targets : 
• To provide a single focus for school leadership development and
research . 
• To be a driving force for world class leadership in our schools and the
wider education service . 
• To be a provider and promoter of excellence ; a major resource for
schools and a catalyst for innovation . 
• To stimulate national and international debate on leadership issues 
( NCSL , 2002a , p . 9 )  . 
The college is now housed on a £25 million state of the art conference
centre , which was completed on the Jubilee Campus at the University of
Nottingham , in the summer of 2002 . From this conference centre the
college will run headship training programmes , short skills programmes , 
its virtual presence and research-led learning . 
Richard Greenhalgh , Chairman of Unilever , and Chair of the Governing
Council of the college said in his introduction to the college ’ s Corporate
Plan :  ‘ We know from other sectors – both business and public – that in
changing organisations , the difference between success and failure is often
the quality of the leadership .  ’ His aspiration for the college was that , by
the year 2006 , it would be :  ‘ a world class leadership centre , recognised
internationally both inside and outside education ’  ( NCSL , 2002a , p . 5 )  . 
The UK Prime Minister , Tony Blair , was also in no doubt about the
importance of the initiative : 
leadership and vision are crucial to raising standards and aspirations
across our nation ’ s schools .  .  . We cannot leave them to chance .  .  . our
best heads are superb – but we need more of them – and that means
offering them the best available training ; the chance to share their
experience of what works ; the opportunity to learn from the best in
leadership whether in the public or private sectors in this country or
abroad ; and time for reflection , refreshment and inspiration .  
( DfEE , 1999 , p . 2 ) 
This clear goal setting and reaffirmation of support from the highest levels
of government has been extremely important in ensuring that the college
has been enabled to progress swiftly with it strategic plan for the
development of school leadership . These plans are embodied in the
Leadership Development Framework ( NCSL , 2001a ) produced after wide
consultation with all sectors of the educational community . 
92 Leadership in Education
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 92
THE LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK
In October 2001 the college launched a new leadership framework ( NCSL , 
2001a )  , offering it to the profession for consultation . The framework is a
comprehensive plan to ensure a coherent programme of training and
development throughout the career of a school leader . The framework
came about as a result of considerable consultation with many thousands
of school leaders and many hundreds of key organisations . Heather Du
Quesnay , Chief Executive and Director of the college has said :  ‘ this
framework is designed to be the backbone for leadership development in
this country ’ s schools . We want it to form a coherent and flexible whole
which will make a real difference to our education system .  ’  ( NCSL ,  
( 2001a )  . 
The underpinning educational principles for the framework came about
as a result of extensive work by a think tank , led by the then Professor of
Education at the University of Nottingham , David Hopkins ( see NCSL , 
2001a , p . 4–6 )  . The think tank , with extensive , national and international
representation , helped the college to conceptualise its work . The think
tank generated ten propositions around the nature of school leadership , 
principles of learning underpinning those propositions and
recommendations as to the characteristics of any activity that should sit
within a leadership development framework . 
The ten school leadership propositions run as follows . School
leadership must : 
• be purposeful , inclusive and values driven
• embrace the distinctive and inclusive context of the school
• promote an active view of learning
• be instructionally focused
• be a function that is distributed throughout the school community
• build capacity by developing the school as a learning community
• be futures orientated and strategically driven
• be developed through experiential and innovative methodologies
• be served by a support and policy context that is coherent and
implementation driven
• be supported by a national college that leads the discourse around
leadership for learning ( NCSL , 2001a , p . 4 )  . 
The implications of this work for the college are many . A clear link is
made between research about high-quality learning and the leadership
curriculum . At the same time the needs of the individual must be met . 
This will enable a productive involvement in training that seeks to help
leaders to shape , interpret and implement a government agenda that seeks
to transform the nation ’ s education service . Not only must leadership
training take into account career-long aspirations , but also the unique
context of the school . 
The National College for School Leadership 93
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 93
The think tank paved the way for the college to promote leadership
training as a series of building blocks , intermingling training in
instructional skills , organisational and strategic management and the
development of personal and interpersonal skills . A heavy burden rests
on the training providers , who should not only understand what
constitutes the best adult learning , but also how to ensure the development
of appropriate skills and the acquisition of innovative and enquiring
leadership minds . 
The work of the think tank and its recommendations sit alongside other
foundations for leadership learning . These include the National Standards
for Headteachers ( and other groups of leaders and teachers ) published by
the Teacher Training Agency in the latter part of the 1990s ( TTA , 1997b ) 
as well as a developing strategy for continuing professional development
being constructed within the Department for Education and Skills ( DfES )  . 
Furthermore a major training programme for prospective headteachers , the
NPQH , and the two other major national development programmes , 
HEADLAMP and the LPSH , both described earlier , are already well
established . In addition , local education authorities , diocesan boards , 
professional associations , leadership centres and universities across the
country offer a host of other leadership and management programmes to
schools . 
HEADSHIP TRAINING PROGRAMMES
The college already runs all three of the national headship programmes . 
The revised NPQH is being undertaken by well over 5 , 000 candidates
across the country . This programme balances training and development
with work-placed learning . It combines private study , school-based
assessment , residential training , face to face learning and a strong element
of information and communication technology ( ICT )  . 
The Headteachers ’ Leadership and Management Programme has been
running for a number of years . Headteachers have access to over £2 , 500
worth of funding to spend on training and development activity
commensurate with their needs . This has been provided by well over 150
training providers nationally . In its review of HEADLAMP ( NCSL , 2001b )  , 
published alongside the Leadership Development Framework , the college
recommends a tighter structure for the programme , tying provisions to
individual needs , core modules of a training and development programme , 
mentor support , learning networks and a tighter relationships between
continuing professional development and a personal leadership
development profile . 
94 Leadership in Education
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 94
THE FIVE STAGES OF SCHOOL LEADERSHIP
In order to make sense of training provision for school leaders on a
national basis and provide a structure around which the college and its
numerous partner providers can organise leadership training and
development activity , the college has proposed that there are essentially
five stages of school leadership ( NCSL , 2001a , p . 7–12 )  . 
Emergent leaders are those beginning to take on formal leadership roles
within the system , managing teams , co-ordinating the work of other
teachers in a single subject , pastoral or special needs area . Many would
think of teachers in this group as ‘ middle managers ’  . The National College
has been charged with developing a training programme for subject and
specialist leaders to be applied on a national basis . Early piloting work of
elements of this programme ,  ‘ Leading from the Middle ’ began in April
2002 and the programme was due to begin to roll out fully in autumn
2002 . Meeting the needs of underrepresented groups , such as Asian and
Black teachers is also crucial to the future of our schools . 
Established leaders are those who are experienced deputy and assistant
headteachers and expert heads of subject and specialist areas who have
decided that they do not wish to become headteachers . Meeting their
training and development needs is vital for the continuing health of the
profession . 
Those entering into headship are well catered for in the NPQH and the
Headteachers ’ Induction Programme , both available to support school
leaders as they move into the more senior positions ( see NCSL , 2002a )  . 
Following the implementation of its review recommendations the college
aims to significantly increase the take-up of the induction programme . The
college is working with the DfES on a consultation to explore the
implications of making NPQH compulsory . 
Those in advanced leadership positions have significant and important
continuing training needs . The LPSH has traditionally filled this area and
the college is developing a range of additional programmes in relation to
change management , school renewal and the effective management of
people . The college is also providing a platform for serious consideration
of future schools and the implications for the organisation of schooling . 
School leadership faces challenges and difficulties as new conceptions
emerge as to the purpose and nature of schooling in the future . Research
into the future schools agenda and dissemination of our knowledge of elearning and innovative teaching strategies will underpin the college ’ s
work . 
The richest resource in the profession is undoubtedly those consultant
leaders who have moved through all the other stages and are now highly
experienced and proficient in their roles . The knowledge , skills and
experience of these individuals are a rich resource and the college is
seeking ways to harness this resource both for the benefit of the
The National College for School Leadership 95
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 95
individuals concerned and the profession as a whole . 
The College recognises that the value and status of leadership training
will be enhanced by accreditation arrangements that provide progression
to other higher education programmes and recognition within a national
framework of qualifications . To this end the college is currently working
with partner universities to secure that recognition . 
To effectively reach the many thousands of potential and actual leaders
that constitute its clientele the college also needs a strong regional
presence . To that end it is seeking to establish a network of affiliated
centres around the country both to provide programmes from the national
agenda and develop and offer distinctive local and regional provision . 
A VIRTUAL PRESENCE
One of the commonest feelings of those in leadership positions in schools
is one of isolation and loneliness . NCSL Online – the National College for
School Leadership ’ s virtual arm – is determined to address this problem
by exploiting the power and potential of new technology . Through this
new technology the college ’ s intention is to make accessible to school
leaders the knowledge they need to help their staff and their pupils exploit
the power of technology to the full and transform learning for the majority . 
The college already hosts two groundbreaking new online communities
– Talking Heads ( for serving headteachers ) and Virtual Heads ( for NPQH
candidates )  . Both of these sites has been extremely well received by the
profession and around 10 , 000 school leaders are registered to use them . 
The sites are used for the exchange of ideas , problem-solving , debating
issues with colleagues and learning about leadership and leadership
methodology . Talking Heads provides communities for practising
headteachers as well as access to key figures such as Professor Michael
Barber , Professor Tim Brighouse , Professor Stephen Hepple and others . 
Virtual Heads , the NPQH training arm , provides a convenient and flexible
method of studying for NPQH candidates . 
The National College ’ s website ( NCSL , 2002b ) and online communities
are vehicles for developing a living and continuous debate within the
profession on all aspects of school improvement and practice . A major
challenge facing the profession is managing the impact of new technology
on the curriculum on teaching and learning and on the organisation and
management of schools . It is vital that the leadership of schools fully
understands the implications of ICT for learning and organisational
effectiveness . In order to support headteachers in acquiring this learning , 
NCSL is providing a range of training opportunities both face to face and
through its online communities . 
A major development , which will have important implications for
teachers and school leaders , is the rise and development of a digitally
96 Leadership in Education
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 96
available and digitally delivered curriculum . The BBC with Granada
Learning have been awarded a contract to design , develop , produce and
make widely available six GCSE subjects and these will be delivered to
learners through home personal computers ( PCs ) at school and home , 
possibly through digital television and in time through other devices that
can access the World Wide Web . The increasing opportunity for pupils to
learn ‘ virtually ’ and independently has massive implications for the future
of formalised schooling . 
The college is a major player in understanding how to manage pupil ’ s
learning when much of it will be taking place away from the conventional
school . The college recognises a need for a healthy debate by what is meant
by e-learning and e-pedagogy and its implications for the future
organisations of schools . Managing ‘ distributed learning ’ will have
massive implications for the timing of the school day , the organisation of
the formal timetable and the deployment of staff . The potential benefits
that this technology offers are massive and the college is keen to involve
school leaders in creating this future for themselves . 
RESEARCH AND SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT
Underpinning the work of the college and all its activities for school
leaders is a strong research base . Through its research group the college
will be engaged in a process of knowledge creation , knowledge
formulation and knowledge transfer ( see NCSL , 2002c )  . The college
considers it vital that the use of this knowledge , and the customisation of
the knowledge so that it is accessible , constantly underpins its work . 
Through the Research and School Improvement Group the college will
come to better understand the characteristics of learning leaders , learning
schools and a knowledge rich system . The college is committed to working
directly with school leaders , thereby promoting enquiry based leadership
models and facilitating the formulation of knowledge from practice . 
Through working with groups and networks of schools , connections can
be made between school leaders , e-networks set up and other partners
such as LEAs involved at all levels of the system . 
The college is committed to working within the research community in
universities and has already extensively engaged with the Evidence for
Policy and Practice ( EPPI ) reviews ( see EPPI , 2002 )  ; the Standing
Conference for Research on Educational Leadership and Management 
( SCRELM )  ( see SCRELM , 2002 )  ; the British Educational Leadership , 
Management and Administration Society ( BELMAS )  ( see BELMAS , 
2002 ) and other groups . In order to ensure that research significantly
underpins the college ’ s work a number of strands are being developed . 
These include researching successful leadership in urban and challenging
contexts : 
The National College for School Leadership 97
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 97
• focusing research on the best national and international evidence concerning operation for and support for newly appointed headteachers
• work designed to understand how to increase the capacity of schools
to improve by engaging new and emerging knowledge within their
development
• bringing learning communities together as networks to apply , study and
contribute to emerging knowledge about effective schools
• learning from best practice worldwide through links with international
leadership centres , universities internationally , international
conference circuits and the British Council . 
A CHALLENGING FUTURE
The Leadership Development Framework ( NCSL , 2001a ) and the Corporate
Plan 2002 / 06 ( NCSL , 2002a ) demonstrate clearly the range and depth of
work that the college will be undertaking . In particular the college is
committed to delivering high-quality leadership development opportunities to its 25 , 000 schools , developing , piloting and researching new
and innovative approaches to meeting the leadership development needs
of school leaders , and learning from the profession and partners and using
this emerging knowledge and experience to help shape future policy and
strategy both for the college and the education system as a whole . 
The canvas the college has to work on is extensive . It will focus its
activities in the first few years to ensure the greatest impact . Networked
communities of learners will help create both professional knowledge and
learning . The online community will grow ; particularly as e-learning
discussion communities are given priority . The college will work closely
with government to support urban improvement initiatives , such as
Excellence in Cities and its Transforming Secondary Education strategy . 
The two national training programmes will continue to evolve and grow
and the college will particularly emphasise the role of consultant leaders
as a significant force in transforming the profession . New leaders trained
through the Leading from the Middle programme will be the bedrock of
new members of the leadership profession and a central part of the
college ’ s work in the future . 
REFERENCES
British Educational Leadership , Management and Administration Society ( BELMAS )  ( 2002 ) 
Bolam , R .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Management development for headteachers ’  , Educational
Management and Administration , 25 ( 3 )  , 265–83 . 
Brundrett , M .  ( 1999 ) Beyond Competence : The Challenge for Educational
Management , Dereham : Peter Francis . 
98 Leadership in Education
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 98
Department of Education and Science ( DES )  ( 1972 ) Teacher Education and Training 
( James Report )  , London : HMSO . 
Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  ( 1999 ) National College for
School Leadership : A Prospectus , London : DfEE . 
Evidence for Policy and Practice ( EPPI )  ( 2002 ) 
Glatter , R .  ( 1972 ) Management Development for the Education Profession , London : 
Harrap . 
Her Majesty ’ s Stationery Office ( HMSO )  ( 1998 ) Teachers Meeting the Challenge of
Change , London : HMSO . 
Lloyd , K .  ( 1981 ) Primary school headship types – a study of the primary head ’ s
leadership role perceptions , M . Ed thesis , University of Birmingham , in M . G . 
Hughes ( 1982 ) Professional Development for Senior Staff in Schools and
Colleges , Educational Management and Administration 4 ( 1 )  , 29–45 . 
Lyons , G .  ( 1976 ) Heads ’ Tasks : A Handbook of Secondary School Administration , 
Windsor : NFER . 
National College for School Leadership ( NCSL )  ( 2001a ) Leadership Development
Framework , Nottingham : NCSL . 
National College for School Leadership ( NCSL )  ( 2001b ) Review of the Headteachers ’ 
Leadership and Management Programme , Nottingham : NCSL . 
National College for School Leadership ( NCSL )  ( 2002a ) Corporate Plan 2002 / 06 , 
Nottingham : NCSL . 
National College for School Leadership ( NCSL )  ( 2002b ) NCSL Homepage , 

National College for School Leadership ( NCSL )  ( 2002c ) Research and Development : 
R and D Programmes ,  / index . cfm ? pageid = randd-programmes-index
Nias , J .  ( 1981 )  ‘ Leadership styles and job satisfaction in primary schools ’  , in T . 
Bush , R . Glatter , J . Goodey , C . Riches ( eds )  , Approaches to School Management , 
London : Harper & Row . 
Plowden Report ( 1967 ) Children and their Primary Schools , 2 vols , Report of the
Central Advisory Council for Education in England , London : HMSO . 
Standing Conference for Research in Educational Leadership and Management 
( SCRELM )  ( 2002 ) 
Teacher Training Agency ( TTA )  ( 1995 ) HEADLAMP 3 / 95 , HEADLAMP Programme
Document , London : TTA . 
Teacher Training Agency ( TTA )  ( 1997a ) National Professional Qualification for
Headship , London : TTA . 
Teacher Training Agency ( TTA )  ( 1997b ) National Standards for Headteachers , 
London , TTA . 
Teacher Training Agency ( TTA )  ( 1998 ) National Leadership Programme for Serving
Headteachers , London : TTA . 
Wood , A . D .  ( 1982 )  ‘ A training college for headteachers of secondary schools ; some
thoughts and consideration ’  , School Organization , 3 ( 3 )  , 287–96 . 
FURTHER READING
NCSL ( 2001 ) Leadership Development Framework , Nottingham : NCSL . 
NCSL ( 2002 ) Corporate Plan 2002 / 06 , Nottingham : NCSL . 
The National College for School Leadership 99
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 99
NCSL ( 2002 ) Leading the Management of Change – Building Capacity for School
Development , Nottingham , NCSL . 
NCSL ( 2002 ) National Professional Qualification for Headship ( NPQH ) Guide for
Applicants , Nottingham : NCSL . 
NCSL ( 2002 ) NCSL Homepage , 
NCSL ( 2002 ) NCSL Online Showcase , Nottingham : NCSL . 
NCSL ( 2002 ) Research and Development : R and D Programmes ,  
/ index . cfm ? pageid = randd-programmes-index
100 Leadership in Education
chapter 6 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 100
Section C : Teachers as Leaders
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 101
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 102
7
TEACHER LEADERSHIP : ITS NATURE , 
DEVELOPMENT , AND IMPACT ON 
SCHOOLS AND STUDENTS
Kenneth Leithwood
INTRODUCTION
Over the past four years , my colleagues , students and I have conducted a
series of six studies on teacher leadership . Three of these studies , 
grounded in design ( Strauss and Corbin , 1990 )  , relied on qualitative data
to describe the nature of informal teacher leadership in both elementary
and secondary schools ( Anderson , 2002 ; Leithwood , Jantzi and Steinbach , 
1999 ; Ryan , 1999 )  . The remaining three studies inquired about the effects
of teacher leadership on selected aspects of school organisation , as well
as on students ( Leithwood and Jantzi , 1999 ; Leithwood and Jantzi , 2000 )  ; 
in these three studies , which tested a framework for understanding
leadership effects using quantitative methods , teacher leader effects were
compared with the effects of principal leadership . Throughout the chapter
some or all of these studies are referred to as the ‘ CLD research ’  ( CLD is
the acronym for the Centre for Leadership Development , our institutional
home within OISE / UT )  . 
Each of the six studies conceptualised leadership as an influence
process ( Yukl , 1989 ) that depends on a person ’ s behaviour being
recognised as , and at least tacitly acknowledged to be ,  ‘ leadership ’ by
others who thereby cast themselves in the role of followers consenting to
be led ( Greenfield , 1995 ; Lord and Maher , 1993 )  . From this perspective , 
leadership is ‘ the process of being perceived as a leader ’  ( Lord and Maher , 
1993 : p . 11 ) through the social construction of meaning on the part of
followers ( Meindl , 1995 )  . 
This chapter summarises evidence and implications from the six studies
to briefly answer three questions : What is ‘ teacher leadership ’  ? How much
does it contribute to a school ’ s effectiveness ? And how can it be
103
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 103
developed ? In light of the answers to these questions , the paper concludes
by briefly considering whether teacher leadership is actually a useful
concept . 
WHAT IS ‘ TEACHER LEADERSHIP ’  ? 
Background
Leadership , suggest Sirotnik and Kimball ( 1996 )  , does not take on new
meaning when qualified by the term ‘ teacher ’  . It entails the exercise of
influence over the beliefs , actions , and values of others ( Hart , 1995 )  , as is
the case with leadership from any source . What may be different is how
that influence is exercised and to what end . In a traditional school , for
example , those in formal administrative roles have greater access than
teachers to positional power in their attempts to influence classroom
practice , whereas teachers may have greater access to the power that flows
from technical expertise . Traditionally , as well , teachers and
administrators often attempt to exercise leadership in relation to quite
different aspects of the school ’ s functioning , although teachers often report
a strong interest in expanding their spheres of influence ( Reavis and
Griffith , 1993 ; Taylor and Bogotch , 1994 )  . 
Teacher leadership may be either formal or informal in nature . Lead
teacher , master teacher , department head , union representative , member of
the school ’ s governance council , mentor – these are among the many designations associated with formal teacher leadership roles . Teachers assuming these roles are expected to carry out a wide range of functions . These
functions include , for example : representing the school in district-level
decision-making ( Fullan , 1993 )  ; stimulating the professional growth of
colleagues ( Wasley , 1991 )  ; being an advocate for teachers ’ work ( Bascia , 
1997 )  ; and improving the school ’ s decision-making processes ( Malen , 
Ogawa and Kranz , 1990 )  . Those appointed to formal leadership roles also
are sometimes expected to induct new teachers into the school , and to
positively influence the willingness and capacity of other teachers to
implement change in the school ( Fullan and Hargreaves , 1991 ; Whitaker , 
1995 )  . 
Teachers exercise informal leadership in their schools by sharing their
expertise , by volunteering for new projects and by bringing new ideas to
the school . They also offer such leadership by helping their colleagues to
carry out their classroom duties , and by assisting in the improvement of
classroom practice through the engagement of their colleagues in
experimentation and the examination of more powerful instructional
techniques . Teachers attribute leadership qualities , as well , to colleagues
who accept responsibility for their own professional growth , promote the
school ’ s mission and work for the improvement of the school or the school
104 Leadership in Education
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 104
system ( Harrison and Lembeck , 1996 ; Smylie and Denny , 1990 ; Wasley , 
1991 )  . 
CLD research
Functions reported for teacher leaders in this literature created
expectations about what we might find were the functions of teacher
leaders in our study . But the three studies specifically inquiring about the
nature of informal teacher leadership were guided by the principles of
grounded theory development . Methodologically , all three studies were
conducted in two stages . During the first stage , all teachers in selected
schools were asked to respond to a one-page , confidential questionnaire
requesting them to nominate people in their schools , exclusive of
administrators , who provided leadership . At the second stage , the three
people receiving the most nominations by their colleagues in each school , 
along with the nominators , were interviewed . Questions focused on what
it was that caused the nominees to be viewed as leaders and what they
did to provide leadership . 
Based on the application of ‘ constant comparative ’ coding methods
recommended for the development of grounded theory , results suggested
that teachers ’ perceptions of informal teacher leadership could be
described in terms of traits , capacities , practices , and outcomes . Results
from Leithwood , Jantzi and Steinbach ( 1999 ) illustrate much of what has
been learned about each of these categories . 
Traits . In these studies of teacher leaders in six secondary schools , 75
specific traits were identified from a total of 341 units of coded text . These
traits were further classified as mood , values , orientation to people , physical characteristics , responsibility , personality , and work-related traits . 
The most frequently mentioned specific trait was ‘ quietness ’  ; being unassuming and soft-spoken was highly valued by these teachers . The next
most frequently mentioned specific traits were : having a sense of commitment to the school and / or the profession ; having a sense of humour ; 
being a hard worker ; and possessing an appreciative orientation to others . 
Personality characteristics were mentioned 69 times . This category of
trait included being unselfish , intelligent , genuine , humble and energetic . 
Values were mentioned 58 times and included commitment to the school
and / or profession , having strong beliefs and being fair . Mood , mentioned
53 times , included being quiet , having a sense of humour , and being eventempered . Work ethic also was mentioned 53 times , a category which
included : being determined ; not appearing to be ‘ empire-building ’  ; being
a visionary ; and having high standards . Responsibility was discussed 34
times . This category included : being a hard worker ; being steady ; and
being dependable . Physical characteristics , being tall or big , were
mentioned only three times . 
Teacher leadership : its nature , development and impact 105
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 105
Capacities . This category encompasses a leader ’ s knowledge , skills
and / or abilities . One hundred and fifty-nine items coded in this category
were organised into seven dimensions : procedural knowledge ; declarative
knowledge ; relationships with staff ; problem-solving ability ; relationships
with students ; communication skills ; and self-knowledge . 
The most frequently mentioned skills were associated with procedural
and declarative knowledge . Procedural knowledge had to do with a
teacher ’ s knowledge of how to carry out leadership tasks , e . g .  , making
tough decisions , knowing how to run a meeting , and dealing with
administration . As teachers said :  ‘  [ she ] can put out fires without too much
trouble ’  ;  ‘  [ he ] knows how to handle a situation without implicating anyone
else ’  ; or ‘  [ she ] knows how to evaluate our students , modify programs , 
develop report cards ’  . 
The declarative knowledge category refers to knowledge about specific
aspects of the profession , e . g .  , knowledge about government education
policy ; knowledge about education in general ; knowledge about the
school , students and the community ; knowledge about specific subjects ; 
and knowledge about union issues . 
Teachers ’ ability to work well with their colleagues included statements
about how a particular teacher can motivate staff , work effectively with
others and be willing to moderate disagreements . Being a good problemsolver was seen as an important leadership capacity . For example , one
teacher said ,  ‘  [ she ] can listen to a discussion and , in the end , filter it all
down to what the real problems are ’  . Getting to the heart of the matter or
being able to synthesise information was mentioned five times . Dealing
with difficulties well and being able to think things through are other
examples of statements coded as problem-solving skills . 
The capacity to relate well with students , particularly being able to
motivate them and being able to understand them , was valued among
teacher leaders , as was having good communication skills ( being articulate
and persuasive )  . Statements coded as self-knowledge referred to a leader ’ s
ability to change , and to ‘ know what she is doing ’  .  ‘  [ She ] knows she can ’ t
win all of her battles .  ’ 
Practices . What leaders actually do is what we coded as ‘ practices ’ in
our studies . These functions , tasks , and activities , were organised into
nine dimensions . The most frequently mentioned dimension was that the
teacher performs administrative tasks , such as working administrative
periods in the office , being on committees , and organising specific events 
( e . g .  , running the commencement programme and spearheading the implementation of special courses )  . Modelling valued practices was the next
most frequently mentioned dimension . This included leading by example , 
interacting with students , being a motivator for staff and students , and
never missing a day of work . One teacher said ,  ‘ he sets the example that
there are many teachers who have taught for a long time and who are
excellent teachers ’  . Another said ,  ‘ he reminds us of our objectives ’  . 
106 Leadership in Education
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 106
Formal leadership responsibilities were frequently mentioned . This
dimension reflects the number of times teachers were nominated as
leaders because of their position , e . g .  , being a department head or being
head of a particular committee . Supporting the work of other staff was
associated by many respondents with leadership ; this referred to the help
the teacher provided to his or her colleagues ( e . g .  , helps young teachers , 
helps with course outlines , helps with a difficult class ) or the support
given to staff ( e . g .  ,  ‘ kind of stroking people and saying you can do it ’  ,  
 ‘ speaks out on our behalf whether we agree or disagree ’  ,  ‘ allows people
to vent ’  )  . 
Teachers felt being visible in the school was an important dimension
of leadership . Examples of this practice include : presenting information
at staff meetings and being a leader in the school not just in the
department . Specific teaching practices ( e . g .  , having lessons well prepared
and being a good teacher ) often were mentioned . Confronting issues
directly , sharing leadership with others , and personal relationships were
the last three dimensions of practices mentioned by the interviewees . 
Outcomes . The outcomes associated with leadership provide important
clues about the basis for leader attributions under circumstances in which
leadership is experienced long enough to draw inferences from leader
effects on the organisation , not simply on existing leader stereotypes . 
Outcomes of leadership identified by ‘ followers ’ tell us something about
the needs people have that they hope leadership can meet . One hundred
and sixty-two statements were coded as nine different dimensions of
outcomes . Most frequently mentioned was gaining the respect of staff and
students . Next most frequently identified as a leadership outcome was that
activities involving the leader were invariably implemented well (  ‘ it went
off very well ’ or ‘ things always work out in the end ’ or ‘ he and [ T ] have
taken the track team to extreme heights ’  )  . The fact that people listen to
the leader was mentioned frequently ; one interviewee said , for example ,  
 ‘ when she speaks up , people listen ’  . 
Being widely perceived as a leader was mentioned often . One teacher
said ,  ‘ people turn to him for leadership in the school ’  . Another said ,  ‘ I
think he ’ s someone they would turn to if they were looking for avenues
to proceed ’  . A desire to emulate the leader was mentioned :  ‘ She makes
you want to put as much effort forth as she does ’  ;  ‘ You ’ re just saying , hey , 
if I could be like that ’  . Having a good effect on students , contributing to
the culture of the school (  ‘ he adds to the heart of the school ’  )  , enhancing
staff comfort level and meeting high expectations were other types of
outcomes associated with those teachers nominated as leaders by their
peers . 
Teacher leadership : its nature , development and impact 107
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 107
TEACHER LEADERSHIP EFFECTS ON SCHOOLS 
AND STUDENTS
Background
Empirical evidence concerning the actual effects of either formal or
informal teacher leadership are limited in quantity and report mixed
results . For example , many of the more ambitious initiatives establishing
formal teacher leadership roles through the creation of career ladders have
been abandoned ( Hart , 1995 )  . And Hannay and Denby ’ s ( 1994 ) study of
department heads found that they were not very effective as facilitators of
change largely due to their lack of knowledge and skill in effective change
strategies . On the other hand , Duke , Showers and Imber ( 1980 ) found that
increased participation of teachers in school decision-making resulted in
a more democratic school . Increased professional learning for the teacher
leader also has been reported as an effect of assuming such a role 
( Lieberman , Saxl and Miles , 1988 ; Wasley , 1991 )  . 
Empirical evidence about school effects , in general , and principal leader
effects , in particular , is helpful in establishing realistic expectations for
what is likely to be found in empirical studies of teacher leader effects . 
Recent reviews of empirical research on school effectiveness suggest that
educational factors for which data are available explain , in total , 
something less than 20 per cent of the variation in student cognitive
outcomes ; very little evidence is available concerning such non-cognitive
outcomes as the one used in our studies . Reynolds et al .  ( 1996 ) suggest
8–12 per cent for research carried out in the UK , while Creemers and
Reetzigt ( 1996 , p . 203 ) suggest 10–20 per cent for studies carried out ‘ in
the Western Hemisphere .  .  . after correction for student intake measures
such as aptitude or social class ’  . Variation within this range across studies
may be explained by such variables as school size , type of student outcome
serving as the dependent measure , nature of students , as well as
department and subject matter differences . 
While these relatively small amounts of explained variation are now
considered to be both meaningful , and practically significant , a school is
not a single variable . It is an aggregate of variables , the ‘ correlates ’ of
effective schools , or the organisational conditions used as mediating
variables in our own studies , for example . Some of these variables most
likely contribute more strongly than others to a school ’ s effects , although
they have yet to be unpacked empirically , except for distinguishing
between classroom and school level factors ( Creemers and Reetzigt , 1996 ; 
Scheerens , 1997 )  . Efforts to do the unpacking , however , realistically begin
with very modest amounts of variation to be explained , especially if it is
assumed , as seems reasonable , that at least a handful of factors contribute
to explained variation . This was Ogawa and Hart ’ s ( 1985 ) argument in
claiming importance for their finding that principal leadership explained
108 Leadership in Education
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 108
2–8 per cent of the variation in student performance , the range of variation
common to the leadership effects studies reviewed by Hallinger and Heck 
( 1996 ; 1998 )  . 
CLD research
All three CLD studies inquiring about teacher leader effects assessed the
relative effects on selected aspects of school organisation and on students
of both teacher and principal sources of leadership ( Leithwood and Jantzi , 
1999 )  . The framework for these studies conceptualised the two sources of
leadership as independent variables , family educational culture as a
moderating variable , and a cluster of school ( e . g .  , culture , vision , structure ) 
and classroom ( e . g .  , instructional practices ) characteristics as mediating
variables . The dependent variable was student engagement with school , a
variable with two dimensions – identification and participation . 
Data to test this framework were collected from large samples of teachers and students in two large school districts in Ontario and Nova Scotia
using two survey instruments . One survey asked teachers about the status
of school organisation conditions , as well as the relative influence of principal and teacher sources of leadership . The second survey asked students
about their engagement with school ( participation and identification )  , and
the status of their family educational culture . Regressions and path modelling techniques ( LISREL 8 ; see Joreskog and Sorbom , 1993 ) were the primary methods of data analysis used to test the framework . 
Results of the three studies are very similar . Figure 7 . 1 , from Leithwood
and Jantzi ( 1999 )  , reports the results of testing ( using LISREL ) the
framework for the study adapted in response to a factor analysis in which
all items measuring school conditions loaded on the same factor . The
model as a whole , explains 84 per cent of the variation in student
participation and 78 per cent of the variation in student identification . 
Significant relationships , with differing strengths , are reflected in the total
effects of family educational culture (  . 88 )  , school conditions (  . 13 and . 18 )  , 
and principal leadership (  . 07 and . 09 )  . The total effects of teacher
leadership are not significant . 
Figure 7 . 1 also indicates strong , significant relationships (  . 56 ) between
principal leadership and school conditions , a much stronger relationship
than is the case with teacher leadership (  . 29 ) or family educational culture 
(  . 28 )  . School conditions are weakly related to both student variables ; the
relationship with student identification is , nevertheless , statistically
significant (  . 18 )  . 
An additional series of regression analyses were completed to determine
the strength of the relationships between teacher and principal leadership
and each of the five variables included as part of school conditions . Both
principal and teacher leadership were significantly related to all school
Teacher leadership : its nature , development and impact 109
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 109
conditions , although with a uniform pattern of stronger relationships with
principal leadership . Principal leadership has its greatest effects on culture 
(  . 26 ) and structure and organisation (  . 27 )  . The weaker effects of teacher
leadership do not vary much among school conditions (  . 05 to . 10 )  . 
With student engagement in school as the dependent variable , results
of the study indicate that teacher leadership effects are statistically nonsignificant whereas , principal leadership effects , although not strong , do
reach statistical significance . As well , teacher leadership had smaller
effects on school conditions as compared with principal leadership . More
teacher leadership has been advocated over the past decade for several
reasons but without much evidence that it has the potential its advocates
claim . While Heller and Firestone ( 1995 ) concluded from their data that
principal leadership does not stand out as a critical part of the change
process , our results suggest that teacher leadership is not likely to stand
out either , at least not for change processes aimed at increasing student
engagement with school . 
110 Leadership in Education
Family Educational Culture 
(  . 39 )  (  . 16 )  . 01 . 28 *  . 41 * 
Principal Student . 82 * 
Leadership . 56 * School .  . 03 Participation
Conditions 
. 35 *  . 18 *  . 52 *  
( 1 . 00 )  . 29 *  (  . 55 )  . 01
– . 09 Student
Teacher Identification
Leadership .  
(  . 88 )  (  . 22 ) 
Total Student Student
Effects Participation Identification
Family . 88 *  . 88 * 
Teacher Leadership . 01 – . 03
Principal Leadership . 07 *  . 09 * 
School Conditions . 13 *  . 18 * 
Figure 7 . 1 Results of path analysis estimating the effects of principal
and teacher leadership on student engagement
Source : Leithwood and Jantzi ( 1999 ) 
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 110
HOW CAN TEACHER LEADERSHIP BE DEVELOPED ? 
Background
In spite of the modest effects that CLD research has found for teacher
leadership on schools and students , many will still want to know how it
might be fostered . Both the development and exercise of teacher
leadership is inhibited by a number of conditions . Time taken for work
outside of the classroom likely interferes with time needed for students 
( Smylie and Denny , 1990 )  . When extra time is provided for leadership
functions , it is usually not enough ( Wasley , 1991 )  . Furthermore , the lack
of time , training and funding for leadership roles ( Cooper , 1988 ; White , 
1992 ) interferes with teachers ’ personal lives , as well as their classroom
work . 
Cultures of isolationism common in schools inhibit the development of
teacher leaders and their work with teaching colleagues , as do the
associated norms of egalitarianism , privacy , politeness , and contrived
collegiality ( Duke , Showers and Imber , 1980 ; Griffin , 1995 ; Hargreaves , 
1994 ; Sirotnik , 1994 )  . Teacher leaders ’ effectiveness , some claim , is
constrained by lack of role definition ( Smylie and Denny , 1990 ) and by
requiring them to take on responsibilities outside their areas of expertise 
( Little , 1995 )  . 
CLD research
Our research about this question has focused on the development of
informal teacher leadership , although much of what is suggested in this
section also is appropriate for the development of those assuming such
formal teacher leader roles as department head and lead teacher ( see
Leithwood , Jantzi and Steinbach , 1999 , ch . 8 ; Ryan , 1999 )  . Teachers in our
qualitative studies were asked to describe the practices of principals which
made an important contribution to the development of teacher leadership
in their schools . While some teachers claimed that their ‘ principal has the
greatest impact on [ who assumes ] leadership roles ’  , others claimed that
people become leaders because of what they do . Still others believed that
it ’ s a ‘ combination of being tapped on the shoulder and self-identifying ’  . 
Regardless , most teachers claimed that some principal practices can
significantly influence how teacher leadership develops . These responses
are summarised here in five categories , the first four of which reflect
dimensions from our model of transformational school leadership 
( Leithwood , Jantzi and Steinbach , 1999 )  . 
Providing individualised support . One of the most frequently mentioned
ways that principals influence the development of distributed leadership
is by supporting and encouraging specific staff initiatives and leadership
Teacher leadership : its nature , development and impact 111
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 111
in general . For example , one teacher said ,  ‘ the administration has been
very supportive of any initiatives that we take ; at times people are
encouraged , they sort of get a little push ’  . One form that this support takes
is through the encouragement of risk-taking . When asked how the
principal developed leadership among others , one teacher replied ,  ‘ he
builds the ability for people to take risks ; he doesn ’ t criticise for failures ’  . 
Creating a comfortable and safe environment for trying out leadership roles
and for encouraging the free expression of ideas was seen as an important
practice for principals . 
Another form of support mentioned by many teachers was the emotional
support provided by the principal ’ s appreciation for and recognition of a
job well done . Pats on the back and other forms of praise were interpreted
as encouragement to tackle leadership roles . As one teacher said ,  ‘ If the
top of the administration believes in you , then I think you ’ ll find people
are willing to take leadership roles on themselves ’  . The principal can also
show support by ‘ pump [ ing ] you up when you ’ re getting discouraged ’  . 
Building collaborative cultures . Along with creating a risk-free
environment , many teachers spoke about the contribution to developing
teacher leadership development of the principal ’ s efforts to build
collaborative cultures and the structures required for collaboration to take
place . Establishing and / or maintaining a tradition of shared decisionmaking was seen to be crucial by many teachers . As one teacher said :  ‘ The
principal influences the distribution of leadership with encouragement to
get involved . I think for the most part there ’ s just been the atmosphere of
encouraging input on anything .  ’ 
Setting up a committee structure in the school was frequently
mentioned as one way to accomplish this because of the leadership
opportunities it provided for staff . One caveat mentioned by many teachers
regarding the establishment of a committee structure was the importance
of awarding some authority or autonomy along with the leadership
responsibility . The principals in our studies did that . Said one teacher ,  
 ‘  [ principal ] was really good at delegating responsibility to others and then
allowing them the freedom to do whatever they want to do , providing that
they didn ’ t get totally out of control ’  . Having some freedom of action was
seen as as an incentive for taking on leadership responsibilities . 
Providing intellectual stimulation . Being open to new initiatives and
encouraging a culture of continuous improvement was mentioned as
important for developing teacher leadership . Providing professional
development opportunities and giving people the ‘ space to grow ’ were
also viewed as fostering such leadership . Two teachers described how their
principals provided intellectual stimulation as follows : 
The principal is really good at listening and he ’ s smart . He ’ ll say , have
you thought of .  .  . and he can be really quick at coming up with
possible paths to take , and that ’ s good because sometimes you ’ re so
close to it that you don ’ t see it . 
112 Leadership in Education
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 112
We ’ ve had a lot of administrators come out of this school , go to the
board ; we have a lot of people in this school who are known around
the board for their work in curriculum . That ’ s because he ’ s very
conscious of saying , why don ’ t you go to that conference ? Or he ’ ll say
why don ’ t you do a presentation on this to that group ? 
Other teachers indicated that their principals fostered teacher leadership
by encouraging staff to take courses and get advanced degrees . 
Modelling . This category of practice includes those principals ’ 
personality traits that teachers found particularly conducive to developing
their leadership . Being professional , having a high energy level , being
gregarious and positive were among the traits mentioned . The willingness
to share leadership ( not being threatened by giving up some control or
power ) was claimed to be an important way for principals to model a
sincere belief in teacher leadership . 
Teachers also spoke about principals creating an ‘ environment here
that ’ s very receptive to people taking on leadership ’  , including being
approachable and open to diverse opinions from staff . 
Identifying and selecting potential teacher leaders . Many teachers
reported that their principals developed teacher leadership in the school
through their choice of people for various leadership opportunities in the
school . One teacher said , for example ,  ‘ the development of school leaders
is entirely in [ the principal ’ s ] court and whether he serves the ball to you
or not [ determines ] if school leaders develop ’  . Mostly the way this was
done was described as subtle :  ‘ the principal asks if someone would
consider volunteering for something that needs to be done ’  . But sometimes
it was more direct : one teacher described the principal ’ s influence as 
 ‘ simply a case of sitting down with people and talking a little bit about
what he has in mind and what he hopes will happen and then asking you
to consider how you might participate in that ’  . There is never intimidation
or coercion to accept a position . 
The most important aspect of the selection process , though , is the
principal ’ s knowledge of each teacher ( e . g .  , what the teacher is capable of
doing but may be reluctant to tackle )  , what would be beneficial for the
teacher to for his or her professional development . The selection or request
for participation emerged out of an established relationship . One teacher
said ,  ‘ he knew what to suggest , but he never assigned or anything like
that ’  . Another teacher said , of a different principal , 
He can spot budding leaders . He has a good sense of who is ready to
take on a different role , who is able and who is ready . He will give it
to somebody who he thinks is ready to take it on even knowing that
the first time it might get screwed up . So he isn ’ t just delegating ; he is
picking and choosing people and nurturing leadership along . 
That was seen as a crucial practice on the part principals . Another teacher
described the role as ‘ probably more of a parent , to be able to find out
Teacher leadership : its nature , development and impact 113
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 113
emotionally , physically , mentally , spiritually where you are and be able
to try to get you to the next level ’  . This has important implications for
expanding the teacher leadership available within a school . Formal school
leaders are by no means the only influence on who is selected for teacher
leader roles in the school . This is especially the case when those roles are
of an informal nature , or when self-selection is possible . But when formal
school leaders are able to participate in determining the choice of people
for teacher leader roles , our study recommends a preference for teachers
who already display the traits associated with teacher leaders from among
those who display comparable levels of development with respect to
practices and capacities . 
CONCLUSION : IS TEACHER LEADERSHIP A USEFUL
CONCEPT ? 
Results of our research are consistent in many respects with evidence
provided by other large-scale , quantitative studies of principal leadership
effects . To date , however , there have been very few such large-scale studies
of teacher leadership effects . So the representativeness of our findings
concerning such effects remains to be tested by others . Advocates of
teacher leadership may find these results disappointing . They do not
confirm the beliefs of such advocates or the implications typically drawn
from qualitative studies of teacher leadership . However , the results should
not be viewed as surprising . Most areas of inquiry touching on school
effects have proceeded through an initial phase of enthusiastic advocacy , 
followed by a phase of largely qualitative research in small numbers of
exceptional cases aimed at better understanding the phenomena , to a more
mature phase which includes quantitative testing of effects on a large
scale . This third phase is always hard on the initial advocates , because
effects are very difficult to produce on a large scale , and even more
difficult to detect quantitatively . It is probably time the concept of teacher
leadership moved into this third phase . Our research provides a point of
departure for the move . 
Somewhat indirectly , results of our research also have prompted us to
reconsider the motivation for grafting the concept of ‘ leadership ’ onto the
concept of ‘ teacher ’  . Some of this motivation , no doubt , is to enhance the
status of the occupation in an effort to further professionalise it . But the
meaning of leadership remains murky , and its present status is highly
dependent on a set of possibly fleeting , modern , Western values . In
contrast , the concept of teaching is relatively clearer , and teaching is a
long and honoured practice in most cultures . From this perspective , does
not grafting leadership onto the concept of teaching actually devalue the
status of teaching in the long run ? Does not this grafting imply that being
a teacher , and all that entails in the classroom and the wider organisation , 
114 Leadership in Education
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 114
is really not enough to warrant a respected role in bettering the human
condition ? Indeed , it seems likely that this marriage of concepts will do
a disservice to the concept of leadership , as well . If everyone is a leader , 
for example , does not the concept lose all value as a legitimate distinction
among social and organisational practices , separating it even further from
its genesis in organisational administration ? 
REFERENCES
Anderson , K .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Shared decision-making , school improvement and educational leadership in schools ’  , PhD thesis , OISE University of Toronto . 
Bascia , N .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Invisible leadership : teachers ’ union activity in schools ’  , Alberta
Journal of Educational Research , 43 ( 2 / 3 )  , 69–85 . 
Cooper , M .  ( 1988 )  ‘ Whose culture is it anyway ?  ’  , in A . Lieberman ( ed .  )  , Building a
Professional Culture in Schools , New York : Basic Books , pp . 45–54 . 
Creemers , B . P . M . and Reetzigt , G . J .  ( 1996 )  ‘ School level conditions affecting the
effectiveness of instruction ’  , School Effectiveness and School Improvement , 
7 ( 3 )  , 197–228 . 
Duke , D .  , Showers , B . and Imber , M .  ( 1980 )  ‘ Teachers and shared decision-making : 
the costs and benefits of involvement ’  , Educational Administration Quarterly , 
16 , 93–106 . 
Fullan , M . and Hargreaves , A .  ( 1991 ) What ’ s Worth Fighting For : Working Together
for your School , Toronto : Ontario Public School Teachers ’ Federation . 
Fullan , M .  ( 1993 ) Change Forces , Toronto : Falmer Press . 
Greenfield , W . D .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Toward a theory of school administration : the centrality
of leadership ’  . Educational Administration Quarterly , 31 ( 1 )  , 61–85 . 
Griffin , G .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Influences of shared decision-making on school and classroom
activity : conversations with five teachers ’  . The Elementary School Journal , 
96 ( 1 )  , 29–45 . 
Hallinger , P . and Heck , R .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Reassessing the principal ’ s role in school effectiveness : a review of empirical research 1980–1995 ’  . Educational
Administration Quarterly , 32 ( 1 )  , 5–44 . 
Hallinger , P . and Heck , R . H .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Exploring the principal ’ s contribution to
school effectiveness : 1980–1995 ’  . School Effectiveness and School
Improvement , 9 ( 2 )  , 157–91 . 
Hannay , L . M . and Denby , M .  ( 1994 )  ‘ Secondary school change : the role of department heads ’  , paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association , New Orleans , April . 
Hargreaves , A .  ( 1994 ) Changing Teachers , Changing Times : Teachers ’ Work and
Culture in the Postmodern Age , New York : Teachers College Press . 
Harrison , J . W . and Lembeck , E .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Emergent teacher leaders ’  , in G . Moller and
M . Katzenmeyer ( eds )  , Every Teacher Is a Leader : Realizing the Potential of
Teacher Leadership , San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Hart , A . W .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Reconceiving school leadership : emergent views ’  , Elementary
School Journal , 96 ( 1 )  , 9–28 . 
Heller , M . F . and Firestone , W . A .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Who ’ s in charge here ? Sources of leadership for change in eight schools ’  , The Elementary School Journal , 96 ( 1 )  , 65–86 . 
Joreskog , K . G . and Sorbom , D .  ( 1993 ) LISREL : Structural Equation Modeling with
Teacher leadership : its nature , development and impact 115
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 115
SIMPLIS Command Language , Chicago , IL : Scientific Software . 
Leithwood , K . and Jantzi , D .  ( 1999 )  ‘ The relative effects of principal and teacher
sources of leadership on student engagement with school ’  , Educational
Administration Quarterly , 35 ( supplemental )  , 679–706 . 
Leithwood , K . and Jantzi , D .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Principal and teacher leadership effects : a
replication ;  , School Leadership and Management , 20 ( 4 )  , 415–34 . 
Leithwood , K .  , Jantzi , D . and Steinbach , R .  ( 1999 ) Changing Leadership for Changing
Times , London : Open University Press . 
Lieberman , A .  , Saxl , E . R . and Miles , M . B .  ( 1988 )  ‘ Teacher leadership : ideology and
practice ’  , in A . Lieberman ( ed .  )  , Building a Professional Culture in Schools , 
New York : Basic Books , pp . 148–66 . 
Little , J . W .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Contested ground : the basis of teacher leadership in two restructuring high schools ’  , The Elementary School Journal , 96 ( 1 )  , 47–63 . 
Lord , R . G . and Maher , K . J .  ( 1993 ) Leadership and Information Processing , London : 
Routledge . 
Malen , B .  , Ogawa , R . and Kranz , J .  ( 1990 )  ‘ What do we know about schoolbased management ? A case study of the literature ’  , in W . Clune and 
J . Witte ( eds )  , Choice and Control in American Education Volume 2 : The
Practice of Choice , Decentralization and School Restructuring , New York : 
Falmer Press . 
Meindl , J . R .  ( 1995 )  ‘ The romance of leadership as a follower-centric theory : a
social constructionist approach ’  , Leadership Quarterly , 6 ( 3 )  , 329–41 . 
Ogawa , R . and Hart , A .  ( 1985 )  ‘ The effects of principals on the instructional 
performance of schools , Journal of Educational Administration , 23 ( 1 )  , 
59–72 . 
Reavis , C . and Griffith , H .  ( 1993 ) Restructuring Schools : Theory and Practice , 
Lancaster , PA : Technomic . 
Reynolds , D .  , Sammons , P .  , Stoll , L .  , Barber , M . and Hillman , J .  ( 1996 )  ‘ School
effectiveness and school improvement in the United Kingdom ’  , School
Effectiveness and School Improvement , 7 ( 2 )  , 133–58 . 
Ryan , S .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Teacher leadership : a qualitative study in three secondary schools ’  , 
PhD thesis , OISE / University of Toronto . 
Scheerens , J .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Conceptual models and theory-embedded principles on effective schooling ’  , School Effectiveness and School Improvement , 8 ( 3 )  , 269–310 . 
Sirotnik , K .  ( 1994 )  ‘ Curriculum : overview and framework ’  , in M . J . O ’ Hair and S . 
Odell ( eds )  , Educating Teachers for Leadership and Change , Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Corwin Press , pp . 235–42 . 
Sirotnik , K . and Kimball , K .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Preparing educators for leadership : in praise
of experience ’  , Journal of School Leadership , 6 , 180–201 . 
Smylie , M . A . and Denny , J . W .  ( 1990 )  ‘ Teacher leadership : tensions and ambiguities in organizational perspective ’  , Educational Administration Quarterly , 
28 ( 2 )  , 150–84 . 
Strauss , A . and Corbin , J .  ( 1990 ) Basics of Qualitative Research : Grounded Theory
Procedures and Techniques , Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . 
Taylor , D . L . and Bogotch , I . E .  ( 1994 )  ‘ School level effects of teachers ’ participation
in decision-making ’  , Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 16 ( 3 )  , 302–19 . 
Wasley , P . A .  ( 1991 ) Teachers as Leaders : The Rhetoric of Reform and the Realities
of Practice , New York : Teachers College Press . 
Whitaker , T .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Informal teacher leadership : the key to successful change in
the middle school ’  , NASSP Bulletin , January , pp . 76–81 . 
116 Leadership in Education
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 116
White , P .  ( 1992 )  ‘ Teacher empowerment under “ ideal ” school-site autonomy ’  , 
Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 14 ( 1 )  , 69–84 . 
Yukl , G .  ( 1989 ) Leadership in Organizations , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . 
FURTHER READING
Harrison , J . W . and Lembeck , E .  ( 1996 )  ‘ Emergent teacher leaders ’  , in G . Moller and
M . Katzenmeyer ( eds )  , Every Teacher is a Leader : Realizing the Potential of
Teacher Leadership , San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Leithwood , K . and Jantzi , D .  ( 1999 )  ‘ The relative effects of principal and teacher
sources of leadership on student engagement with school ’  , Educational
Administration Quarterly , 35 ( supplemental )  , 679–706 . 
Leithwood , K . and Jantzi , D .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Principal and teacher leadership effects : a
replication ’  , School Leadership and Management , 20 ( 4 )  , 415–34 . 
Leithwood , K .  , Jantzi , D . and Steinbach , R .  ( 1999 ) Changing Leadership for Changing
Times , Buckinham : Open University Press . 
Ryan , S .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Teacher leadership : a qualitative study in three secondary schools ’  , 
PhD thesis , OISE / University of Toronto . 
Teacher leadership : its nature , development and impact 117
chap 7 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 117
8
TEACHER LEADERSHIP : PROSPECTS AND
POSSIBILITIES
Helen M . Gunter 
INTRODUCTION
The study and practice of educational leadership continues to be a busy
terrain , particularly since the realities of professional work are often in
tension with the current demands for modernisation . How teachers in their
everyday work live their professional identities , make choices and take
action , within a structuring context that seeks to confirm or challenge what
they do and do not do , is central to this chapter . I will be asking questions
about the stabilities and fractures in teachers ’ work , and examining the
acceptability and possibilities for enabling teachers to reveal what they do
as educational leadership . In doing this I will be drawing on published
research and I intend to position myself as public intellectual ( Gunter and
Ribbins , 2002 )  . In contrast with other professional practice ( such as
trainer , teacher , consultant , expert ) where I may seek to locate myself , to
different degrees as neutral facilitator , in this chapter I take up a committed
commentator position . The implications of this are that in providing
evidence and argument I am aiming to promote intellectual engagement
and practical action around fundamental questions about society . Issues
about teachers ’ work are inextricably connected with how we engage with
the public good , and how we understand the purposes of schools and
schooling . Such matters are simultaneously close to and distant from
everyday practice . Closeness comes from recognising the dilemmas that
teachers have every day in the choices they make in how to handle the
tough issues of caring for and working with children ; distance comes from
the need to create the space to reflect upon the implications of our actions
for how we want to live and work together . 
118
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 118
FROM SEDITION TO SEDATION
For the past 30 years teachers have been positioned in print and in minds
as the problem in education . There are two fabricated images that have
been reworked and overlain until they have become so simple as to make
professional irresponsibility obvious to all . Teachers have either made
parents and children the victims of progressive ideologies and have used
misguided notions about how schools should be organised , and / or
teachers have waved placards and thrown eggs at ministers and so are
unfit to be in charge of impressionistic minds . Teachers it seems have too
much time to think because of the privilege of a short working day and
long paid holidays . It seems that teachers have been cartooned as seditious
by working contrary to parental interests . Consequently , teachers have had
to be brought under control , and this is being done by cleansing the
profession in England : 
• Economically : low wages limits recruitment and retention . 
• Intellectually : competencies prescribe acceptable values , behaviours , 
tasks and knowledge . 
• Physically : illness and disillusionment means that particular types of
teachers and talent exit . 
• Practically : routinisation limits creativity and the opportunities to
think otherwise . 
• Socially : admitting to being a teacher in public is a defensive
embarrassment and hence might be best left unsaid . 
The combined effect of this has been to simultaneously sedate and
stimulate the teacher and so the core activity of teaching and learning is
being reconfigured around comparative measurement within and between 
 ‘ performing schools ’  ( Gleeson and Gunter , 2001 ; Gunter , 2001a )  . On the
one hand the teacher is calmed through the provision of ringbinder scripts
for the what , why and how to teach , and on the other hand is exhorted
to be excited about their performance delivery . Two trends are illustrative
of how the preferred teacher is being storied : language and evidence . 
The language of education is shaping how we are allowed to think in
ways that make the problems of schools and schooling look simple and
hence capable of being easily solved . Staff rooms , performance threshold
applications for salary enhancement and training assessment portfolios are
awash with effectiveness , improvement , standards , auditing , vision , 
teams , stakeholders and outcomes . We might ask where has the dialogue
gone around issues of pedagogy , learning , social justice , caring , democracy
and theory ? The modernisation of the teacher means that these words
along with the complex and contested matters underpinning them have
been consigned to the dustbin of history . A teacher who wants to survive
at work has to stop talking about the realities of doing the job and instead
image the self in line with the need to perform . 
Teacher leadership : prospects and possibilities 119
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 119
Not only is the language banal because it is preventing the endemic
issues undermining teaching and learning to be surfaced , but it is also
making out that resolution is easy by having a school development action
plan or by improving the average points score in the national examination
league tables . Teachers must evidence what they do and why they are
doing it . Interventions in social relationships that are long term , complex
and the product of collective activity are being scripted into short-term
individualised encounters where cause and effect are close together . 
Teachers must be outcome orientated where their eye is on delivery , and
so accountability is through being able to demonstrate that what they have
done is not based on professional judgement and courage but on their fit
with external training requirements . Furthermore , the culture of selfcompliance ( or self-absence / exit , as illustrated above ) means that asking
questions , promoting alternative debates , confronting tough matters , is
difficult . It is hard to stand up and say that you have questions about why
schools , as the prime target , should improve or be effective , and yet this
is the type of enquiry that we need if we are to escape and provide
alternatives to the current mediocrity that besets modernisation . 
Furthermore , as Smyth ( 1995 , p . 5 ) argues children who witness this close
up learn that in problem resolution ‘ institutional authority has more
currency than the moral authority and credibility that attach to peer and
collegial professional judgement on what is important about teaching ’  . 
This modernisation is almost feudal in both intent and impact , as the
teacher is positioned as follower to the all-visioning headteacher as leader . 
Role incumbents either as senior or middle managers are also victims of
modernisation as their identity is being shifted away from the professional
matters of learning , and the needs of children and teachers , towards the
disciplinary control of external accountability . Failure to perform in ways
that are approved of means that heads and managers ( and their families ) 
have found themselves being publicly named and shamed . 
It seems that in the last 30 years we have shifted from restructuring to
retasking to reculturing and this has stripped the educational out of
leadership as business sector models have come to dominate ( Gunter , 
2001a )  . Consequently , in spite of the rhetoric of leadership in education
we have moved to performativity where the individual teacher or
headteacher is on their own in demonstrating their worth and worthiness 
( Ball , 1999 )  . By drawing on Sennett ’ s work , Smyth ( 2001a ) argues that we
are witnessing a ‘ corrosion of character ’ in schools and we need to ask 
 ‘ why do teachers do things with which they disagree ?  ’ Compliance can
be secured through the logic of economic need in which education must
produce the outcomes demanded by the globalising economy , and arguing
for other educational goals located in citizenship and community is
difficult because it is idealistic ( the causal link with profit and profitability
is difficult to make ) and easily marginalised as dangerously ideological . 
120 Leadership in Education
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 120
FROM SACRIFICE TO SIGNIFICANCE
Where do we go from here ? Research shows that there is a ‘ refusal ’ to do
things in ways that are being strictly prescribed ( Nixon , 1995 )  . Heads and
teachers are trying to retain education within learning rather than submit
to the dead hand of tests and more tests . In spite of the continued
fabrication of long holidays , teachers have continued to use their time in
ways that are educationally productive such as summer school , preparing
sessions and working with students as examination results are published . 
We should not confuse this commitment to children , parents and the
community with a compliance with modernisation . Teachers have always
given of themselves , it is embodied in who they are , and it is a concern
that it is not given the positive recognition it deserves ( Hargreaves , 1998 )  . 
Indeed , it has been turned into a type of martyrdom in which the
invisibility of intrinsic rewards has been either sentimentalised , or often
ridiculed around vocation and putting up with poor pay and working
conditions . A legacy of Thatcherism is that this served powerful economic
interests as the failure of teachers to make an effective case for more status , 
and hence worthiness of investment , affected recruitment and retention . 
The personal and personalising nature of teaching which means that you
cannot walk away from tough issues means that the cost of educational
reform has been borne by teachers and their families . Private business has
always looked longingly at the public sector and tried to reproduce the
capacity to work beyond the terms and conditions of the job description . 
It has done this through teams and profit incentive schemes , but it has
largely failed because in the end entrepreneurship is elitist and hollow . 
The irony lies in the obsession with destroying public sector values by
the use of private sector techniques at a time when the latter would benefit
from a collective approach to economic problems . 
The crisis in the recruitment and retention of teachers opens up
possibilities for reconceptualising the significance of teachers and
teaching . This has to be more than recognising that teachers have been so
far largely ignored , except as implementers , in much of the reform agenda . 
It also has to go beyond the need to create only financial incentives to
train and stay . We need to look at how and why teachers go about their
work , what it means and the possibilities for development . In doing this
we need to take a long hard look at leadership and how current preferred
models may position teachers in ways that prevent the type of profession
that learners need . Is it sufficient to argue for leadership to be ‘ distributed ’  
( Gronn , 2000 , p . 317 )  ,  ‘ shared ’  ( Moos and Dempster , 1998 , p . 108 )  ,  
 ‘ dispersed ’ or ‘ dense ’  ( Sergiovanni , 2001 , p . 112–16 )  ? As Blackmore ( 1999 . 
p . 222 ) argues :  ‘ It also means problematising leadership as a key concept
in educational administration and policy – redefining it and even rejecting
it – for perhaps the focus upon leadership is itself the biggest barrier to
gender equality .  ’ Hence our task is not just to stimulate future and current
Teacher leadership : prospects and possibilities 121
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 121
teachers in ways that generate job satisfaction , but we need to look at the
conditions of that satisfaction and engage with issues that challenge the
power structures which seek to do the satisfying . 
A current trend in the modernisation process is to reprofessionalise
teachers as organisational leaders . Teachers are followers of and are
integrated within the vision and mission created , and sustained by the
headteacher and senior management . Teacher capabilities are harnessed
and utilised through both a cognitive and emotional commitment to school
goals , and they can demonstrate their empowerment through teamwork
and the use of problem-solving strategies . This transformational leadership
is about winning hearts and minds in order to realise organisational goals , 
and participation in processes such as development planning , long-term
strategic thinking , as well as day-to-day efficiency and effectiveness , gives
the teacher the opportunity to use new skills and knowledge . This trend
in both policy and globalised models of leadership enables teachers with
particular dispositions towards organisational compliance to gain
leadership experience that is consistent with the type of formal leadership
that post-holders in schools are being trained in ( Gunter , 1999 )  . However , 
while the rhetoric is of teams and empowerment , this is a very top-down
model , or as Allix ( 2000 , p . 18 ) argues :  ‘ implies a pattern of social relations
structured not for education , but for domination ’  . It assumes that in the
division of labour the direction of control from top to bottom remains , and
can be reinforced by models such as instructional leadership where the
headteacher : 
is responsible for improving instruction and developing teachers ’ 
practice . It is the principal who must be trained to recognise good
teaching , often by learning a prescribed five-step model of teaching . It
is the principal who will teach the teachers about teaching practice . 
Instructional leadership will be accomplished through evaluation of
teachers by principals using a standardised version of teaching 
( Garman , 1995 : p . 151 ) 
Consequently empowerment is the acceptance of organisational hierarchy
and professional judgement is replaced by recipes devised by those at
distance from practice . Garman ( 1995 , p . 32 ) goes on to argue that the calls
for empowerment have not come from teachers themselves , they are the 
 ‘ silenced practitioners ’ because it is difficult to argue against the power
structures that position the voice of teachers and children as being
contrary to the drive for standards . 
We might therefore ask where are the possibilities for teacher leadership
that is both about education and is itself educative ? Fruitful terrain for
exploring this is by acknowledging the importance of teachers as
researchers , mentors , learners and , ultimately , as teachers . By embarking
on this journey there is the need to acknowledge that all of these teacher
identities can be incorporated and sanitised through the current model of
122 Leadership in Education
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 122
transformational leadership , and so I would like to note that my approach
here is to investigate the issues around teachers ’ work that assumes
professionality . As Nixon et al .  ( 1997 , p . 12 ) argue :  ‘ the shift .  .  . is away
from “ professionalism ” as the ideology of service and specialist expertise ; 
away from “ professionalisation ” where the status of the occupation is at
stake ; and towards “ professionality ” which focuses on the quality of
practice in contexts that require radically altered relations of power and
control ’  . Consequently , if we are really serious about teacher leadership
then we need to create the conditions for the exercise of agency and give
recognition to teachers who may think otherwise to the mainstream vision
and mission . The challenge lies both with those who are practitioners and
their dispositions to engage in practice as intellectual and not just
technical work , and with those who research school practice and the
extent to which they reveal this in action ( Gunter , 2001a )  . 
Teacher research has a long history and , it could be argued , has always
been a part of practice through trial and error approaches to developing
and implementing new strategies . However , formalising teacher enquiry
within the classroom and / or the school as a whole could be used to silence
ideas if it is only based on audit and technicist evaluation . The
possibilities still exist for an alternative conceptualisation through action
research that seeks to be emancipatory by interventions that lead to
sustainable change . Grimmett argues that action research is central to
enabling professionality : 
Teachers face many of the dilemmas encountered by elite athletes and
chronically ill patients . They frequently hold high aspirations for their
own classroom performance ; their own person is integrally part of their
practice , placing their self-esteem constantly at risk ; and their need for
skills to help them cope with inordinate pressures created by the
changing societal context is fairly evident . Like elite athletes , teachers
clearly need mental skills that enable them to engage in reframing the
everyday dilemmas they face in teaching and in the implementation of
a new programme . However , they also need interpersonal support , 
stability and intellectual challenge in a community of inquirers . 
Teacher research provided a structure that permitted such an enabling
environment to flourish .  
( Grimmett , 1995 , p . 118 ) 
Clearly a teacher cannot engage in professionality on their own , and how
teachers work with children , with each other and in wider networks , in
the generation and use knowledge , is central to an exercise of agency in
which they can act upon what they know is worth knowing . Illustrative
of this is the drive to formalise teachers as mentors , particularly with
teachers in training , newly qualified teachers and , increasingly , with
children . The danger in the creation and widespread adoption of
mentoring is that it could be implemented as an integrating top down
Teacher leadership : prospects and possibilities 123
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 123
process of induction into established and / or preferred ways of working . 
Cochran-Smith and Paris ( 1995 ) argue that in order to move away from
the conservative and smooth process of co-option into established norms
then we need to begin with the epistemology of teachers and enable power
to operate as a shared resource : 
If teaching is regarded as an intellectual activity and teachers are among
those who have the authority to generate knowledge about teaching , 
then a central task involved in mentoring is supporting beginners as
they learn to be knowers . This means learning to be not only critical
consumers and interpreters of other people ’ s knowledge but also
knowledge-makers who formulate analytical frameworks , pose
problems of practice and develop conjoined ways of collecting and
connecting evidence in order to make decisions about teaching .  
( Cochran-Smith and Paris , 1995 , pp . 184–5 )  . 
This has implications for teacher learning and how individual biographies
and organisational experiences support this type of thinking . We are all
aware of the ‘ re-entry ’ problem of having had access to new ideas and
having them discounted back in the organisation . Also we can all possibly
cite evidence of the cynicism that can surround teacher experiences of
intensive learning required by the come-and-go of internal and external
initiatives . As Hursh ( 1995 ) argues , teachers need to challenge the
normality of teaching and learning , and see it as a product of political
struggles that they have an entitlement to be a part of . Within school the
operation of performance review with lesson observations does not have
to follow a strict line management process based on abstracted criteria that
is presented as good practice . Peer and pupil review are possibilities , but
as work on teacher appraisal in the 1990s shows , such radical changes
cannot be imposed or legislated without work that enables questions to
be asked about the nature of teaching and learning , and how best might
we research it for ourselves ( Gunter , 2001b )  . 
The arguments presented so far do present contradictions and , like
Blackmore ( 1999 )  , I remain troubled by the use of the word ‘ leadership ’ 
and how it has been defined and used to position teachers . The
appropriation of leadership as the functions and behaviours of post
holders means that the professionality imbued in relationships between
teachers , and with children , parents and the community , is being elided . 
I would want to argue that we need to engage with the extensive work
that exists about teachers ’ working lives in order to promote teachers as
teachers . Leadership is within this conceptualisation but if we are really
serious about improving teaching and learning then it cannot be structured
by enduring hierarchical power structures . Teachers will continue to have
technical competence , and will develop craft knowledge through
experience , but they also need to position themselves within practice in
such a way that they are able to ‘ confront strangeness ’  ( Smyth , 2001b , p . 
124 Leadership in Education
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 124
171 )  . In this way they can draw on a range of resources , including theories
gathered from study and reading , and theories developed within practice , 
which I call conceptually informed practice ( Gunter , 2001a )  . As Atkinson 
( 2000 ) argues , we cannot ignore that teachers do base their work on
theories and so we need to open this up so that this is critically engaged
with . I do not underestimate the challenge in all of this , and it is about
working for rather than establishing a vision of an end result to be
achieved . There is much that will enhance it and it has been revealed
through research that shows teachers can and do exercise professional
courage in the choices over teaching and learning ( Crowther , 1997 )  . 
Furthermore , such work shows that schools need not adopt traditional
hierarchies and cultures which prevent authentic teacher participation , 
and so those who may benefit from a top-down model need not accept
the practice that is associated with it ( Smyth , 2001b )  . On the other hand , 
there are long traditions within the teaching community of allying their
interests in ways that may run contrary to the prime purposes of teaching
and learning . We have to address this , and perhaps a good place to begin
is to discuss what we mean by competency to teach , what this means , 
who defines it , and why particular practice is experienced and labelled
as such . 
FROM SILENCE TO STEREO
Studying and practising teaching is essentially sociological . If we are to
open up our understandings and to look at possibilities for change then
we need to approach researching teacher work through conceptualising
agency and structure ( Gunter , 2001a )  . For example , Gronn ( 1996 ; 2000 )  , 
in his scholarly analysis of leadership theory , has argued that we need to
view distributive or shared leadership by asking different types of
questions about organisations . Understanding a division of labour in
which there is the leader and the followers is unhelpful because of the
neo-Taylorist approach to the separation of the design from the
implementation of work . Dressing this up in the more seductive language
of the 1990s with empowerment and collaboration does not really deal
with the dualisms of leader–follower , visioner–deliverer . If we are to begin
with the realities of practice , and that the work of teaching and schools
is distributed , then , as Gronn ( 2000 ) argues , we need to have a more
sophisticated analysis of who or what does the distribution than just the
leader empowering the follower . Similarly , Wallace ( 2001 , p . 165 ) has
shown that the contextual setting of headship in the UK means that while
it may be normatively desirable to share , the realities of accountability do 
 ‘ justify British headteachers proceeding with caution towards the most
extensive , equal sharing of leadership possible to maximise potential for
synergy , while allowing for contingent reversal to hierarchical operation
Teacher leadership : prospects and possibilities 125
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 125
to minimise the risk of disaster ’  . What we are facing is how the arguments
for site-based management in the 1980s , which put emphasis on delegating
decisions and choices to those who had to live with the consequences , 
have been lost because of the endurance of the headmaster tradition . For
site-based management to deliver its democratic possibilities for authentic
participation in schools , there needed to be a follow through in
discussions about traditional hierarchies . Not only has this not happened
but hierarchy has been strengthened through the emphasis on
headteachers as organisational and transformational leaders , and by the
excessive demands for public accountability through narrow indicators of
school performance . Nevertheless , the debate about democratic
development is timely since there is research evidence of increasing
demands by teachers , parents and pupils for more involvement in
decision-making ( Moos and Dempster , 1998 )  . 
How might we proceed as practitioners and researchers ? The
questioning of the existence of leadership because there are ‘ substitutes ’ 
for leaders only takes us part of the way . Gronn ( 2000 , p . 319 ) describes
these arguments as :  ( a ) there is ‘ evidence in numerous studies of a lack of
demonstrated leader effects in explaining organisational outcomes ’  ;  ( b ) 
there are ‘ the personal attributes of organisational members ( e . g . their selfmotivation to perform )  ’  ;  ( c ) there is a momentum to work or ‘ organisational
processes ( e . g . autonomous work group norms )  ’  , and ( d ) there are
regularities to work or ‘ the characteristics in the work itself ( e . g . its routine
or programmed nature ’  . Giving recognition to teacher agency within the
division of labour is helpful in this analysis , but labelling it as a 
 ‘ substitute ’ only creates a push–pull debate over whether leaders do or do
not deny teacher professionality . If we conceptualise leadership as what
leaders as role incumbents do when they are leading , then looking for
places and spaces where their influence and power does not reach is an
interesting activity . If , however , leadership is conceptualised as a dynamic
relationship that all in school and the community can engage in , then we
need to develop a sociologically informed approach to the interplay
between agency and structure . What we need is theory and theorising that
is able to recognise the complexities of how agency and structure work
within practice , and so teacher motivation to act is revealed or cloaked
because of the shaping influence of structures such as organisational
culture which approves of or criticises such activity . In this way the
emphasis is less on being or not being an official in-post leader , and more
on what agents do , and how we seek to capture and understand it within
real time and real-life practice . 
Bourdieu ’ s constructivist social science removes the dichotomy between
agency and structure through providing the tools of field and habitus to
describe and explain the dynamics of leadership ( Gunter , 2000 )  . A field
is a dynamic ‘ space of relations within which agents evolve ’  ( Bourdieu , 
1990 , p . 192 )  , and so Bourdieu is interested in exploring how and why : 
126 Leadership in Education
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 126 
 ‘ types of behaviour can be directed towards certain ends without being
consciously directed to these ends , or determined by them ’ and he argues ,  
 ‘ the notion of habitus was invented , if I may say so , in order to account
for this paradox ’  ( ibid .  , pp . 9–10 )  . Habitus or dispositions to act reveal
positioning of the self , and how the practitioner can be positioned by
others : 
The habitus , as the system of dispositions to a certain practice , is an
objective basis for regular modes of behaviour , and thus for the
regularity of modes of practice , and if practices can be predicted ( here , 
the punishment that follows a certain crime )  , this is because the effect
of the habitus is that agents who are equipped with it will behave in
a certain way in certain circumstances . That being said , this tendency
to act in a regular manner , which , when its principle is explicitly
constituted , can act as the basis of a forecast ( the specialised equivalent
of the practical anticipations of ordinary experience )  , is not based on
an explicit rule or law . This means that the modes of behaviour created
by the habitus do not have the fine regularity of the modes of behaviour
deduced from a legislative principle : the habitus goes hand in glove
with vagueness and indeterminacy . As a generative spontaneity which
asserts itself in an improvised confrontation with ever-renewed
situations , it obeys a practical logic , that of vagueness , of the moreorless , which defines one ’ s ordinary relation to the world .  
( Bourdieu , 1990 , pp . 77–8 ) 
The school as a field of study and practice is a place of struggle over
purposes , processes and products . The staking of cultural and symbolic
capital through entering and positioning within a field provides a dynamic
conceptualisation through which the location and exercise of power can
be understood . Conflict is not a product of human nature but it is the
structure of unequal distribution of capital which ‘ by generating the rarity
of certain positions and the corresponding profits , favours strategies aimed
at destroying or reducing that rarity , through the appropriation of rare
positions , or conserving it , through the defence of those positions ’  
( Bourdieu , 2000 , pp . 183–4 )  . A headteacher having a vision and / or
presenting a visioning process is a position , and a teacher who positions
the self or is positioned in ways that deny or enhance agency can be
understood as a part of a complex process of habitus being disclosed
within the context of an arena of struggle . As Bourdieu ( 2000 , p . 180 ) 
argues ,  ‘ habitus is not destiny ’ but is generative because ‘ habitus is that
presence of the past in the present which makes possible the presence in
the present of the forth-coming ’  ( ibid .  , p . 210 )  . Whether and how this plays
out within everyday practice enables us to have the opportunity to
understand how by attributing leadership to a role incumbent is not just
a product of an organisational flow chart but is integral to how teacher
habitus has been structured over time , and how this experience structures
Teacher leadership : prospects and possibilities 127
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 127
future action . Consequently , the division of labour is a structuring process , 
but how agents engage with this is related to their ‘ feel for the game ’ that
they may or may not enter . Therefore , it is less helpful to talk in terms of
distributing leadership and more productive to think in terms of how
teachers take up positions in relation to those who seek to do the
distributing . 
What Bourdieu ’ s theory of practice does for us is to enable position to
be related to existing power structures both institutionally ( Bourdieu , 
1988 ) and politically ( Bourdieu , 1993 ) in which claims about objectivity
can be related to political and economic interests that can shape and
determine such activity . When role incumbents take on the charismatic
role of visionary and hence position the teacher as follower we can ask
ourselves how this has been structured by agency or by the impact of
modernisation structures which require headteachers to have a vision to
be both appointable and accountable . The impact of the changing political
economy of where ‘ relevant ’ leadership can and should be produced
means that Bourdieu ’ s theorising of the impact of neo-liberalism on
structures and practices in what counts as leadership can enable us to gain
new insights into the contradictions in working lives ( Bourdieu , 2000 ; 
Bourdieu et al .  , 1999 )  . 
Teachers worry about the current modernisation process but may not
be able to take action without fulfilling the caricature of the trendy lefty
radical . However , teachers clearly cannot work for alternative leadership
practices on their own . For teachers to change the labelling of their
leadership as sedition then they also need children and parents to resist
the folklore positioning of teachers as subversives in how they
communicate their support for schools within the wider community . In
this way , while the issues are lived every day in schools , the wider context
of how we conceptualise and practise the public good is central . What is
our contribution as researchers and commentators on schools and
schooling ? Unfortunately the economising of research and professional
practice of those in higher education who work with teachers means that
the opportunity to speak out is also increasingly limited ( Gunter , 2002 )  . 
Nevertheless as knowledge workers who work with teachers in reflecting
on and developing their practice , then the role of the social sciences comes
into play . As Bourdieu ( 1990 ) argues , by making the conditions in which
the researcher produces knowledge about knowledge production explicit
then we are freed from the illusion of adopting technical method as a
guarantor of freedom . 
Emancipation like empowerment always has been and continues to be
problematic . Just as we can question the top-down models of
empowerment based on the illusion that people can only be ‘ switched on ’ 
by external structural forces such as development planning and the
charismatic leader , then we also need to question the ideological goals of
seeking to liberate by standing outside of so called ‘ false consciousness ’  . 
128 Leadership in Education
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 128
We need to understand the settings in which people work , and that their
dispositions are real and reasonable for them . The consequences are that
as Delanty argues we need to work through the complexity of the public
intellectual role with living in an emergent world of ‘ indeterminacy ’  
( Delanty , 1997 , p . 141 )  . There is very little point in writing this chapter if
it only mattered to me ; on the other hand , if others raise questions then
the resulting dialogue is such that there should be opportunities to speak
out . This is not an indulgence because our work as social scientists is to
problem pose because ‘ social science cannot itself provide answers to
social problems ’  ( Delanty , 1997 , p . 141 )  . This can easily be characterised , 
in a climate of problem-solving , as irrelevant and , so , just as teachers need
to rework their role as mediators within knowledge production , then so
do we . 
REFERENCES
Allix , N . M .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Transformational leadership : democratic or despotic ’  , 
Educational Management and Administration , 28 ( 1 )  , 7–20 . 
Atkinson , E .  ( 2000 )  ‘ In defence of ideas , or why “ what works ” is not enough ’  , 
Management in Education , 14 ( 3 )  , pp . 6–9 . 
Ball , S . J .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Performativities and fabrications in the education economy : 
towards the performative society ?  ’  , keynote address to the AARE Annual
Conference , Melbourne . 
Blackmore , J .  ( 1999 ) Troubling Women : Feminism , Leadership and Educational
Change , Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Bourdieu , P .  ( 1988 ) Homo Academicus , Cambridge : Polity Press in association
with Blackwell Publishers , Oxford . 
Bourdieu , P .  ( 1990 ) In Other Words : Essays Towards a Reflexive Sociology , trans . 
M . Adamson , Cambridge : Polity Press in association with Blackwell Publishers , 
Oxford . 
Bourdieu , P .  ( 1993 ) The Field of Cultural Production , Cambridge : Polity Press . 
Bourdieu , P .  ( 2000 ) Pascalian Meditations , trans R . Nice , Cambridge : Polity Press
in association with Blackwell Publishers , Oxford . 
Bourdieu , P .  , Accardo , A .  , Balazs , G .  , Beaud , S .  , Bonvin , F .  , Bourdieu , E .  , Bourgios , 
P .  , Broccolichi , S .  , Champagne , P .  , Christin , R .  , Faguer , J .  , Garcia , S .  , Lenoir , R .  , 
Œuvrard , F .  , Pialoux , M .  , Pinto , L .  , Podalydès , D .  , Sayad , A . Soulié , C . and
Wacquant , L . J . D .  ( 1999 ) The Weight of the World , Cambridge : Polity Press , in
association with Blackwell Publishers , Oxford . 
Cochran-Smith , M . and Paris , C . L .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Mentor and mentoring : did Homer have
it right ?  ’ in J . Smyth ( ed .  )  , Critical Discourses on Teacher Development , London : 
Cassell . 
Crowther , F .  ( 1997 )  ‘ The William Walker Oration , 1996 . Unsung heroes : the leaders in our classrooms ’  , Journal of Educational Administration , 35 ( 1 )  , pp . 5–17 . 
Delanty , G .  ( 1997 ) Social Science : Beyond Constructivism and Realism , 
Buckingham : Open University Press . 
Garman , N . B .  ( 1995 )  ‘ The schizophrenic rhetoric of school reform and the effects
on teacher development ’  , in J . Smyth ( ed .  )  , Critical Discourses on Teacher
Teacher leadership : prospects and possibilities 129
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 129
Development , London : Cassell . 
Gleeson , D . and Gunter , H . M .  ( 2001 )  ‘ The performing school and the modernisation of teachers ’  , in D . Gleeson and C . Husbands ( eds .  )  , The Performing School , 
London : Routledge Falmer , pp . 139–58 . 
Grimmett , P .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Developing voice through teacher research : implications for
educational policy ’  , in J . Smyth ( ed .  )  , Critical Discourses on Teacher
Development , London : Cassell . 
Gronn , P .  ( 1996 )  ‘ From transactions to transformations ’  , Educational Management
and Administration , 24 , 7–30 . 
Gronn , P .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Distributed properties : a new architecture for leadership ’  , 
Educational Management and Administration , 28 ( 3 )  , 317–38 . 
Gunter , H .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Contracting headteachers as leaders : an analysis of the NPQH ’  , 
Cambridge Journal of Education , 29 ,  ( 2 )  , 249–62 . 
Gunter , H .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Thinking theory : the field of education management in England
and Wales ’  , British Journal of Sociology of Education , 21 ( 4 )  , 623–35 . 
Gunter , H . M .  ( 2001a ) Leaders and Leadership in Education , London : Paul Chapman
Publishing . 
Gunter , H . M .  ( 2001b )  ‘ Teacher appraisal 1988–1998 : a case study ’  , School
Leadership and Management , 53 ( 3 )  , 241–50 . 
Gunter , H . M .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Purposes and positions in the field of education management : 
putting Bourdieu to work ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 
30 ( 1 )  , 3–22 . 
Gunter , H . M . and Ribbins , P .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Leadership studies in education : towards a
map of the field ’  . Educational Management and Administration , 30 ( 4 )  , 387–416 . 
Hargreaves , A .  ( 1998 )  ‘ The emotional politics of teaching and teacher development : with implications for educational leadership ’  , International Journal of
Leadership in Education , 1 ( 4 )  , 315–36 . 
Hursh , D .  ( 1995 )  ‘ It ’ s more than style : reflective teachers as ethical and political
practitioners ’  , in J . Smyth ( ed .  )  , Critical Discourses on Teacher Development , 
London : Cassell . 
Moos , L . and Dempster , N .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Some comparative learnings from the study ’  , in
J . MacBeath ( ed .  )  , Effective School Leadership : Responding to Change , London : 
Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Nixon , J .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Teaching as a profession of values ’  , in J . Smyth ( ed .  )  , Critical
Discourses on Teacher Development , London : Cassell . 
Nixon , J .  , Martin , J .  , McKeown , P . and Ranson , S .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Towards a learning profession : changing codes of occupational practice within the new management
of education ’  , British Journal of Sociology of Education , 18 ( 1 )  , 5–28 . 
Sergiovanni , T . J .  ( 2001 ) Leadership : What ’ s in it for Schools ? London : Routledge
Falmer . 
Smyth , J .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Introduction ’  , in J . Smyth ( ed .  )  , Critical Discourses on Teacher
Development , London : Cassell . 
Smyth , J .  ( 2001a )  ‘ Reflections on a “ Damaged Life ”  , the “ hidden injuries ” of teaching within the self-managing school ’  , paper presented to the Annual Meeting
of the American Educational Research Association , Seattle , 10–14 April . 
Smyth , J .  ( 2001b ) Critical Politics of Teachers ’ Work : An Australian Perspective , 
New York : Peter Lang . 
Wallace , M .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Sharing leadership of schools through teamwork : a justifiable
risk ?  ’ Educational Management and Administration , 29 ( 2 )  , 153–67 . 
130 Leadership in Education
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 130
FURTHER READING
Gronn , P .  ( 1996 )  ‘ From transactions to transformations ’  , Educational Management
and Administration , 24 , 7–30 . 
Gronn , P .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Distributed properties : a new architecture for leadership ’  , 
Educational Management and Administration , 28 ( 3 )  , 317–38 . 
Gunter , H .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Contracting headteachers as leaders : an analysis of the NPQH ’  , 
Cambridge Journal of Education , 29 ( 2 )  , 249–62 . 
Gunter , H . M .  ( 2001 ) Leaders and Leadership in Education , London : Paul Chapman
Publishing . 
Gunter , H . M .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Purposes and positions in the field of education management : 
putting Bourdieu to work ’  , Educational Management and Administration , 
30 ( 1 )  , 3–22
Gunter , H . M . and Ribbins , P .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Leadership studies in education : towards a
map of the field ’  . Educational Management and Administration , 30 ( 4 )  , 387–416 . 
Moos , L . and Dempster , N .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Some comparative learnings from the study ’  , in
J . MacBeath ( ed .  )  , Effective School Leadership : Responding to Change , London : 
Paul Chapman Publishing
Nixon , J .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Teaching as a profession of values ’  , in J . Smyth ( ed .  )  , Critical
Discourses on Teacher Development , London : Cassell . 
Sergiovanni , T . J .  ( 2001 ) Leadership : What ’ s in it for Schools ? London : Routledge
Falmer . 
Smyth , J .  ( 2001 ) Critical Politics of Teachers ’ Work : An Australian Perspective , 
New York : Peter Lang . 
Teacher leadership : prospects and possibilities 131
chapter 8 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 131
9
EFFECTIVE LEADERSHIP FOR WAR 
AND PEACE
Clive Harber and Lynn Davies
INTRODUCTION
Recent global events have underlined the argument of this chapter , that
educational leadership has to enter a new phase – a phase that will require
very different thinking . This shift is not the same as simple incremental
changes to allow for new technology or the ‘ knowledge economy ’  . Nor is
it an expansion of the usual nods in the direction of contingency and
regard for contextual difference . Much is indeed already made in the
leadership literature of the need to take into account the context of the
educational institution . Sergiovanni ( 2001 ) for example starts his recent
book on leadership by quoting Barth ’ s critique of the ‘ list approach ’ to
factors in effective leadership , i . e .  , that the same things applied to different
contexts and to different situations typically produce different results . 
However , our chapter argues that such an acknowledgement of context is
often no more than lip-service . By chapter 5 , Sergiovanni is arguing for a 
 ‘ system of layered standards in school ’  , with the first one being ‘ uniform
standards for all schools in basic reading , writing and math ( maybe civics )  ’  
( ibid .  , p . 93 )  . The assumption of unchanging and undifferentiated goals
for formal education remains the same . 
There are three major problems with current educational leadership
literature . The first is that it is mainly about conventional schools – fixedsite buildings where pupils go at regular times on a daily basis and learn
a planned curriculum manifested in a timetable . Schooling does not equal
education and there are many different forms of education as well as many
different forms of schooling . A second problem is that of real contextuality , 
in that the published literature largely stems from , and is written about , 
the industrialised north of the planet . Educational organisations in
developing countries and in unstable societies exist in very different
contexts , as we have argued in detail elsewhere ( Harber and Davies , 1997 )  . 
132
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 132
The third and most significant problem , related to the first two , is the lack
of acknowledgement of ideology . Education is intimately bound up with
goals based on open or hidden values , and forms of education policy and
provision reflect these values . Leadership cannot be discussed as if it
existed in a moral or political vacuum , as if there were ‘ principles ’ of
leadership regardless of the goals of the educational institution . Yet if we
merely take a model of educational effectiveness and leadership
effectiveness as based on the principle of congruence between inputs , 
processes and desired outputs , this can end up being morally relativist . 
Consider the following example . 
Let us imagine a terrorist training camp which is , above all else , an
educational institution . How would we judge its effectiveness ? First , we
would need to understand the goals it had set itself , then we could judge
its effectiveness in terms of the appropriateness of its inputs and processes
and how they did or did not contribute to success or failure in achieving
desired outcomes . Leadership of the terrorist training camp would be a
key process variable . Let us say its goals are to produce 50 highly
disciplined and dedicated terrorists a year , willing to sacrifice their own
lives and capable of making bombs and using and handling automatic
guns . Inputs required would include experienced terrorists to carry out
the training , a secret and secluded training camp and a good supply of
necessary materials and weaponry . Outputs might be judged in relation to
both the successful ‘ graduation ’ of 50 terrorists and the extent to which
they wreaked havoc on the designated enemy . Process variables might
include intense indoctrination in the cause , strict discipline , a rigorous
regime of physical training and practical lessons in bomb-making and
firing a machine gun . What would be the characteristics of an effective
educational leader in this context ? He or she would need to be
authoritarian , unbending , harsh , closed-minded , violent and full of hatred
for the enemy . 
This example of educational leadership is effective in terms of the goals
it sets itself . However , who are the goals themselves effective for ? Are all
goals equally morally acceptable ? One of the criticisms made of the school
effectiveness literature is that it skates over the issue of the diversity of
possible goals for education . However , recognising that such diversity
exists immediately raises the issue of acceptability . Even our example is
not straightforward . While not likely to find much support in the
atmosphere of the ‘ international war against terrorism ’ in which we are
writing , it nevertheless has to be pointed out that in recent history
liberation movements in Africa ( for example , Zimbabwe , Namibia and
South Africa ) have had to organise along very similar lines in order to
overcome undemocratic , oppressive and violent regimes . Training and
education were very much part of their organisational structure ( Harber , 
1989 ; 1997 )  . This chapter , then , deliberately sets out to provide an antidote
to the more conventional literature on leadership by exploring the
Effective leadership for war and peace 133
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 133
diversity of educational organisation and goals , and the implications for
effective educational leadership . In particular , it explores the growing
arena of educational leadership in times of political conflict and crisis . 
ARE ALL EDUCATIONAL GOALS EQUALLY 
MORALLY ACCEPTABLE ? 
In Nazi Germany an effective school leader was a party member , a believer
in racist doctrine , a supporter of military expansion and blindly obedient
to the party and the state . In this way he or she would help to produce
young fascists for the Reich . This example brings home the issue of the
moral purpose of education in a rather stark manner , but it is far from
being alone . From 1948 to 1994 , South African schools existed to try to
make apartheid ‘ normal ’ and ‘ acceptable ’ in the minds of young South
Africans . From the apartheid government ’ s point of view the role of
education was to help perpetuate and reproduce a racist system and to
encourage obedience and conformity to that system . Again authoritarian
and racist leaders would be ideal heads . 
Perhaps these examples , though real enough , are too clear cut . In
Denmark there is a Private Independent Schools Act which allows for
schools to be established on any chosen ideological basis . Twelve pupils
are needed to start a school and the school is then subsidised by the state . 
In 1998 the Danish neo-Nazi party , the Danish National-Socialist
Movement , intended to set up a school of its own . The Ministry of
Education would assess the school ’ s purpose , including potential breaches
of the law on racism ,  ‘ but breach of the law is not in itself enough to deny
a school a subsidy ’  ( De Laine , 1998 )  . Is the educational leadership likely
to be exercised in this school at odds with the sort of educational
leadership that should be exercised by the state in this case ? Is neo-Nazism
just another ideology or do its tenets , for example racism , depart from the
very basis of democracy ? Does the greater goal of democracy therefore
exclude this particular version of diversity ? 
At the time of writing this chapter , the British government was calling
for more faith-based schools . Here is one example . The Head of Kilskeery
Independent Christian School in County Tyrone , Northern Ireland , claims
that whenever she has a teacher recruitment crisis she does not advertise
but gets down on her knees and prays for help . Staff at the school must
share the doctrine of the Free Presbyterian faith that they are God ’ s true
servants in an immoral world , that the theory of evolution is wrong and
that all children are natural sinners who must be taught to conform to
God ’ s law . The head ’ s leadership style consists of doctoring Macbeth to
cut out the ‘ immoral ’ bits , showing how the Bible proves evolution to be
wrong , rejecting sex education of any kind and using corporal punishment
to restrict the innate sinful tendencies of children ( Ghouri , 1998 )  . Can the
134 Leadership in Education
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 134
leadership of such a school be judged to be effective solely in terms of the
goals that it has set for itself or are some of its aims harmful and therefore
its leadership also harmful ? Ironically , at the same time the government
was attempting to promote more faith-based schools , reports on race riots
in Oldham , Burnley and Bradford over the summer of 2001 suggested that
part of the problem was that schools had become too racially segregated
and that there should be more mixing of faiths . Should forms of
educational organisation be judged on the extent to which they contribute
to the strength and sustainability of democracy ? 
BASIC PRINCIPLES : PEACE , SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT AND DEMOCRACY
It will be clear from the above examples that we do not believe in a moral
relativism in discussions of educational leadership and school
effectiveness . We start from a number of linked propositions : 
1 That one of the major goals of education should be peace . 
2 That sustainable development of a society is integral to that peace . 
3 That goals of literacy or productivity should be a sub-set of goals of
peace and sustainable development . 
4 That democratic organisation and education for democracy are the most
likely ways to achieve the above ends . 
5 That schools and leadership in many contexts remain authoritarian , 
and hence unlikely to achieve the above ends . 
Many ( since the early 1990s , most ) countries internationally pay lipservice to the need to operate a democratic system of government . So the
key national goal set by political leaders is democracy and , indeed , the
word ‘ democracy ’ often features in government policy documents on
education . Yet one insufficiently remarked aspect of school and classroom
leadership internationally is that it is authoritarian leadership . Elsewhere
one of the writers has summarised evidence from a wide range of countries
in South and Central America , Africa , Asia , North America and Europe
as to the authoritarian nature of school and classroom relationships 
( Harber , 1997 )  . Educational leaders set the tone and nature of such
relationships . Yet if democracy is supposed to be the foremost political
goal of education , should not this be reflected in the ways in which
schools are led if schools are to be judged effective ? This is the opposite
argument to the one explored in the section above . Instead of what forms
of leadership should be excluded from a consideration of ‘ effectiveness ’ 
because they are not morally effective in their own right , this section
argues that there ought to be one overriding consideration in terms of
goals , given the stated commitment of governments to democracy . 
Education should produce democratic citizens committed to equality of
Effective leadership for war and peace 135
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 135
human rights , to mutual respect between individuals and groups and to
free participation and informed choice in political decision-making . 
Where research has been done on the views of pupils , the lack of
democracy in their lives at school is a salient theme . A survey of 3 , 600
students in schools in Canada found widespread evidence of what Fullan
and his colleagues ( 1991 , p . 171 ) called the ‘ alienation theme ’  . Students
were consistently critical of a lack of communication , dialogue , 
participation and engagement in the process of learning . In Britain a recent
survey of 15 , 000 pupils found that among what they would like would
be , 
• a listening school with children on the governing body , class representatives and the chance to vote for teachers
• a flexible school without rigid timetables or examinations , without
compulsory homework , without a one-size-fits-all curriculum , so that
they could follow their own interests and spend more time on what
they enjoy
• a respectful school where they are not treated as empty vessels to be
filled with information , where teachers treat them as individuals and
where children and adults can talk freely to each other , and the pupils ’ 
opinions matter . 
What is clear is that , given that the children were asked to write about 
 ‘ The school that I ’ d like ’  , they did not feel that these were currently
features of schooling in Britain ( Birkett , 2001 )  . 
There are a range of issues here . One appears to be inefficiency : Smith
and Andrews ( 1989 ) studied over 2 , 500 teachers and 1 , 200 principals and
found that effective principals were engaged in four areas of leadership
interactions with teachers :  ( 1 ) as ‘ resource provider ’  ,  ( 2 ) as ‘ instructional
resource ’  ,  ( 3 ) as ‘ communicator ’ and ( 4 ) as ‘ visible presence ’  . Of these the 
 ‘ instructional leader ’ role was found to be particularly important in
identifying the effective head . However , only 21 of the 1 , 200 were actually
effective instructional leaders . Two other studies found that only 10 per
cent of headteachers functioned effectively according to their criteria 
( Fullan , 1991 , p . 151 )  . 
More sinister even than alienation is how schools actually harm pupils . 
In some parts of the world there is increasing evidence of the psychological and physical harm – manifested in stress , anxiety and resulting physical symptoms – which is done to children and teachers by increasingly
controlled , regulated , ordered , inspected , competitive and test-driven
schooling systems which are aimed at classification and ranking in order
to serve markets in education . A survey in 2000 of 8 , 000 pupils in England
and Wales , for example , found that stress is damaging pupils and resulting in sleeping and eating disorders . The cause of this was endless testing , 
with the report entitled ‘ Testing to Destruction ’  . It was calculated that by
the time the average sixth former leaves school he or she will have taken
136 Leadership in Education
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 136
75 or more external tests ( Smithers , 2000 )  . One in five primary children
in Bavaria is taking medication for stress or to improve ‘ performance ’  
( Sharma , 2001 )  . In a study in America , it was found that students were
stressed out and regularly participated in devious , deceptive and cruel
behaviour to get the best grade ( Hill , 2001 )  . In India , in 2000 at least four
suicides were reported because of pressure on students for college entry 
( Behal , 2000 )  . Back in the UK , one survey found that 58 per cent of teachers had sought medical help for stress . This can have consequences for
pupils , in that :  ‘ the daily classroom experiences of a child whose teacher
is under stress will certainly be less than positive . Shouting , verbal putdowns , short temper , poor quality assignments , poorly planned , unimaginative lessons , work not marked ’  ( Cosgrave , 2000 , pp . 117–18 )  . 
The issue for leadership is grave . While we have concentrated here on
stress and anxiety as an example , there is considerable evidence of the
many ways in which schooling can cause violence to pupils and reproduce
violence in the wider society ( Harber , 2002a )  . It is not merely a problem
of schools being vaguely undemocratic within themselves , but that
educational leaders may have little power to change the inexorable testing
and regulatory regimes imposed by governments or little capacity to
challenge acceptance of violent solutions to problems . If educational
leaders accede to the pressure for ‘ standards ’ without providing ways in
which their pupils and staff can live in a dignified and humane fashion , 
then their schools will be contributing to conflict ( Davies , 2001b )  . The
schools may be effective in the narrow sense of academic achievement , 
but they will also be effective in turning out damaged and aggressive
individuals . 
SHIFTS TOWARDS DEMOCRATIC LEADERSHIP
Nonetheless , we do have examples internationally of education systems
that organise , or are attempting to organise their schools on a more
democratic basis . Davies and Kirkpatrick ( 2000 ) studied schools in
Denmark , Holland , Sweden and Germany , and found that England was
lagging behind the rest of Europe in terms of pupils ’ rights and their
participation in educational decision-making . Legislation in these
countries ensured not just the presence of school councils , but also pupil
representation on school boards , on curriculum committees and on
appointments or promotions panels . Very effective pupil unions –
financed and supported by the state – enabled forums for consultation of
young people about education by government or local authority as well
as ways of training pupils in the practice of democracy . 
In some developing countries undergoing transition to democracy there
is also a clear recognition of the importance of education in building a
sustainable democracy . In South Africa all secondary schools must now
Effective leadership for war and peace 137
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 137
by law have a Learner Representative Council ( LRC ) elected by the student
body and representatives from the LRC sit on school governing bodies
which have considerable powers over the running of schools . Similar
policies have been adopted in neighbouring Namibia , and Uganda is also
making considerable efforts in regard to education for democracy ( Harber , 
1997 ; 1998 ; 2001 ; 2002b )  . In our book on school management and
effectiveness in developing countries we discussed further examples in
Chile and Colombia ( Harber and Davies , 1997 )  . 
Another instance of growing democracy and power-sharing is the whole
questioning of single leadership . Do schools need a single headteacher at
all ? In Zurich Canton in Switzerland , schools , for example , have no
headteachers . The basic unit of organisation is the classroom . Classroom
teachers vote for a leader , a first among equals , to represent them on the
school board , the employer . Teachers in Switzerland are the best paid in
Europe ( 50 per cent better in real terms than in Britain )  . Switzerland
spends 6 per cent of its gross domestic product on education – twice as
much as Britain . The schools are small and so are the classes . Eleven-yearold Swiss children are among the most literate and numerate in Europe 
( Rafferty , 1998 )  . The article in the Times Educational Supplement from
which this information is drawn provoked a letter from an education
academic at Leicester University in the following week ’ s edition which
pointed out that Switzerland was not the only country where headteachers
do not exist : 
In the Reggio Emilia early years system in Northern Italy , schools have
an administrator ( clerical level ) and an atelierista who is responsible
for ensuring quality curriculum planning and implementation . In
addition a pedagogista ( a high quality trained teacher ) is attached to a
small group of schools , with a main responsibility for staff development
and training decisions . Even those roles are not perceived by staff to
be hierarchical , the staff taking full and joint responsibility for
promoting the quality of education within their schools . I have never
spoken to such committed teaching staff – with no-one to whom the 
 ‘ buck ’ can be passed it is evident how responsible individuals feel . 
Other noteworthy features to which we aspire in this country were the
parents ’ apparent satisfaction with and support for the schools and the
staff , the high standards achieved by very young children and the very
evident atmosphere of mutual respect and cooperation . But then , 
Reggio Emilia staffing is around 12 children to one adult !  
( Moyles , 1998 ) 
In a chapter in a book Educational Dilemmas , Davies ( 1997 ) made a case
for ‘ leaderless schools ’ or at least rotational leadership . This derived from
concerns about the dangers of the new managerialism in education with
apparently charismatic and manipulative heads leading an intensification
of teachers ’ work . Models and metaphors of effective leadership are still
138 Leadership in Education
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 138
patriarchal , militaristic and sporting in many parts of the world , with combative leadership styles matching competition between schools for results
and reputations . Davies ’ s argument was – and is – for federalism and
mutual ownership , with a matrix model , a range of elected posts and multiple memberships of different groupings .  ‘ Strong leadership ’ may indeed
be necessary in times of crisis , but collegial styles better suit innovation , 
collaboration and the teamwork necessary in modern democracies ( see
also Torrington and Weightman , 1989 )  . The case for leaderless schools predictably provoked a reaction ( Fidler , 1997 )  , with the argument that parents
should not have to suffer the ‘ vagaries ’ of a collective of publicly funded
teachers , that clear lines of accountability are needed , that it is difficult to
improve a school with collegiate decision-making . It is argued that there
appears to be a strong psychological need for a single leader , for someone
who can mobilise for action . Yet we would still claim that acceding to this
need can be undemocratic and even hazardous . 
Grint , in his The Arts of Leadership ( 2000 ) is nicely cynical about ‘ the
leader ’  : 
Many of our problems stem not from what our leaders do but what we
let them get away with . It is important to note that the power of leaders
rests not in themselves , as possessions , but in their followers , as a
network of relationships . Just as leadership is indeterminate , one of the
ways that leaders persuade their followers to obey them or follow them
is by suggesting that leaders can determine the future , that what is
negotiable is actually non-negotiable . The dereliction of followers ’ 
responsibility is not simply something that can be laid at the feet of
failed leaders . It fits too often on the shoulders of those who silently
followed without resistance , of those who refused to speak out against
their own leaders and whose inaction allowed the leaders to proclaim
that , since none was against them , all must be for them .  .  . 
The trick of leadership – and the real invention – is to develop
followers who privately resolve the problems leaders have caused or
cannot resolve , but publicly deny their intervention . Thus leadership
reverts to its talismatic origins : it performs a ritual that followers appear
to require . Whether it actually works miracles is irrelevant , because , as
long as followers believe they need leaders , leaders will be necessary 
.  .  . As the organisational jungle joke goes : when leaders look down
from the top of the tree in the jungle , all they see is their organisation
staffed by monkeys . When followers look up at their leaders from their
position at the bottom , all they see is bums .  .  . It is followers who save
leaders and therefore make them .  ( ibid .  , pp . 419–20 ) 
While many leadership studies have focused on the ‘ successful leader ’  , 
with its connotations of willing and captivated followers , this chapter
argues against this approach as being highly dangerous historically – and , 
indeed , anti-educational . 
Effective leadership for war and peace 139
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 139
BUT IS DEMOCRATIC LEADERSHIP UNIVERSALLY
APPLICABLE ? 
The question of crisis versus stability leads on to the question of
contingency and context to determine leadership . Let us imagine a range
of existing diverse contexts , forms , purposes and clienteles of education , 
as follows : 
• Distance education provided via written packs , television , radio , the
Internet and some face-to-face contact . 
• Home-based education where parents educate their children at home . 
• Steiner Waldorf schools where teaching does not begin until age six
and where there is an emphasis on nourishing the emotional and
motivational need of the child and where art , drama and music have
a central place in the curriculum . 
• Green schools where the emphasis in all school-based activity is on
ecological sustainability and seeing the world holistically and as
interconnected . 
• Schools in areas which have recently been affected by violent conflict
and where priorities are conflict resolution skills , addressing grief and
psychological / social stress , landmine awareness and health awareness . 
• The education of refugee children . 
• The education of street children who have to earn a living partly or
wholly on the streets of big cities throughout the world . 
• The education of nomadic children . 
• A school with no running water , electricity , telephone or inside latrines
and where the nearest town is two hours ’ drive away . 
• A school with a large number of AIDS orphans and where teachers are
dying of AIDS on a regular basis . 
Is it possible to talk about educational leadership or democratic leadership
in a generalised manner to cover all these common situations ? Does it not
matter what is being led ? Moreover , each one of these examples has
considerable diversity within it , depending on the context involved . Let
us take a couple of examples and briefly suggest some implications for
leadership . 
How would educational leadership be exercised in the case of the
education of street children ? First , there would be a need to lead some
research – who are the street children in the area concerned ? How do they
earn income ? What are their work patterns ? What dangers do they face ? 
What might be their educational priorities be ? Second , an educational
leader in this situation would need to establish flexible forms of
organisation and provision that suited the needs of street children and not
the other way around . This might involve very flexible timetabling of
provision at all times of the day and working out in the community / on
140 Leadership in Education
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 140
the streets . Third , the educational leader would need to staff his or her
organisation with colleagues who were prepared to work in this way and
to organise staff development that enhanced these skills and this may
involve some street children themselves . Fourth , the leader , and through
him or her the staff , would need to have to operate on a client-led basis
in terms of the perceived needs of the street children themselves – both
in the way they operated and in what was provided . Health education , 
counselling and self-defence might be more important than geography or
chemistry . The actual answers and practices stemming from these issues
would nevertheless still vary between Rio de Janeiro , Lagos and Jakarta . 
Another example might be based on an existing secondary school in
Kosovo . After years of running the ‘ parallel system ’ under the rule from
Milosevic , whereby Albanian schools took place in homes and shops , a
principal returned to his original school in July 1999 , after the end of the
conflict , together with three other teachers . The door was locked . He
recounted : 
We didn ’ t know what we would find inside . The military had been
here during the air strikes . A cleaner , a refugee from Croatia , was here , 
living in one of the rooms . We thought there might be bombs , the
classrooms were also locked , we unlocked them with knives . We found
signs of the military , their uniforms . There was not much physical
damage , but materials had all been taken .  .  . In September we started
the school . The biggest challenge was that we didn ’ t know whether the
staff were alive , or the pupils . There was some information that one of
the 16-year-old students had been massacred . Many students had lost
their parents , or did not know how to contact them . The private houses
where the parallel schools had been had all been burned , all the
documentation . We had to make a new register according to how the
teachers had remembered the names .  .  . 
What are the challenges for leadership here ? Too numerous to count . The
principal isolated some : the stress and trauma of students and staff ; the
family breakdowns that had occurred during the war and in the camps ; 
many young people having been abroad , and not familiar with the
situation in Kosovo ; and the current education reform . Students had heard
of changes and liberalisation of education , but without any clarification – 
 ‘ they think they have the right to do anything ’  . They were producing
revolutionary pamphlets ! Finally , the principal was aware that the society
also had to be transformed , but ‘ it was difficult to know how ’  . It is clear
that leadership in this highly volatile and sensitive situation required a
complex array of activities , none of which had to do with performance
management . 
It would seem that any literature on educational leadership that tried
to establish lists of prescriptive characteristics , tasks or skills for the 
 ‘ effective leader ’ would need to be very wary unless the specific context
Effective leadership for war and peace 141
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 141
and goal for these was made very clear – for example ‘ secondary schools
in England aiming at GCSE results ’  ( and even then there may be
rural / urban differences )  . There are , for example , still too many books that
glibly claim to be ‘ international ’ in the title but which only deal with
industrialised nations ( an example would be Day et al .  ( 2000 ) recently
reviewed by one of the authors )  . 
There are a number of dilemmas here . First , at one level we are arguing
for contextuality , which implies a sort of relativism , that there are no
universal prescriptions , that everything is context driven . On the other
hand we are arguing for important internationally applicable goals for
education and an implicit set of democratic principles , applicable
everywhere , to underpin them . Second , on the one hand , we are arguing
for a match between process and goal , that democratic goals require
democratic processes ; on the other hand , we might want to argue that if
democratic processes are so efficient , they would be just as useful in a
terrorist organisation which had authoritarian aims . A third dilemma is , 
of course , in the very definition of democracy itself . Our recent research
with teacher educators in the Gambia ( Davies , 2002 ; Schweisfurth , 2002 ) 
revealed a number of different definitions , often revolving round the
intersection between Islam and western interpretations , between
autonomy and respect for one ’ s family , for one ’ s organisation and for
traditional gender hierarchies . Can one be relativist even within the
concept of ‘ democracy ’  ? 
SCHOOLS AND LEADERSHIP THAT DO NO HARM
Perhaps the only universal principle is the one often quoted by the
medical profession :  ‘ to do no harm ’  . The examples given above provided
myriad examples of the ways that schools can harm people – students and
staff . Schools are of course also – often simultaneously – doing good . Our
aim should be to lower the levels of pain . There was a joke going round
in the film industry at the time of the making of the film Raise the Titanic . 
The costs of making the film escalated so much that the producer was
heard to mutter ‘ It would have been cheaper to lower the Atlantic ’  . Rather
than a focus on ‘ raising standards ’ – which always disadvantages a large
number – we might want a focus on ‘ lowering distress ’  . This matches the
contemporary call for education to be involved in the elimination of
distress factors such as poverty and conflict . 
Our argument would be that some form of democratic leadership is the
best way to do no harm . Democracy involves finding out what people want
and giving them a voice to air their joys and pains . Democracy involves
giving people a change to eject leaders that cause them distress . Democracy
involves giving people the knowledge to be able to make an informed
choice about which leaders are likely to cause them the least distress and
142 Leadership in Education
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 142
the most gain . The democratic school would be one where students and
staff had the skills and knowledge to participate in deciding the
leadership . The question is not ‘ what makes a good leader ?  ’ but ‘ what
makes a good election for a leader ?  ’ 
Similarly , democracy is about equity and about respect for others . It
involves having the skills and knowledge to be able to challenge injustice . 
Again , the question is not ‘ what is effective leadership ?  ’ but ‘ what learning
enables people to respect or conversely challenge those in power ?  ’ 
Admittedly , some of this learning might well be from the example of a
leader : a principal of a Serb school in Brc˘ko , Bosnia told one of the authors
of his attempt to start the integration process between Serb and Bosnian
schools after the conflict ( Davies , 2001a )  . He started by organising a
football match between his school and a neighbouring Bosnian school . 
Two parents ( both war invalids ) refused to allow their children to play ; 
one was persuaded . It was a very successful occasion , but two Serb
principals of other schools then objected , and tried to prevent his reelection as principal . However , he won , and eventually other principals
came round to his position . The point of this narrative was that here was
a principal who was prepared to take risks , to challenge the continuing
mistrust and hostility in the region , and to act as a role model for that
new spirit . Leadership for democracy and peace is not just about
delegation and power-sharing , but about going out on a limb against the
forces of authoritarianism . 
Doing no harm , ironically , is not a passive approach but entails setting
up situations of ( positive ) conflict . This could be a school council with
teeth and with input into both curriculum planning and school discipline ; 
competition not for academic achievement but for posts of responsibility 
( by head , staff and students )  ; joint debates by students and staff over the
vision of the school and its external role ; classrooms which encouraged
questioning and challenges to teachers and learners ; and forays into
injustice in school , in the local community or even in the national / 
international community . This has obvious parallels with the notion of
global citizenship . We have some published examples of headteachers
who have ‘ led ’ schools in a democratic fashion ( Trafford , 1997 ; Watts , 
1989 ; Welgemoed , 1998 )  , and all have been prepared to take risks and
establish positive conflict to ensure maximum benefit . 
Of course if new or previously traditional heads were to work in a
democratic manner then they might need training – or at least much
reflection – and this would have to involve not only the implications for
practice but also the nature and philosophy of democracy .  ‘ Being a leader , 
undertaking leadership and trying to hold on to educational leadership is
highly political ’  ( Gunter , 2001 , p . 17 )  . Leadership education for democracy
needs to include considerations of structural issues such as gender as well
as of school micropolitics ( Davies , 1998 )  . Yet , in England at least , headship
training seems to exclude philosophical matters such as the culture and
Effective leadership for war and peace 143
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 143
values of the school and concentrates on what can be learned quickly 
( Gunter , 2001 , p . 90 )  . Our experience from trying to examine ‘ effective ’ 
leadership in a range of international contexts is that , like democracy , it
is a process , not an end-state . It cannot be learned quickly and for all time . 
And it can be learned only be setting up structures for challenging its very
existence . 
CONCLUSION
One cannot simply say that the good leader is one who has a ‘ strategic
vision ’  , if that vision is to bomb the hell out of another country . One cannot
simply say the good leader is one who has ‘ high expectations ’ if those
expectations are for uncritical but efficient avengers . Leadership must
have a value base , with the links between that value base and daily school
processes made transparent and coherent . Our reconciliation of
contextuality and universality is twofold : first , that whatever the diverse
context of educational provision , all institutions operate in a global arena
beset by actual or potential tension , and hence need a goal at least not to
add to this tension ; and , second , that democratic processes ( however
messy and time-consuming ) will be the only way to foster the active
challenge to conflict escalation , to ensure sustainable learning for
sustainable development . 
REFERENCES
Behal , S .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Exam stress prompts reform demand ’  , Times Educational
Supplement , 21 July . 
Birkett , D .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Future perfect ’  , Guardian Education , 5 June . 
Cosgrave , J .  ( 2000 ) Breakdown : The Facts About Stress in Teaching , London : 
Routledge Falmer . 
Davies , L .  ( 1997 )  ‘ The case for leaderless schools ’  , in K . Watson , C . Modgil and S . 
Modgil ,  ( eds )  , Educational Dilemmas : Debate and Diversity , Vol . 3 , London : 
Cassell . 
Davies , L ( 1998 )  ‘ Democratic practice , gender and school management ’  , in P . Drake
and P . Owen ,  ( eds )  , Gender and Management Issues in Education , Stoke-onTrent : Trentham Books
Davies , L .  ( 2001a ) Curriculum Harmonisation in Bre˘ko District , Bosnia-Herzegovina
report to EC / CfBT . 
Davies , L .  ( 2001b )  ‘ Education , social identity and conflict ’  , Educational Practice
and Theory , 23 ( 1 )  , 5–23 . 
Davies , L .  ( 2002 )  ‘ The democratization of teacher education ’  , in E . Thomas ( ed )  , 
Teacher Education : Dilemmas and Prospects : World Yearbook of Education , 
London : Kogan Page . 
Davies , L . and Kirkpatrick , G .  ( 2000 ) The EURIDEM Project : A Review of Pupil
Democracy in Europe , London : Children ’ s Rights Alliance . 
Day , C .  , Fernandez , A .  , Hauge , T . and Moller , J .  ( 2000 ) The Life and Work 
144 Leadership in Education
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 144
of Teachers : International Perspectives in Changing Times , London : Falmer
Press . 
De Laine , M .  ( 1998 )  ‘ State to help finance neo-Nazi private school ’  , Times
Educational Supplement , 6 November , 12 . 
Fidler , B .  ( 1997 )  ‘ The case for school leadership ’  , in K . Watson , C . Modgil and S . 
Modgil ( eds )  , Educational Dilemmas : Debate and Diversity , Vol . 3 , London : 
Cassell . 
Fullan , M .  ( 1991 ) The New Meaning of Educational Change , London : Cassell . 
Ghouri , N .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Battle to teach God ’ s own law ’  , Times Educational Supplement , 
9 October , p . 10 . 
Grint , K .  ( 2000 ) The Arts of Leadership , Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
Gunter , H .  ( 2001 ) Leaders and Leadership in Education , London : Paul Chapman
Publishing . 
Harber , C .  ( 1989 ) Politics in African Education , London : Macmillan . 
Harber , C .  ( 1997 ) Education , Democracy and Political Development in Africa , 
Brighton : Sussex Academic Press . 
Harber , C .  ( 1998 ) Voices for Democracy : A North–South Dialogue on Education for
Sustainable Democracy , Nottingham : Education Now in association with the
British Council . 
Harber , C .  ( 2001 ) State of Transition : Post-Apartheid Educational Reform in South
Africa , Oxford : Symposium Books . 
Harber , C .  ( 2002a )  ‘ Schooling as violence : an exploratory overview ’  , Educational
Review , 541 ( 1 )  , 7–16 . 
Harber , C .  ( 2002b )  ‘ Education , democracy and poverty reduction in Africa ’  , 
Comparative Education , 38 ( 4 )  .  ( forthcoming )  . 
Harber , C . and Davies , L .  ( 1997 ) School Management and Effectiveness in
Developing Countries , London : Cassell . 
Hill , A .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Stressed students get ill to win good marks ’  , Observer , 15 
August , 8 . 
Moyles , J .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Italians also manage without their heads ’  , Times Educational
Supplement , 3 July , 20 . 
Rafferty , F .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Happy without a head ’  , Times Educational Supplement , 26
June , 15 . 
Schweisfurth , M .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Democracy and teacher education : negotiating changes to
practice in the Gambia ’  , Comparative Education , 38 ( 4 )  ,  ( forthcoming )  . 
Sergiovanni , T .  ( 2001 ) Leadership : What ’ s in it for Schools ? London : Routledge
Falmer . 
Sharma , Y .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Primary pupils turn to stress pills ’  , Times Educational
Supplement , 13 July , 20 . 
Smith , W . F . and Andrews , R . L .  ( 1989 ) Instructional Leadership : How Principles
Make a Difference . Alexandria , UA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development . 
Smithers , R .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Exams regime harms pupils ’  , Guardian , 4 August , 1 . 
Torrington , D . and Weightman , J .  ( 1989 ) The Reality of School Management , 
Oxford : Blackwell . 
Trafford , B .  ( 1997 ) Participation , Power-Sharing and School Improvement , 
Nottingham : Educational Heretics Press . 
Watts , J .  ( 1989 )  ‘ Up to a point ’  , in C . Harber and R . Meighan ( eds )  , The Democratic
School , Ticknall : Education Now . 
Effective leadership for war and peace 145
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 145
Welgemoed , A .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Democratising a school in South Africa ’  , in C . Harber ( ed .  )  , 
Voices for Democracy : A North–South Dialogue on Education for Sustainable
Democracy , Nottingham : Education Now , in association with the British
Council . 
FURTHER READING
Davies , L .  ( 1997 )  ‘ The case for leaderless schools ’  , in K . Watson , C . Modgil and S . 
Modgil ( eds )  , Educational Dilemmas : Debate and Diversity , Vol . 3 , London : 
Cassell . 
Fidler B .  ( 1997 )  ‘ The case for school leadership ’  , in K . Watson , C . Modgil and S . 
Modgil ( eds )  , Educational Dilemmas : Debate and Diversity , Vol . 3 , London : 
Cassell . 
Grint , K .  ( 2000 ) The Arts of Leadership , Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
Gunter , H .  ( 2001 ) Leaders and Leadership in Education , London : Paul Chapman
Publishing . 
Harber , C . and Davies , L .  ( 1997 ) School Management and Effectiveness in
Developing Countries , London : Cassell . 
Sergiovanni , T .  ( 2001 ) Leadership : What ’ s in it for Schools ? London : Routledge
Falmer . 
146 Leadership in Education
Chap 9 leadEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 146
Section D : Perspectives on Leadership 
in Practice
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 147
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 148
10
LEADING HIGH-PERFORMING SCHOOLS
Mark Brundrett and Neil Burton
INTRODUCTION
The Beacon Schools scheme was devised by the UK ’ s Department for
Education and Employment as a project ‘ specifically designed to help raise
standards in schools through the sharing and spread of good practice ’  
( DfEE , 1999a )  . This chapter outlines the nature of the Beacon Schools
scheme and examines and delineates some of the leadership implications
of managing such schools . The analysis offered is based on an interest in
the scheme that the authors have retained since its inception and draws
on a series of published items . The first piece of research by the authors 
( Brundrett and Burton , 2001 ; Burton and Brundrett , 2000 ) was based on
a quantitative survey of the initial ‘ cohort ’ of Beacon Schools within which
the authors also requested if any such schools would wish to contribute
to a series of ‘ case studies ’  . These case studies , written largely by the staff
of the schools themselves , eventually developed into the text , The Beacon
Schools Experience : Case Studies in Excellence ( Brundrett and Burton , 
2000 ) and a subsequent and similar process , which included new cohorts
of schools involved in the scheme , enabled the construction of a second
text , The Beacon Schools Experience : Developing the Curriculum ( Burton
and Brundrett , 2002 )  . 
A further ‘ grounded study ’ of a Beacon school sought to reveal some of
the management practices and processes in one such school which may
be associated with its success in gaining this accolade ( Brundrett , 2002 )  . 
One central contention of that latter piece of work was the suggestion that
the increasingly ubiquitous management paradigm of ‘ collegiality ’  , the
strengths and inadequacies of which have been explored elsewhere 
( Brundrett , 1998 )  , is neither a sufficient nor an accurate representation of
effective models of school leadership . The latter part of the chapter offers
an alternative conception of ‘ co-constructed ’ leadership which , at one and
the same time , attempts to ensure equity and fairness in decision-making
149
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 149
but also encompasses notions of legitimate ‘ authority ’ in school leaders . 
THE BEACON SCHOOLS SCHEME
The strategic aim of the Beacon Schools scheme , noted above , was initially
facilitated by the identification of 75 such schools , whose Beacon status
commenced in September 1998 , with a remit to operate in that capacity
for three years . Beacon Schools were selected from among those
institutions identified by the Office for Standards in Education ( OFSTED ) 
as the ‘ best performing ’ in their 1996 / 97 report ( OFSTED , 1997 )  . The
scheme was subsequently extended in order to move towards a more even
geographical distribution of such schools covering ‘ a wider range of social
backgrounds ’  ( DfEE , 1999a ) and , by 1999 , there were over 500 such
institutions . On 22 March 1999 , the Secretary of State for Education and
Employment announced the ‘ Excellence in Cities ’ strategy aimed at
improving inner-city schools . Under these proposals the Beacon initiative
was expanded to 1 , 000 schools in 2002 with the intention that this number
should include at least 250 secondary schools . 
Beacon Schools receive additional funding in order to ‘ build
partnerships to foster a two-way exchange of knowledge and ideas ’  ( DfEE , 
1999a ) with other schools in their locality . Beacon Schools are thus
encouraged to engage in a wide range of activities to disseminate their
good practice including holding seminars with teachers from other
schools , mentoring , work-shadowing , provision of in-service training , 
consultancy , links with initial teacher training institutions and support for
newly qualified teachers ( DfEE , 2001 )  . It is particularly important to note
that one central premise of the scheme is the notion that such development
can only be based on the building of partnerships to foster a two-way
exchange of knowledge and skills between professionals . The concept is
not one whereby schools in the scheme seek to ensure that other
institutions simply replicate practices from one school to another . It is , 
rather , one where Beacon Schools seek to share the ideas and systems that
have worked for them , in their particular circumstances and environment , 
allowing partner institutions to decide for themselves whether the
principles can be adapted to fit their own situation ( Brundrett and Burton , 
2000 )  . 
Equally , the scheme is not one that only targets help on schools in
difficulty . The DfEE ( 1999b ) point out that those who have identified
weaknesses in their own school ’ s performance may well wish to examine
the work of the Beacon Schools in order to see if there is anything that
they can learn from their success . Just as importantly , all schools may feel
that they can learn more by developing supportive partnerships within
which one , or more , Beacon Schools form an element . It has been found
that the most common areas for partnership are literacy and leadership ; 
150 Leadership in Education
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 150
the most frequent methods of dissemination are consultation and lesson
observation ; each Beacon School has an average of nine partner schools ; 
and around half of all Beacon Schools are engaged in Initial Teacher
Training activities ( DfES , 2002a ; NFER , 2002 )  . 
The issue of the efficacy of different methods of dissemination has been
the subject of a number of studies including early international
comparative studies ( Rudduck et al .  , 1976 )  . There has , moreover , been a
more recent resurgence of interest in the topic both in terms of
disseminating research ( see , for instance , Barnes and Clouder , 2000 ) in
order to enhance school effectiveness and improvement strategies 
( Wikeley , 1998 )  . Evaluation studies of dissemination practice in a crosssection of case study Beacon Schools emphasised the quality of
relationships as being fundamental to the dissemination of good practice 
( Rudd , 2000 )  . Furthermore , they point out that staff in Beacon Schools
must know how to , and be able to , transfer the necessary skills and
information across different school contexts and cultures ( Rickinson and
Rudd , 2001 )  . A wide range of actual and potential benefits of the scheme
for Beacon Schools themselves has been noted including a higher demand
for places . Nonetheless the impact of some areas of Beacon activity may
be particularly difficult to measure in terms of quantifiable success criteria
since well-defined systems for evaluating the impact of Beacon activity
are currently underdeveloped at both local and national levels . This has
major implications for current and future practice if the flagship scheme
is to encourage transformation in partner schools ( Rickinson and Rudd , 
2001 )  . 
SURVEY OF THE FIRST BEACON SCHOOLS
Research undertaken by the writers on the first 75 Beacon Schools had
two central aims which were , first , to examine the management and other
processes that were assisting in or detracting from the sharing of success
which is at the heart of the initiative and , secondly , to assess to what
extent schools were being successful in balancing the ongoing internal
requirements of their schools with the provisions of the Beacon initiative . 
A questionnaire was sent to all 75 of the initial cohort of Beacon Schools
within which the initial questions focused upon the school ’ s general
perceptions of the success of their year as a Beacon School . Overall the
general impressions of the year from the headteachers or ‘ Beacon School ’ 
co-ordinators were very positive – the large majority of schools claimed
that achieving the status led to further improvements and developments
within the school . Indeed , over 80 per cent also believed that the year had
been a worthwhile and positive experience , a significant vote of
confidence in the initiative . Given that the success of a school year tends
to be very dependent upon the progress of the pupils , it would appear
Leading high-performing schools 151
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 151
that the prime function of these schools , to teach children , was not
compromised by the initiative . 
There was only slightly less support for statements suggesting that
becoming a Beacon School enhanced the development of strong links with
other schools . There was a similar positive response to the suggestion that
it offered a means of publicly recognising the achievements of the school
and the talents of the individuals and teams working there , culminating
in a sense of pride for the whole school community . It would appear from
these responses that recognition of achievement , at both institutional and
individual level , were judged as significant motivational factors for the
teaching staff ( see also the work of MacGilchrist , Myers and Read , 1997 ; 
Sammons , Thomas and Mortimore , 1997 )  . This would imply that the
headteachers of Beacon Schools at least acknowledged the potential of the
initiative to motivate and reward , through non-financial means , the work
of those involved in the success of the school . The enhanced links with
local schools similarly acknowledge the importance of peer recognition of
achievement ( Riches , 1997b , p . 93 )  . 
Most of the schools stated that they had been used extensively to
support the development of other professionals , thus fulfilling one of their
key roles as a Beacon School , to work with and help to develop the
profession . The Beacon Schools ’ own rating of success in supporting other
colleagues and institutions showed that , on the whole , they rated
themselves as ‘ very successful ’ or ‘ successful ’ and there were few
acknowledgements of particular themes not being taken up . Over 20
themes were reported and those with an emphasis on core skills , 
particularly literacy and numeracy , appeared to have been particularly
successful , a fact which may reflect wider governmental initiatives on the
development of basic skills . Some respondents reported that local
education authorities had not supported the initiative fully . In contrast , 
however , nearly half of schools claimed an increased acknowledgement
of their strengths within their own LEAs . Where conflict did appear to
exist it was clear that one problem was that both the Beacon Schools and
the LEAs concerned were offering support and professional development
in the same areas . 
In contrast to the suggestion made by Ghouri ( 1999 ) most of the
respondents claimed that the requirements of Beacon Schools were not
difficult to balance with their normal educational duties . Clearly the
Beacon Schools project was a high-profile initiative which , like all such
developments , has its supporters and its detractors . The resultant pressure
being placed on the Beacon Schools to succeed from all quarters must be
significant . The survey asked the respondents what contributed to this
success . With each school offering different strengths , and operating
within a different set of local circumstances , a wide range of reasons for
success was given . A significant number of the respondents referred to the
enthusiasm of the profession for the initiative as the key factor
152 Leadership in Education
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 152
contributing towards such positive outcomes . Moreover it was clear that
this enthusiasm applied to both the staff teaching within the Beacon
School and the schools making use of the services offered . 
Adequate preparation and liaison , both internally and externally , in the
lead-up to becoming a Beacon School were regarded as essential , 
particularly by those who felt that they had received insufficient time for
this . Successfully communicating the ‘ vision ’ of Beacon School status
throughout the school , including constituents such as parents and the
community as a whole , appeared essential for some , a feature explored by
a number of commentators ( Bailey and Johnson , 1997 ; Foreman , 1998 ; 
Weindling ; 1997 )  . This would appear to be an extension of the need for
effective communication , important within the operation of any well-run
school ( see , for instance , Riches , 1997a )  . 
As suggested in much of the literature on school effectiveness ( see , for
instance , Barber et al .  , 1995 ; Mortimore , 1998 ; Sammons , Hillman and
Mortimore , 1995 ) the leadership of the head appeared to be the key driving
force in Beacon Schools . In most responses there was the
acknowledgement that the internal organisation of the school , as translated
into management structures , was an essential element of the success . 
Schools staff need to be empowered to ‘ make things happen ’ and allow
their talents to be realised . Using hindsight , the respondents were asked
to suggest how they might have done things differently had they known
then what they know now . This provided some useful pointers for aspiring
Beacon Schools . There seemed to be two distinct ways in which Beacon
status can be effectively developed . There were those schools that
suggested a tighter focus involving fewer partner schools and the others
who suggested one large-scale project involving a wider range of schools . 
In either scenario , the emphasis was on reducing the demands being made
on the staff of the Beacon School , either by reducing the number of
relationships that have to be managed or by reducing the breadth of
support on offer . Both are consistent with good management practice –
setting focused , achievable targets as a basis for future development , with
clearly defined success criteria built in ( Southworth , 1998 , p . 81 )  . The
reduction in the number of partners encourages a deeper and more intense
relationship offering the possibility of developing the relationship further
in the long term . By focusing on a narrow range of strengths for a wider
audience two options are possible . From that wider initial contact , closer
relationships may be developed with a much smaller number of
particularly interested partners , or the approach could be repeated to a
different group of partners . Clearly , with the limited input , there is a
degree of superficiality with this second approach but it does allow a key
message to be spread far . 
Respondents acknowledged the importance of managing the marketing
of the Beacon initiative more effectively . This was expressed in a variety
of ways , but each involved the communication with partner or potential
Leading high-performing schools 153
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 153
partner schools . In particular the specificity of materials produced needed
to be more focused in terms of content , expectations , to whom it was sent , 
the approach that it suggested , or in the wording that it used . The
importance of ‘ treating the “ customers ” as professionals , who are able to
offer expertise in their own right ’ was the way that one respondent
expressed it ( see also the work of Davies and Ellison , 1997 )  . 
THE CASE STUDIES
The case studies of the initial Beacon Schools ( Brundrett and Burton , 
2000 ) represented the diverse nature of the Beacon initiative . They were
drawn from many of the divergent phases and types of school that make
the patchwork of provision that has grown up in England and Wales . One
was an infant school , two were primary schools , three were secondary
schools and three were special schools . Of these , five were denominational
schools and one a selective grammar school . 
Most schools involved in the case studies had chosen a number of foci
for the Beacon initiative . These foci included Accelerated Learning , ICT , 
Personal Social and Health Education , Sport , Performing Arts , Music , 
English , Mathematics , Music , Special Needs , Literacy and Numeracy . 
Unsurprisingly these topics tended to be drawn from perceived areas of
expertise within the schools . Several respondents were keen to point out
the indebtedness of Beacon projects to highly talented individuals or
teams of individuals within their schools . There was a notable
determination on the part of respondents . The writers betrayed little or
no arrogance about their own achievements and seemed well aware that
their methods and techniques might need adaptation to fit other situations
or , indeed , might be inappropriate for others in different circumstances . 
Indeed , most respondents pointed out that that they had learned a great
deal by taking part in the project and several were keen to point out that
they felt that the institutions with which they worked provided mutually
supportive partnerships . 
Strategies employed in the development of effectiveness included joint
In-Service Training days ; the sharing of school documentation , proformas
and equipment ;  ‘ masterclasses ’ conducted by teachers with especial
expertise in given curriculum areas ( Music )  ; and classroom observation of
effective teaching strategies . One of the schools had hosted a day-long 
 ‘ Beacon School conference ’ and further such conferences were planned
for the future . Visits to respective schools were considered of especial
value 
All respondents were asked to provide their overall reflections on the
effects of the Beacon project within and between schools . The respondents
were universally supportive of the initiative . One respondent in particular
expressed concern about the stress felt by teachers who were striving to
154 Leadership in Education
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 154
continue to enhance teaching and learning within their own institution
while at the same time assisting another school . Overall , however , most
respondents felt that the project had been of assistance in developing
teaching and learning both within their own schools and in partner
institutions . Indeed , one headteacher stated :  ‘ As a profession , teachers are
highly self-critical and in the view of the headteacher this initiative has
made a significant step towards reinvigorating the quality of pedagogical
exchange between practising classroom teachers .  ’ 
Overall the case studies revealed elements of the journey that a number
of high-performing schools have undertaken in their attempts to provide
the best learning environment possible for their pupils or students . Many
of the features identified in the research on school effectiveness were
embedded within the discourses that they offered . These features included
strong leadership by the headteacher ( see , for instance , Bell and Rhodes , 
1996 ; MacBeath , 1998 ; Southworth , 1998 )  ; a commitment to a ‘ learning
organisation ’  ( see MacGilchrist , Myers and Read , 1997 )  ; and the
importance of empowering staff , especially heads of departments ( see
Sammons , Thomas and Mortimore , 1997 )  . The schools that contributed
were striking examples of communities working together towards a
common goal and by agreeing to be part of the Beacon scheme they had
committed themselves to the sharing their experiences , knowledge and
expertise with others . 
The second group of case studies were focused on curriculum issues 
( Burton and Brundrett ( 2002 )  , and a notable key theme running through
the contributions was the focus on how individuals could become more
effective learners . This was addressed in the learning context of both
students and teachers , and in terms of both the content of their learning
and their readiness to learn . It became increasingly apparent that many
Beacon Schools had achieved their pre-eminence in learning and teaching
by reflecting more closely on the relative merits of theories of learning
and effectively applying these ideas to improve practice . The ability of
schools focusing on the specific learning needs of particular groups of
children ( special schools ) had enabled teachers to develop effective
strategies to address specific challenges . The approaches that had been
developed in these , often extreme , learning conditions had then been
generalised for application in mainstream classes . 
Significantly , schools , in developing learning in the classroom , had also
begun to assess the ramification of these approaches to developing
learning potential for staff development . These approaches , which proved
to be so effective within the classroom , were being adapted and applied
throughout the school in the pursuit of excellence as a truly ‘ learning
organisation ’  . Gardner ’ s work on multiple intelligences ( Gardner , 1993 ) 
was clearly influential among some of the Beacon School practitioners , 
with at least one respondent noting that their whole project had been
inspired by his work ( Heightman , 2002 , p . 24 )  . Implication for learning
Leading high-performing schools 155
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 155
must be considered as significant – both for pupils and students and the
professional development of their teachers . Such a focus on 
 ‘ individualised learning ’ was also apparent in excellent practice being
developed in ‘ special schools ’ that was being disseminated to ‘ mainstream ’ 
colleagues ( see , for instance , Simpson et al .  , 2002 )  . In other case studies
mainstream special schools demonstrated the leadership and courage of
professional conviction to set challenging targets for their pupils 
( Dunkerton , 2002 , p . 8 ) within the framework developed by central
government agencies ( DfEE , 1997 )  . 
The case studies also made clear that the use of advanced skills teachers 
( ASTs ) within schools , to provide both an exemplar of good practice for
others to observe and emulate and also to coach teaching staff as they
progress towards mastery of new skills , was seen as a potent means of
improving learning and teaching ( Blades et al .  , 2002 )  . Well-chosen
presentations , raising awareness of pedagogical approaches , can therefore
be developed into embedded practice through effective collaboration
within the school . Once again this highlights the importance of the
organisational structure of the school in the development of a learning
culture . For learning to be most effective within the school , not only do
the teachers need the skills to teach and support the learning of the
children , they also need to be able to support the learning of colleagues . 
The development of a supporting learning culture offers ‘ ownership ’ of
developments within the school to teachers , which might reasonably be
expected to lead to increased motivation and reductions in the levels of
uncontrollable stress . 
Overall the case studies offered examples of how different schools had
taken control of the learning experience and had enhanced student
achievement as a result . In each case organisational culture which values
both the learning of students and staff , could be seen as being one of the
core foundations of the successful school . 
MANAGING A SUCCESSFUL SCHOOL : TOWARDS A
NOTION OF CO-CONSTRUCTED LEADERSHIP . 
There is evidence that , in Britain , a collegial style of school leadership
has become the ‘ official model of good practice ’  ( Wallace , 1988 )  . Indeed , 
much of the recent work on school improvement and effectiveness in
Britain such as that of Hargreaves and Hopkins ( 1991 ; 1994 )  , Hopkins , 
Ainscow and West ( 1994 ) and Gray et al .  ( 1996 ) has either an open or tacit
acceptance of collegial management styles as one of the keys to enhanced
school development . A detailed exegesis of this model does , however , 
reveal that it contains within it a variety of inadequacies both as a
functional description of good management practice and as a practical
model for school leadership and governance ( Brundrett , 1998 )  . A case
156 Leadership in Education
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 156
study of one Beacon School has led to the postulation that , at a time when
accountability to external organisations is becoming increasingly
important , collegial models may lead to conflicts between participation
and accountability . Collegial models may , for instance , be difficult to
sustain in view of the requirement that heads and principals remain
accountable to the governing bodies which appoint them , and leaders may
be sandwiched between these very different pressures ( Bush , 1993 , p . 12 )  . 
The headteacher in the study noted that :  ‘ How can a school be ‘ collegial ’ 
when it is the Head who is in charge and who has to take responsibility
for the decisions that are taken , especially to the Governors and to Ofsted ?  ’  
( Brundrett , 2002 )  . This accords with the notion that collegial models can
make it difficult , particularly for external analysts , to establish who is
responsible for organisational policy ( Bush , 1995 , p . 63 ) and there can
even be a somewhat nightmarish scenario for the governance of the
institution within which the locus of power seems , to the observer , to be
forever ‘ receding ’ and ‘ the real decisions always seem to be taken
somewhere else ’  ( Noble and Pym , 1970 , pp . 435–6 )  . This is , however , only
one of a nodal set of criticisms of the collegial model of management , 
perhaps the most cogent of which are presented in the ideological critique
offered by Hargreaves and Dawe ( 1990 ) and Hargreaves ( 1994 ) who , while
supporting the notion of genuine participatory and innovatory
management of educational institutions , criticise what is seen as 
 ‘ contrived collegiality ’  . Citing the work of Judith Warren Little ( 1990 ) 
Hargreaves posits that there are , in fact , different kinds of collegial
relations in terms of their implications for teacher independence , and that
the characteristics and virtues of some kinds of collegiality and
collaboration are often falsely attributed to some other kinds ( Hargreaves , 
1994 , p . 188 )  . Within this view teacher empowerment , critical reflection
and continuous improvement are claims made for collaboration and
collegiality as a whole but are , in fact , attributable only to certain versions
of it . 
It is thus clear that collegiality places a methodological emphasis on
what is shared in a manner which may exaggerate consensus based aspects
of human relationships ( Hargreaves , 1994 , p . 190 )  . It may be that indeed
the ubiquitous use of the actual term ‘ collegiality ’  , with its deeply
embedded overtones of democratic decision-making , is actually
inappropriate for the ways in which management does , and can , function , 
in successful schools under the current framework of governance . 
Nonetheless any wise school leader will wish to gain as much agreement
and consensus around proposed changes as is possible . Thus the potential
exists for a disequilibrium between the headteacher ’ s accountability
functions and the desire to operate in a quasi-democratic manner that will
facilitate staff commitment to goals . The skilled headteacher in the
successful school will counter-balance these potentially countervailing
pressures by ensuring that issues are discussed fully and that strategic
Leading high-performing schools 157
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 157
changes that are required by the Head do not appear as mere ‘ directives ’ 
which emerge without consultation . 
One solution to this apparently dichotomous existence can be found in
recent work on teaching learning that supports the efficacy of 
 ‘ co-constructed ’ forms of learning , that integrate teacher or subject centred
systems with pupil-centred approaches in order to create a third 
 ‘ partnership ’ approach ( Silcock , 1999 ; Brundrett and Silcock , 2002 )  . This
work argues that programmes devised by those who take recent cognitive
developmental theory seriously ( Adey and Shayer , 1994 ; Resnick , 1985 ; 
Resnick , Bill and Lesgold , 1992 )  , are dedicated to co-constructivist
techniques ( Broadfoot , 2000 ) whereby twin perspectives ,  ‘ top down ’ and 
 ‘ bottom up ’  ( Biggs , 1992 ) spring both from pupils ’ experientially based
attitudes and capabilities and the special features of subjects being taught . 
Crucial to this sort of teaching is peer interaction whereby pupils
habitually challenge , support , comment , evaluate , debate each others ’ and
standard views and a co-constructivist classroom is thus one where such
talk is key . Adey and Shayer ’ s ( 1994 ; 1996 ) and Resnick , Bill and Lesgold ’ s 
( 1992 ) evidence is that such talk works by developing critical states of
mind ( Piagetian formal operations ; Vygotskian higher-order skills ) and
integrated forms of thinking ( Broadfoot , 2000 )  . All teachers co-operate , 
negotiate , reconcile views sympathetically , resolve differences , mediate
between options , contest issues generously , present dialectical cases in
ways making them vulnerable to argument , and generally act in a socially
skilled manner . It follows that teachers in partnership with pupils will
appreciate alternatives , experiment with radical positions , show a
tolerance usually untested within mono-cultural settings , and use
mediation and conflict-resolution as markers for their professional
territory ( Brundrett and Silcock , 2002 , p . 91 )  . 
What is being posited here is that the skilled headteacher will function
within the equivalent ‘ co-constructive ’ management style that integrates
the apparently contradictory hierarchical management systems with
collegial models . Just as the effective teacher will engender debate in order
to reach curricular objectives , so the effective headteacher will create the
climate for change by stimulating debate on new initiatives . The
headteacher will tolerate competing views but will not abnegate
responsibility for decision-making . Indeed it has been suggested that
schools can be ‘ deliberative democracies ’  ( Engelund , 2000 , p . 307 ) within
which pupils come to their rights , roles and responsibilities as members
of communities ( White , 1993 )  . Pupils may not only experience democratic
milieus and join in democratic decision-making , but find out at first hand
how to be democrats and take full part in communal life . In fact such
notions of ‘ democracy ’ in school organisation may be as inappropriate or
impractical as collegial models , but what matters will not be so much the
fact that schools are always hierarchically organised ( Wilson , 2000 )  , 
affecting the democratic quality of decisions made , as what pupils and
158 Leadership in Education
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 158
staff learn from making such decisions ( Brundrett and Silcock , 2002 )  . This
view of the classroom operating through co-constructed management can
be extrapolated to the school as a whole wherein the deliberation is
between headteacher and staff , staff and pupils . 
Nonetheless this ability to initiate change , to engender discussion , to
tolerate and encourage disputation , but finally to make decisions for which
one is accountable , is undoubtedly the most severe challenge that faces
any school leader . As the headteacher of the case study school commented :  
 ‘ That ’ s the hardest part of being a Head . There is formal training for the 
 “ big things ” but no one really tells you how to relate to the staff ’  
( Brundrett , 2002 )  . One wonders how any system of training could instil
the qualities required to take on the formidable panoply of skills required
in a headteacher . The evidence of the quality of teaching and learning in
Beacon Schools , and indeed the majority of schools in the UK , is that most
headteachers , whether trained in the new ‘ national programmes ’ for school
leadership such as NPQH or not , overcome the dichotomous objective of
driving through change while at the same time ensuring a high degree of
consensus and commitment by staff . 
CONCLUSION
The Beacon Schools project provides reaffirmation of the importance of
the salient features of school leadership and management identified in
earlier school effectiveness and improvement studies . The scheme also
provides encouraging initial indications that such features can be
developed through the creation of mutually supportive partnerships
between schools . The scheme is also one which offers an invaluable
resource to researchers and practitioners alike since a searchable database
of Beacon Schools ’ activities has been constructed which forms a data set
that is of increasing interest to researchers in the field of leadership and
management and in the wider fields of educational enquiry ( DfES , 2002b )  . 
It is , as yet , too early to tell whether the Beacon initiative will lead to
sustained improvements in teaching and learning in partner institutions . 
Equally , it is for future studies to determine whether the notion of ‘ sharing
success ’ will provide enhanced levels of achievement in schools
throughout England in the way that the UK Department for Education and
Skills expects . 
Recent changes in the governance of schools have led to the increased
desire for a technicist and rationalist systems of internal school
organisation . The movement towards value-led management systems , 
which are often broadly characterised as being ‘ collegial ’ in form , is a
welcome development since it holds out the potential for more inclusive
and democratic systems of school leadership and management . The danger
exists , however , that school leaders can become disempowered by such
Leading high-performing schools 159
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 159
systems , thus leaving them open to accusations of irrationality with the
concomitant danger of leaving schools to ‘ drift ’ at times when
accountability and target setting form the dominant discourse of central
government ( Brundrett , 2002 )  . Co-constructed systems of leadership hold
out the possibility of empowering all the workers in the school
organisation and offer a legitimation of the decision-making process . 
Through such co-construction the role of the headteacher / principal in
leading the school is saved from the promiscuity of indefinite outcomes
and inappropriately lengthy decision- making processes . It may be that
the headteacher / principal is thus best described as being primus inter
pares rather than the patrician ruler of school . 
REFERENCES
Adey , P . and Shayer , M .  ( 1994 ) Really Raising Standards , London : Routledge . 
Adey , P . and Shayer , M .  ( 1996 )  ‘ An exploration of long-term transfer 
effects following an extended intervention program in the high school 
science curriculum ’  , in L . Smith ( ed .  )  , Critical Readings in Piaget , London : 
Routledge . 
Bailey , A . and Johnson , G .  ( 1997 )  ‘ How strategies develop in organisations ’  , in M . 
Preedy , R . Glatter and R . Levac˘i´c ( eds )  , Educational Management : Strategy , 
Quality and Resources , Buckingham : Open University Press , pp . 183–93 . 
Barber , M .  , Stoll , L .  , Mortimore , P . and Hillman , J .  ( 1995 ) Governing Bodies and
Effective Schools , London , DfEE . 
Barnes , V . and Clouder , L .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Dissemination as evidence ? Deconstructing the
processes of disseminating qualitative research ’  , paper presented at the 
 ‘ Qualitative Evidence-based Practice Conference ’  , Coventry University , 15–17
May . 
Bell , L . and Rhodes , C .  ( 1996 ) The Skills of Primary School Management , London , 
Routledge . 
Biggs , J . B .  ( 1992 )  ‘ Returning to school : review and discussion ’  , in A . Dimetriou , M . 
Shayer and A . E . Efklides ( eds )  , Neo-Piagetian Theories of Cognitive
Development : Implications and Applications for Education , London : Routledge . 
Blades , B .  , Cade , J .  , Fletcher , M .  , Miles , F . and Taj , M .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Using advanced skills
teachers as change agents for effective teaching and learning ’  , in N . Burton and
M . Brundrett ( eds )  , The Beacon Schools Experience : Developing the Curriculum , 
Dereham : Peter Francis , pp . 190–204 . 
Broadfoot , P .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Liberating the learner through assessment ’  , in J . Collins and
D . Cook ( eds )  , Understanding Learning : Influences and Outcomes , London : 
Paul Chapman Publishing / Open University Press . 
Brundrett , M .  ( 1998 )  ‘ What lies behind collegiality – legitimation or control ?  ’  , 
Educational Management and Administration , 26 ( 3 )  , 305–16 . 
Brundrett , M .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Mission , faith and management : co-constructing leadership
in a Beacon Lower School ’  , Education 3–13 , 30 ( 3 )  , 42–7 . 
Brundrett , M . and Burton , N .  ( 2000 ) The Beacon Schools Experience : Case Studies
in Excellence , Dereham : Peter Francis . 
Brundrett , M . and Burton , N .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Sharing success : the development of the first
160 Leadership in Education
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 160 
 “ Beacon Schools ” in England ’  , International Studies in Educational
Administration , 29 ( 1 )  , 19–28 . 
Brundrett , M . and Silcock , P .  ( 2002 ) Competence , Success and Excellence in
Teaching , London : Routledge Falmer . 
Burton , N . and Brundrett , M .  ( 2000 )  ‘ The first year of Beacon School status : maintaining excellence and sharing success ’  , School Leadership and Management , 
20 ( 4 )  , 489–99 . 
Burton , N . and Brundrett , M .  ( 2002 ) The Beacon Schools Experience : Developing
the Curriculum , Dereham : Peter Francis . 
Bush , T .  ( 1993 ) Exploring Collegiality : Theory , Process and Structure , E236
Managing Schools ; Challenge and Response , Buckingham : Open University
Press . 
Bush , T .  ( 1995 ) Theories of Educational Management , London : Paul Chapman
Publishing . 
Davies , B . and Ellison , L .  ( 1997 ) Strategic Marketing for Schools , London , Pitman . 
Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  ( 1997 ) Excellence for All , 
London : HMSO . 
Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  ( 1999a ) dards . dfee . gov . uk / guidance / beaconschools , online . 
Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  ( 1999b ) dards . dfee . gov . uk / guidance / beaconschools /  , online . 
Department for Education and Employment ( DfEE )  ( 2001 ) Individual Education
Plans . 
Department for Education and Skills ( DfES )  ( 2002a ) Beacon Schools Site : NFER
Evaluation – Interim Findings , dards . dfee . gov . uk / beaconschools / general / 447218
Department for Education and skills ( DfES )  ( 2002b ) Beacon Schools : Case Studies
Index , dards . dfee . gov . uk / beaconschools /  ? view = casestudiesindex
Dunkerton , J .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Target setting and school improvement in a special school ’  , 
in N . Burton and M . Brundrett ( eds )  , The Beacon Schools Experience : Developing
the Curriculum , Dereham : Peter Francis , pp . 8–21 . 
Engelund , G .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Rethinking democracy and education : towards an education
of deliberative citizens ’  , Journal of Curriculum Studies , 32 ( 2 )  , 305–13 . 
Foreman , K .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Vision and mission ’  , in D . Middlewood and J . Lumby ( eds )  , 
Strategic Management in Schools and Colleges , London , Paul Chapman
Publishing , pp . 18–31 . 
Gardner , H .  ( 1993 ) Frames of Mind , 2nd edn , London : Harper Collins . 
Ghouri , N .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Beacon Schools battle to cope with success ’  , Times Educational
Supplement , 23 April , p . 16 . 
Gray , J .  , Reynolds , D .  , Fitz-Gibbon , C . and Jesson , D .  ( 1996 ) Merging Traditions : 
The Future of Research on School Effectiveness and School Improvement , 
London : Cassell . 
Hargreaves , A .  ( 1994 ) Changing Teachers , Changing Times : Teachers ’ Work and
Culture in the Post-modern Age , London : Cassell . 
Hargreaves , A . and Dawe , R .  ( 1990 )  ‘ Paths of professional development : contrived
collegiality , collaborative culture , and the case of peer coaching ’  , Teaching and
Teacher Education , 6 ( 3 )  , pp . 227–41 . 
Hargreaves , D . H . and Hopkins , D .  ( 1991 ) The Empowered School , London : Cassell . 
Leading high-performing schools 161
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 161
Hargreaves , D . H . and Hopkins , D .  ( eds )  ( 1994 ) Development Planning for School
Improvement , London : Cassell . 
Heightman , S .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Effective learning for students ( and teachers !  )  ’  , in N . Burton
and M . Brundrett ( eds )  , The Beacon Schools Experience : Developing the
Curriculum , Dereham : Peter Francis , pp . 22–35 . 
Hopkins , D .  , Ainscow , M . and West , M .  ( 1994 ) School Improvement in an Era of
Change , London , Cassell . 
Little , J . W .  ( 1990 )  ‘  ’ The persistence of privacy : autonomy and initiative in teachers ’ professional relations ’  , Teachers College Record , 91 ( 4 )  , pp . 509–36 . 
MacBeath , J .  ( ed .  )  ( 1998 ) Effective School Leadership : Responding to Change , 
London , Paul Chapman Publishing . 
MacGilchrist , B .  , Myers , K . and Read , J .  ( 1997 ) The Intelligent School , London , 
Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Mortimore , P .  ( 1998 ) The Road to Improvement , Lisse : Swets and Zeitlinger . 
National Foundation for Educational Research ( NFER )  ( 2002 ) Evaluation of the
Beacon Schools Project , 
Noble , T . and Pym , B .  ( 1970 )  ‘ Collegial Authority and the Receding Locus of
Power ’  , British Journal of Sociology , 21 , 431–45 . 
Office for Standards in Education ( OfSTED )  ( 1997 ) 
pdf / i48 / 48536 . pdf , online 23 November 1999 . 
Resnick , L . B .  ( 1985 ) Education and Learning to Think , Pittsburgh , PA : Learning , 
Research and Development Centre , University of Pittsburgh . 
Resnick , L . B .  , Bill , V . and Lesgold , S .  ( 1992 )  ‘ Developing thinking abilites in
Arithmetic class ,  ’ in A . Dimetriou , M . Shayer and A . E . Efklides ( eds )  , NeoPiagetian Theories of Cognitive Development : Implications and Applications
for Education , London : Routledge . 
Riches , C .  ( 1997a )  ‘ Communication in educational management ’  , in M . Crawford , 
L . Kydd and C . Riches ( eds )  , Leadership and Teams in Educational Management , 
Buckingham : Open university Press , pp . 163–78 . 
Riches , C .  ( 1997b )  ‘ Motivation in education ’  , in M . Crawford , L . Kydd and C . 
Riches ( eds )  , Leadership and Teams in Educational Management , Buckingham : 
Open University Press , pp . 88–102 . 
Rickinson , M . and Rudd , P .  ( 2001 )  ‘ The success of Beacon partnerships ’  , Education
Journal , 57 , 30–2 . 
Rudd , P .  ( 2000 ) Evaluation of Pilot Beacon Schools , Nottingham : Department for
Education and Employment . 
Rudduck , J .  , Kelly , P .  , Wrigley , J . and Sparrow , F .  ( 1976 ) The Dissemination of
Curriculum Development , Windsor : NFER . 
Sammons , P .  , Hillman , J . and Mortimore , P .  ( 1995 ) Key Characteristics of Effective
Schools : A Review of School Effectiveness Research , report commissioned by
the Office for Standards in Education , Institute of Education and Office for
Standards in Education . 
Sammons , P .  , Thomas , S . and Mortimore , P .  ( 1997 ) Forging Links : Effective Schools
and Effective Departments , London : Paul Chapman Publishing . 
Silcock , P .  ( 1999 ) New Progressivism , London : Falmer Press . 
Simpson , I .  , Hutchinson , S .  , Griffiths , D .  , Bates , S . and Norris , D .  ( 2002 )  ‘ SEN –
effective inclusion ’  , in N . Burton and M . Brundrett ( eds )  , The Beacon Schools
Experience : Developing the Curriculum , Dereham : Peter Francis , pp . 108–23 . 
Southworth , G .  ( 1998 ) Leading Improving Schools , London : Falmer Press . 
162 Leadership in Education
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 162
Wallace , M .  ( 1988 )  ‘ Towards a collegiate approach to curriculum management in
primary and middle schools ’  , School Organisation , 8 ( 1 )  , 25–34 . 
Weindling , D .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Strategic planning in schools : some practical techniques ’  , in
M . Preedy , R . Glatter and R . Levac˘i´c ( eds )  , Educational Management : Strategy
Quality and Resources , Buckingham : Open University Press , pp . 218–33 . 
White , R .  ( 1993 )  ‘ Autonomy as foundational ’  , in H . J . Silverman ( ed .  )  , Questioning
Foundations , New York : Routledge . 
Wikeley , F .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Dissemination of research as a tool for school improvement ’  , 
School Leadership and Management , 18 ( 1 )  , 59–73 . 
Wilson , J .  ( 2000 ) Key Issues in Education and Teaching , London : Cassell . 
FURTHER READING . 
Brundrett , M . and Burton , N .  ( 2000 ) The Beacon Schools Experience : Case Studies
in Excellence , Dereham : Peter Francis . 
Brundrett , M . and Burton , N .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Sharing success : the development of the first 
 “ Beacon Schools ” in England ’  , International Studies in Educational
Administration , 29 ( 1 )  , 19–28 . 
Burton , N . and Brundrett , M .  ( 2000 )  ‘ The first year of Beacon School status : maintaining excellence and sharing success ’  , School Leadership and Management , 
20 ( 4 )  , 489–99 . 
Burton , N . and Brundrett , M .  ( 2002 ) The Beacon Schools Experience : Developing
the Curriculum , Dereham : Peter Francis . 
Department for Education and Skills ( DfES )  ( 2002 ) Standards Site : Welcome to the
Beacon Schools , dards . dfee . gov . uk / beaconschools / 
National Foundation for Educational Research ( NFER )  ( 2002 ) Evaluation of the
Beacon Schools Project , 
Rickinson , M . and Rudd , P .  ( 2001 )  ‘ The success of Beacon partnerships ’  , Education
Journal , 57 , 30–2 . 
Rudd , P .  ( 2000 ) Evaluation of Pilot Beacon Schools , Nottingham : DfEE . 
Leading high-performing schools 163
Chap 10 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 163
11
LEADERSHIP IN FURTHER EDUCATION
Graham Peeke
INTRODUCTION
This chapter will focus upon leadership of further education ( FE ) colleges
and begins by noting the leadership challenge for the colleges postincorporation in 1993 . This is followed by a brief consideration of what
we know of college leadership from the literature . The chapter will then
explore three key questions : what kind of FE institutions will we 
need leaders for in the future ? What kinds of people will be needed to
lead these institutions ? What skills and qualities will these people need
to be successful leaders ? Three key issues will also be discussed : the
tension between strategic leadership and the influence of external drivers , 
the tension between the core mission and the access mission of colleges , 
and the tension between leadership of institutions and leadership of
learning . 
CONTEXT
Clear definitions of what constitutes FE have always been fairly
problematic . There is a blurring at the edges of the sector with regard to
16–19 education , which is delivered in both schools and colleges , and
with regard to higher education because a substantial amount of this is
delivered in further education colleges . With the creation of the learning
and skills sector in April 2001 , further education now finds itself to be a
substantial sub-sector of a post-16 phase of education which includes
school sixth forms , FE colleges , adult and community learning , and workbased training providers . To talk of leadership in further education is
therefore to talk of leadership of the FE colleges . The issues and challenges
of leadership may be similar across all organisations that constitute the
new learning and skills sector , but insufficient is known about the wide
164
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 164
range of organisations within it so that such judgements cannot be made
with any confidence . 
Following the incorporation of colleges in 1993 , the Further Education
Funding Council ( FEFC ) virtually tutored college managers by
correspondence in the management challenges of running an independent
corporation . These challenges included strategic planning , estates , 
financial and human resource management , all functions which had
previously been overseen by the local education authorities . The urgent
need to focus upon such pressing matters was complicated for many
college managers by having to cope with a major review of lecturer
contracts , leading in many cases to difficult industrial disputes . This has
been the standard explanation for the traditional focus of many college
principals on matters relating to the running of their institution , rather
than the leadership of learning . To paraphrase the above , it could be said
that the challenges for principals post-incorporation were challenges of
management not leadership . 
An example of a focus on management rather than leadership is
provided by college responses to the strategic planning process . As Lumby 
( 1998 ) reports , the FEFC provided clear guidance on a framework for
rational strategic planning . This led to the development of a body of
expertise within colleges concerning the production of strategic plans , and 
 ‘ led to the creation of a better structured , more consistent planning
process ’  ( Drodge and Cooper , 1997 ; p . 47 )  , but not necessarily the
development of strategic thinking within institutions . As Lumby ( 1998 , p . 
95 ) comments :  ‘ evidence collected to date shows that the process of
arriving at the plan , and the effectiveness of its implementation have not
been entirely successful for many colleges ’  . From a management
perspective , colleges became efficient at writing plans , but many lacked
the strategic thinking that characterises effective leadership . 
Given the focus in colleges upon management rather than leadership , it
is not surprising that there is little literature on leadership in further education . The most comprehensive and recent review of the literature on this
topic is that carried out by Sawbridge ( 2000 )  . This work forms part of the
Learning and Skills Development Agency ’ s ( LSDA ) Raising Quality and
Achievement ( RQA ) programme , an LSC funded initiative to improve
quality and standards in FE . As Sawbridge ( 2001 , p . 16 ) comments :  ‘ There
is little in the way of published research or evaluated practice to support
effective leadership development in further education . Our understanding
of what works in educational leadership is drawn largely from research in
the schools sector .  ’ While the main focus of the review was on the impact
of leadership upon achievement , the review raises more questions about
leadership in FE than information about how leadership is carried out . 
Finding little in the literature that was specific to leadership in FE , 
except for a few case studies and personal accounts , Sawbridge draws on
more general literature relating in particular to school leadership and the
Leadership in further education 165
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 165
school effectiveness movement . The paucity of research into leadership is
consistent with the relative lack of scholarly activity focused on FE . In
reviewing the scope of research into FE , Hughes , Taylor and Tight ( 1996 , 
p . 13 )  , state :  ‘ There has been relatively little critical analysis of policy or
practice within further education , in the sense of trying to explain and
understand these experiences from outside . There has been almost no
theorisation or model building , making use of the wealth of available
disciplinary frameworks from the social sciences .  ’ 
In examining the work on school leadership and effectiveness , 
Sawbridge raises a range of questions about the nature of leadership in FE
and its possible impact upon student achievement , for example : what do
we mean by leadership ? Who are the leaders ? Does leadership affect
student outcomes ? Sawbridge also outlines current approaches to
leadership discussing , in particular , the transactional , instructional and
transformational approaches . 
Transactional leadership is usually associated with managerial , 
functional or action-based leadership , which focuses on the skills of
leadership and its impact upon others . This leadership paradigm is
frequently criticised for its mechanistic emphasis and tendency to reduce
complex interactions to a set of skills to be acquired . Instructional
leadership concentrates on the leadership of the curriculum and teaching
and learning , and has close links with the school effectiveness movement . 
It emphasises the role of the leader in promoting learner outcomes but , 
although there appears to be a link between effective leadership and
student achievement , it is not clear what constitutes this link . 
Transformational leadership concerns the leader ’ s ability to transform the
function of an organisation in order that staff and learners can function at
a higher level . This approach tends to focus more on leadership behaviours
and the ability of leaders to empower and motivate others and promote
change . The approach has been criticised on the grounds that its
preoccupation with continuous improvement ignores the important need
to concentrate on the quality of teaching and learning . Sawbridge ( 2001 , 
p . 15 ) concludes that ‘ Although there are exceptions , leadership in FE
colleges in the UK largely conforms to a managerial or functional model ’  . 
This supports the proposition , suggested above , of a managerial approach
developing in FE post-incorporation . 
WHAT KIND OF FE INSTITUTIONS ? 
When considering leadership in FE it makes sense to think about what
kind of institutions will need leading in the sector of the future . Like any
educational establishment , FE colleges will be subject to curricular influences determined by the changing nature of society . Factors such as the
development of a knowledge-based economy , high levels of consumption , 
166 Leadership in Education
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 166
globalisation and the international movement of populations all have
major consequences for educational organisations . 
In addition , the future is likely to bring significant changes in the
systems for recognising and accrediting learning . As the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD , 2001 , p . 69 ) comments :  
 ‘ It is scarcely imaginable that significant progress can continue towards
the knowledge-based , lifelong learning society without major changes in
the systems for recognising and accrediting competence .  ’ The OECD sees
a future whereby monopolies over certification are broken , which may
become viewed as a liberating factor for educational organisations as they
come ‘ to focus more on learning and less on sorting and credentialing ’  
( OECD , 2001 , p . 69 )  . 
More immediately however , there are a number of key factors which
will have an impact upon the nature of college organisation and structure . 
These are information and communication technology ( ICT )  , the advent
of the new post-16 learning and skills sector itself , and the inexorable
pressure upon colleges to move more towards becoming learning
organisations . 
In terms of ICT , its increasing sophistication leads to important
questions about the physical structure and existence of colleges , the role
of teachers , and the role of colleges as social institutions and sites for the
development of relationships between people . The creation of a wider
post-16 sector and the emphasis on collaboration will also lead to the
development of new post-16 organisational forms . Already , early in the
life of the new sector , there have been a number of mergers between
colleges and work-based training providers . It is expected that the overall
number of work-based training providers will decline significantly as
consolidation takes place . Closer links with employers through initiatives
like the Centres for Vocational Excellence ( CoVEs ) and closer links
between further and higher education , also suggest a new typology of
organisations in the future . With regard to the development of colleges as
learning organisations , the criticisms and imperatives that the OECD note
for schools are likely to be equally valid for colleges . The OECD argues
that too little has changed in the basic structural , organisational and
behavioural characteristics of schools , and that they need to focus as much
on knowledge creation as knowledge transmission . This would mean
changes in the roles of teachers and the need to learn from a range of
professionals rather than just teachers . 
To capture the implications of a range of social , economic , political and
technological factors upon schools the OECD have created six scenarios
for the future of schooling designed to act as tools for reflection , rather
than analytical predictions . Such tools help to clarify main directions and
strategic options . This set of scenarios can be adapted for college purposes
to create a set of possible scenarios for the future of colleges . Using this
framework , these scenarios can be summarised as follows . 
Leadership in further education 167
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 167
Scenario 1 : More of the same
In this scenario the current bureaucratic structure of colleges remains
much the same as at present . Problems of lecturer supply intensify , and
although there is increased use of ICT , there is no radical change to the
organisational structures of teaching and learning . The dominance of the
teaching room with an individual teacher continues . 
Scenario 2 : Extension of the market model
Here , diversification of colleges and the emergence of new providers in
the learning marketplace are key features of the scenario . This leads to
greater experimentation with organisational forms and more specialisation
within colleges . New types of partnerships between providers and other
organisations will develop and colleges will face more international
competition . Information and communication technology will be
extensively and imaginatively exploited for learning and networking will
flourish . The stability of colleges will be dependent upon the effectiveness
of the market in meeting the needs of the economy and the community . 
Scenario 3 : Colleges as core social centres
Many diverse types of colleges will develop , but strong local links will be
a feature of all . Colleges will be less bureaucratic and will combine
teaching and learning with other community responsibilities . Information
and communication technology will be strongly developed , and the
functions of advice , guidance and support will be high profile . Colleges
are more likely to be liberated from the excessive pressures of
credentialism . 
Scenario 4 : Colleges as learning organisations
More specialisms would be catered for but all learners would experience
a demanding mix of learning . Colleges will be flatter ; team orientated
organisations , with greater attention to management skills for all
employees . Information and communication technology will be strongly
developed as a tool for learning and communication . There will be many
links with other knowledge industries and international networking will
be common . Major increases in staffing levels are to be expected allowing
greater innovation in teaching and learning , professional development , 
and research . 
168 Leadership in Education
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 168
Scenario 5 : Colleges as parts of learner networks
Learners will be involved in much individualised learning and learning
through networks . Information and communication technology will be
extensively exploited for learning and networking . Only a few colleges
will remain , either to serve those excluded by the ‘ digital divide ’ or as
part of community-based networks . New learning professionals will
emerge , employed by major players such as media companies and software
developers . There will be a decline in established curriculum structures
and new forms of accrediting achievement . 
Scenario 6 : The ‘ melt down ’ scenario
This scenario is based on the presumption that the shortage of teachers
becomes critical , leading to the development of diverse organisational
arrangements . These could include the intensive use of ICT as an
alternative to teachers , ICT companies actively involved in delivery , 
corporate and media interest in provision intensifying , and the expansion
of semi-professional roles in facilitating learning . This scenario could lead
to serious inequalities in provision ; a strengthened centralised
examination and accreditation system and established curriculum
structures coming under intense pressure . 
In summary , these scenarios suggest that whatever specific form the
future takes , it is highly likely that the college leaders of the future will
have to lead organisations characterised by
• flux and ambiguity
• greatly increased use of ICT for learning
• more specialisation of provision
• broader community responsibilities
• existence as part of a wider learning network
• emphasis on knowledge management in addition to knowledge
creation . 
A common feature of all the scenarios is the diversity of types of colleges
and an increasing emphasis on specialisation . The CoVE initiative is an
example of an attempt to create diversity of mission leading to the creation
of more distinctive roles for colleges . The initiative is also a key device
to promote the regeneration of technical and vocational education by
systematically recognising and promoting high-level , specialist vocational
provision in colleges . The developing emphasis on specialisation and
distinctiveness is a source of tension for college leaders who have spent
the years since incorporation concentrating on access and growth , factors
which have been instrumental in encouraging breadth of provision rather
than specialisation . As Kennedy ( 1997 , p . 1 ) noted :  ‘ Further education is
Leadership in further education 169
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 169
everything that does not happen in schools or universities .  ’ Greater clarity
of core business will be a feature of colleges in the future . 
The question of core business for general FE colleges is a complex one . 
Virtually all colleges will offer a substantial amount of provision at entry
level and levels 1 and 2 . For some this will constitute the vast majority of
their provision and thus access is their core mission . For other colleges , 
the core mission is A-level provision , or general further education , once
the access type of provision is acknowledged . The general FE colleges will
need to further identify a core mission within their general technical / vocational provision . This is in order to develop a strong sense of priorities at
institutional level which , is as apparent in the case of sixth form colleges
and specialist schools , suggests greater success in achieving higher standards . The CoVE initiative should help in a similar way in the drive to
raise standards and to position a college in relation to other providers . 
The challenge for college leaders this presents , is to manage the tension
between maintaining a broad emphasis on access and growth , and
establishing a more specialised mission within the area of technical and
vocational provision at higher levels of achievement . Breaking down
potential barriers between the various aspects of the mission rather than
creating them is a crucial task here . In essence , within the college this
involves working with colleagues to secure their commitment to the
revised mission . In order to balance an access mission with a specialised
vocational one , and to move from a general to a more specialised mission , 
the mission needs to be agreed across the college . In addition , it needs to
be evidenced in the actions of leaders and managers and to impact upon
the day-to-day operation of the college . 
Outside the college , there is a need to see clear local strategy emerge in
partnership with the Local Learning and Skills Councils ( LLSCs )  . 
Comprehensive provision across an area , rather than comprehensive
provision in each college is the aim . This should result in energy and
direction developing within colleges and should encourage new
initiatives , with employers for example . 
WHAT KINDS OF PEOPLE ? 
Detailed information on leaders in FE is difficult to find . An unpublished
internal survey conducted on behalf of the DfES in 2001 , found that the
vast majority ( 68 per cent ) of principals who responded to the survey ,  ( 78
per cent of the total in the FE colleges ) were aged 51 and over . Of these , 
36 per cent possessed a qualification in management , although the
majority of these were gained at least six years previously . A high
percentage of the respondents ( 45 per cent ) had been employed as
principals for six years or more . Seventy-nine per cent were senior postholders in FE immediately prior to accepting a post as principal . 
170 Leadership in Education
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 170
These figures can be compared with the results of a survey of almost
1 , 500 practising managers in a broad cross section of organisations
conducted by the Institute of Management ( Horne and Stedman-Jones , 
2001 )  . This survey found that 53 per cent of managers were over the age
of 54 , and that 57 per cent stated that they held a management
qualification . In comparison , leaders in FE appear to be older and less
academically qualified for the role than their counterparts in other parts
of the public and private sectors . 
Interesting figures available from the Institute of Management survey
relate to gender and ethnicity . Twenty-five per cent of respondents to this
survey were female , and 96 per cent of all respondents were white . No
comparable official figures exist for FE . Research by Stott and Lawson 
( 1997 ) showed that there were 81 women principals in the autumn of
1997 , just over 17 per cent . However , this figure is likely to have increased
substantially in recent years . No figures exist for women in senior
management positions . In its Update Report , the Commission for Black
Staff in Further Education ( 2001 , p . 4 ) notes that it is commissioning work
on the employment profile of Black staff in FE and that there are ‘ few
Black staff in the sector ’  . It further notes :  ‘ While there is data on staffing , 
there is little collation above college level and there is little evidence of
analysis and action based on this data , or of systematic ethnic monitoring ’  
( ibid .  , p . 27 )  . 
This brief statistical profile of FE leaders shows a picture of a group of
people who are predominantly white , male and over 50 . In addition , the
majority has spent many years in the FE sector and , consequently , has
little experience of the wider world of business and industry . It is clear
that diversity is a key issue for the sector , currently leaders are drawn from
a limited section of the population and rarely from outside the sector . This
prevents FE from benefiting from a rich seam of both life experience and
experience available in the wider public or private sectors . As important
is the fact that both teaching , and leadership and management staff , rarely
reflect the gender and ethnic profile of learners in the institutions in which
they work . 
In the context of consideration of the type of people who lead the sector , 
a key question is the way these leaders see themselves . A tension appears
to exist between the role of leader as institutional leader or chief executive , 
and that of the role of leader as leader of learning . This becomes
increasingly important as more emphasis is placed on leadership for
achievement within the sector and the new common inspection framework
awards grades for the impact of leadership and management upon student
achievement . As OFSTED ( 2002 , p . 54 ) comment , in relation to postcompulsory education :  ‘ The Government has stressed that the new
legislation places the individual learner as the central focus . The primary
task of inspectors is , therefore , the direct observation of teaching and
training sessions .  ’ 
Leadership in further education 171
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 171
Along with this goes an emphasis on the impact of leadership and
management on the teaching and learning process . Post-incorporation
leaders were encouraged to focus upon planning , organising and
controlling , whereas today the emphasis has shifted to their impact upon
achievement . In the broader sector of education and in North America in
particular , there is increasing emphasis upon the features of leadership , 
which make a difference to learner outcomes . This shift in emphasis
mirrors a wider debate in the field of leadership studies between
transactional , skills-based approaches and transformational approaches
which see leadership as a set of characteristics and behaviours which are
evident in effective leadership practice . 
As reported earlier , Sawbridge ( 2000 ) sees the dominant leadership
paradigm in FE to be managerial or functional . However , if leadership is
also about improving effectiveness , promoting excellence in teaching and
learning , and the development of curriculum knowledge and expertise , 
then leadership practice based on an instructional leadership or
transformational model is arguably more relevant . The impact of
leadership upon learning also raises the notion of distributed leadership , 
for it is clear that others within the college than those with designated
leadership roles , will have an impact upon teaching , learning and
curriculum development . These are likely to be curriculum and course
team leaders and individual teachers . 
Research by Martinez ( 2000 )  , demonstrates that many of the variables
which have the greatest impact upon student achievement are those
related to the structure of learning , curriculum choice , evaluation and
monitoring of student progress and student support . Those closest to the
learner experience , that is teachers and team leaders , are therefore likely
to have a significant impact upon learner achievement . A key challenge
for FE leaders is to acknowledge the leadership role of colleagues
throughout the organisation , and to examine their own contribution to
learner achievement . 
Leaders who acknowledge the reality of shared leadership are likely to
find it easier to tackle the demands of implementing multiple change . The
concept of distributed leadership draws attention to the fact that each staff
member can act as change agent . Colleagues throughout the college have
considerable influence on how things work out in practice . The principal
can articulate the importance of a focus on achievement , but it is down
to course and curriculum leaders to translate this in practical terms and
work with colleagues to turn it into reality . 
WHAT SKILLS AND QUALITIES ? 
The starting place for an analysis of the skills and qualities needed by
leaders in the FE sector is the set of national occupational standards
172 Leadership in Education
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 172
published by FENTO ( 2001 )  , for management in further education . The
standards are presented in several parts including a statement of the values
which underpin the practice of management , the generic knowledge and
critical understanding needed of a manager , and the personal attributes
describing why and how a manager operates . The core of the standards
are the performance outcomes organised around four key areas : developing
strategic practice , developing and sustaining learning and the learning
environment , leading teams and individuals , and managing finance and
resources . These key areas are further subdivided in the following manner : 
A Develop strategic practice
• A1 Develop a vision
• A2 Plan to achieve the vision
• A3 Manage change and continuous improvement
B Develop and sustain learning and the learning environment
• B1 Develop and sustain services for learners
• B2 Manage quality in the delivery of services
• B3 Manage human resources to support the provision of services
C Lead teams and individuals
• C1 Manage and develop self and own performance
• C2 Maintain and develop team and individual performance
• C3 Build and maintain productive working relationships
D Manage finance and resources
• D1 Plan resource requirements
• D2 Manage finance
• D3 Manage physical resources
Sawbridge ( 2000 , p . 26 ) argues that the standards ‘ reinforce the skills
approach to leadership inherent in the managerial leadership model ’  , 
thereby locating the model for the development of the standards within
the dominant paradigm for leadership currently existing in the sector . 
Sawbridge ( 2000 , p . 26 ) criticises the standards for reducing complex
activities to ‘ a set of management activities performed to a predetermined
criteria and again largely assuming a management by objectives approach ’  . 
However , he also acknowledges that there is strong emphasis within the
standards on the development of personal attributes , which have the
potential to reflect leadership behaviours as opposed to skills . 
Despite concerns that attempts to identify performance outcomes or
competences reduce leadership to a set of functions , frameworks of
competences or capabilities are common across the developed economies
of the first world . The University of Texas ( 2001 ) in its leadership
programme for community colleges for example , groups leadership
competencies around the twelve roles of visionary , task giver , motivator , 
Leadership in further education 173
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 173
figurehead , liaison , monitor , disseminator , spokesperson , entrepreneur , 
disturbance handler , resource allocator and negotiator . In Australia , Callan 
( 2001 ) identifies nine core capabilities , with numerous sub-elements , as
the main elements in a management and leadership capability framework
for the vocational education and training sector . The capabilities are
corporate vision and direction , strategic focus , achievement of outcomes , 
develop and manage resources , change leadership , interpersonal
relationships , personal development and mastery , business and
entrepreneurial skills , and develop and empower people . 
Callan notes the emergence of transformational leadership as a new
leadership paradigm and identifies the extent to which a leader can raise
employees to a higher level of functioning , as a defining feature of the
approach . He notes that the level of such leadership required from
Australian leaders will continue to increase . Callan identifies the nine
capabilities as crucial for the application of transformational leadership , 
thus avoiding the accusation that his list of capabilities merely provides
a set of functions leaders need to display . 
Respondents to the Institute of Management leadership survey ( Horne
and Stedman-Jones , 2001 )  , identified the following key characteristics of
leaders : 
• inspiring
• strategic thinker
• forward-looking
• honest
• fair-minded
• courageous
• supportive
• knowledgeable . 
The Institute of Management checked to see if respondents believed that
these characteristics added up to any systematic model of leadership . They
ascertained that they relate primarily to a relational model , which
emphasises interpersonal and motivational skills , thus corresponding
closely with the transformational paradigm . 
A common element to all these frameworks is an emphasis upon
strategic thinking . This emphasis raises the issue of the extent to which
leaders in FE have responsibility for strategy . Frequent contact with
principals through a range of development activities provided by the
LSDA , suggests that a number of principals view their strategic capability
as severely limited by constant external interference from government or
the funding agencies . The establishment of the Learning and Skills Council 
( LSC ) and its 47 local arms , with a remit for planning provision across the
local area , casts further doubt over the degree of freedom colleges have to
think strategically . Smith et al .  ( 2001 , p . 2 ) believe that the FE sector has 
 ‘ fallen victim to a mechanistic view of strategy as planning through a filter
174 Leadership in Education
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 174
of ever reducing degrees of freedom rather than a more holistic perspective
incorporating strategic thinking , formulation and implementation .  ’ The
authors believe that a sole reliance on strategic planning as a vehicle to
formulate strategy is both inappropriate and ineffective . Their research
supports the view that ‘ within the FE sector a range of “ logics ” exist which
serve to help principals , governors and SMTs ( senior management teams )  
 “ make sense ” of their environment and help prioritise the strategies which
they consider valid and useful ’  ( Smith , et al . 2001 , p . 7 )  . 
The three sets of dominant logics they discern are : 
1 Stability maximising : Principals of these colleges argue that in reality
neither they nor their team are strategists but operators who are there
to provide an education-based , community service as efficiently and
effectively as they can within the constraints set by funders and other
stakeholders . 
2 Market maximising : The principals of these colleges have embraced the 
 ‘ college as business ’ model , which accepts commercial realism and
points to market orientation as the only viable option . Colloquially , 
Pritchard ( 2000 , p . 150 ) reports this approach as one of ‘ find a market , 
get into it , suck it , satisfy it and move on ’  . 
3 Resource maximising : Here the dominant strategic logic centres on the
college as a set of educational resources and capabilities . There are
educational needs , which need to be met , and these are congruent with
the focus of the college . These colleges do not ignore the market but
attempt to benefit from their capability rather than seek markets and
learn how to exploit them . 
If these logics reflect the dominant patterns of strategic thinking in
colleges , it is clear that many principals and senior managers will not see
their main role as strategists in the usual sense of the word , but as
operations managers . In this role their key task is in ensuring that colleges
make the most effective provision , given the resources available and the
policy imperatives which impact upon their operations . This view is
further reinforced by the role of local LSCs in planning . With the LLSCs ’ 
brief to plan provision across their area , it can be argued that the role of
college principal is reduced to that of ‘ branch manager ’  , ensuring the
supply of educational courses and services within a framework
determined at ‘ head office ’  . This planning brief is reinforced by the
findings of OFSTED ( 2002 , p . 53 ) that : 
The lack of strategic direction and co-ordination of 16–19 education
and training has been a common feature of many of the areas inspected . 
The introduction of Local Learning and Skills Councils and new
funding regimes will oblige providers to look more critically at the
rationale behind what they offer and ensure that planning takes account
of the needs of the area as a whole and avoids unnecessary duplication . 
Leadership in further education 175
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 175
The need to plan college provision in collaboration with the LLSC does
not detract from the need for strategic thinking within individual
institutions . Colleges will continue to need to seek out new opportunities , 
to take some commercial risks and to form strategic alliances and
partnerships . Principals will need to lead strategic change within their
colleges and , as mentioned earlier in this chapter , manage change that
leads to the redesign of their colleges as learning organisations . Challenges
in terms of quality improvement , team operation and performance-based
reward systems will all require principals to provide vision and direction
through which they can lead change . These are not strategic planning
challenges , but the challenges of implementing strategic change . 
Recent debates about the nature of leadership within the FE sector have
focused on the concept of emotional intelligence ( Goleman , 1998 )  . The
LSDA ’ s leadership development programme for principals has been based
around a set of individual diagnostics measuring emotional intelligence , 
leadership styles and organisational climate . These instruments are
developed and administered by the HayGroup , who run the programme
in partnership with LSDA , and are based upon a similar model and set of
diagnostics as those used in the leadership programme for serving head
teachers , which is also run by Hay . About 350 principals have participated
in these development programmes between 1999 and 2002 , creating a
common vocabulary within the sector about leadership styles and the
application of emotional intelligence . As Callan ( 2001 , p . 21 ) remarks : 
Managers who have high levels of emotional intelligence show a
propensity to suspend judgement and to think before they act . They
show trustworthiness and integrity , are comfortable with ambiguity , 
and are open to change . In addition , managers who are emotionally
intelligent are empathetic . They demonstrate an ability to understand
the emotional makeup of other people , and show skill in treating
people according to their emotional reactions . In addition , they
demonstrate expertise in building and retaining talent , and in providing
service to clients and customers . 
There are no studies exploring the impact of emotional intelligence upon
college management . However , it does appear that a major capability
required of today ’ s leaders is a willingness to engage in personal
development and acquire a sense of personal mastery of one ’ s own
weaknesses and strengths , as well as those of others . 
The notion of emotional intelligence has been criticised for the lack of
data about its impact on life achievement and organisational effectiveness . 
It is also possible to criticise any approach to leadership that relies on the
identification of personal characteristics and behaviours , as rooted in a
personological paradigm that asserts that human behaviour is a function
of individual characteristics . This is opposed to the view that behaviour
is a function of situation or interaction . 
176 Leadership in Education
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 176
Sala ( 2002 , p . 18 ) reports on the impact of the various leadership styles
upon college success and the link between organisational climate and
success . He comments : 
As suggested by previous research , managerial styles were found to be
associated with various measures of institutional success . Managerial
styles seem to most impact student retention rates and overall ratings
for the management of the college . More specifically , the Authoritative
style seems most important since it was significantly correlated with
student retention rates , support for students , and college management
ratings . 
Sala goes on to add :  ‘ Furthermore , these findings may confirm earlier
research that suggested that presidents ( sic ) ought to utilise Authoritative
and Coaching styles – which were found to be more characteristic of
business leaders – rather than Affiliative , Democratic and Pace Setting
managerial styles ’  ( ibid .  , p . 18 )  . 
In terms of organisational climate , Sala found that ‘ Climate was
positively related to student retention rate , student support , college
management , academic achievement scores and classroom attendance
rates ’  ( ibid .  , p . 19 )  . Overall , Sala ( ibid .  , p . 21 ) concludes that : 
Presidents might consider the way they manage their colleges and the
climates they subsequently create , and the impact that those styles and
behaviours have on their faculty of staff . Education leaders cannot
change the relative deprivation of their students ; they cannot
manipulate the unemployment rate of the areas that their colleges
serve ; they can however , change the style with which they lead their
colleges and they can change the organisational climate that they
create . 
SOME CONSEQUENCES FOR LEADERSHIP
DEVELOPMENT
What does the foregoing imply for the development of leaders in the FE
colleges ? With the development of new perspectives upon the role of
leaders , it is clear that a debate needs to take place regarding the purpose
of leadership . Is the leadership of learning , the development of personal
mastery and the capacity to promote strategic change more important than
the effective functional leadership tasks of monitoring finances and other
resources ? The proposed establishment of a national college for leadership
and management for the learning and skills sector provides an opportunity
for the college to become a focal point for leadership and , perhaps , to
resolve questions of purpose and strategy for the development of leaders
in the future . 
The lack of diversity in the current cadre of college leaders needs to be
Leadership in further education 177
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 177
addressed . Specific initiatives to encourage more leaders from Black and
other ethnic backgrounds already exist on a small scale , but these need to
be extended . In particular , there needs to be a focus on the development
of middle managers to ensure that a supply of potential leaders from a
broader ethnic background is generated . Widening the pool of candidates
available for top posts in colleges also involves consideration of the
viability of encouraging more applications from outside the colleges , either
from the wider public sector or perhaps from the private . Simply
broadening the range of candidates applying for top posts does not
guarantee change . It is also important to look at the recruitment practices
of governing bodies . It is likely that some governing bodies will recruit
principals who reflect their dominant values and characteristics . While
this may lead to relatively harmonious relationships between principals
and governors , it is unlikely to lead to new perspectives , creative tension , 
or to challenge sector norms in terms of standards and innovative practice . 
Leadership development activity should be subject to scrutiny . Before
the structure and content of development programmes themselves are
reviewed there is a need for a national strategy . As the DfES ( 2002 , p . 5 ) 
comments :  ‘ The college will build on the best of the existing programmes , 
to create a clear national strategic framework for managers and leaders . 
There will be a clear routeway for managers to access as their careers
develop , including preparation for and induction to leadership .  ’ 
Leadership development programmes should reflect new thinking on the
nature of the leader ’ s role . This includes a focus on the leader ’ s role in
promoting achievement , personal development and strategic change . In
addition , there is a need for leadership development initiatives at
curriculum team level , and for opportunities for cross public sector
programmes of development . 
Underpinning developments such as these is also a need for more
research into leadership in FE . There is currently insufficient evidence as
to what is effective in terms of leadership development . There is also
insufficient basic information about leaders in FE – the gender and ethnic
breakdown , career progression , turnover , wastage rates and lack of
systematic career tracking of individuals . Finally , there is an urgent need
for a clearer understanding of which leadership behaviours are successful
in delivering high-quality FE . 
CONCLUSION
This chapter began by highlighting the dearth of research into leadership
in the FE colleges . It also pointed out that the majority of leadership
practices fit into the managerial or functional approach to leadership . It
is not enough for leaders simply to be good managers . If the colleges are
to transform themselves to deliver the step changes in standards that
government requires , then more radical change is necessary . We need
178 Leadership in Education
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 178
leaders who can balance the tension between promoting access and growth
at the same time as a more specialised vocational mission , who are willing
to share leadership responsibilities across the college , and who can
promote personal development and strategic change . This will necessitate
the encouragement of a more diverse pool of leaders , more focused and
strategic leadership development , and more research into what works . 
REFERENCES
Callan , V . J .  ( 2001 ) What Are the Essential Capabilities for Those Who Manage
Training Organisations ?  , National Centre for Vocational Education
Research / Australian National Training Authority . Leabrook , South Australia . 
Commission for Black Staff in Further Education ( 2001 )  ‘ Tackling racism together ’  , Update Report , May . 
Department for Education and Skills ( DfES )  ( 2002 ) Raising Standards Training and
Development for Leaders and Managers , consultation paper , February . 
Drodge , S . and Cooper , N .  ( 1997 )  ‘ The management of strategic planning in further
education colleges ’  , in K . Levac˘i´c and R . Glatter ( eds )  , Managing Change in
Further Education , FEDA Report , 1 ( 7 )  , 21–52 . 
Further Education National Training Organisation ( FENTO )  ( 2001 ) National
Occupational Standards for Management in Further Education , London : 
FENTO . 
Goleman , D .  ( 1998 )  ‘ What makes a leader ?  ’  , Harvard Business Review , 
November–December , 93–102 . 
Horne , M . and Stedman-Jones , D .  ( 2001 ) Leadership : The Challenges for All , 
London : Institute of Management . 
Hughes , C .  , Taylor , T . and Tight , M .  ( 1996 )  ‘ The ever changing world of further
education : a case for research ’  , Research in Post-Compulsory Education , 1 ( 1 )  , 
7–18 . 
Kennedy , H .  ( 1997 ) Learning Works : Widening Participation in Further Education , 
FEFC , Coventry . 
Lumby , J .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Strategic planning in further education ’  , in D . Middlewood and
J . Lumby , Strategic Management in Schools and Colleges , London : Paul
Chapman Publishing . 
Martinez , P .  ( 2000 ) Raising Achievement : A Guide to Successful Strategies , London : 
FEDA . 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD )  ( 2001 ) What
Schools for the Future ? OECD . 
Office for Standards in Education ( OFSTED )  ( 2002 ) The Annual Report of Her
Majesty ’ s Chief Inspector of Schools , London : The Stationery Office . 
Pritchard , C .  ( 2000 ) Making Managers in Universities and Colleges , Buckingham : 
SRHE and Open University Press . 
Sala , F .  ( 2002 )  ,  ‘ Leadership in education : effective UK college principals ’  , unpublished paper from HayGroup . 
Sawbridge , S .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Leadership for achievement in further education : a review of
the literature ’  , unpublished FEDA paper , September . 
Sawbridge , S .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Leadership in further education : a summary report from a
review of the literature ’  , in C . Horsfall ( ed .  )  , Leadership Issues : Raising
Leadership in further education 179
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 179
Achievement , London : LSDA . 
Smith , C .  , Gidney , M .  , Barclay , N . and Rosenfeld , R .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Dominant logics of
strategy in FE colleges ’  , paper for SCRELM special edition of Research in Post
Compulsory Education , June . 
Stott , C . and Lawson , L .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Women at the top in further education ’  , FEDA
Report , 2 ( 2 )  . 
University of Texas ( 2001 )  ‘ Community College Leadership Program ’  , Block Guide , 
Autumn . 
FURTHER READING
Gorringe , and Toogood , P .  ( 1994 )  ‘ Changing the culture of a college ’  , Coombe Lodge
Report , 24 ( 3 )  , Bristol : The Staff College . 
Hallinger , P . and Heck , R . H . C .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Exploring the principal ’ s contribution to
school effectiveness : 1980–1995 ’  , School Effectiveness and School Improvement , 9 ( 2 )  , 157–91 . 
Hooper , A . and Polter , J .  ( 2000 ) Intelligent Leadership – Creating a Passion for
Change , London : Random House . 
Horsfall , C .  ( ed .  )  ( 2001 ) Leadership Issues : Raising Achievement , London : LSDA . 
James , K . and Burgoyne , J .  ( 2001 ) Leadership Development : Best Practice Guide for
Organisations , London : Council for Excellence in Management and Leadership . 
Marsh , D . T .  ( 1992 ) Leadership and its Functions in Further and Higher Education , 
Mendip Paper MP035 , Blagdon : The Staff College . 
Peeke , G . C .  ( 1994 ) Mission and Change , Buckingham : SRHE and Open University
Press . 
PIU ( 2001 ) Strengthening Leadership in the Public Sector , a research study by the
Performance and Innovation Unit , Cabinet Office . 
Somekh , B .  , Convery , A .  , Delaney , J .  , Fisher , R .  , Gray , J .  , Gunn , S .  , Henworth , A . 
and Powell , L .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Improving college effectiveness : a scoping study ’  , FEDA
Report , 2 ( 12 )  . 
180 Leadership in Education
chap 11 Leaedu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 180
12
LEADERSHIP IN UK HIGHER EDUCATION
David Watson
INTRODUCTION
The question of whether universities and other institutions of higher
education are ‘ led ,  ’  ‘ managed ’  ,  ‘ administered ’  ( or any combination of the
three ) is one fraught with ideological as well as practical significance . 
Careers have been built out of inventing and attempting to validate
typologies which play across this continuum ( McNay , 1995 )  , as well as of
exploring the implications for recruitment to and survival within senior
positions ( Middlehurst , 1993 )  . The tone of much of the resulting literature
oscillates wildly , between disappointed nostalgia and brittle
triumphalism . The former normally issues into hard criticism of claimed
phenomena like ‘ new managerialism ’  ( Deem , 1998 ; Trowler , 1998a ; 
1998b )  . The latter normally degrades into homiletic ‘ tips for managers ’ in
the mould of railway bookstand literature . An example is the much touted 
 ‘ Warwick Way ’  ( Warner and Palfreyman , 2001 , pp . 167–204 )  . Instances of
attempts to marry ‘ research-based evidence ’ and ‘ practical strategies ’  , such
as Paul Ramsden ’ s guide for department heads are rare and unashamedly
provisional ( Ramsden , 1998 , p . 9 )  . 
A harsh empirical fact is that university leadership has changed less –
in terms of both its operational context ( as set for example by governance
arrangements ) and in performance – than commentators at either end of
the spectrum would like to admit . This conclusion is underlined by two
studies from the University of Leeds on university governance and
university leadership by chief executives ( Bargh , Scott and Smith , 1996 ; 
Bargh et al .  , 2000 )  . To take a historical analogy , scholars of early modern
Italy like to contrast the experience of Venice , with its centuries of steady , 
unadventurous bureaucratic rule by the doges , and the much more volatile
and varied trajectories of the mainland city states ( Pullan , 1974 )  . You sense
that the authors of these two books wanted UK higher education to look
like Florence ; instead , they discovered Venice . 
181
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 181
In the first , Governing Universities , they try to find a new breed of lay
governors challenging the ‘ donnish dominion ’ in the interests of
institutional differentiation , market sensitivity and entrepreneurship . 
Instead , they find only a marginal and qualified impact of new types of
governor upon what ‘ remain in many respects traditional and conservative
organisations ’  ( Bargh , Scott and Smith , 1996 , p . 172 )  . 
The analogous hypotheses in their second study , University Leadership , 
centre on ‘ new forms of executive leadership .  .  . based on managerial
expertise rather than collegial or charismatic authority ’  , as well as ‘ a power
shift in universities , with vice-chancellors becoming the dominant figures
in defining their cultures and determining institutional missions and
performance ’  ( Bargh et al .  , 2000 , p . 162 )  . Neither proposition is
significantly borne out by the evidence they find . Instead , as in the earlier
work , the authors have to concede powerful lines of continuity within the
internal arrangements of universities , regular deference to ‘ traditional ’ 
values and practices , and only limited organisational responses to
considerable pressure from outside . 
The evidence in this second volume is of three key types : historical , 
sociological , and quasi-ethnographic . Of the three types , the historical is
by far the most powerful . The book contains subtle and sensitive accounts
of the recent development of the UK system of higher education , the
institutions which make it up , and of the office of vice-chancellor ( or
equivalent )  . Much of this is structured around a paradox : as public interest
in higher education has waxed ( with an increasing range of stakeholders
demanding a broader set of outcomes )  , so the ‘ planning ’ tendency has
waned . The result is a sector of quasi-autonomous institutions struggling
to meet political , economic and social demands without any secure
framework for collective response . 
The sociological data centres on the formation , attributes and attitudes
of the leadership group themselves , which shows radical lines of
continuity over the half century in question . Changed expectations of
university heads have not been matched by changed recruitment patterns , 
and the wall between the former binary sub-sectors remains high . United
Kingdom data is then compared with the views of a sample of US
presidents and European rectors . From an international perspective , 
external pressures on universities have converged , but the same is not true
of the leadership roles charged with meeting them , which stubbornly
maintain their national characteristics . 
The ethnographic material attempts to test models of leadership in
action by surveying and then shadowing vice-chancellors in action . 
Interview data from 10 institutions is supplemented by material derived
from ‘ shadowing ’ three vice-chancellors over two to three weeks . Some of
the resulting ‘ vignettes ’ are arresting . They certainly demonstrate the
capacity of the subjects for profound multivalence :  ‘ I delegate most things
– and then interfere ’  ; or ‘ the average dean doesn ’ t spend enough time
182 Leadership in Education
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 182
running his faculty . He ’ s given too much of an opportunity to help run
the university ’  ( Bargh et al .  , 2000 , p . 157 )  . However , there is little warrant
for any of the major hypothetical shifts : from transactional to
transformative intentions , from collegial and charismatic leadership to
managerial and entrepreneurial skill , and so on . More expository weight
than is perhaps justified , given this very complex context , is placed on
three case studies of work-shadowing . Nonetheless , these do have the
virtue of bringing to life the essentially messy business of what the authors
call ‘ a process of accretion and renewal rather than transformation and
control ’  ( ibid .  , p . 161 )  . 
The grand picture here is of university institutions renewing themselves
in the changed context of a globalised , knowledge economy and of
increasing social expectations of the positional good of participating in
higher education . The cross-national comparative focus on the careers and
expectations of the leadership group is of interest in policy terms . 
However , individual vice-chancellors can apparently take comfort from
the fact that they are not alone in facing hugely conflicting demands and
muddling through ; just like the doges . 
In these circumstances the question of how university leaders are made
can be answered empirically quite simply : they reproduce themselves . A
more difficult question is how they could ( and possibly should ) be made , 
together with its corollary of how they can be assisted to work more
effectively once they have arrived . 
The vice-chancellors ’ club ( Universities United Kingdom [ UUK ]  ) is
currently looking hard at this question , not least in response to something
of a whispering campaign in government circles that higher education
management is seriously off the pace of private sector practice . There has
always been an asymmetry between university and business perceptions
of how ‘ business-like ’ the former could or should be ( Watson , 2000 , pp . 
37–8 )  . The DfES has recently announced an initiative to organise ‘ business
mentors ’ for university leaders ( DfES , 2001 )  , while the sort of thinking
that suggests the flow of advice should be unidirectional is aided by such
devastating public reports as Michael Shattock ’ s on the expensive failure
of Cambridge ’ s new financial system ( CAPSA )  . 
When I read in Dr Gordon Johnson ’ s excellent introduction to
Cornford ’ s Micrcosmographica Academica that ‘ We are still , many say , 
governed “ very badly ” but that does not seem to affect the University ’ s
capacity to achieve academic distinction ,  ’ sentiments echoed with
various emphases by many of those who came to see me , I am bound
to ask whether Harvard or Stanford , two obvious international
competitors , would tolerate the implicit suggestion that their
governance and management should be permitted to be less effective
because their universities are outstandingly successful academically . 
Even less would they support the notion that ineffectiveness in these
areas might be some sort of concomitant of academic success as one or
Leadership in UK higher education 183
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 183
two of my respondents have implied .  
( Shattock , 2001 , para . 1 . 3 )  .  
( Interestingly , the author cannot resist drawing in the ‘ Warwick Way ’ here
as well [ ibid .  , paras 2 . 22–26 ]  .  ) 
Measured by its outcomes , the management and leadership of UK higher
education has been outstandingly successful in several areas during two
decades of remarkable , often officially inspired turbulence .  ‘ Hits ’ have
included contribution to economic growth , efficiency , student satisfaction
and employability , democratisation and diversity , research quality ,  
 ‘ service ’  , and international reputation . Perhaps most remarkably , this has
all been achieved by working operating resource margins down to the
bone . Meanwhile the ‘ misses ’ have often been reciprocals of these
successes . Among the most notable have been mission convergence , a
failure to tackle the class base of participation , and a reluctance to
rationalise provision ( at the subject and the institutional level ) until in
extremis ( Watson , 2002 )  . 
Against this background it is useful to reflect on how top leadership
within universities may be different : different from the other educational
cases covered in this volume ; and different from the commercial and
industrial models that are prayed in aid . This is possibly the only way
past the railway bookstand offerings of context-independent ‘ models ’ of
leadership as well as the ideological traps alluded to above . Having
considered what is peculiar about the higher education case , it is then
possible to differentiate those leadership challenges which are new and
those which are simply continuous . Together these forms of analysis then
allow an assessment of what policy interventions might make a positive
difference to the quality of leadership . 
HIGHER EDUCATION EXCEPTIONALISM
There are at least three ways in which higher education institutions can
claim to present special issues for their leaders . 
The first arises from their own version of organisational ‘ flatness ’  . Power
relationships within universities are paradoxical . A very high-profile
individual leader , surrounded by a small functional team , heads an
essentially flat organisation , which tolerates hierarchy for limited practical
reasons only , and cannot accept superior authority in the most important
parts of its professional life . In academia this has been a design principle
since the beginning , as individuals and small teams have taken
responsibility for both curriculum and academic standards . 
Much ceremonial power is vested in the head of the higher education
institution , and many heads have been able to convert such power into
broad and deep moral suasion . The best of them have also been able to
184 Leadership in Education
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 184
walk the line between protection of their operation ( by garnering
resources , deflecting external attack and acting as a lightning rod for
unproductive controversy ) and involvement ( of all staff in understanding
and ‘ owning ’ not only the institution ’ s mission , but also a mature
appreciation of its objective position )  . 
As Burton Clark puts the point , somewhat more brutally ,  ‘ Universities
are too bottom-heavy , too resistant from the bottom-up , for tycoons to
dominate for very long ’  ( Clark , 1998 , p . 4 )  . There are analogues within
faculties , departments and ( to a lesser extent ) support departments . But at
the end of the day ‘ flatness ’ rules : the reputation and standing of the
institution rest with the lecturer marking examination papers , the
Examination Board deciding degree classes , and the ethical commitments
of the researcher . 
The second feature of higher education ( HE )  ‘ exceptionalism ’ arises
from a further role for their heads ( alongside the trinity of ‘ leadership , 
management , and administration ’  )  : that of ‘ stewardship ’  . Universities are , 
in the words of the dean of Westminster ,  ‘ institutions ’ and not merely 
 ‘ organisations ’  ( RSA , 1998 )  . This echoes Eric Ashby ’ s ( 1958 , p . 73 ) theory
of ‘ split personality ’ within universities :  ‘ Men with tidy minds are bound
to ask whether universities could not be run more efficiently if their efforts
were co-ordinated and planned from above . The short answer is that a
university is a society , not a public service or an industry .  ’ However , 
universities are now increasingly expected to behave as ‘ organisations ’ 
while simultaneously holding on to both structures and values associated
with ‘ institutions ’  . The strain is showing . 
Thirdly , and in the same vein , universities and colleges have to live
with being formally and informally in both the public and private sectors . 
Although proudly independent from the state and guaranteed ‘ autonomy ’ 
by either their charters or the legislative conditions of their incorporation , 
they nonetheless rely on the public sector as a hugely dominant purchaser : 
of student places , of research and consultancy , and of other services . 
There are external and internal dimensions to this situation , each
shrouded in ambiguity . Externally , many bodies ( such as Regional
Development Agencies [ RDA ]  ) typecast them as belonging to the ‘ public
sector ’  , neatly forgetting the many private companies which also rely for
survival on government contracts . Internally there are the conflicting
drives for staff to be entrepreneurial and go-getting while always
maintaining the best values of public service . Leaders of institutions can
play such ambiguity to strategic advantage . They should never forget , 
however , that they are leading perhaps the classic examples of ‘ social
businesses ’  ( as well as the dean ’ s ‘ institutions ’ or the late Lord Ashby ’ s 
 ‘ societies ’  )  . According to Richard Pinto , such ‘ social businesses ’ are ‘ 
organizations which set out to deliver a service to the community by
operating in a business-like fashion ’  ( Pinto , 1996 , p . 1 )  . 
Leadership in UK higher education 185
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 185
CONTINUITY AND CHANGE
Much of higher education ’ s exceptionalism is historically based . Statesupported mass higher education has , however , brought about some new
problems . 
The first of these challenges is political . In the UK in the past five years , 
New Labour has made it clear that it has serious , policy-related ambitions
for higher education , as indeed it does for the education service as a whole 
( Watson and Bowden , 2001 )  . Tony Blair ’ s possibly most famous quotation
from his first term was the declaration of the three priorities of ‘ education , 
education , education ’  ( Seldon , 2001 , p . 405 )  . In introducing his second
Parliament he declared unambiguously that ‘ in the second term , we want
to get money into secondary schools and universities ’  ( CIHE , 2001 , p . 4 )  . 
These ambitions are chiefly of two types : as a significant contributor to
the new ‘ knowledge economy ’  ; and as an engine room of democratisation
and social inclusion ( Blunkett , 2000 )  . This has created twin poles of
expectation . Our universities must be globally competitive , at the forefront
of wealth creation in the so-called ‘ new economy ’ and , hence ,  ‘ excellent ’  . 
They must also be accessible and socially progressive and , hence ,  ‘ equal ’  . 
In this way they are an archetype of current social and economic policy . 
Great Britain must be modern , lean and efficient , but simultaneously goals
like full employment and the ending of child poverty are to be achieved 
( Toynbee and Walker , 2001 , pp . 7–8 )  . 
Like most recent governments , New Labour has sought to use funding
levers to bring about their goals . A new term in Whitehall is ‘ something
for something ’  . Thus , new resources for higher education invariably come
with strings attached , institutions cannot afford to forgo ‘ special
initiatives ’  , and , as a result , working in higher education is more and more
like working in the National Health Service . 
There is a principle at work here , which can be validated all over the
world . Basically , as governments and the state become more interested in
higher education , so they expect more from it . Inside the system , 
institutional leaders feel ambivalent about these priorities : they welcome
the interest ( they would welcome the implied investment even more )  , but
they worry about the situation when ‘ official ’ priorities might clash with
their own . 
Inside the academy ‘ excellence ’ is most regularly related to research . 
Some of the most extreme tensions within the system centre on the status , 
role and funding of research . There is now widespread acknowledgement
across the system that carefully focused research is a legitimate part of the
mission of all higher education institutions ( HEIs )  ; that – to put the point
in reverse – there is no such thing as a ‘ teaching only ’ university . The
implications of this rejection weigh heavily on the internal value-system
of a modern university . They up the stakes for collaboration ( as not all
institutions can maintain the infrastructure they need )  . They reinforce
186 Leadership in Education
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 186
traditional models of the academic career . In a ‘ mass ’ system they also
arouse concerns about value for money ( there is , for example , growing
resentment in the USA about tuition increases funding research )  . 
Meanwhile , it is clear that the core business of the university is now
even less of a monopoly than it ever was . 
There have been two influential theoretical interventions on this theme . 
The first is the now canonic analysis by Michael Gibbons and his
collaborators . They see an inexorable and irreversible shift from ‘ mode 1 ’ 
thinking ( pure , disciplinary , homogeneous , expert-led , supply-driven , 
hierarchical , peer-reviewed and almost exclusively university-based ) to 
 ‘ mode 2 ’  ( applied , problem-centred , transdisciplinary , heterogeneous , 
hybrid , demand-driven , entrepreneurial , network-embedded etc .  )  
( Gibbons et al .  , 1994 )  . 
The second , more contested , thesis is Ron Barnett ’ s account of ‘ the death
of the university ’ in the face of ‘ supercomplexity .  ’ The key text , Realizing
the University starts with a ringing call for a clean break with the past ;  
 ‘ the death is required ’  ( emphasis in original )  , and yet we are constantly
reminded that ‘ the old lives on within the new ’  ( Barnett , 1999 , p . 11 )  . 
How , for example , does the array of new ‘ values ’ for the age of
supercomplexity really differ from those we have been traditionally
committed to ( at least in theory )  ? 
What is required is the capacity to tame supercomplexity , to inject a
value structure into it even as all value structures are put into the dock . 
The university has to hold on to the value system that helped to
generate supercomplexity – of openness , courage , tolerance and so on
– even as supercomplexity puts these same values under the
microscope . Supercomplexity deprives us of a value anchorage for
answering such challenges . The value background that spawned
supercomplexity , on the other hand , can help us to just that . The values
implicit in rational critical dialogue helped to generate
supercomplexity and they can help to keep supercomplexity in its
place .  .  . The ladder of the university ’ s value background has to be kept
in place , not kicked away .  
( ibid .  , p . 83 ) 
Close your eyes , and we are back in the world of Barnett ’ s earlier
influential works , The Idea of Higher Education ( Barnett , 1990 ) and The
Limits of Competence ( Barnett , 1994 )  . 
At the other end of the scale ,  ‘ inclusion ’ brings equally intensive
challenges to leadership . The most recent surge of expansion in higher
education has made huge differences in the internal population of
universities in terms of gender , age , ethnicity , and even disability , but only
the tiniest inroads on working-class participation . Social class is proving
difficult for the sector to tackle at a fundamental level . It is well known
that the participation rates in higher education by social class go down
Leadership in UK higher education 187
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 187
dramatically from 72 per cent of the children of professional classes to
just 13 per cent of children of unskilled workers . The figures show the
participation of these groups has grown , but has not significantly
improved proportionately within the growth of the sector as a whole . This
is a much more profound problem than that of recruiting well-qualified
students from poorer areas . Tackling it , together with maintaining ( and
ideally improving ) retention , is now urgent . Certainly , there has been
progress in widening participation as a result of special initiatives , 
partnerships , flexible entry and targeted financial support for students . 
However the sector is still in a situation where supply has met demand
for the middle classes and those well qualified , and where a much smaller
impression has been made on social groups IIIm , IV and V ( HEFCE , 2001 )  . 
In effect UK higher education is at a fork in the road . Either the sector
will contribute to further social polarisation , or it will make a major
contribution to overcoming it . In other words , higher education is deeply
implicated in the solutions to the wider problems of a society increasingly
separated by divergences in skills , in access to information and to work
itself . A recent discussion paper for the No . 10 Downing Street , 
Performance and Innovation Unit , has shown the divisive effects of higher
education both as a strong safeguard against downward mobility for ‘ dull
middle class children ’ and as an increasingly critical positional good ( the
more people have it the less valuable it may be , but simultaneously the
penalties for not having it increase )  ( PIU , 2001 , para . 25 )  . Genuinely
widening participation might be hard to tackle , but it is a core leadership
question for higher education . 
So , too , is the vexed question of organisation within and differentiation
across the sector . 
Much of the dramatic expansion in student numbers between the late
1980s and early 1990s was driven by officially sponsored competition : 
competition between different parts of the sector , and between individual
institutions . As numbers levelled out under the last years of the
Conservative government , and as much more targeted expansion has been
renewed under New Labour , official rhetoric has shifted from competition
to collaboration , and funding councils have been directed to encourage
and reward such behaviour . 
Cynics will instantly say that the shift to collaboration is defensive , and
largely driven by resource constraints . This issue has to be tackled head
on , and it has to be admitted that it contains more than a germ of truth . 
Any objective economic appraisal would probably indicate that the UK
has too many , and too many too small , HEIs for all to be able to prosper . 
The management across the sector of operational surpluses down to waferthin levels without widespread institutional failure has been an heroic
achievement . Unfortunately , it has also been accompanied by a number of
less desirable features , such as risk aversion , mission uncertainty and the
underpricing of research . Meanwhile , in its eagerness to achieve policy188 Leadership in Education
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 188
related returns for increased investment in higher education , the
government may have made collaboration harder rather than easier to
achieve . 
But it would be wrong to regard either economic necessity or official
policy as the exclusive engines of change in this direction . It is also
necessary to take account of such influences as the increasing role of
partnerships in research and development , the ‘ joined-up ’ training agenda
required by key clients of higher education such as the National Health
Service , and the new national and regional patterns of responsibility for
social and economic policy . 
In doing so , it is important to remember some key facts about the history
of the sector . For example , as Peter Scott pointed out in his study of The
Meanings of Mass Higher Education , three-quarters of UK universities
have been created since 1945 ( Scott , 1995 , pp . 44–9 )  . Nor should the role
of mergers , acquisitions , alliances and status shifts in the development of
nearly every institution that is now a member of UUK be forgotten . 
Similarly , it would be wrong to assume that mergers and acquisitions
are either the inevitable , or indeed the only , outcome of collaboration and
co-operation . There is plenty of advanced industrial experience of ‘ partial ’ 
or ‘ mixed ’ alliances , whereby corporations agree on the areas in which
they will collaborate and those in which they will continue to compete . 
In this respect they operate like some of the larger US systems ( like the
University of California ) which have different elements – almost
equivalent to separate UK-style institutions – operating within them . 
This exposition has been predominantly about challenges to the sector
and its leadership at the national level . Equally important pressures ( some
with similar sources ) impact at both the international and the local 
( especially regional ) level . On the one hand , there is the need to balance
an ethical and an entrepreneurial approach to the global market . There
are many opportunities to improve an institution ’ s bottom line through
international ventures . There is also the priceless historical reputation of
the British system in helping other nations and societies to develop their
own higher education . On the other hand , all the dilemmas of ‘ excellence ’ 
versus ‘ inclusion ’ play across regional relationships and agendas , together
with the tensions of competition , collaboration and complementarity . 
At the time of writing , UK higher education is going through one of its
most turbulent phases since the mid-1980s , and the conditions which
brought about the National Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education 
( the Dearing Committee )  . This turbulence has several sources : a perception
of rapidly increasing financial strain ; a documented breakdown in the
market mechanisms of ‘ supply and demand ’  ; the government pressures to
deliver on a universal ( and felt to be contradictory ) agenda of both 
 ‘ excellence ’ and ‘ inclusion ’  ; panic over the outcome of the 2001 Research
Assessment Exercise ( RAE )  ; a review ( that has become a ‘ consultation ’ –
always a sure sign that the sponsors do not know what to do ) on student
Leadership in UK higher education 189
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 189
support in England , which seems to have motivated a lot of potential
applicants to ‘ wait and see ’  ; a significant downturn in the numbers of full
fee-paying international students as a result of reluctance to trust
intercontinental air transport after 11 September 2001 ; and renewed
rumblings within the research-rich Russell Group of institutions 
( apparently with official encouragement ) about a break-away from the rest
of the sector ( if the price is right )  . In such circumstances the need for
principled , brave and effective leadership in UK HE has probably never
been higher . How can such leadership be assured ? 
WHAT IS TO BE DONE ? 
Interventions in policy and practice need to separate two phases ; that of
preparing the next generation of university and college leaders , and that
of supporting them when they have arrived . This difference between 
 ‘ getting there ’ and ‘ being there ’ has bedevilled much of the discussion
about ( and many of the plans for ) professional formation of university
leaders , not least in the equal opportunities arena . 
Activities centred on succession planning , on growing capacity and on
improving diversity within the top management group are being
undertaken in the UK at both the institutional and the sectoral level . 
Accredited training has been provided by Higher Education Staff
Development Agency ( HESDA )  , the sector ’ s national training organisation
in the form of a ‘ Top Management Programme ’  ( a sector-specific and
marginally cheaper form of the Cabinet Office Programme with the same
name )  . Partly under the aegis of a Higher Education Funding Council for
England ( HEFCE ) selective initiative ( the ‘ Good Management Programme ’  ) 
a number of institutions have developed their own versions 
( HEFCE / HESDA , 2002 )  . These programmes join a longer established set of
initiatives directed at overcoming gender discrimination in particular 
(  ‘ Room at the Top ’ – also from HESDA was specially directed at senior
women managers , partly at the instigation of the informal ‘ Glass Ceiling ’ 
group )  . It remains to be seen whether such efforts successfully diversify
the population of university leaders , or whether they frustrate participants
led to believe that achievement within them will assure promotion . The 
 ‘ background ’ analysis at the beginning of this chapter suggests that there
is still a long way to go . 
Meanwhile UUK and the Standing Committee of Principals ( SCOP ) of
colleges of higher education are attempting to codify , systematise and
increase the amount of peer support that is available to those already in
leadership positions ( UUK , 2002 )  . Discussions within these groups suggest
that what chief executives in particular want is highly focused , quick
reaction , support on those difficult issues which have a habit of sweeping
across the sector ( new legislation on disability or health and safety , for
190 Leadership in Education
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 190
example , along with a dramatic rise in student complaints , or a rash of
demonstrations on animal houses )  . They also welcome networked systems
of informal ‘ coaching ’ and ‘ mentoring ’ by more experienced peers on a
confidential basis . What goes down least well is banal and generalised 
 ‘ good practice ’ guides , which frequently labour to state the obvious . Vicechancellors are , however , instant and voracious readers of ‘ bad practice ’ 
stories ( such as the CAPSA saga above ) on the time-honoured principle
of ‘ there but for the grace of God go I ’  . 
A PERSONAL CODA
This last section is essentially personal reflections , based on personal
experience as well as the analysis above . These reflections are offered in
the form of 10 ‘ adages ’  . These are of lesser status than formal ( falsifiable ) 
propositions , but ideally more forceful than anecdotal observation . Rather
in the spirit of ‘ grounded theory ’  , I hope they will prove useful in
appropriate circumstances . 
First , higher education leadership has to be more than usually
respectful of the processes of production . The ‘ flatness ’ of academic
authority , as well as the consensual base of academic governance , 
mandates this . That said , secondly , it must not simply give way to
misplaced nostalgia or ‘ fifth amendment ’ -style claims about academic
freedom . It must always be free to challenge , to guide , and to set out
alternative directions of strategic development . 
Simultaneously ( third )  , it needs to adopt a fully professional approach
to support functions ( finance , personnel , estates , marketing and
development , information systems , etc .  )  . If higher education is to punch
its weight in the knowledge economy , and to provide modern working
conditions for its staff , it cannot afford even benign amateurism in these
areas . Teamwork is also of the essence here , across both the academic and
support functions . 
Fourth , in terms of both personal and professional relationships , there
is the necessity of maintaining dignity and good humour in what is a
professionally argumentative community . The stakes here are heightened
by a law of academic life : that academic confidence grows the further the
speaker is from his or her true field of expertise . In other words ,  ‘ at home ’ 
scholars will handle ambiguity , provisionality and incremental insight
with deftness and humility .  ‘ At large ’  , and dealing with difficult aspects
of their working environment , they will know exactly what needs to be
done , and who else should do it . As a consequence , the institutional leader
will need to be thick-skinned about some issues ( especially the receipt of
insults masquerading as forthrightness – although never giving way to the
temptation to reply in kind ) and thin-skinned ( or hypersensitive ) about
others ( especially the early identification of bullying )  . Relentless courtesy
Leadership in UK higher education 191
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 191
– even under provocation – is a vital asset ( see Watson , 1994 )  . 
As a result , the fifth adage is to be clear about when to be humble and
when to be assertive . It has long been understood that the most effective
academic leadership is by stealth . However , Thomas Hughes probably
erred too much on the side of humility in his encomium for Dr Arnold at
the end of Tom Brown ’ s Schooldays . 
And that ’ s the way that all of the Doctor ’ s reforms have been carried
out when he has been left to himself – quietly and naturally , putting a
good thing in the place of a bad , and letting the bad die out ; no
wavering and no hurry – the best thing that could be done for the time
being , and patience for the rest .  
( Hughes , 1856 , pp . 302–3 ) 
Eric Ashby got the balance much better in his description of the Principal 
 ‘ feeding in ’ ideas and devoting ‘ a large proportion of his time , and the
bulk of his reserves of moral stamina ’ ensuring their survival and success
when adopted by others ( Ashby , 1958 , p . 72 )  . 
A route through this minefield can be found ( sixth ) by the leader ’ s
taking responsibility – internally as well as externally – for the narrative
glue which holds the institution together . The modern term is ‘ sensemaking ’  ( Taylor , 1999 )  . This is one feature of successful large private
companies which is probably transferable . It does not imply a vainglorious
cult of personality ; it does mean the ability to express what colleagues
across the institution , at their best , are striving for . 
Effective university and college leaders need to be self-reflective , 
especially about their personal motives and their techniques of selfpresentation . The history of the sector is littered with examples of highprofile leaders who have proved either highly functional or seriously
dysfunctional . Some , almost tragically , became caricatures of their former , 
better selves ( in other words , the promise showed in ‘ getting there ’ seeped
away during the course of ‘ being there ’  )  . In this very tricky area , the first
adage ( about maintaining respect for the intellectual capital of the
institution ) is probably the best guide . 
Meanwhile , perhaps the most valuable task a university leader can
perform is to help colleagues to understand their institution ’ s actual and
potential place within the scheme of things . This is not just about safeguarding the bottom line . Strategic scoping and decision-making may
result in forgoing some apparent immediate institutional advantages or
exposing some institutional weaknesses . This will be especially true in
the fraught arena of collaboration and alliances . In these circumstances 
 ‘ leading ’ the choice of options , and ‘ managing ’ the consequences can come
together in a very profound way . 
Penultimately , and perhaps most obviously , the effective leader has to
be prepared to act , and to act decisively in certain circumstances . Respect
for the operation must not mean reluctance to put right what is wrong and
192 Leadership in Education
chap 12 LeaEdu 11 / 2 / 03 3 : 54 am Page 192
to defend what is right . 
Much of this can sound disturbingly like a counsel of perfection . 
Another strand in the rather thin literature on HE management outlined
at the beginning of this chapter is the ‘ advice book ’ contributions of
superannuated leaders . Many of these could be reduced to ‘ do what I say
rather than what I did ’  ( American former Presidents are especially
susceptible to this syndrome , although there are also some classic British
instances ; see for example , Knight , 1990 ; Sloman , 1964 )  . 
Emotional intelligence in the face of the ‘ wicked issues ’ which bedevil
university communities is the essential requirement , although it can be
hard to apply in specific circumstances ( Watson , 2000 , pp . 80–7 )  . The final
adage is in this spirit . Top academic and institutional leadership is about
values , and it is about setting the balance between continuity and change : 
between understanding and safe-guarding those elements which
contribute to the real strength of the academic community ( including those
ripe for refreshment and renewal ) and those where innovation , change and
reinvention are the conditions of survival and prosperity . Being a doge
will not be enough . 
NOTE
Earlier versions of some of this material appeared in Studies in Higher
Education , in lectures given to the Social Market Foundation and the
University of Kent at Canterbury , and in workshops for the HESDA Top
Management Programme and University of Strathcylde ‘ Leaders for
Tomorrow ’ Programme in early 2002 . 