introduction
Investing In 
Your Future
1
2
This appreciation rate generally takes 
place as part of natural market growth , 
essentially , without you doing anything . 
To illustrate , consider homeowners who 
purchased their homes 20 years ago 
and now find themselves with $150 , 000 
in equity in their homes , something they 
never thought about at the time they 
purchased the home . Beyond that , you 
can create situations where you “ force ” 
appreciation , such as through renovations 
or cosmetic improvements to a home ( we 
call this rehabbing properties )  . This is 
where the work you put into a property 
makes it instantly more valuable than the 
price you paid for it . 
• Generate positive cash flow
you can use – Some investors will 
purchase property in order to rent it out 
and create positive monthly cash flow . 
Property can sometimes be rented for 
more than the total expenses ( principal 
and interest , taxes and insurance )  , so 
you can make money from the rental , 
while someone else is building equity in 
your property . Another way to buy and 
hold property is to lease it to someone 
else with an option for them to purchase 
it in the future . This technique creates 
excellent positive monthly cash flow since 
looking for everything from their first home to 
their retirement home—and you will be the 
investor who has exactly what these buyers 
need . 
Before we go into greater detail in 
this manual about profiting with real estate , 
locating and negotiating deals , evaluating 
properties , and making the most out of some 
of real estate ’ s best opportunities , let ’ s take 
a brief look at the real estate investment 
market in general to see why it provides so 
many avenues for building wealth . 
THE MAJOR BENEFITS
OF REAL ESTATE
The benefits of investing in real estate are 
many , from creating situations where your 
profit potential is up to you , to building a 
lifestyle some people only dream of . With 
real estate , you can : 
• Own your own business
Work part-time or full-time , be your own 
boss , and time things according to your 
schedule and goals . 
• Take advantage of appreciation 
Real estate typically appreciates around 
four to five percent annually . 
Guide to real estate investing
Introduction
3
these tenants are willing to pay more than the average renter will 
pay . 
• Create a hedge against inflation – Even in times of 
inflation , opportunities abound with real estate . That ’ s because 
inflation tends to force higher real estate prices and because the 
underlying asset ( your property ) can be counted on to be there 
through inflation ( while some other investments may not survive 
economic downturns )  . 
• Make money with low risk and low start up
costs – The market for potential customers is huge and you 
can start your business in real estate investing with little or even 
no capital of your own . There are always private investors in the 
marketplace who have the money to invest but do not know how 
( or don ’ t care to do the work ) to do the deals themselves . 
• Profit from equity buildup – You build equity at the 
same time as the property is naturally increasing in value due to 
market conditions and demand . And you can tap that equity in a 
property to finance additional investments . 
• Enjoy multiple channels for profit – There are many 
ways to invest in real estate and there is something for everyone , 
from the casual or first-time investor to the more experienced or 
full-time investor . Once you understand the variety of opportunities 
available , you can choose the deals that help you reach your 
individual goals faster . 
4
many easy ways to find the opportunities 
that will help you succeed . 
• Market your business easily 
Marketing real estate is not complicated . 
Everything from a For Sale sign in the front 
yard of a home you have renovated to 
an ad or direct mail campaign can bring 
in customers . Some investors have netted 
thousands of dollars in profit on deals 
simply because someone called them 
from a car magnet ad on the side of their 
vehicle or from a flyer they posted on a 
community bulletin board at an apartment 
complex . 
• Build a power team to help
you increase and expedite your
profits – To succeed with real estate 
investing , you will want to establish solid 
relationships throughout your community 
and in the business… relationships with 
people who can help you build your 
business , partner with you in investments , 
or be available to buy your properties . 
A winning team of contacts would 
include people like a good real estate 
lawyer , real estate agents or brokers , an 
accountant or tax expert , a mortgage 
broker , a professional home inspector , 
mentors or coaches who can guide 
• Benefit from real estate ’ s 
repeatability – Once you learn the 
basics , learning advanced skills is even 
easier than you might realize . You can 
use the knowledge you build about real 
estate investing to repeat the process 
over and over again , on multiple types 
of properties , increasing your profits 
considerably without working harder to 
do so . 
• Benefit from tax breaks – When 
you invest in real estate , consult with a 
tax professional about the opportunities 
that may be available to you through 
depreciation , in writing off certain business 
expenses , and through tax breaks ( for 
example , deducting the interest portion of 
mortgage payments )  . 
• Find investment propert ies 
and opport unities easily – With 
real estate investing , opportunities are 
all around you . You can make a simple 
effort , like driving through neighborhoods 
looking for For Sale By Owner signs , or 
you can do everything from establishing 
relationships with real estate professionals 
to placing your own ads to generate leads . 
What ’ s nice to know is that regardless of 
the time you have available , there are 
Guide to real estate investing
Introduction
5
you through transactions and help motivate you , and qualified 
contractors , builders , and other professionals who can assist you 
in rehabbing your properties . 
• Help others – One great aspect of real estate investing 
is you can help others in need . Consider someone who has a 
distressed property because they live in another state and they ’ re 
trying to manage it long distance . You could help alleviate that 
burden . Or consider someone who is struggling with debt and 
now the bank is going to foreclose on their home . You could 
help them save their credit . The possibilities for helping others are 
endless . 
A MARKET FULL OF OPPORTUNITIES
There are not only many benefits associated with real estate , but 
also many opportunities for success regardless of your financial 
goals , location , or financial situation . 
Short -term and long-term strategies 
With real estate , there are both short-term and long-term investment 
strategies available to you , giving you the flexibility to make 
investment choices that fit your schedule and needs .  
As an example , you may wish to hold properties only for the 
short-term , so you might purchase a property below fair market 
value , fix it up with minor repairs and cosmetic improvements ( such 
as painting and landscaping )  , and then turn around and sell it 
quickly for profit . 
6
Opp ortunities in all areas 
You can make money with real estate 
regardless of the area you live or invest in . 
This book will begin helping you to become 
knowledgeable about how to analyze and 
identify profit potential in real estate markets . 
Your future training will take you to the next 
level and to those who are committed , the 
potential for wealth accumulation will be 
unlimited . 
Just a few examples of ways to build 
wealth follow and illustrate this point . For 
example , in low-income areas , you can find 
several great opportunities for rehabbing or 
wholesaling properties . These opportunities 
allow the owner / landlord to provide 
affordable , clean housing for low-income 
families , while generating positive cash flow 
through highly profitable weekly or monthly 
rentals . When you act as the intermediary 
investor , they provide a way to generate 
income through either quick turns after 
the rehab or fast cash through wholesale 
techniques .  
In moderate-income areas , you can 
profit from excellent resale values and work 
with a large market of first-time homebuyers 
who may need special financing options 
to purchase their home . Moderate-income 
areas can also provide good rental income 
opportunities .  
You can even purchase or contract for a 
distressed property at well below fair market 
value , and sell either the property or the right 
to buy the property , immediately to another 
investor who will do all the work improving 
the property . This short-term strategy is known 
as “ quick-turning ” or wholesaling properties . 
Individuals have made fast profits of thousands 
of dollars on just one deal in wholesaling 
a property and you can too ! Additionally , 
investors have used wholesaling strategies to 
make quick cash to pay down their debts , 
generate extra income in addition to a fulltime job , start their own business slowly and 
with limited risk , and create capital for future 
investments .  
A long-term strategy might be to buy 
a home below fair market value and then 
rent it out for any number of years or lease 
it to someone else giving them an option to 
purchase it in the future . In situations like these , 
when you have tenants , they are building 
your equity because with every payment they 
make to you , you are taking that payment 
and decreasing your existing mortgage . 
Guide to real estate investing
Introduction
7 
In just above median home value areas there are currently 
great prospects for two techniques : either offering lease options 
to potential homebuyers , or buying at substantial discounts due to 
distressed seller situations and then holding the properties for shortterm for profits at the time of sale .  
And finally , there is tremendous opportunity in some of the best 
neighborhoods and school districts in the cities across the U . S . due 
to the distress of the sellers who must get out of a property quickly . 
While not for the beginning investor , these types of deals can give 
experienced investors the opportunity to invest when tax shelters are 
the priority . 
Evaluating Buy & Hold Propert ies
If you intend to buy and hold property for cash flow , it is important 
that you choose properties that will cash flow—and the United States 
has an abundance of properties available that will meet your needs ! 
Having said that , if you are considering rental housing consider 
carefully the benefits of buying houses that have more than one 
stream of income coming in each month . For example , if you are 
buying a single family house to rent out , if it is vacant for a month , 
you are making the entire mortgage payment . However , if instead 
of buying single family houses to rent out you focus on duplexes , 
triplexes , and quads , if one of the units is empty , you still have the 
other ( s ) to help cover your expenses . That is part of the beauty of 
real estate—various tweaks on your buying decisions can make 
big differences in the outcome of the deal . And in this scenario , the 
price of a duplex is seldom anywhere close to double the price of 
the single family . Yet , the rents from each unit are not half as much as 
the single family ’ s rental income price . For that reason , it is unusual 
for us to recommend you buy and rent out single family homes in 
working class neighborhoods . Go for the duplex ! On the other 
8
• Seller financing – You can take 
advantage of seller financing , lease 
options , etc .  , to allow you to purchase 
properties with little or no money down . 
• Sources for seed money 
( capital ) to finance your
investment – Even people with poor 
credit have still been able to achieve 
success in real estate investing ; you just 
have to know how to look for the creative 
financing opportunities . Some examples 
include seller financing , wraparound 
mortgages , equity financing , partnering 
with other investors , etc . 
So , for many reasons , real estate provides 
people with opportunities to profit and 
earn income in ways they never would 
have dreamed possible . The more you 
learn and the more prepared you are 
to take on new opportunities , the better 
you ’ ll succeed in generating amazing 
profits and changing your life forever . We 
are dedicated to helping you get there . 
So let ’ s get started ! 
hand , in the upper income neighborhoods , 
lease options work beautifully on single 
family homes because you will be dealing 
with future buyers of the property from the 
beginning . Knowing what to buy , where to 
buy , and how to hold will move you to your 
financial dreams more quickly than you can 
imagine—the opportunities are endless ! 
Multiple financing options
Real estate investing can be done virtually 
anywhere by anyone—the key is knowledge . 
It provides a way for any individual to 
get involved and reach their financial 
goals , regardless of their current financial 
situation . That ’ s because there are many 
creative financing and buying approaches 
available . You just have to know where and 
how to look for them . For example , you can 
find opportunities through : 
• Government programs – There 
are many ways to purchase homes 
well below fair market value through 
government-sponsored programs , and 
there are ways to use government 
programs to find opportunities you could 
not find anywhere else . 
chapter
one
9
PORTFOLIO
2-3 Streams
EARNED
3-4 Streams
PASSIVE
3-4 Streams
11
Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth
creating your personal 
business road map
f you were going to travel from 
New York City to San Francisco , 
there are such good road signs and 
highways systems across the United 
States that you could probably find 
your way without having a detailed 
road map that outlined your journey . 
But doing so wouldn ’ t make much 
sense , would it ? You would end up 
taking a few wrong turns , you ’ d have 
trouble getting started , and ultimately , 
you would be sure to get lost a few 
times along the way . 
The same is true for choosing 
to invest in business . Having a clear 
idea of the benefits and advantages 
of different types of real estate deals , 
clearly evaluating where you are in 
terms of resources , and moving in the 
right direction with the least amount 
of wasted time will be a tremendous 
asset to you . That is the purpose of 
this chapter—to help you begin to 
get more clear about where you are , 
where you want to go , and the best 
way to get there . 
One of the first things you should 
do is a personal financial evaluation 
of where you are at this moment in 
time . Do you have strong or weak 
i
the circle of 
wealth Multiple 
Streams Of Income In 
Real Estate Investing
12
Technique / 
circumstance 

Wholesale buying 
& contract sales 
Lease Option 
Foreclosure 
Rehabbing
Mobile Homes
Tax Liens & Deeds
Property 
Management 
( Managing other 
investors ’ property ) 
Benefit 

Quick cash 
return / low cash 
investment
Cash flow , 
appreciation / 
can be structured 
with a low cash 
investment
Quick cash 
( short-term )  , needs 
some cash to do
Quick cash , 
cash flow / needs 
cash or credit 
investment
Cash flow / low 
cash investment
Portfolio income 
from interest / 
higher cash 
investment / little 
leverage
Cash flow / 
very low cash 
investment 
needed to begin
credit ? Do you have access to money 
lending sources ? Are they public ( lenders , 
banks , mortgage brokers ) or private 
( personal contacts who might be willing to 
help you to get started )  ? Once you have 
clearly delineated your current position you 
are better able to begin choosing the right 
types of deals to move you towards financial 
freedom . For example , if you have few 
financial or credit resources , you will want 
to choose types of real estate deals ( at least 
in the early stages of your career ) that do 
not rely on either credit or funding . One of 
these types of deals is called “ wholesaling .  ” 
So , let ’ s begin this chapter by outlining the 
various ways to make money—and the type 
of money it takes to do that kind of deal . 
MANY PROPERTY TYPES AND
INVESTMENT STRATEGIES 
Real estate investing is attractive because 
there are many property types to invest in , 
as well as many strategies for what to do 
with those properties . And each comes with 
its own rewards . The following are some of 
the main types of investment opportunities , 
with their primary benefits listed . 
13
Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth 
Investors consider different options based on the outcome they 
want to achieve , the amount of cash they want to invest in the 
project , and / or their level of experience with different strategies . 
For example , an investor may want to consider quick cash 
investment strategies for a variety of reasons , among them being 
high consumer debt ( generating quick cash to pay down that debt ) 
or lack of seed capital to work with ( using wholesale opportunities 
to quickly build more money for future investments )  . 
Of course , with multiple income streams and opportunities 
comes the need to obtain the proper knowledge to specialize 
in different areas . Because wholesaling , foreclosures , and lease 
options are some of the more popular ones in real estate investing , 
we have included chapters focused specifically on those strategies 
in this manual . This book also introduces you to several other streams 
of income in real estate investment and defines the types of income 
those strategies can produce . As you grow your business and find 
the real estate investment areas and strategies that interest you most , 
you can discuss with us more opportunities for advanced training in 
those areas so you can maximize your profit potential . 
The Circle of Wealth and 
Multiple Income Streams
You might be wondering how to choose your streams of income 
and what factors should influence your decision , so before we go 
any deeper into this book , let ’ s take some time to define the various 
types of income and the benefits of choosing one over the other . 
14
deals , you collect the rent ( or your property 
manager collects it for you ) every single 
month . Another real estate related field of 
income that would be considered passive 
is when you become a property manager , 
have a property management company , 
and investors hire you to collect the rents for 
them and pay you a fee to do it ! 
Types of passive Streams 
of Income in Real Estate : 
• Rentals— houses , apartments , 
mobile homes , etc . 
• Leases— lease option properties
• Propert y Management— 
mentioned above
• Recreational Parks— where you 
rent out spaces
• Mobile Home Parks— where you 
rent out lots and others own the 
mobile homes
• Apartm ent Houses— which bring 
you in multiple payments every month
Types of Earned Streams 
of Income in Real Estate : 
• Wholesaling
• Foreclosures , Pre-foreclosures , and 
Real Estate Owned Properties ( Post- foreclosures ) 
• Rehabbing
• Probate 
• Discount Note Selling
• Remodeling
• Land Development
Basically , anything that you are going to 
contract and sell quickly would fall into the 
Earned Income category . 
Passive Income : Passive income is 
money that comes to you week after week 
or month after month without you going 
out and doing another deal . This type of 
income is also sometimes called “ recurring 
income .  ” In real estate , these would be 
your buy and hold properties—your rentals 
and leases . Once you have closed on these 
15
Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth
• Commercial Spaces— offices , retail establishments , 
storage unit facilities , industrial buildings , etc . 
Buy and hold properties are where you build long-term wealth and 
begin to benefit from appreciation and tax advantages . So , earned 
income streams help you generate the cash to move towards buy 
and hold long term wealth ! The two work hand in hand to help you 
achieve your goals . 
Port folio Income : Portfolio income is when your money begins 
to make money for you—typically through interest . Let ’ s say you 
have $30 , 000 to invest in some type of real estate related deal but 
you do not want to have to do any work or invest any time once 
you have made your purchase . In this situation , you might choose to 
invest that money in tax liens that earn a return of 18% per year . You 
attend the tax lien auction , purchase liens that take the $30 , 000 
investment amount , and then you sit back and wait for them to be 
redeemed ! Your money begins earning interest at the rate of 18% 
per year the day you pay for the liens and the county property tax 
office employee does all the monitoring and paperwork ! That sure 
beats investing in a CD at 1% or 2% interest , doesn ’ t it ? 
There are several other ways for you to generate portfolio 
income that is real estate related , as well . Most of these streams of 
income relate to the investor earning interest on his or her money . 
While this book will not go into depth on these techniques , it is 
important for you to at least understand the potential and definition 
of these income streams . 
16
New investors who have a limited 
amount of money begin by becoming 
knowledgeable in a few earned income 
streams such as wholesale , foreclosure , and 
rehabbing . Now they have more control 
over their ability to generate large amounts of 
cash in a short period of time . They then take 
that money and begin to invest in buy and 
hold properties such as lease option houses . 
They have now learned to invest safely , and 
once we learn to do it safely , we can do 
it quickly !  
As the passive income grows or the lease 
option properties begin to sell ( usually three 
years later )  , the investor has two choices : 
either buy another buy and hold property or 
invest in a portfolio stream ( such as tax liens , 
defined above )  . 
Begin to train your mind to 
think in terms of The Circle of 
Wealth and always ask 
yourself what your short 
and long term goals are 
at any given moment . 
Yes , we get rich in buy 
and hold situations , so 
that is your ultimate goal , 
but if you are beginning with 
limited resources and need to 
generate some cash so you can build a 
substantial portfolio in a fairly modest number 
of years , earned income can help you do that . 
Types of portfolio Streams 
of Income in Real Estate : 
• Tax Lien Auction Investments
• Discount Note Buying
• Seller Financing
• Hard Money Lending
• Venture Capital
In real estate , you will often hear others refer 
to “ The Circle of Wealth .  ” Real estate can 
allow investors to create wealth through a 
very systematic process that builds 
upon itself . Here ’ s how it looks 
and how it works : 
While everyone is 
different , with different 
goals and demands on 
their time , professional 
real estate investors will 
typically want to have 
three to five streams ( and 
accompanying knowledge 
bases ) of earned income , three to five 
streams of passive income , and two to three 
streams of portfolio income . 
PORTFOLIO
2-3 Streams
EARNED
3-4 Streams
PASSIVE
3-4 Streams
17
Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth
An Import ant Consideration : As investors , it is crucial for 
us to “ begin with the end in mind .  ” Now , I realize that you might 
be starting on a shoestring and you probably have immediate 
needs that you want real estate to assist you in fulfilling . However , 
this business can be one of the best ways for you to become a 
millionaire or a multi-millionaire—and on some level you understand 
that or you wouldn ’ t be reading this book . So , set aside your fear 
and discouragement from yesterday and ask yourself ,  “ If I could 
retire in ten years and own and control 350 apartments in a good 
neighborhood that produced $25 , 000 a month in positive cash 
flow , would I feel safe and secure about my financial future and 
my golden years ?  ” I believe that most of you would answer this 
question with a resounding ,  “ Yes !  ”  
So , let ’ s begin your investing business with that level of 
commitment to your future . The Circle of Wealth can help you 
achieve those goals . Consider it carefully and ask yourself what it 
could mean to your current lifestyle ( and checkbook balance ) if you 
had 7-10 streams of income and could generate both short and long 
term cash flow . Then , commit to your future , to your accumulation of 
knowledge , and to having a mentor to guide you along the way . 
An Introduction To Some Key Areas of 
Real Estate Investment Covered in This Book 
Before we delve deeper into these subjects , let ’ s take a moment to 
discuss some of the key property and investment types in overview 
form to familiarize you with some of your options and prepare you 
for what you are about to learn from this material . 
18
As professional investors , we weigh each 
deal against the ideal and then consider the 
benefits of that type of deal versus another 
opportunity . We do not always hit each one 
of these characteristics—particularly in the 
beginning of our investment careers—but we 
always evaluate and make informed choices . 
When considering a distressed property , 
we are looking for the following advantages : 
• There is often less competition for 
them since the average individual wants 
properties in good condition . 
• Most market areas offer numerous 
distressed properties to choose from . 
• You can often purchase distressed 
properties under flexible , easy terms 
and for prices substantially below 
market value , making for a nice profit 
margin on a resale or good cash flow 
on a rental . 
• You have the ability to instantly 
increase your property ’ s value through 
minor improvements and rehab 
work ( forced appreciation )  . 
Making The Right
Income Stream Choices
Distressed Properties Vs . Distressed 
Or Motivated Sellers 
There is an old maxim when it comes to real 
estate investing :  “ There are only two types of 
deals out there—either distressed properties 
or distressed sellers .  ” Regardless of your 
investment strategy or targeted property type , 
you will find that some properties provide 
more ideal investment opportunities than 
others . When we refer to a property as 
 “ ideal ,  ” we do so for a reason . The word is 
also an acronym for the following : 
I = Income ( Produces Cash Flow ) 
D = Depreciable ( Offers Tax Advantages ) 
E = Equity ( Equity Build-up Increase Net 
Worth ) 
A = Appreciation ( Increases in Value ) 
L = Leverage ( Increases Return on 
Investment ) 
19
Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth
Some things to think about with distressed properties include : 
• Most real estate markets have a sizable number of investors 
looking for these types of properties , so your marketing efforts 
need to be active , well planned , and effective to find good 
deals . It would be wise to investigate different marketing 
strategies that have worked well for other real estate 
investors , and to find others in the business that are willing to 
teach you where to look for opportunities and provide tips 
on how to bring opportunities to you . 
• To avoid costly mistakes , you ’ ll need to know how to 
effectively evaluate the property and its neighborhood . 
• Thorough inspections and repair estimates should be 
performed prior to a purchase . 
• If the property is in a lower income and / or older 
neighborhood , the comparable sales in that area will 
not go over a certain amount of money , no matter how much 
improvement is made . Repairs are often costly—so in order 
to maximize profitability in the older , lower income areas , it 
is typically safer to combine a distressed property with a 
distressed seller and maximize the profit potential on 
each aspect . 
20
• You must know what put the seller in the 
situation they are currently in and figure 
out the best way to help them get out 
of it . In order to understand their 
problem and solve it , you will need to 
develop good listening and negotiating 
skills . 
• Some distressed sellers present 
compelling reasons why they want to 
stay in their properties and the 
tendency is to want to accommodate 
this . If their challenge is for financial 
reasons , this can be risky . It is important 
to keep your emotions out of it . 
wholesale buying
Distressed properties make for great 
wholesaling candidates . And wholesaling is 
an excellent opportunity because it requires 
little expertise and typifies the quick cash 
type of deal that many beginning investors 
are looking for . 
Wholesale deals may be one of the 
first types of deals you will make in real 
estate investing because it ’ s easy to identify 
distressed properties and there is such great 
potential for quick cash . 
Advantages of working with distressed 
sellers include : 
• There is seller distress in every price 
range . 
• You can sometimes purchase 
properties under flexible and easy 
terms . The seller needs help and , in 
many cases , just needs a way out , 
but does not know what to do . You 
can provide the solution . 
• Seller distress is often caused by 
property distress , so the chances 
of being able to increase property 
value through cosmetic improvements 
or rehabbing when you can match 
a distressed seller with a distressed 
property are excellent . 
Things to think about with distressed sellers 
include : 
• Seller distress must be handled 
delicately . These sellers are going 
through rough personal , professional , 
or financial times and they can be 
experiencing all kinds of emotions . 
21
Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth
To truly be successful with wholesaling , some of the things you 
will need to learn include how to : properly segment your market ; 
develop a database of potential properties , investors , and buyers ; 
understand the multiple ways to target and market for wholesale 
deals ; locate absentee owners ; build a network with other investors ; 
and develop key strategies that will help you close deals . 
In addition , you should master several basic aspects of the 
wholesaling business , including : 
Prescreening prospects – Since distressed properties should 
be your primary target , you should learn how to both identify and 
evaluate distressed properties . You should also understand that a 
distressed property does not necessarily mean a deal is good , but 
that it is a good start . So you need to master the techniques to 
know when a deal is too good to be true , when it ’ s time to move 
forward , and when the deal needs to be left on the table . It will 
also help to know how to identify a motivated seller , because the 
combination of a motivated seller and a distressed property will 
make this opportunity far more advantageous . 
Determining market value – You need to understand the 
importance of determining fair market value after repairs to be a 
successful wholesaler . The real estate professionals on your power 
team will be key assets for getting this information . Also , using 
comparable sales of homes in the same market area will help you 
determine fair market value . 
Estimating repairs – This won ’ t be a successful venture if you 
do not estimate repairs correctly . Learn how to analyze deals to 
ensure you make an offer that will result in the most profit . There are 
22
lease options
Lease options represent one of the most 
attractive real estate investment opportunities 
for both new and experienced investors 
particularly because they can generate 
multiple streams of income within a single 
deal . The following offers a few general 
points about using lease options to invest in 
real estate : 
If you buy property with a lease option , you 
can : 
• Gain control of a property without 
taking ownership of the property – 
You have no obligation to buy , but 
you have established the right to buy . 
• Work with distressed sellers , not 
with distressed properties – Seller 
circumstances create the deal . What 
you need to do is find the problem 
owners . 
• Live in or control nice homes in 
nice areas – In these cases , the seller 
needs to get out and investors want 
to get in ( an excellent match !  )  .  
Desirable neighborhoods create 
demand . 
also strategies you can learn that will save 
you money on rehab projects and maximize 
your profits . 
Making offers and counteroffers – You need to become familiar with 
good negotiating and communication skills , 
learn how to make offers and counteroffers 
effectively without compromising your goals , 
and learn how to work with contracts . 
Knowing how to properly evaluate properties 
will be critical to determining not only what to 
offer , but if you should make an offer at all . 
Lining up buyers – Wholesaling is actually 
only partially complete if you can find and 
negotiate deals , but you have nobody lined 
up to readily assign contracts to . Building a 
sizable investor database to tap regardless 
of the type of deal you are working on will 
help you move things forward quickly and 
preserve your profit margins . 
Closing effectively – You need to 
learn the strategies necessary to close 
without cash , including how to do contract 
assignments and simultaneous closings . 
23
Guide to real estate investing
The Circle Of Wealth
• Help someone else in many cases – The determining 
factor in lease options is often debt relief . You are usually 
working with people who may not necessarily want to 
sell their property , but who must sell it because of financial 
problems . You can help someone else reach a solution 
quickly . Meanwhile , you can do it with little or no money outof-pocket . 
If you sell property with a lease option , you can : 
• Benefit from a large market of motivated buyers – Lease 
options can be very attractive to people who are just starting 
out or who are starting over . And lease options may be the 
only option available to some people based on their credit 
circumstances . 
• Find multiple profit centers through lease options – You can 
create positive monthly cash flow for yourself , collect a nonrefundable option consideration , and profit from the 
difference between what you paid for the property and what 
price you set for your tenant / buyer . 
foreclosures 
The foreclosure market can also provide a great avenue for profit 
for the beginning to experienced investor . Foreclosures , while 
unfortunate , are an everyday occurrence , and this can be your 
opportunity to not only make a wise investment , but also to help 
someone in need . 
24
and opportunities that will afford you the 
most profit . You can learn how to line up 
investors before you buy properties to limit 
your risk and how to line up potential buyers 
before you move forward on deals . You can 
become adept at finding motivated sellers 
simply by knowing what to look for in their 
ads and more successful with your sales 
simply by knowing what to write in yours . 
You can learn how to rehab properties to 
maximize profits with minimal investment , 
including what to look for and what to 
avoid , as well as how to make money by 
wholesaling properties without ever having 
to fix them up . And you can master the 
negotiating strategies necessary to get the 
best deal or know when to walk away from 
the table . 
Remember that foreclosures can happen 
for any number of reasons , and this is an 
area where you can really create a win-win 
situation and do something that benefits both 
you and the person who might be in trouble . 
Investors must be able to effectively negotiate 
with both lenders and homeowners to 
optimize profits on these deals . 

IT ’ S A LEARNING PROCESS
With so many strategies to employ and ways 
to make money in real estate , knowledge 
will be key to your success . 
By investigating the opportunities 
available in real estate investing , you have 
taken your first important step towards 
obtaining financial independence . Now , 
it ’ s time to move on to the next level with the 
guidance and knowledge you can receive 
through our program and this manual . Every 
part of this program has been designed 
to help you achieve increasing levels of 
knowledge and success as a real estate 
investor .  
You ’ ll soon see that with the material 
presented here , you can easily learn how to 
spot distressed properties , motivated sellers , 
chapter
two
25

nvesting Is About Supply and 
Demand : One of the most 
important things you can learn when 
it comes to real estate investing is 
market analysis—having the ability to 
evaluate a market , whether your own 
or one in another part of the United 
States , and determine if the values are 
going up , going down , or are flat . 
This is where amateur investors fall 
short in their knowledge and this lack 
of understanding creates problems for 
them when they buy , hold , and sell . 
History is a Great
Teacher—And 
Predictor of the Future : 
A little bit of history from the past ten 
years will illustrate our points as we 
begin to increase our understanding 
of market analysis . In 2000 , the stock 
market was in a self-correction process 
and investors who typically put their 
money in stock were worried about 
their earnings and profit potential in 
the short term . In any investment there 
will be periodic self-corrections in a 
market , whether it is real estate , stock , 
or even in gold . Prices and values go 
I
UNDERSTANDING 
MARKET ANALYSIS 
& EVALUA TION
27
Guide to real estate investing
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation
28
So , with the stock market in a state of 
stagnation or self-correction , average home 
interest rates lower than they had been in 
over thirty years , and lending guidelines more 
lenient than we had seen in decades , people 
began to take their accessible investment 
money and purchase homes and land . 
In essence , we had a “ blue light 
special ” or buying frenzy kick into full gear 
and real estate became the investment 
strategy of choice for many people who had 
never owned real estate , at all ! Adding to 
that , investors who were disillusioned with 
the performance of the stock market began 
pulling available revenue from this type of 
investing and move it to real estate . 
On top of the stimulus of low interest rates 
and extremely relaxed lending qualifications , 
the first waves of baby-boomers were within 
a few years of retiring . As they saw the 
opportunity to invest ( and also saw the 
non-performance of their stock portfolios )  , 
they began visiting retirement states and 
purchasing their homes or condominiums 
earlier than they had planned . This was 
typically a wise move on their part—but it 
created an increased demand on real estate 
that was unexpected . 
When opportunities to make money 
abound , builders will rise to the occasion . 
up , they hit a peak , they stabilize , and if 
they are not in line with what the market 
will bear , they will go back down until they 
reach the point that buyers will once again 
make purchases . 
To add to the situation with stock 
investments , in late 2001 we experienced 
the trauma of September 11th and there 
was more emotional fear generated by this 
event than our population has seen on a 
collective level in our entire lifetimes . The 
natural reaction of people in the grips of 
uncertainty is to do nothing—to “ batten 
down the hatches ” until the storm is over . 
The problem with this reaction is the paper 
currency that we operate on in the United 
States . The way our economy flourishes is 
for the paper to keep moving . When the 
flow of money stops , the economy stalls . 
To encourage the American people to 
buy / spend their money and keep the paper 
moving , the Federal Reserve dropped 
interest rates—which allowed people to buy 
property with far less interest expense than 
historic levels had demanded . Additionally , 
loan programs were rolled out with much 
more lenient lending guidelines so many 
more people were able to qualify for loans 
than historic guidelines in the past had 
provided . 
29
Guide to real estate investing
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation 
Since there were not enough houses available to purchase , 
pre-construction plans became the norm . The mantra across the 
United States became ,  “ Pay a 20% non-refundable deposit , contract 
for us to build a home or condo at a pre-agreed upon price , and 
when construction is complete , you can close .  ” That accomplished 
two different things : people were working ( construction picked up 
dramatically , jobs were in abundance , and building materials were 
flying off the shelves )  , and paper was moving ! For the potential 
investor , a feeling of “ locking in a price ” was of utmost importance . 
If the investor was “ buying ” in a 20% appreciation rate market , and 
if the condo was going to take two years to complete , life seemed 
golden ! The condo would theoretically be worth 40% more upon 
completion ( and closing ) that the contract price ! Talk about getting 
rich quick—it sure felt as if the goose was laying a golden basket 
of eggs !  
However , depending upon where an investor was in the 
market cycle of self-correction , was there going to be a buyer 
for the property to do a quick turn ? In 2002 , the answer was 
a resounding ,  “ You Betcha ’  !  ” However , by 2005 and 2006 , the 
buyers had exhausted their buying ability ( run out of money ) and the 
markets began to stall .  
Since real estate revolves around supply and demand , if there 
are not buyers that match sellers , the market will stall—which is what 
happened . What a concept—ultimately , there must be someone to 
live in a house or condo once it is built . 
30
else is afraid , be greedy .  ” In essence , the 
professional investor will typically do the 
opposite of what the general population of 
amateur investors is doing . 
If Educated Investors 
Don ’ t Buy Emotionally , 
How Do They Know
When ( And Where ) To Buy ? 
Several factors in real estate drive real 
estate prices . For example ( and this is 
simply common sense )  , if a market has high 
unemployment rates , the local economic 
conditions are dismal , and interest rates are 
high , the real estate market will stall along 
with sales of other goods and services 
Let ’ s take a moment and list the factors 
that influence and drive the real estate 
market and prices : 
How Does That Relate 
to Today ’ s Markets ? 
The following diagram provides a graphic 
view of what happened , where we are right 
now , and what to expect based upon historical 
data , in the future . The solid diagonal line 
( A ) indicates where we should have been 
in terms of appreciation . The vertical line 
( B ) in 2002-05 shows what happens when 
demand skyrockets . The declining line ( C ) 
illustrates what is happening across much of 
the country as prices self-correct to get back 
to the markets ’  “ normal ” line of appreciation .  
Do you notice that when we have an 
upward self-correction , the prices will tend 
to rise too high and too fast for the market 
to bear ( for a period of time ) and then 
come down too much and too fast on the 
downward side ? That is due to the tendency 
for people to live and make decisions 
based upon recency bias ! If everyone else 
is buying , they hear about it , jump on the 
band wagon , and they buy ! If everyone 
else is afraid to buy , they jump on the 
band wagon , and they are afraid to buy ! 
Warren Buffet has a saying that comes to 
mind in these situations , and to paraphrase 
him , it comes down to ,  “ When everyone 
else is greedy , be afraid . When everyone 
31
Guide to real estate investing
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation
• Interest rates & inflation
• Lending qualifications
• Availability of housing
• Tourism
• Job growth and stability
• Industry & Manufacturing
• Population growth 
• Demographic changes
Every city has historic numbers for appreciation rates—how much per 
year , on a fairly long-term basis , the value of real estate increased , 
on average .  
In most areas of the country , real estate goes up approximately 
4-5% per year . Now , some years there may be little change in 
prices , and then in other years there will be a jump to correct the 
lack of growth in previous years—but when we take a 25 year 
average of the median home prices , we see what the city ’ s average 
growth has been in percentage points . That percentage tells us 
what to expect for an area ’ s overall growth rate , prior to factoring 
in anomalies such as a new factory moving into the area that brings 
in thousands of new jobs . 
So now we have an annual average and can base our decisions 
and projections for appreciation on numbers , rather than feelings . 
This is a key point ! Human beings who are not knowledgeable 
32
changes . What should they have done ? A
knowledgeable investor would have been 
researching markets for areas that were 
under-valued prior to the drop in interest 
rates and lending qualifications . Then , the 
investor could target areas based upon his 
or her knowledge of the upcoming babyboomers who would be moving into certain 
areas of the country when they retired . And 
finally , the investor would have worked 
closely with professionals in that area and 
found out how many homes were on the 
market , how long listings were taking to 
move , and if any changes were taking place 
within the community to signal a change in 
expectations for that market . 
So , a savvy investor in an under-valued 
city like Bradenton , FL . would have been 
buying property in 2002 , 2003 , and 2004 , 
but would have seen that prices were no 
longer in line with the economy of that city 
by early in 2004 and begun to sell before 
things got out of control in terms of the price 
of houses . Always remember , houses in any 
city are there for people to actually live in 
( what a concept )  ! If the average person 
does not make enough to live in a house 
or apartment ( either buy or rent )  , there are 
going to be vacancies ! Real estate is like a 
finely tuned instrument—it will self-correct or 
 “ retune ” itself whenever the prices get too 
far out of line with the economy of the area . 
about a topic tend to make decisions on an 
emotional level—and then to compound the 
problem , they have what I refer to as “ recency 
bias .  ” Whatever is happening today , sure 
feels as if it will always be happening . That 
is not a good place to make decisions from ! 
Think about this for a few minutes—if real 
estate is dramatically increasing in value at a 
rapid rate , it sure feels as if you ’ d better jump 
on the bandwagon and buy real estate in 
that area ! 
This is what happened to many investors 
between 2003 and 2006 . The news came 
on at 6 p . m . and the announcer conveyed 
the new NAR ( National Association of 
Realtors® ) Quarterly appreciation rates for 
the largest 125 cities in the country and 
Bradenton / Sarasota , FL . was # 1 in the 
nation ! What did uneducated investors do ? 
They jumped on an airplane for Bradenton 
and bought four houses—and they had 
no understanding of the above factors that 
influence demand on real estate in the long 
term scheme of things ! 
You ’ ve Got to Know When 
to Hold—and When to Fold ! 
What was wrong with that picture ? They 
bought AFTER the market had emerged 
and grown—not before or during the 
33
Guide to real estate investing
Understanding Market Analysis & Evaluation
The educated and knowledgeable investor would have been selling 
by 2004 and 2005—not buying ! And , the people he or she would 
have been selling to would , in large part , have been the people 
who were buying airplane tickets and flying into the area to buy 
property that they didn ’ t have the correct knowledge to buy . 
what this means to you
At this point you might ask yourself ,  “ How do I find undervalued areas 
to invest in ? How do I evaluate where those areas are in terms of the 
market cycle ?  ” One of the best things you can do as you begin your 
real estate investing business is have a mentor to guide you through 
the process . He or she will know and understand the intricacies of 
investing and market analysis . As well , your mentor will work with you 
to identify new market trends that are taking place in the area under 
investigation , the number of days on market , the sub-areas within the 
overall city that are most likely to appreciate the most quickly , and 
those that are most likely to stall and begin self-correcting first . 
Now , in a market that is already stalled , where do investors 
begin ? Start by identifying the sub-neighborhoods that are moving 
the most quickly ! Working with your real estate professional , do a zip 
code search for the areas that have the properties that are moving 
with the most frequency . And then , begin looking for distressed sellers 
that are highly motivated to sell in those zip codes . If one of your 
streams of income is going to be foreclosures , you could target all 
sellers within a certain zip code who are in pre-foreclosure status . 
If one of your investment strategies is to buy and hold using lease 
option techniques , you could then buy the pre-foreclosure , hold it for 
three years using a lease option technique , and realize the benefits 
of the appreciation that the city ’ s otherwise stalled market is not 
experiencing . 
34
Self-Correcting Markets : Areas 
that have either gone up too quickly 
or too much due to dabblers investing 
and creating artificial demand that was 
not filled by actual long term buyers or 
tenants , or areas that are undervalued 
that need to adjust upward to change 
the pricing for that physical location ’ s 
proximity to nearby , higher priced areas . 
Depreciating Markets : Areas where 
industry , manufacturing , or tourism has 
declined , decreasing the demand on 
the existing available housing and new 
structures or sources of revenue are not 
yet in place to create a new demand . 
Based upon these definitions and categories 
of markets , where would you categorize 
your city , overall ? 
Many new investors , as they evaluate 
their local markets , believe that property is 
depreciating when it is actually self-correcting . 
As well , they buy based upon price , rather 
than buying based upon market potential . 
Most new investors lean towards buying in 
the low or middle income areas because they 
feel the risk is lower . However , when market 
analysis is a part of your knowledge base , 
buying decisions are made based upon exit 
and holding strategies , not on fear of risk 
( bigger numbers )  . 
The key concept in this chapter is for 
new investors to understand the magnitude 
of analyzing a real estate market prior to 
buying property . If you are buying in a 
stalled real estate area , and you understand 
that from the beginning , you will know to 
buy at a large discount to cover and build in 
the lack of appreciation that you understand 
is going to be a part of that deal . 
If you know where you are in a market 
cycle , you can buy , hold , or sell accordingly , 
as well as change or modify your exit 
strategy to complement the part of the cycle 
you are in . The cycles or conditions of a real 
market are as follows : 
Appreciating Markets : Areas where 
there is not enough housing , high demand , 
or a shortage of land . Areas where an 
increase in population is placing pressure 
on the housing market . Neighborhoods 
that are in high demand due to location , 
school districts , or other influences are 
cause the area to be considered “ choice .  ” 
Flat Markets : Areas that have an 
adequate amount of housing for the 
population and housing demands . Areas 
that have an abundance of land for future 
development and few restrictions on 
building new houses . 
chapter
three
35

s we learned in the previous 
chapter , real estate investors 
must know how to analyze an overall 
market to determine what is happening 
within it at any given time . In addition , 
they must use their knowledge to identify 
the most profitable neighborhoods 
within that market for their various 
streams of income . Now , with that 
knowledge we can begin to look at 
ways to make wise buying decisions 
in the right places . 
The most important thing you will 
do in real estate investing is buy right 
( in other words , make the best deal 
possible when buying a property )  . 
This is where you will really make 
your money in real estate . In fact , you 
may have heard people say it before : 
you make your money when you buy ; 
you just realize it when you sell your 
property and make a profit , or when 
you start getting positive cash flow 
from an income-producing property . 
And it ’ s true . So , it ’ s imperative you 
buy right , meaning you never pay too 
much for a property . 
To do this , you need to get to 
know and understand the market 
you ’ re buying in . After all , the only 
way you can calculate the after-repair 
value of a property is by knowing the 
fair market value of houses in the area 
you choose to concentrate in . It is a 
crucial part of the evaluation process . 
A
getting to 
know your
market
37
Guide to real estate investing
Getting To Know Your Market
38
DEFINING THE AREA
YOU WILL INVEST IN
Start by looking in a low- to moderate-income 
neighborhood , where you will find a large 
inventory of properties . If you want to buy , 
fix , and sell , look for decent neighborhoods 
where it is clear neighbors care about their 
property and the community ( these are often 
termed “ We Care ” neighborhoods )  .  
If you want to wholesale properties 
( quick-turn properties to other investors – a 
popular and profitable strategy you will 
learn about in greater detail later )  , you will 
be looking more toward extremely distressed 
properties or neighborhoods .  
Of course , in order to define your target 
area in relation to your goals , you need to 
know where each of these areas is in your 
city . If you are not sure where these areas 
are , you will need to segment your city with 
the help of your real estate agent . If you do 
not already have a real estate professional 
or need to know what to look for in a good 
real estate agent , please refer to Chapter 
Two . 
TRUE MARKET VALUE
Some people think the true market value is 
what they see advertised in the classified 
section of the newspaper or in flyers they 
have pulled out of a box on a real estate 
agent ’ s sign . But that is a “ wish list ” – what 
the seller hopes to get . The true market value 
is not what people are asking for . It is what 
someone is willing to pay and someone else 
is willing to accept . And more specifically , 
it is the sales prices of houses that have sold 
within the last six months ( not what they were 
listed for , but what they actually sold for )  .  
No matter what type of real estate 
investing you do ( buy , fix , and sell ; 
wholesale ; foreclosure ; lease option ; income 
property ; etc .  )  , you will need to understand 
your market . Understanding your market 
will help you know what to offer , how to 
recognize a good deal when you see one , 
and how to act quickly . And as you develop 
your knowledge of the market , you will be 
spending less time looking at properties that 
aren ’ t worthwhile investments . 
39
Guide to real estate investing
Getting To Know Your Market
segmenting your area
Ask the real estate professional what the average price of a three 
bedroom , two bath , single family home is in your city . You also want 
the agent to pull up a one-line MLS ( multiple listing service ) list of 
single family homes . Sometimes they call this a “ short form .  ” Have the 
agent start at $0 and go to 120% of the average home price . 
With this information , you can now identify which areas are 
low-income , working class , middle-income , and higher-income 
neighborhoods . Next , take the average price of a home in your 
city and multiply it by 70% and by 110% . 
For example : 
$100 , 000 = average price 
70% = $70 , 000 
110% = $110 , 000 
EXAMPLE
Below 70% of 
Average
70% of 
Average
Average 
Home Price
110% of Average
110% + of 
Average
Low Income 
Neighborhood
Working Class 
Neighborhood
Working Class 
Neighborhood
Middle Income 
Neighborhood
$70 , 000 $70 , 000 $100 , 000 $110 , 000 $110 , 000
Once you have this information , you will need to get a map of your 
city , which you can usually obtain directly from your city , purchase 
from a store , or find on the Internet . You will need to make at least 
two copies of this map . Have one copy enlarged to a size that 
allows you to easily see the streets and get this copy laminated . If 
you live in a large city , begin by concentrating on about a one-mile 
square area or on a 20 to 40-block square ; you can gradually 
expand your area . 
40
neighborhoods more appropriate for 
wholesaling opportunities . If you don ’ t know 
where these areas are , talk to someone who 
is knowledgeable about your area . You can 
contact property management companies , 
appraisers , postal carriers , cable workers , 
or your local police . 
These maps will also help you 
understand what homes are selling for in 
different segments of your city . 
The second map should be on an 
8 ½ x 11 inch sheet of paper that you can 
put in a notebook and carry with you in the 
car ( you may need to use several sheets , 
depending on the size of your city )  . Write 
on the map where the low-income , working 
class , and the middle-income areas are 
based upon the information you received 
from the agent . Identify extremely distressed 
My City
Lease 
Options
Wholesale
Pre-Foreclosure Dovetailed 
With 
Buy & Hold 
Lease Options
Commercial Office 
Space
Apartments
Wholesale
Rehab
Potential : 
Revitalization Areas : 
Historic Grant & 
Tax Credits
Apartments
Land 
Development
Wholesale Mobile 
Home Lease 
Options
Lease 
Options
Lease 
Options
Wholesale
Pre-Foreclosure Dovetailed 
With 
Buy & Hold 
Lease Options
Commercial Office 
Space
Apartments
Wholesale
Rehab
Potential : 
Revitalization Areas : 
Historic Grant & 
Tax Credits
Apartments
Land 
Development
PreForeclosures
PreForeclosures
Wholesale Mobile 
Home Lease 
Options
Lease 
Options
41
Guide to real estate investing
Getting To Know Your Market 
As you become more familiar with real estate investing and 
the skills needed for the streams of income you will focus on , this 
map will become more valuable to you as time passes . Now , when 
you are searching the MLS list for various properties that are for 
sale , you can do specific searches of zip codes or neighborhoods 
when you are ready to go after your next lease option , foreclosure , 
wholesale , or rehab property . 
decide what area you want to focus on
As discussed before , pick an area you want to focus on . Your target 
area will depend on what kind of investing you want to do . For 
example , if you plan to buy a house , fix it up , and then resell it , you 
will be looking in the working to middle-income areas . If you want 
to do quick-turns without ever fixing up the property , you ’ ll look in 
areas that are more distressed—areas that the rehabbers tend to 
work in . If you are not sure which area to target , then start with the 
working to middle-income neighborhoods . You can always expand 
to other areas .  
Once you have completed this assignment , you will be able to 
go into another region , anywhere in the country , and get to know 
the market there quickly . 
determining property values using comps
Now that you have picked your target area , you are ready to get to 
know the market . You will now ask the real estate agent to pull up the 
comps ( nickname for comparables ) within a certain neighborhood . 
What you will get is a list of properties that have sold within the 
42 
If you are buying rental properties , the 
appraiser will use an income approach . 
The value of the property is based upon the 
income it produces . This method is used in 
determining the value of multi-units .  
Have the real estate agent pull up a 
list of houses that have sold within the last 
six months in the area you are focusing on . 
Ask the agent to pull up about 20 houses . 
If 20 houses haven ’ t sold , that ’ s okay . You 
can ’ t make more houses sell than have sold . 
On the other hand , if the agent pulls up 40 
houses , that ’ s too many . Ask your agent to 
condense the list down either by square 
footage , number of bedrooms , geography , 
or style until you have 20 houses . 
Keep in mind that information about 
houses that have sold within the last three 
months is more valuable than the comps that 
are six months old , since the market can 
change quickly . 
what the comparables 
will tell you
Looking at the list of properties that have 
sold within the last six months , you will see 
information about each house , such as : 
Listed price – This is the price the house 
was listed for ( the asking price )  . 
last six months in the particular area where 
you are focusing your investing . The reason 
you need the agent to do this is because 
the comps help you understand the market . 
Earlier , we mentioned some people think the 
true market is what they see in the houses for 
sale section of the newspaper . But the true 
market is what someone is willing to pay 
and someone else is willing to accept in a 
competitive and open market . 
Real estate appraisers use the sales 
comparison approach to identify properties 
that have recently sold that are similar in 
square footage , number of bedrooms , 
location , property type , available amenities , 
condition , etc . to the house they are 
appraising . Appraisers will usually look at 
three houses and determine the value of the 
house they are appraising based upon the 
recent sales prices for those similar houses . 
Appraisers also look at other methods to 
determine the value of a property , such 
as a cost replacement method . With this 
method , they are comparing this house to 
what it would cost per square foot to build 
a new one . This method is not as accurate 
because supply and demand , as well as 
the economics for an area determines what 
people are willing to pay . You will find 
the appraised value leans heavily on the 
comparables . 
43
Guide to real estate investing
Getting To Know Your Market
Sold price – This is the price the house actually sold for . 
Now you will know if the sellers got the price they were asking for 
or less . 
Days on the market , or DOM – The number of days listed 
next to this tells you how many days the home stayed on the market 
before it was sold . Sometimes you will just see a number indicating 
the number of days it took to sell the property ; other times , you may 
see both a listed and a sold date . Either way , this provides valuable 
information because it helps you understand the time it typically 
takes to sell a house in your area . 
Square footage – This tells you the size of the house . It also 
helps you determine the cost per square foot that homes are selling 
for ( some comps will actually list the price per square foot )  . 
How many bedrooms and baths
Lot size – It may tell you the dimensions of the lot or indicate what 
percent of an acre the lot is ( for example ,  . 20 = one fifth of an 
acre )  . 
Year built or age of house – This will either tell you the year 
the house was built or how old the house is . 
This is the minimum information you should have on each of the 
comps . However , you will probably see more because you are 
going to ask the agent to include the remarks ( or comments ) and a 
picture . The reason the remarks are so valuable is you will be trying 
to figure out why these houses sold for the price they sold for . You 
will be driving by each of them , but because they have been sold , 
44
drive by the houses that
have sold
When you get your comparables list , you 
need to drive by each of the houses on it . 
Stop the car and look out the window . Write 
down what you see . This is not a test to 
find something wrong with the property . The 
house may look great ! You are just trying to 
figure out why the house sold for that price . 
Start with the roof 
How does the roof look ? You don ’ t have to 
be a roofing expert to know it needs work 
if you see some missing shingles or shingles 
that are curling up . 
Look at the exterior of the house 
How does it look ? Does it need work ? 
Again , this is not a test to find what ’ s wrong 
with the house . You have permission to write 
down ,  “ House looks great .  ” But if you do 
notice something is wrong , then write it 
down . Be sure to pay attention to the picture 
on the MLS sheet . If the picture does not 
look as nice as the house does now , then 
the person who bought the house probably 
fixed it up . 
Look at the yard 
Now , check out the yard . How does it look ? 
Does it look groomed and taken care of ? 
Again , pay attention to the picture . 
you will not be able to see inside . Since you 
cannot judge a house by its cover any more 
than you can judge a book by its cover , 
the remarks will give you a clue as to the 
condition of the house . 
Things you may see in the remark section of 
the MLS include : 
• Great Fixer-Upper 
• Handyman Special 
• Needs TLC 
• Sold As-Is 
Reading this , you will know the house 
probably needed some work even if it looks 
great on the outside . 
Other things you may notice in the remarks 
section are : 
• Motivated Seller 
• Must Sell 
• Foreclosure 
• Bank Owned 
• Illness Forces Sale 
• Divorce 
• Transferred 
When you see words like that , it could be 
an indicator the seller is motivated . 
chapter
four
45

n order to be successful , you will 
need to work with others… people 
who know this business or can help 
you build yours , people who can help 
direct you to buyers for your properties 
or provide financial assistance , etc .  
As an investor , you ’ ll learn how to 
leverage your money , but you will also 
need to learn how to leverage your 
time . Careful selection of qualified 
people who can assist you in growing 
your business can help you manage 
your time and energy more effectively . 
And leveraging your team members ’ 
knowledge can also help you avoid 
making mistakes . 
To help get you started , this 
chapter will introduce you to the key 
contacts you will most likely have on 
your power team . 
The important thing to remember is 
you don ’ t need to try to do all the 
work yourself . Seek professional help 
and support and recognize you will 
need to learn to delegate certain 
responsibilities at some point .  
You will find that putting your 
team together is an ongoing process . 
Your team will grow as you expand 
your knowledge of real estate and 
take advantage of additional income 
streams and opportunities . 
FINDING THE RIGHT REAL
estate professional
A good working relationship with a 
real estate professional is one of the 
most important assets an investor can 
have . For one , when a property you 
I
selecting
A Power team
47
Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team
48
choosing a REAL
estate professional
When choosing an agent , you want 
someone who works in the business full time 
and has strong knowledge of his or her field . 
You are looking an agent who is creative , 
hard working , and aggressive , and who 
knows how and where to find deals . 
Most real estate professionals have 
not worked with investors . They have never 
done a creative transaction . This can be 
a challenge for you and it can take some 
time to find the right agent , but the time you 
spend will be well worth it . Since your agent 
is one of the most important , if not the most 
important , member of your power team , he 
or she cannot be your weakest link in your 
power team chain !  
One of the most important things you 
are looking for is an agent who thinks 
like you do—like a millionaire real estate 
wealth builder ! Most agents are not 
receptive to “ unusual ” offers . They may not 
believe in “ nothing down ” offers or creative 
approaches . If you plan to make a creative 
offer and you are working with an agent 
who doesn ’ t think “ outside the box ,  ” it ’ s 
time to find a new one ! In the meantime , 
insist on being the one to present the offer 
because you want the owner to hear the 
are interested in purchasing is listed with an 
agent you will want to have your own agent 
working with you to represent your best 
interests in the deal . Secondly , real estate 
professionals can help you evaluate deals 
by pulling up sold properties comparable to 
the one you are thinking of buying , giving 
you a good idea of the market value for that 
neighborhood . And third , Realtors® have 
access to the Multiple Listing Service ( MLS ) 
remarks section , a valuable source for finding 
potential deals . The MLS is a cooperative 
exchange of listing information . When a 
seller lists his or her home with a Realtor® , 
the listing is put on the MLS , making the 
home available for any agent who belongs 
to the MLS to bring a buyer and share in the 
commission with the listing agent . 
The properties on the MLS will usually 
include pictures and a good deal of 
information about the property , including 
the address of the property , the number of 
bedrooms and baths , the square footage , 
and available amenities . The MLS may also 
include any special terms the seller may 
consider .  
As we discussed in the previous chapter , 
the remark section of the listing will contain 
clues about the condition of the property 
and the motivation of the seller . Your agent 
can put keywords into the remark section to 
pull up properties of interest to you . 
49
Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team
benefits of your offer . Believing in those benefits will be key to making 
a convincing presentation . 
Tell the agent what you ’ re looking for—and be specific . If you 
are beginning with wholesale deals , let the agent know you are 
looking for distressed properties that need repair . Do not let the agent 
pre-qualify you . Let them know you use private funding and can close 
quickly .  
Find a real estate professional who works in your target area by 
driving through the neighborhood . Look for agent signs and pick the 
three companies with the most signs . As you do this , you may notice 
an agent dominating the area . Real estate agents usually “ farm ” an 
area , meaning they focus on a particular area and work it to get 
listings . They do this by actively contacting the owners through phone 
calls , mailing promotional material , and knocking on doors . 
Begin your interview by saying ,  “ We are real estate investors and 
we ’ re buying houses in this area . We are looking for properties 
that are 20-30% below market and / or distressed properties 
in need of repair . We also look mainly for properties in need 
of cosmetic repairs . We are also looking for an agent who 
specializes in income properties such as apartment buildings , 
duplexes , and four-plexes . Is there someone in your office who 
fits that description ?  ” 
Not Too Big , Not Too Small , Just Right ! 
One of the questions new investors have when it comes to choosing 
the right person to work with is ,  “ How much experience should 
the agent have ?  ” There is no one size fits all answer to this , but 
experience has shown me that somewhere between three and five 
years seems to be a good blend of knowledge about the business 
and not being too set in their ways . 
50
by and present offers on properties that I ’ m 
interested in . 
This will be a good opportunity for 
both of us to make some money . Are you 
able to help me out ?  ” 
• How long have you been in the real 
estate business ?  ( You want a minimum 
of one year of experience .  ) 
• Do you specialize in any type of real 
estate ?  ( Their specialty should 
preferably be your area of interest .  ) 
• Do you specialize in any area of town ? 
• Do you have any satisfied customers I
can talk to ? 
• Do you make real estate your living ?  
( Answer should be yes !  ) 
• Are you willing to put the time in to 
help me find the right properties ? 
• What neighborhoods are turning 
around properties more quickly than 
others ? 
• Do you have any banking connections ?  
( Mortgage brokers , lenders , etc .  ) 
REAL estate professional 
interview script
The following is a sample script of what 
you might say when interviewing potential 
agents .  
 “ Hello , my name is _______________ . I ’ m 
in a position to do some investing in real 
estate . I am looking to buy properties in your 
area and I want to develop a relationship 
with someone who understands my needs . 
I ’ m looking for any property that 
makes sense . I will consider everything : 
single family , and multi-units with a good 
cash flow . I ’ m interested in properties that 
are cosmetically distressed . Fixer-uppers 
are great . You know , paint , carpet , and a 
little cleanup , that sort of thing . I am not 
looking for any major repairs like plumbing 
or structural . 
I can pay cash in some instances . 
Generally I use private funding to purchase 
these houses and can close quickly ( they 
think commission !  )  . However , I am always 
interested in seller financing . 
I am looking for an agent who will 
research the MLS for me to find properties 
that meet my criteria and fax or email me 
a copy of those listings . I will do a drive-
51
Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team
• Can you recommend a good closing agent in town ? 
• How much is your commission ? 
• Do you have the flexibility to work with your broker ? 
• Is this a good time to buy ? Why ? 
• What is your opinion of the direction the real estate market is 
headed ? 
• What are the average number of days on market in ________ 
zip code ? 
• Do you own any real estate in town ?  ( You want this answer to 
be yes .  ) 
• Have you ever owned investment property ? 
• Are there any areas you feel particularly good about ? If so , 
why ? 
• Where would you invest if you were going to buy property 
yourself ? 
• What kind of properties would you buy ? 
• Does your firm manage properties ? If yes , what do you 
charge ? 
• What is the vacancy rate in the area ? 
52
finding the right
mortg age broker
A good mortgage broker can be the real 
estate investor ’ s best friend . You want a 
broker who can put the deal together and 
get it closed .  
Sometimes you have to go through 
several brokers until you find the one you 
want to work with , but remember that it 
never hurts to have more than one contact . 
In fact , we suggest that you have not one , 
but THREE , mortgage brokers on your team . 
Why ? This keeps them on their toes and 
provides you with more loan products to 
choose from .  
You are looking for a broker who has 
been in the business a while . You want one 
who is experienced in working with investors 
and bridge financing ( hard money lenders )  . 
And you want one who is thoroughly 
familiar with FHA financing , local down 
payment assistance programs , grants , and 
hard money lending .  
A mortgage broker can be a good 
source for finding investment deals and is 
usually more creative than a banker when it 
comes to funding your opportunities . 
• How many properties do you have 
listed ?  ( This is just to give you an idea 
of whether this agent works primarily 
as a buyer ’ s or a seller ’ s agent .  ) 
• How many properties did you sell last 
year ?  ( You want to see how busy they 
are .  ) 
• Do you work with investors ? If so , how 
many are you actively seeking 
properties for , right now ? 
• Are you available on the weekends ? 
• Do you have any properties for sale 
that would be a good investment for 
me ? 
• Are there areas that seem to be going 
up in value faster than others ? If they 
answer yes to this question , ask more 
questions—such as what is driving that 
market , why the demand is higher in 
this area , etc . 
53
Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team
When you talk with mortgage brokers , do not let them run a 
credit check until you find a mortgage broker you like . Every time 
they run a credit check , it can lower your score , so don ’ t authorize 
a pre-approval credit check . The best way to find a good mortgage 
broker is often through a real estate professional . Interview at least 
five mortgage brokers before choosing the ones you will eventually 
work with . 
Another good question to ask potential brokers is how they 
are creatively dealing with the tight lending policies in place at the 
present time . Find out what they will need you to have in terms of 
credit scores , down payments , and other qualifications in order to 
get deals closed . 
mortgage broker interview
Ask the following questions to help determine if this is the right 
mortgage broker for your team . 
• Is the major part of your business refinancing ?  ( Anyone can 
do refinance . This is not what you are looking for .  ) 
• How long have you been a mortgage broker ?  ( You want at 
least three years experience . It takes experience to know a 
lot of different lenders and products , and the mortgage 
industry is constantly changing .  ) 
• Do you work with investors ? 
• Do you lend on appraised value or purchase price ?  ( Will 
they lend on the after-repair value ?  ) 
54
who had good credit but couldn ’ t 
qualify because of employment history 
or down payment amounts ? Would 
you be willing to refer those people 
to me for possible lease option deals 
and then I would send them back 
to you when they have improved their 
scores ( or whatever else caused them 
to be ineligible ) for funding at that 
time ? 
community banker 
Your contact at the bank should be someone 
at the vice president level or another 
executive with lending authority . Take time 
to interview several bankers until you find 
someone you would like to work with . 
There are several benefits to using a 
community bank . First , they have local 
knowledge of the area and know the 
growth pattern of the community first-hand . 
Second , they have local decision making 
ability ( decisions are not being made in 
some other state where the person doesn ’ t 
know your real estate market ’ s potential or 
the trends of your market )  . Third , they offer 
flexibility and are able to be more creative 
than the larger banks . And fourth , they want 
to build relationships . Finally , and far from 
the least important point , they often make 
• Can you put together 100% financing 
packages ? 
• Do you have access to hard money ? 
• Do you specialize in the nonconforming arena ? 
• Are you a correspondent lender ?  ( A 
correspondent lender can lend money 
for 90 days until lenders complete 
their funding . They help ensure you 
won ’ t lose a deal because of last 
minute problems with the lender ’ s 
underwriting team . Correspondent 
lenders get the job done by lending 
the money themselves .  ) 
• Do you have the ability to fund your 
own loans ?  ( If they are not familiar 
with the term “ correspondent lender .  ”  ) 
• Would you help me put the deals 
together ?  ( The mortgage broker can 
put the deal together for you .  ) 
• Do you have names on file of people 
who wanted to purchase a home , 
were qualified in terms of a down 
payment , but fell short due to their 
credit scores ? How about people 
55
Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team
what are referred to as LTV loans—loans based upon the value of 
the property , rather than the amount of the contract and appraisal 
combined . What does this mean ? If you are buying at 70% of 
FMV , and the appraisal on the house is $100 , 000 , an LTV lender 
will lend the full amount ( and sometimes even more )  . A conventional 
lender through your mortgage broker will typically lend a maximum 
of 80% of the contract price or 80% of the appraisal , whichever 
gives them the most secure position ! Community banks are known 
for providing great service and will usually tell you why you were 
turned down if a loan is rejected and work with you to help you 
overcome that hurdle . They want you to stay with them a long time . 
Realize that building a solid relationship with the right banker 
takes time , but the effort is worth it . 
contractor handyman
A contractor or handyman can perform the necessary repairs on your 
properties ( investors generally prefer working with a handyman )  . 
It is critical that the person or persons you use are licensed and 
insured to protect you and them . You need to find someone you 
can trust , and someone who can give you bids and manage the 
subcontractors .  
You can find contacts for the services you need through your 
local home improvement store ’ s bulletin board or get a referral from 
other investors or individuals you know who have had experience 
working with contractors or handymen . Another good way to find 
handymen is through internet sites , including internet referral sites . 
56
lawyer
Your lawyer must be in full-time real estate , 
mortgage , and corporate law . You want 
someone who is able to review documents 
and contracts , and is familiar with rent 
review and tenant ’ s protection legislation . 
You also want an attorney who is aggressive 
in asset protection . You don ’ t want to amass 
a fortune and then lose it because of a 
lawsuit . An attorney can also be a great 
resource for finding deals . 
Title company
If you invest in a state where title companies 
are used , you ’ ll find that a title company can 
provide you with many beneficial services . 
For example , they can provide property 
reports on properties you are thinking of 
buying . And they can give you information 
about owners of homes in an area you 
are “ farming .  ” Title companies can also 
handle closings and provide title insurance 
to protect you . Sometimes , they are able to 
pull up pre-foreclosure lists for you . Another 
advantage of working with a title company 
is they usually know plenty of investors . 
Ask them to alert you when deals don ’ t go 
through . 
tax professional
An accountant or CPA can help you take 
advantage of any available deductions 
from the ownership of real estate and can 
help you stay on top of your taxes as a 
self-employed individual . You need to find 
one who understands what you are doing 
and what you are planning to do . And 
they should be knowledgeable about real 
estate and tax law , as well as the impact 
of income taxes and capital gains on what 
you plan to do . They should also understand 
corporations and what will help you achieve 
your financial goals . 
appraiser
Appraisers are hired to determine the market 
value of homes when necessary and can 
help with “ Rent to Own ” and “ Sweat Equity ” 
programs . You want to find an appraiser who 
will do “ subject to ” repairs , and who is FHA
approved . Appraisers know what needs to 
be done to qualify for FHA and they know 
how to bring a property to code . You can 
learn a great deal from your appraiser . 
57
Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team
home inspection professional
Develop a relationship with a home inspection professional . Be 
sure to accompany the inspector as he or she inspects the house 
and ask a lot of questions . Use a property manager or a real estate 
professional to help you find a good one . 
surveyor
These professionals will survey the land . A land survey is sometimes 
necessary to close on the backend . 
termite inspectors
Termite inspectors are sometimes necessary for closing and they can 
alert you to expensive hidden problems . Use a large established 
company . If the property is treated or was treated within the last 
year , make sure there is a contract and that it is renewable . 
insurance agent
An insurance agent can be a great resource in helping you decide 
the best coverage for your various properties and may be able 
to direct you to potential deals . Look for an insurance agent who 
specializes in working with investors . 
58
mentor 
Model yourself after people who impress 
you . You will learn much from someone 
 “ who has been there ” before you . Follow 
the approach of people who have proven 
themselves in this business . A mentor could 
also be a potential investor for you . 
networking contacts
Network with everyone you know and meet . 
Hand out business cards whenever possible 
because leads can come from some of the 
most unlikely places ( for example , stick them 
inside the envelopes when you pay your bills 
or leave them with your tip for a waitress )  .  
Attend industry-related events such as 
foreclosure auctions to meet and get to know 
other investors and communicate regularly 
with the members of your power team .  
And definitely do not miss out on 
attending meetings of your local real estate 
investment club if you have one ( if you don ’ t , 
then consider creating one !  )  . Most real 
estate investment clubs have a guest speaker 
and meet once a month . If you have trouble 
finding a creative lender or another member 
of your power team , you may get a great 
property manager
If you are buying income properties and 
don ’ t want to manage them , property 
managers will be vital to your business . You 
can learn a lot from property managers , such 
as the vacancy rate for the area and what 
the going rent is . Sometimes they will alert 
you when an investor they are managing 
properties for is thinking of selling . They may 
also be able to give you a referral for a 
good handyman . 
Government grant
and loan specialist
A government grant and loan specialist can 
assist you in finding grants and loans that 
will help you in your real estate investing . 
You can find them by contacting government 
agencies or by calling several banks in your 
area . You may also want to talk to other 
investors to see what they know and to get 
referrals . 
59
Guide to real estate investing
Selecting A Power Team
referral from a club member . And you can usually find hard money 
lenders at the meetings . 
Check with other investors , title companies , real estate professionals , 
mortgage brokers , or anyone who is in the real estate business about 
an investment club in your area . They may charge a monthly or yearly 
fee for membership . Ask if you can go free on a complimentary visit 
the first time you attend . 
assignment
The following is a suggested assignment . 
Begin building your power team . 
Start by building relationships with a real estate professional , a 
mortgage broker , and a banker . They are critical to your success in 
real estate investing . 
60
chapter
five
61

y now you should know how to 
figure out the true value of a 
property by using the comps you can 
get from a real estate professional . 
You should have started building your 
power team and are now eager to find 
a deal . You are ready to make money ! 
We talked about how you make 
your money when you buy and the 
importance of buying right . Buying 
right would mean getting a great 
deal to maximize your profit on the 
backend .  
Ultimately , you are going to find 
what creates a great deal is finding 
a motivated or flexible seller . In fact , 
locating motivated sellers and helping 
them with their problems is the secret 
to great deals . 
WHAT IS A
MOTIVA TED SELLER ? 
Motivated sellers are real estate 
owners who have to sell for one reason 
or another . There are many factors that 
affect their motivation to sell and these 
factors fall into three main categories : 
personal hardship , the property itself , 
or economic problems . 
What kind of personal hardships 
may cause a homeowner to become a 
motivated seller ? For one , an owner ’ s 
failing health may cause him to need to 
sell the house . Or perhaps the owner 
has a job out of state and the house 
is vacant ; as time passes , that owner 
B
finding
motivated 
sellers
63
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
64
how do we find them ? 
Regardless of the factors that create the 
need to sell , the point is there are many 
motivated sellers out there and many ways 
to find them . In doing so , you can locate a 
great deal . 
This chapter offers some techniques 
you will find helpful in locating flexible 
sellers in your area . 
Work with Real estate 
professionals
We talked about the importance of having 
a good real estate agent as a member of 
your power team and that it may take some 
time to find the right one . In fact , you may 
have to try several of them out first before 
you find the right agent or agents for you , 
but that ’ s okay . Once you find just a couple 
of agents who have the ability to locate 
deals and who will work hard for you , your 
phone and fax will begin ringing . 
Working with real estate agents is 
usually the best way to locate good deals 
and motivated sellers when you first start out 
with real estate investing . Look for the ones 
who know how to be creative and who 
specialize in working with investors . 
will likely become more flexible on price or 
terms . Maybe the seller has suffered a job 
loss and the house is going into foreclosure . 
Or maybe divorce is forcing a sale . Perhaps 
the owner died and the house needs to be 
sold to settle the estate and pay the heirs . Or 
a partnership has fallen through , causing the 
need to sell . 
The property ’ s condition may create 
a need to sell as well . Perhaps the owner 
doesn ’ t have enough money to fix it up . 
Sometimes a property may have financing 
that has a balloon payment due and the 
owner can ’ t refinance it because the property 
isn ’ t in sufficient condition to qualify for a 
loan . Or you may find a tired landlord with 
a house that was trashed by the tenants .  
Economic problems can create a need 
to sell as well . But remember , some economic 
problems you may encounter can be caused 
by a change in the economy overall , not 
just in the economics of the homeowner . For 
example , a business that employs most of 
the town , but then goes out of business , will 
have an impact on real estate in the area . 
Be careful ! You may find phenomenal deals , 
but are they really great deals if you can ’ t 
sell the properties or rent them out ? 
65
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
Working with more than one agent
Most investors have more than one agent they work with because it 
can be very beneficial to have different agents on your power team . 
A listing agent , for example , can hold off putting the property on the 
MLS for a couple of days so an investor has less competition for his 
or her offer . When you work with an agent who has pocket listings , 
they may give you first shot at making an offer on a property before 
they put it on the MLS .  
Another type of real estate professional you may find good 
to work with is a foreclosure specialist . There are banks that work 
specifically with certain agents in listing their foreclosures . Even 
though not every foreclosure is a deal , some are worth checking out .  
Another real estate professional you may want to work with 
would be a “ hoop jumper ” – an agent who is aggressive and works 
hard for you as a buyer . They will put keywords into the MLS and pull 
up comps for you .  
No matter how many agents you work with , you need to 
keep one thing in mind : be loyal . If you receive information from 
one agent and then buy through another agent , you cannot expect 
that first agent to keep looking for properties for you . Real estate 
agents have to eat , too . Always buy from the one who gives you the 
information first . Be loyal to that agent and always create a win / 
win situation for both of you .  
Additionally , some investors try to go around the agent to 
avoid paying their fees . But this doesn ’ t make good business or 
moral sense . You need to treat the agent who generates good 
leads right by rewarding them and not trying to take away their 
commission .  
Since you will be working with more than one agent , you need 
to understand that it may be a concern to an agent that he or she 
will bring you a property , only to have you go directly to the owner 
66
• Divorce 
• Illness 
• Transferred 
• Foreclosure 
• Condemned 
• Bank Owned 
• Desperate 
• Estate Sale 
• Moving 
• Seller Will Finance 
• Will Sacrifice 
Expired or “ aged ” listings 
Once you have a good relationship with a 
agent , you can ask him or her to pull up 
the expired listings or the listings that have 
been on the market for a while . Sometimes 
the MLS system will allow your agent to find 
properties that are free and clear . 
Create a flyer to attract
aggressive agents 
If you want to attract agents who may 
already have motivated sellers or who know 
of interesting properties , you may want to 
run an ad or send a flyer to all the real estate 
offices in your area of interest . 
A sample of what your flyer might look like 
can be found on the next page . 
or work with another agent . To alleviate this 
concern , you could offer to sign a Buyer ’ s 
Broker Agreement . In the agreement , you 
state you will work with only this agent on 
the particular property he brought to you for 
a specific period of time . This protects the 
agent and keeps him working hard to locate 
deals for you . 
Using keywords 
As we ’ ve mentioned previously , the 
real estate professional can put keywords 
into the remark section of the MLS to find 
some interesting properties that meet your 
requirements . For example , the agent can 
put in the word “ motivated ” and the computer 
will give a listing of every property that has 
the word “ motivated ” in it . 
Keywords you will want the agent to search 
for include : 
• Handyman Special 
• Investor Special 
• Needs Work
• Offer 
• Must Sell 
• Needs TLC 
• As-Is Condition 
• Fixer-Upper 
• Motivated 
67
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
HOW TO 
INCREASE YOUR SALES ! 
Attention : Broker and Real Estate Office Managers ! 
If you want to MAKE MORE MONEY , 
then make a copy of this EXCITING OPPORTUNITY 
for each of your agents or please post on your board . 
WE NEED To BUY HOUSES AND 
MULTI-FAMILY UNITS NOW ! 
WE ’ LL PAY UP TO 60% OF VALUE WITH CASH , 
OR MORE WITH TERMS ! ANY AREA OR CONDITION 
$500 BONUS ! 
Call us with your properties to sell or sell our properties to your customers and 
get a $500 BONUS on top of your commissions ! 
WE HAVE THE EXPERIENCE TO BE SUCCESSFUL 
WE ’ RE FLEXIBLE , CREATIVE , AND GOOD AT SOLVING 
PROBLEMS .  .  . 
We have a WIN / WIN Philosophy ! Call me today ! 
Joe Smith , 555-1212 
68
phone number . Most neighbors realize this 
vacant house is bringing down the value 
of their home and will be anxious to help 
you locate the owner . If they seem to know 
how to reach the owner , but are hesitant to 
give you this information , just give them your 
business card and ask them to let the owner 
know you may be interested in purchasing 
the property .  
Leave several flyers at the vacant 
house . The owner or a family member often 
checks on the house . 
How to find the owners of 
vacant houses 
• Look up the owner ’ s name in tax rolls , 
appraisal districts , or computerized 
services . Or check online at : 
netronline . com . Click on public 
records , then your county and state .  
Look for the assessor or auditor ’ s office . 
Many times this information is on the 
Internet . 
• Check with the neighbors on both 
sides of the house and see if they know 
how to reach the owners or where they 
have moved . 
• Send two letters , one to the address 
FSBO ( For Sale By Owner ) Signs 
By now , you are probably already taking 
a different route to work every day . You 
should be paying attention to any FSBO
signs you see , especially because some 
of these properties may not even be listed 
in the newspaper and the only way to 
know about them is from the signs . Poorly 
advertised FSBO homes are an excellent 
source of leads ( think less competition for 
your offer !  )  . Write down the phone number 
and call the owner . Better yet , get out of the 
car and knock on the door . 
Tracking Vacant or
Boarded Houses 
Whenever you are in the car , you should 
be looking for vacant houses , distressed 
properties , FSBOs , and houses for rent . Drive 
up and down your target area regularly and 
seek out these types of properties . Owners 
of vacant or distressed properties can be 
motivated sellers . 
Write down or tape record the 
addresses of any vacant or distressed homes 
you find . You can look up the owner ’ s name 
at the courthouse . If you have time , stop 
the car , get out , and knock on neighbors ’ 
doors . They may know where the owner 
has moved to or they may have the owner ’ s 
69
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
of the vacant house asking it to be 
forwarded , and the other one to the address with the words 
 “ Address Service Requested – Do Not Forward ” on the 
envelope . 
• Check with the utility company to see if a new account is open 
in the previous owner ’ s name . 
• Check the phone book or call Information to see if a new 
phone number has been issued to the owner or if they have a 
new address . 
If you have a different mailing address for the owner , but it isn ’ t 
listed in the phone book , check a reverse directory , which can be 
found in the reference section of your public library . The directory 
starts with addresses first , allowing you to search for the owner ’ s 
name when the only information you have is their address . Or go 
to reverseaddress . com . Sometimes the owner may be living with 
relatives with a different last name and reverse directories can help 
you find them . 
• Employ a private investigator ( look in the phone book under 
Private Investigator ) to have them do a skip trace to find 
the owner . Try to negotiate with them that they must find the 
information you are looking for or there is no fee . 
Auctions 
Look in the Yellow Pages and in newspaper advertisements for 
auctioneers . Call every auctioneer you find and ask them if they 
auction real estate . If they say yes , ask to be put on their mailing 
list . If you see an auction for real estate property being advertised 
70
properties to . 
HUD , VA , FDIC , IRS , and others 
In some areas of the country , HUD ( Department 
of Housing and Urban Development ) and VA 
( Department of Veteran ’ s Affairs ) foreclosure 
properties are phenomenal deals . In other 
areas , people pay too much and they are 
not a deal . To find foreclosure properties 
offered by HUD , VA , and others , such as 
the FDIC , the IRS , and Customs , visit the 
HUD website at www . hud . gov / homes / 
homesforsale . cfm . HUD and VA foreclosure 
bids have to be submitted through a HUDcertified agent / broker . 
Important Note : Never bid on an owner 
occupied list unless you plan to live in the 
property . If you are not going to live in the 
property , you need to wait until it appears 
on the list that is open to all bidders . 
Garage Sales 
When you see a garage or a yard sale , 
get out of your car and talk to the owners . 
Remember what most people do before they 
put their house up for sale ? They de-junk ! 
Someone having a garage sale may be 
getting ready to sell his or her home . But 
even if they are not planning on selling , they 
or if you receive a notice in the mail from 
an auctioneer , call and get the address 
of the property . Drive by the house . If you 
like the house , make an offer for them to 
submit before the auction takes place ( if the 
property is bank owned , the bank will wait 
for the auction to make the sale )  . 
Absolute auctions 
There are ABSOLUTE auctions . An absolute 
auction means they will take whatever is 
bid . Banks typically have 14 months to sell 
an REO ( Real Estate Owned )  ; if it is not 
sold by then , they have to quickly unload 
the property . You usually have to enroll to 
be able to bid . Get signed up and get a 
bidder ’ s card . 
Foreclosure auctions 
Go to a foreclosure auction . If you plan 
to buy at this auction , be sure to do your 
due diligence first . You will also probably 
need cash . There will be lots of competition . 
This is also a good place to find investors 
to network with . Go there to meet other 
investors you can buy from or quick-turn 
71
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
may know of someone else who is . You will usually find them to 
be friendly and talkative . Talk to them about the neighborhood . Do 
they know what houses sell for ? Do they know of anyone thinking of 
selling ? Give them your business card . 
Court house Records 
The courthouse is an excellent source for researching and finding 
motivated sellers . Get to know where the records are kept in your 
county courthouse . Sometimes you may be going into different areas 
of the courthouse depending on what you are researching . Look for : 
Foreclosures 
Foreclosure will inevitably create motivation . As mentioned 
before , foreclosure doesn ’ t always mean a good deal , but some 
foreclosure properties are great deals ! When working a foreclosure , 
there are four timeframes that provide profitable opportunities . They 
will be discussed in greater detail in the chapter on foreclosures . 
Private note holders 
Many private note holders are investors . They may own several 
properties or they may be hard moneylenders . Obviously , not all 
private note holders are investors . But if you see a private note 
holder with several notes , then you ’ ve probably found an investor . A
private note holder can become a very motivated seller if they have 
to foreclose on a property they hold . 
Divorce cases 
Divorce is a primary cause of foreclosure . Even if a couple does not 
lose their house to foreclosure , divorce can cause great financial 
hardship and motivate the couple to sell . You must have full disclosure 
with both sellers jointly signing any agreement . 
72
there is a will , there can also be great deals 
if the heirs and beneficiaries are just looking 
to liquidate assets so they can disperse an 
inheritance . This can be a huge opportunity 
for an investor , especially when heirs live 
out of town . The heirs may not want the 
property or they may not be able to afford it . 
Many times , the family tells the executor of 
the estate to just get rid of the property and 
the heirs are often willing to take a large 
discount on it . And sometimes the executor 
has to sell the property to pay off debts and 
taxes . Contact the executor of the will . You 
can find contact information in the county 
recorder ’ s office or in public notices in the 
legal section of your newspaper . 
Bankruptcies 
You can find information about bankruptcies 
in legal papers or at the bankruptcy court . 
The name of the trustee who has been 
appointed to handle the case will appear 
in the papers and the notice should tell if 
real estate is involved . The trustee will give 
you the information if you call . Creditors 
will usually take huge discounts . Even if the 
bankruptcy has been recently filed and is not 
closed , the court can release the property . 
Eviction filings 
Go to your county courthouse and ask the 
Out-of-state owners 
If you can find an out-of-state owner , you 
may find a more flexible seller . It can be 
a hassle to manage a property from a 
distance . Or sometimes the owner had to 
move quickly and now the house is sitting 
vacant . Sometimes a title company will have 
the ability to pull this information up for you 
from the county records . 
Houses with tax liens 
When an owner is having trouble paying 
their taxes , it is usually a sign they are 
having financial difficulty . Often , there is a 
lot of equity in the home and you could help 
solve their problem and make it a win / win 
situation . 
Lis Pendens 
Lis Pendens is Latin for “ suit pending ,  ” 
referring to a court action . In some states , it 
is the beginning stage of foreclosure . 
Probate sales and estate sales 
With probate and estate sales , property can 
be purchased from the estate of an individual 
who has passed away . Sometimes good 
deals can be found in circumstances where 
there is no will or known heirs and the state 
is liquidating the estate ’ s assets . However , if 
73
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
clerk where to find the department to file an eviction complaint . 
A landlord can become a motivated seller after going through 
an eviction and may welcome an offer from an investor who is 
providing a way out of ever having to go through one again . 
Local Newspapers 
You should be checking the classified section of your local newspaper 
on a daily or almost daily basis . Nationwide , the classified ads are 
filled with real estate properties for sale . A small percentage of 
these ads are placed by owners who are slightly motivated to sell . 
An even smaller percentage only 1 to 2% ) of the ads are placed by 
sellers who are desperate and intensely motivated . These are the 
sellers you want to talk to .  
In the beginning , you may think there are no motivated sellers 
in your area , but be persistent and keep calling . Most investors 
check a few ads and then give up . Don ’ t let that be you ! Make the 
effort and reap the benefits .  
You should also “ grade ” the ads , looking for motivated sellers 
by using the keywords mentioned throughout this manual . Start by 
circling or highlighting any word that might indicate a motivated 
seller , a distressed property , or special financing terms , such as 
 “ must sell ,  ”  “ will look at all offers ,  ”  “ investor special ,  ”  “ needs TLC ,  ”  
 “ rent to own ,  ”  “ owner finance ,  ”  “ no qualifying ,  ” or “ take over 
payments .  ” The ads with your target keywords can be your “ A ” 
list , your top picks to call first . Call all the FSBO ads that depict the 
keywords showing that either the property or the owner is distressed 
or that there may be creative financing available .  
You ’ ll soon find that your search for good leads is much more 
effective when you know exactly what you are looking for . 
74
these could be great places for your ad 
in the same sections listed above . When 
people are desperate to sell , they will often 
look in the small newspapers .  ( We have 
also provided other sample ads for you 
throughout this manual .  ) 
Use legal newspapers 
Legal newspapers are another way to 
find motivated sellers , as people who are 
struggling with bankruptcy , foreclosure , 
divorce , etc . will be in the legal notices . See 
if your local library has a copy or ask how 
you can find the legal newspaper by talking 
to title companies , attorneys , and banks . 
When you find the legal notices , 
you may want to contact these potentially 
motivated sellers with a simple letter . Your 
letter might read like the following :  
I understand you have recently gone 
through some difficult circumstances in your 
life and may be interested in selling your 
home . If you are interested , please call me 
at 555-1212 . 
People who are having difficulties will 
often look in the legal publication to see 
if their notice is in the paper , so consider 
running an ad in a legal publication . You 
may find attorneys will also start calling , 
asking for a business card to pass on to their 
clients . 
Place a “ goldmine ” ad 
In addition to being a source of finding 
houses for sale , newspapers can be a way of 
generating deals when savvy investors place 
their own ads in the paper . Getting the seller 
to call you is extremely important . This can 
save you time and give you a good deal . 
An example of a goldmine ad follows : 
Private investor 
looking to buy 
income properties . 
Will look at all , 
any condition . 
Can pay cash
555-1212
As a buyer , you want to get the seller to 
call you ! You can place these ads in the 
Real Estate Wanted section or in the Houses 
For Sale section of your local newspaper 
and real estate magazines . Additionally , 
if your town has a “ Thrifty Nickel ,  ”  “ Penny 
Saver ,  ”  “ Shopper ’ s Guide ,  ” or similar paper , 
75
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
I Buy Houses Any Area , Any Condition 
CASH 
Completely Confidential Call 555-1212 
 “ Bird Dogs ” 
Bird dogs are referrals who act as your eyes and ears looking for 
leads on your behalf . You might also hear this referred to as “ ant 
farming .  ” For the hard work they provide , you pay them a finder ’ s 
fee . 
Who can be your potential bird dogs ? Think of the people 
who are out in the neighborhoods every day , such as the mail 
carrier and the cable installer . These people are regularly going into 
your prime target areas . You may also consider talking to garbage 
collectors , meter readers , lawn service workers , pizza deliverers , 
newspaper deliverers , code enforcement officers , firefighters , and 
more . 
Create flyers and reward cards 
To help you find potential bird dogs , create simple flyers and reward 
cards to attract them to the opportunity and explain the benefits of 
your bird dog program . 
To get the flyers noticed , you may want to use fluorescent 
colored paper . For the reward cards , it may be best to use doublesided business cards to make them easy to pass out . If your doublesided business cards can have a fluorescent colored front and a 
white back , it will help them stand out from the average business 
card . 
Here ’ s an example of how your reward card might read : 
76
BIRD DOG FEES SAMPLE FLYER
Cash 
reward
$250 . 00 
Bring me any 
vacant or boarded 
houses . 
Fluorescent color front with black lettering . 
I will pay
$250 . 00
every time I 
buy one ! 
Don ’ t bring me any agent signs . 
Call
555-1212
White background and black lettering . 
$Cash reward$
$250 . 00 
Bring me any 
vacant or boarded 
houses . 
Everywhere you go , hand your reward card 
out . When you go out to dinner , put one 
with the tip . When you see the mail carrier , 
stop and give him or her a card .  
Additionally , hand out a flyer listing 
the fees you would pay your bird dog . A
sample flyer might include the following 
information : 
• Make $5 every time you bring us the 
address of a vacant or boarded up 
house whether we buy it or not . 
• Make $10 every time you bring us 
a Polaroid picture with the address of 
a vacant or boarded up house whether 
we buy it or not . 
• Make $250 every time you bring us 
the address of a vacant or boarded 
up house and we buy it ( paid at closing 
only )  . Exceptions : Please be advised that we
do not accept properties in the following 
areas : 
77
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
_______ or those with an agent sign on them or those addresses already 
submitted by other bird dogs . All bird dogs are paid upon a first-come , 
first-served basis . 
Niche Marketing
Signs 
A fluorescent yellow sign with black writing attracts attention . Make 
it a simple one-line ad that can easily be read from a distance 
and include your phone number . Post your signs wherever you are 
allowed in your city . For example , post signs on or at : 
• Bus stop benches 
• Community billboards ( use small signs ) 
• Stadium seating 
• Movie theaters 
• Take out menus 
• Grocery store carts 
• Utility posts or telephone poles 
( best when they are posted up high ) 
• Major intersections 
( use surveyor stakes to put them in the ground ) 
You can go to an office supply store and buy a package of 
fluorescent paper ( 8-1 / 2 x 11 sheets – 100 sheet package ) for 
your signs . Place them in plastic sheet protectors and staple them on 
telephone poles . Or use plastic corrugated sheets ( lightweight , but 
sturdy sheets of plastic ) for your signs and attach them with roofing 
nails . Make sure you are not violating any city codes . 
78
in the neighborhood . Car windows and 
mailboxes are off limits . 
Door hangers 
People generally respond well to door 
hangers . Most printers will design and cut 
them out for you . Hire someone to deliver 
them or incorporate passing them out into 
an exercise routine and do it yourself . 
Bulletin boards 
Put flyers anywhere you see bulletin boards , 
such as grocery stores , laundromats , 
restaurants , the community center , the 
unemployment office , a city center , and mail 
centers . Every time you enter a business 
place , look to see if they offer a community 
bulletin board where you can post your 
information . 
Car washes 
Ask the manager if they can hand out your 
flyers . Offer to pay them per car . 
Handouts 
You can provide handouts wherever you 
are , wherever it is allowed . You may be 
able to distribute handouts at some school 
or local events , for example . 
Example signs might be : 
I buy 
houses
for cash
555-1212
In the beginning , you will need to have an 
answering machine . The message they get 
when they call might be something like :  
 “ Hi ! I ’ m Jimmy . If you ’ re interested in buying 
or selling a house… ”  
Later , you may want to use an 
answering service ; people like to talk to a 
live person . 
Flyers 
Design an 8-½ x 11-inch flyer and distribute 
it door to door in the neighborhoods where 
you want to buy . The flyer should read like 
an ad :  
 “ We buy houses , fast cash , fast closing times , 
any condition , any price , 555-1212 .  ” 
You can hire students or people from 
your local labor board to distribute the 
flyers . Two people can put out 500 flyers 
in three hours . Put your flyers on every door 
79
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
Magnetic car signs 
Put magnetic car signs on your car . It can give you credibility to be 
in the neighborhood . 
WE BUY HOUSES CASH OR TERMS PHONE # 
Check with your car insurance company to see if you need to 
change your coverage ( some car insurance companies will consider 
it a vehicle used for business if you display a magnetic car sign and 
you will need to have that in the policy )  . 
Drive for dollars 
As you are driving around looking for vacant houses , have your 
signs in the back of your car along with a staple gun and tape . 
Every time you see a vacant house , not only should you be writing 
down the address , but you should also get out of the car and put 
a sign on the vacant house ( the wording can be the same as the 
magnetic car sign )  . Make sure the signs are large enough to be read 
from the street . We are not only trying to get the vacant homeowner 
to call ; we also want motivated sellers who happen to see our sign 
to call us . 
Cooperative advert ising
Have you ever received mail that contains advertisements for several 
companies in one envelope , like Valpak® ? Everyone shares in the 
production costs , reducing your own cost . Make sure the message 
is simple . The mailing company may have people on staff who can 
help you design your ad .  
Align yourself with a couple of banks or credit unions . Talk to 
the branch manager and tell them you are involved in mailings and 
ask them to join you . Tell them that every week , you will go to the 
80
to continuous advertising or advertising 
mixed with a few TV news-related programs . 
In some markets , the cost of advertising on 
this channel can be relatively inexpensive , 
especially during non-peak times . This 
is often the best time to advertise , when 
people who can ’ t sleep turn on the TV .  
Additionally , you may want to consider 
radio advertising , which is another great 
way to market your business , usually with 
less competition for your services . 
Restrooms 
In some public restrooms , low-cost advertising 
is offered on the back of the stall doors . 
Business cards 
Your business cards should say something 
simple and to the point like : 
I BUY HOUSES , CASH , ANY CONDITION 
or 
I BUY AND SELL HOUSES 
or 
WE BUY HOUSES CASH ! 
Or 
WE SOLVE REAL ESTATE PROBLEMS 
You want your business cards to clearly 
state what you do . Avoid phrases like “ real 
estate investor ” which means nothing to a 
Chamber of Commerce and pull out leads 
and send their information along with yours . 
Suggest that their part of the deal be to pay 
for the postage . 
Direct mail 
Make sure that when you mail to people in 
your target area , you do repeat mailings . It 
usually takes four mailings for most people 
to respond . If you want to target a specific 
area , you can get a list of owners and 
addresses from your title company . Some 
people will use a reverse address book . 
Yellow page listings 
Successful investors advertise in the same 
section as real estate professionals . Make 
sure you advertise that if they call you , they 
will not be paying a commission . You want 
to stand out from the crowd . 
Listing publications 
Consider placing a small display ad 
approximately 1 ” x 2 ” in your Sunday 
newspaper ’ s free TV listings guide . The cost 
is usually quite reasonable . 
Radio and television 
Most cable programming offers a TV listings 
channel showing what will be on for that 
day . The top of the screen is usually devoted 
81
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
motivated seller . They are only interested in what you can do for 
them : I BUY HOUSES , CASH ! Your name should be the smallest 
information on the card . Hand them out everywhere , such as 
restaurants , barbershops or salons , stores , and offices . You should 
be ordering new cards every three months or you are not getting 
the best use out of them . 
networking resources 
Banks , mortg age companies , credit and finance 
The people at these businesses deal regularly with investors and , 
quite often , are investors themselves . They sometimes have REOs 
( real estate owned – bank owned properties )  , foreclosures , and 
other leads . 
Private lenders 
Private lenders can be more than a great financial resource ; they 
can also be a resource for potential deals . As more and more buyers 
turn to them instead of banks and traditional mortgage companies 
for loans , many of these private lenders start to build an inventory 
of foreclosed properties when those loans default . Sometimes they 
just want to cash out . 
Title companies 
Title companies close for other investors . By networking with them , 
you can often find out what other investors are doing . 
Ask the title company to let you know when deals don ’ t go through 
and to alert you to those opportunities . 
82
to let you know of investors who are looking 
to sell and to tell you what ’ s right or wrong 
with their properties . 
Section 8 
You can get a free database of owners who 
do Section 8 . Go to the Section 8 housing 
office and get a list of properties for rent with 
Section 8 . Try to get a list of 1-to 4-bedroom 
rentals . Bail Bondsman will also be on the 
list if doing rentals . 
City code enforcement
Get a list of houses with code violations 
from them . They tag the houses , so they 
know before everyone else which ones are 
vacant or have a code violation . In some 
regions , the city council has a website and 
you can pull up the minutes from their council 
meetings . The code enforcement person has 
to fill out a daily form . 
Appraisers 
You can learn a lot from appraisers , such as 
what needs to be done to qualify for FHA . 
An appraiser also knows when deals won ’ t 
work because the house doesn ’ t meet code . 
They know a lot of investors and sometimes 
hear of deals . 
Attorneys 
Contact bankruptcy attorneys . The attorney 
doesn ’ t care what the property sells for ; they 
Relocation directors 
When an employee of a large corporation 
is relocated , the company will often market 
or buy the employee ’ s previous home as 
part of their relocation package . These 
corporations become extremely motivated 
to unload these homes . To find them , start 
by mailing letters to the relocation directors 
of major employers in your area . You will 
need to get the address for the corporate 
headquarters , which may be out of state . Let 
them know what you are looking for . If they 
don ’ t have anything at this time , ask them to 
keep your letter on file so they can contact 
you if something in your area becomes 
available . 
Propert y managers 
Property managers often manage properties 
for out-of-state investors who may be tired 
of owning property in another state or 
for investors who don ’ t take care of their 
properties for any number of reasons . Many 
property managers also actively invest in 
property themselves . Network with these 
individuals ; they always come across deals 
and are a great resource if you end up 
needing property management yourself . 
Remember , as managers of properties for 
other investors , they are in a good position 
83
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
get the same amount of money regardless . And most of them only 
have two or three investors they know to contact with opportunities . 
In bankruptcy cases , the owner usually wants or needs the property 
sold quickly . Usually they will settle for pennies on the dollar . 
Contact attorneys who handle probate ( check the Yellow 
Pages )  . Get on their contact list to be the first person they call to sell 
property . They want CASH – the advantage you want to give them 
is that you can buy with cash .  
Additionally , attorneys know of people who are having 
financial or legal problems and need to sell their real estate . 
Contact attorneys who specialize in real estate , foreclosure , estate 
planning , and divorce . Network with them and ask them to refer 
your services ! 
Accountants 
Accountants work with people having financial or tax problems . 
They will most likely not give out names , but they may be willing to 
give your name to their clients . 
Insurance agents 
Insurance agents have clients facing issues such as fire and water 
damage , vacant homes , and mold . These situations can create 
motivation on the part of the owner of such a house , and sometimes 
the insurance company and lender . If they know you buy these kinds 
of properties , they may be more than happy to pass this information 
on to their clients . 
Bail bondsmen 
When bail bondsmen bail people out of jail , some of those 
people will have money and some of them will have property . 
Send postcards to the bondsmen in your area . If they own a lot 
of properties , they put signs out to get more people calling . They 
84
can ’ t sell at a discount until after the fouryear period or no one would donate . 
You might send a letter that reads : 
To whom it may concern : 
Hello , My name is _____________ . I am a local 
real estate investor in your area . I am writing you 
to inquire about charitable donated properties 
you may have in the church ’ s portfolio . If your 
church has any single family homes or investment 
properties that have been donated , I may be 
interested in making an offer on any or all of 
them . 
Thank you for your consideration in this matter . 
Sincerely , 
Condemned and fire damaged 
propert ies 
Contact the health department , fire marshal , 
and the city code enforcement department 
to locate these types of properties . 
Investors and investment clubs 
Investors are a great source for both buyers 
and sellers . For example , wholesalers ( see 
the chapter on wholesaling ) are always 
looking to quick-turn property and can lead 
you to some great deals . 
are used to buying and selling and they get 
properties really cheap . They usually buy for 
collateral and sell when they have too much 
inventory . Some will do Section 8 rentals . 
Health and senior services 
Health and senior services workers often 
take care of people who have no family 
to leave their properties to . In some cases , 
the nursing homes have the right to sell the 
assets . This is one time when you definitely 
cannot put “ and / or assigns .  ” The judge 
wants to know who bought the property . 
Contact the manager or the executors . Send 
a postcard : 
Attn : Nursing Home Director We buy homes 
CASH 
Charitable organizations – 
a hidden market ! 
When a person donates real estate to 
a church or charitable organization , the 
appraised value is tax deductible . There is 
a four-year hold for the full tax deduction . 
If a church or charitable organization sells 
at a discounted price before the four-year 
period , the person who donates will not 
get the full deduction , so churches and 
charitable organizations are left holding a 
lot of property , but they need the cash . They 
85
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
Too many investors don ’ t want to work with other investors . 
This is ridiculous . Somehow they have a false notion they will be 
supporting their competition if they share ideas or make deals with 
each other , but that just makes them miss out on some amazing win / 
win opportunities . In fact , the most successful wholesale investors 
work almost exclusively with other investors . They recognize that 
they don ’ t have to spend all their time working with potential 
homeowners who are often unsophisticated when it comes to real 
estate ; they can instead work with investors who understand the 
business , who can move quickly on deals , and who know how to 
spot good deals when they see them . 
The bottom line is networking with other investors can be both 
educational and profitable . 
To begin building relationships with other investors , look for 
their ads in local newspapers and contact real estate investment 
clubs in your local area . Ask investors , bankers , and real estate 
agents if they know where a local investment club meets . Attending 
club meetings is a great way to sharpen your real estate skills , 
network with like-minded individuals , and find great deals . 
Clubs usually meet once a month and have a guest speaker 
who may provide valuable information about your area . But don ’ t 
judge the club by the speaker ; look at the investors attending . Who 
are the members ? How can they help you ? Are they friendly ? 
Most clubs charge a monthly or yearly fee to members , so ask 
if you can go free on a complimentary first visit . At investor clubs 
you will be able to find referrals to build your power team . You may 
find deals , a hard moneylender , or creative financing . Locating a 
good one is worth the effort .  
Now go out and find a motivated seller and get a great deal ! 
86
• Tracking Vacant or Boarded 
Houses 
– Drive up and down your target area 
– Write down addresses of any 
vacant or distressed properties 
– Locate the owner 
– Talk to neighbors 
– Check county records 
– Send out letters 
– Check with the utility company 
– Check the phone book or call In 
formation 
– Check a reverse directory if you have 
a mailing address and want a phone 
number 
– Look on the Internet 
– Do a skip trace 
• Auctions 
– Call auctioneers and ask to be put 
on their mailing list 
– Can make a n offer before the 
auction 
– Check out absolute auctions 
• Foreclosure Auctions 
– Attend an auction 
– Research the property with 
due diligence if you plan on buying 
– Good place to meet and network 
with other investors 
review
The secret to great deals is finding a motivated 
seller . We do not want to waste time working 
with sellers who are not flexible with their 
price or terms . 
We find these sellers in many ways : 
• Use a Realtor® 
– Work with more than one agent 
– Have the real estate 
professional search the MLS 
using the keywords you have 
learned 
– Create a flyer to attract aggressive 
agents 
• FSBO Signs 
– Take different routes while driving in 
the car 
– Write down the phone number and 
call or knock on the door 
87
Guide to real estate investing
Finding Motivated Sellers
• HUD , VA , FDIC , IRS
– Visit the HUD website : www . hud .  
gov / homes / homesforsale . 
– Bids must be submitted by an 
approved real estate professional 
– Good deals in some areas of the country 
– Do not bid on owner occupied list unless you intend to live 
in the house 
• Garage Sales 
– People get rid of their junk before they sell 
– Get out and talk with the owners 
– Ask about the neighborhood and may be thinking of 
selling 
• Court house 
– Foreclosures 
– Private note holders 
– Owners of vacant houses 
– Divorce 
– Out-of-stat e owners 
– Houses with tax liens 
– Lis Pendens 
– Probate sales 
– Estate sales 
– Bankruptcies 
– Eviction filings 
88
– Direct mail 
– Yellow Pages 
– TV listing publications 
– Radio and television ads 
– Restrooms 
– Business cards 
• Networking
– Banks , mortgage companies ,  
credit , and finance 
– Private lenders 
– Title companies 
– Relocation director s 
– Property managers 
– Section 8 
– City code enforcement 
– Appraisers 
– Attorneys 
– Accountants 
– Insurance agents 
– Bail bondsmen 
– Health and senior services 
– Charitable organizations 
– People who serve legal documents 
– Condemned and fire damaged 
properties 
– Investors and investment clubs
• Local Newspaper
– Check out the classifieds 
– Place a goldmine ad 
– Legal newspaper 
• Bird Dogs 
– Let others be your “ eyes and ears ” 
– Pass out flyers 
– Mail carrier 
– Cable installer 
– Garbage collector 
– Meter reader 
– Lawn services 
– Pizza delivery 
– Paper carrier 
– Code enforcement 
– Firefighter 
– Offer a finder ’ s fee 
• Niche Marketing
– Signs 
– Flyers 
– Door hangers 
– Bulletin boards 
– Car washes 
– Handouts 
– Magnetic car signs 
– Drive for dollars 
– Cooperative advertising 
chapter
six
89

Wholesaling is immediate money 
in your pocket . When you 
wholesale a property , you are buying 
and selling , not buying , fixing , and 
selling . You don ’ t need to get a loan 
to buy the property . You never fix it up . 
You don ’ t have to put a lot of time and 
work into the house . You simply put the 
property under contract and sell it to a 
buyer without ever having purchased 
it . Once you have a property under 
contract , you should be able to have 
a “ payday ” a week to ten days later ! 
This is called quick-turning a property . 
When you wholesale , you are using 
a buy low , sell low strategy . The type 
of real estate you will be looking at 
will be considerably below market 
value . These properties can be single 
family or multi-family homes , but most 
of the properties you wholesale will 
be single family . This is because there 
is a larger inventory of single family 
homes to pick from and your buyer , 
the investor , will most likely be more 
interested in the single family homes .  
You will find your best deals 
in properties that are vacant , 
abandoned , or boarded up – 
properties no one is really looking to 
buy . Banks won ’ t finance condemned 
properties . Insurance companies 
won ’ t insure them . Most real estate 
agents won ’ t list them . You should be 
targeting these types of houses . 
Making
Quick Cash : 
Wholesales 
91
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
92
where to find wholesale deals
In the last chapter , we discussed how to 
locate motivated sellers and , in doing so , 
find the “ deal .  ” Use the ideas given there 
to help you locate this kind of property . In 
the meantime , here is a quick review of the 
techniques we have found most useful in 
finding wholesale deals : 
• Read and advertise in your local 
newspapers 
– Check out the classifieds 
– Place a goldmine ad 
– Use the legal newspaper 
– Use bird dogs ( pass out flyers and 
offer a finder ’ s fee ) 
– Mail carrier 
– Cable worker 
– Garbage collector 
– Meter reader 
– Lawn service worker 
– Pizza deliverer 
– Paper carrier 
– Code enforcement officer 
– Firefighter 
Properties like this usually have 
motivated sellers . For some reason the 
owners are unable to take care of them or 
just don ’ t want them . The houses don ’ t have 
to be boarded up , just rundown and unable 
to be financed . You are targeting problem 
properties . You want properties that are 
physically distressed .  
Sounds pretty bad – nothing you really 
want to fix up , so why are we talking about 
these types of houses ? Don ’ t we stress 
 “ cosmetic work only ?  ”  
Some of the properties may only need 
cosmetic repair , but many will need major 
renovations . They may be in marginal 
neighborhoods . What you need to 
remember is : 
THERE IS NO FIX-UP . 
WE BUY AND SELL AS-IS ! 
Remember , the key to any real estate deal 
is buying right . With wholesaling , you buy 
them ugly and sell them ugly to investors , 
maximizing your profits with minimal effort . 
Now that ’ s definitely buying right ! 
93
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
• Market your services whenever , wherever possible 
– Signs 
– Flyers 
– Door hangers 
– Bulletin boards 
– Car washes 
– Handouts 
– Magnetic car signs 
– Direct mail 
– Business cards 
• Drive for dollars ( see the next section ) 
driving for dollars
Pick the areas of town that are known for having distressed 
properties ( identify two to five neighborhoods that would have these 
types of properties )  . You will be looking at low to moderate class 
neighborhoods and “ we care ” neighborhoods . These are the areas 
where you will find investors rehabbing and where you might see 
Habitat for Humanity building affordable homes . Look for areas that 
have a lot of renters . Homeowners living there have usually lived 
there for several years and many have their homes paid for . 
Once you have identified the areas with these characteristics , you 
will be “ driving for dollars ”  ( literally driving around , looking for 
profitable deals )  . As you drive in your car , look up and down each 
street trying to locate vacant or abandoned houses . You can easily 
spot these kinds of properties . Look for : 
94
Cash 
reward
$250 . 00 
For finding vacant and 
boarded up houses . 
Any area . Any condition . 
555-1212
Let others be your bird dogs – your eyes and 
ears . Offer them a reward for helping you 
achieve success . 
Tell everyone in your world what you are 
doing ! Talk to the grocery store clerk , your 
hairdresser or barber , people at your church , 
those you work with , and the waitress where 
you dine . Let all your friends know what you 
are doing . Get the word out !  
Additionally , put magnetic car signs 
on your vehicle . Many of our students have 
had tremendous success making money 
simply off calls from people who saw their 
magnetic car signs . 
While driving for dollars , you should 
also have signs in the back of your car along 
with a staple gun and some tape . Make the 
words bold and large enough so they can 
• Tall grass , leaves all over , snow not 
plowed 
• Lots of newspapers in the yard , at the 
bottom of the driveway , or on the porch 
• No curtains or window coverings 
• Broken windows , boarded up windows 
and doors 
• City or county stickers 
• Abandoned automobiles , junk in the 
yard 
• Missing utility meters ( electric , gas , 
water ) 
• Flyers stuck in the door 
• Property in bad shape – needs work 
( might be “ ugly ”  ) 
• Mail piled up in the mailbox 
While you are driving for dollars , write 
down the addresses of the distressed 
properties you find . And be sure to talk to 
neighbors , mail carriers , cable workers , 
and utility workers . Create a “ reward flyer ” 
and hand it out . Here ’ s an example of how 
your reward flyer might read : 
95
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
be read from the street . Too many words will make it harder to read . 
Keep the wording simple , such as : 
WE BUY HOUSES CASH Phone # 
Use colorful , fluorescent paper to attract attention . We want 
everyone to see these signs . 
If a house is boarded up , staple the sign on one of the boards . If it 
isn ’ t boarded up , but it is abandoned , tape the sign on a window . 
If the house has a “ no trespassing ” sign , then don ’ t put the sign up . 
Try to place the signs where they can be easily seen and read , even 
from the street . You want people with unwanted houses calling you ! 
You can also have surveyor stakes that you can attach the sign to 
and place in the ground at intersections and very visible areas . 
When you drive for dollars , you are not only trying to find distressed 
properties , but you are also letting everyone know you buy houses . 
$CASH$ FOR HOUSES
Any Area , Any Condition CALL NOW ! Phone # 
When you find a vacant home , ask the neighbors if they know how 
you can reach the owner ( see How to Find the Owners of Vacant 
Houses in the previous chapter )  . Or you can go to the courthouse 
where the property taxes are paid to see if you can find their name . 
They may have a different mailing address . 
96
to assign him or her the contract ( the fee you 
are charging for having found and made 
this great deal that you are passing along )  . 
The typical fee for an assignment of contract 
is around $3 , 000 to $5 , 000 . However , 
students have made $10 , 000 or more 
( when your profit is this high , you will want 
to do a double closing instead , which we 
will discuss in a moment )  . 
When you assign the contract , you will make 
sure you collect a non-refundable deposit . If 
you can collect the full assignment fee at that 
time , by all means take it . Otherwise , try 
to get half of the fee or at least $1 , 000 to 
$2 , 000 . That way , if for some reason your 
buyer backs out , you still have made some 
money .  
In essence , what you have done is sold 
your purchase contract to your buyer . You 
never own the property , you should not have 
to pay closing costs , and your name will not 
appear on the deed . You get the property 
under contract , assign the contract , and 
make money . It ’ s a terrific and very popular 
way to make money in real estate . 
Double Closing 
( or Simultaneous Closing ) 
Because your buyer will know how much 
money you are making with an assignment 
of contract , you will want to make sure you 
don ’ t care if he or she has this information . 
assignment of contract
and double closing
There are two ways you can wholesale a 
property . You will either do an assignment of 
contract or a double closing ( also referred to 
as a simultaneous closing )  . 
Assignment of Contract
With an assignment of contract , you will 
have two contracts . One will be a purchase 
and sale contract between you and the seller 
of the property . In this assignable contract , 
you will put your name plus the additional 
words “ and / or assigns ” beside it ( i . e , John 
Smith and / or assigns )  . This gives you the 
right to assign the contract . The idea here 
is you have used your expertise to negotiate 
a fantastic deal with the seller and now you 
are assigning your right to make that deal on 
the terms you have negotiated to someone 
else , your buyer . 
The second contract will be between you 
and your buyer and is called an assignment 
of contract . An assignment of contract will 
have the address of the property , as well 
as information about the seller , about you 
as the original buyer , and about the buyer 
you are assigning the contract to . It will also 
have the amount your buyer is paying you 
97
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
Most investors and sellers will not mind you making some money . 
You should be paid for your expertise and foresight . But if they 
think you are making too much money , they may try to go behind 
your back or not work with you again . So generally speaking , 
when you are going to be making a lot of money on the deal ( say , 
more than $7 , 000 )  , you will do what ’ s called a double closing ( or 
simultaneous close )  . 
With a double closing , you will have two purchase and sale 
contracts . You will have one between you and the seller of the 
property . The other purchase and sale contract will be between 
you and your buyer . This is how it works : You actually buy the 
property and sell it in a simultaneous closing to your buyer . The 
title company or closing attorney handles the transaction for you , 
making everything happen simultaneously and smoothly , but without 
ever having you , your buyer , or the seller together at the same table . 
Your buyer will usually be asked to come in first to close with you as 
the seller . They will bring the money that is needed to purchase the 
property ( you will later use this money to pay the seller )  . The money 
given to the title company or lawyer sits in a trust until the original 
seller of the property comes to sign their paperwork associated with 
you as the buyer . You will come in last and sign both sides of the 
transaction ( as a seller and as a buyer )  . The seller will only see the 
transaction between you and him or her . Likewise , your buyer will 
only see the contract between the two of you . There will be closing 
costs that you may have to pay . 
contingencies
Note : This section offers only general guidelines no legal advice is being 
offered . Always consult with your local attorney for guidance . 
98
If the FSBO house is not vacant , then put in 
a clause of : 
• Buyer shall have access to the 
property for the purpose of showing 
the property to prospective occupants 
and to obtain bids on repairs . 
An optional contingency you may add ( be 
aware that too many “ subject to ” clauses 
can kill a deal )  : 
• It is agreed that Buyer has 30 
business days from the date of this 
offer to perform due diligence . This 
may include determining any needed 
repairs , researching the title , and 
confirming market value . In the event 
the Buyer determines that the property 
does not meet with his / her approval , 
the contract will become null and 
void , and the Buyer ’ s deposit returned 
immediately . 
When doing an assignment of contract , 
give yourself as long of a closing date as 
you can ( preferably at least 45 to 60 days )  . 
If you don ’ t have a buyer within two to three 
weeks , back out of the deal . We don ’ t want 
to hurt people and get the reputation of tying 
up properties and never purchasing them . 
Because the properties you are looking at 
to wholesale are not the sort of properties 
you really want to buy , you will want to 
use contingencies (  “ subject to ”  ) to protect 
yourself if you don ’ t find a buyer ( consult a 
lawyer for assistance )  .  
In both the assignment of contract 
and the double closing , you will use the 
same contingencies and conditions in your 
addendum . 
In the addendum , you may consider adding 
these contingencies and conditions .  ” 
• Sale is contingent upon inspection 
and approval of bids by Buyer and 
Buyer ’ s partner to be completed in 
writing within _________ business 
days . 
• Upon acceptance of the offer , buyer 
to receive key to the property and 
have the right to show to any and all 
prospective occupants . 
Use this second contingency is generally 
used if it is a FSBO . If the property is listed 
with a real estate professional , put : 
• Buyer to receive access to the property 
upon acceptance of offer . 
99
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
TITLE COMPANIES OR CLOSING ATTORNEYS
A critical element in being able to do an assignment of contract or a 
double closing is having a good closing officer who knows how to 
do them . Start calling title companies ( or attorneys if your state uses 
attorneys for real estate closings )  . You will need to get past the front 
desk and speak to the actual person who handles the closings . Ask 
them if they have worked with investors . Can they do assignment 
of contracts or double closings ? Have they ever done them before ?  
Do not be discouraged if they don ’ t seem to know what you are 
talking about . It is not uncommon for title companies and even some 
attorneys to be unfamiliar with double closings and assignment of 
contracts .  
If you feel like giving up , don ’ t ; just keep calling until you find 
one who understands what you want to do . Sometimes it helps to 
get a referral from an investor who has done this before . 
Make sure the closing agent understands you do not plan to 
bring any money to the closing table when you are talking about 
double closings . You are simply bringing two purchase contracts : 
one between the seller and you , the other between you and your 
buyer . Ask them what they would charge you to handle this type of 
transaction .  
Also ask if they charge you to do an assignment of contract . 
Routinely , it will be the seller and your buyer who pay the closing 
costs . You are just the middleman and once you have assigned the 
contract , you are out of the deal except for the fact that they will cut 
you a check for the agreed upon fee that is listed in the assignment 
of contract .  
Ask the closing agent if they have had any problems doing an 
100
• You will also like dealing with 
investors because cash or hard money 
means a quick closing . Wouldn ’ t you 
rather have a paycheck a week after 
finding your buyer instead of waiting 
30 days ? 
building a database of buyers
You may be worrying ,  “ How will I find the 
buyer ?  ” Finding the buyer is the easy part 
when you have the right price accepted . 
When you wholesale , it is not location , 
location , location . Rather , it is the deal , 
the deal , the deal ! If you can buy it cheap 
enough , you will have an investor who will 
want the property . In fact , investors will keep 
coming back to you for more . 
When you wholesale a property , you should 
create a database of buyers . Don ’ t panic if 
you find an exceptional deal and you don ’ t 
have any investors in your database . You 
should have no problem finding a buyer 
who will want to purchase the property . If 
there is money for the investor to make , he 
or she will want it . However , you should start 
networking with other investors and building 
your database as soon as you possibly can . 
assignment of contract or a double closing . 
They may tell you that when your buyer ’ s 
lender looks at the assignment of contract , 
they may say ,  “ Who is this Joe Buyer ? We 
want the contract between Sally Seller and 
Jim ( your new ) Buyer . Get Joe out of the 
way .  ” Well that will work if Sally Seller is 
willing to redo the contract . Otherwise you 
have a problem ! 
There are many reasons why we want to 
work with an investor : 
• An investor does not have to “ fall in 
love with the property .  ” They will 
crunch the numbers and if it ’ s a great 
deal , they want it . 
• Investors have access to hard money 
or cash . Hard money and cash don ’ t 
care if it ’ s an assignment of contract 
or a double closing . You should build 
a database of hard moneylenders for 
you to use if later on you want to 
buy , fix , and sell , and for your buyers 
( if a buyer needs hard money to close 
the deal , you can refer him or her to 
the hard moneylender )  . 
101
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
There are many ways and places for you to find investors for your 
database , including : 
• Investment clubs 
• Auctions 
• Properties with “ For Rent ” signs ( write down phone numbers 
and call ) 
• Talk to people rehabbing a home and ask who the owner is 
( probably an investor ) 
• People who call off your signs 
• Real estate professionals , title companies , attorneys , 
appraisers , contractors , bankers 
• Calling the “ I buy ” ads 
• Advertising 
The following offers a little more insight into how to tap these sources 
for your database . 
Real estate investment clubs 
When you attend your local investment club , you need to network 
with the investors there . These are potential buyers for your deals . 
You will find endless possibilities when you rub shoulders with other 
investors . 
Tell everyone what you are planning on doing and see who is 
interested . Ask them what types of properties they are interested in 
and in what areas . Ask them if you can call them when you find a 
property you think fits their requirements . 
Auctions 
Attend a real estate auction . You will see other investors there . Talk 
to them . Get their business cards and give them yours . Again , your 
goal is to find out what kind of investing they do to see how you can 
102
Real estate professionals , bankers , 
appraisers , lawyers , etc . 
Professional people who are in the real 
estate business know investors . They are 
people you want to interact with . 
Call the “ I Buy ” ads 
Call all the “ I buy ” ads you see in the 
newspaper , such as advertisements that 
read :  “ I buy houses . Pay cash . Any area , 
any condition .  ” There are usually two 
categories of people who place these ads : 
1 ) wholesalers – buy low and sell low ; and 
2 ) retailers – buy , fix , and sell properties or 
buy , fix , and keep properties . 
When you talk to the wholesalers : 
• Tell them you ’ re looking to buy some 
properties 
• Let them know you are a new investor 
in town and you need 
some deals 
• Ask them if they have any inventory 
( properties for sale ) 
• If they have inventory , ask them to fax 
you a list of the 
properties they have for sale 
work with them . Let them know what you do 
and tell them you come across phenomenal 
deals but you simply cannot buy everything 
you find . Tell them you will gladly contact 
them when you find a property they may be 
interested in purchasing . 
Propert ies with “ For Rent ” signs 
Properties that are offered for rent are oftened 
owned by investors . Perhaps they are 
looking to purchase additional properties . It 
never hurts to call and ask . 
Talk to rehabbers 
If you see someone rehabbing a property , 
ask them if they are an investor . You might 
find yourself talking to the investor or with 
a member of his or crew . If an investor is 
rehabbing a property in one of the areas 
you are focusing on , then he or she may 
want a deal you find in that same area or 
one similar to the property they ’ re already 
working on . Let the investor know you are 
just starting out and that you will be looking 
for houses that need to be rehabbed . Ask 
them if they would like you to contact them 
when you find a rehab for a good price . 
Most would be happy to have you bring 
them a good deal . You save them time 
researching so they can spend more time 
rehabbing . 
103
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
Next , drive by the properties . Now you will see where these 
wholesalers are finding the good deals and where wholesale 
deals are being done in a short period of time . You will find that 
wholesalers typically farm an area . Usually they concentrate in two 
to three different areas . You ’ ll also see how much they ’ re asking for 
the properties and what type of houses they have . 
Call them back and say :  
 “ I might be interested in some of the properties you have for sale . I
like working with investors . I don ’ t care how much money you are 
going to make on a deal as long as I get the deal I need . By the 
way , the properties here on the list , are you going to be assigning 
them or do you already own them ?  ” 
If they say they ’ re an assignment of contract , figure they paid about 
$3 , 000 less than what they ’ re asking . If they say they own it ( they 
may not – but they may want more money )  , figure they paid about 
$10 , 000 less than what they ’ re asking . Ask them if they have any 
funding sources ( hard moneylenders )  . Now we ’ re finding a potential 
funding source for us to borrow money from . We are also finding a 
funding source for our buyer to use . 
When you talk to the retailers : 
• Ask them what kind of properties they 
are looking for 
• Find out if they are into major rehab 
or a little fix-up 
• Ask what areas they are focusing on 
• Find out what price range they prefer 
104
your property , your phone should start 
ringing off the hook ! 
Here are a couple of sample ads : 
3 bdr 2 bath
Terrace Park Area
Worth $160K
will 
sacrifice 
for $100K
Call
555-1212
3 bdr 2 bath
Valued At $80K
fire sale
$40K
Cash Buyers Only
555-1212
Whatever you do , don ’ t become a real estate 
agent for other investors ! Don ’ t waste time 
looking for the “ one ” property an investor 
wants . It is helpful to know what they are 
looking for and where , but find great deals 
and let everyone know what you have . 
Be sure to get their phone numbers , fax , 
email , etc . so you can reach them quickly . 
advertise to find your buyer
As we mentioned before , don ’ t panic if you 
don ’ t have any investors in your database 
right now . In fact , many investors find a 
great deal and get an offer accepted 
without having a potential buyer lined up . 
They know if the price is right , it will not be 
difficult to wholesale the property . Again , this 
goes back to the idea of buying right . If they 
have figured in a good range of profit for 
an investor , investors will want the property . 
In these cases , to find their potential buyer , 
they simply place an ad in the newspaper . 
To attract investors , the ad should state what 
the property is worth fixed up and how 
much you are asking for it ( what you have it 
under contract for plus your profit )  . When the 
investor sees a huge spread and calculates 
his or her potential for profit in purchasing 
105
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
Once you have started working on a database of potential buyers 
for the properties you want to wholesale , be sure to use a system 
that is organized and includes their names , phone numbers , fax 
number , email , and other pertinent information , such as what types 
of properties they are looking for , what areas they like to invest 
in , and what price range they prefer . Included in this chapter is 
a Buyer Tracking Sheet for you to use until you find the system that 
works best for you . 
what to offer
When wholesaling a property , how do you figure out what to offer ? 
Here is a formula you can use : 
What is the After-Repair Value ( ARV )  
$________________ 
Subtract repairs – 
$________________ 
Subtract profit for the investor – 
$________________ 
If ARV is under $80K ,  
subtract $15K 
If ARV is over $80K ,  
subtract 20% of the ARV 
Subtract at least $5K for you – 
$________________ 
 ( or whatever you want ) 
Equals the most you would offer =  
 ( TOTAL ) $________________ 
106
Let ’ s see how using the percentage would 
work : 
FOR EXAMPLE
ARV $160 , 000
minus repairs $30 , 000
minus profit for investor $32 , 000
minus your profit ( what you want ) $10 , 000
equals the most you 
would offer
$88 , 000
FOR EXAMPLE
ARV $160 , 000
minus repairs $30 , 000
minus purchase price $112 , 000
leaves profit for you 
and investor to split
$18 , 000
This is not a deal that would be appealing 
to the investor and would offer you very 
little , if any , profit !  
As you can see , if there are a lot of 
repairs , using percentages alone will not 
work . If there had been only 10K worth of 
work , here is how the numbers would have 
gone offering 30% below . This would be an 
easy deal to wholesale to an investor ! 
Remember , you can always offer less . You 
may also have no clue as to the cost of 
repairs . You can get bids , ask the owner 
what he thinks it will cost , or come up with 
a ballpark figure . This doesn ’ t have to be 
rocket science . You could get three bids 
and there could be a $20 , 000 difference . 
One investor may think it needs $10K worth 
of work and another thinks it will be more 
like $23K . If you would rather work with 
percentages , you will find it depends a 
lot on the area and the prices . Here is an 
average percentage guide you can use : 
Low-Income Areas – Offer 35 to 70% 
below ARV
Working Class Areas – Offer 25 to 
40% below ARV
Middle-Income Areas – Offer 20 to 
30% below ARV or 30% below $160 , 000 
Equals $112 , 000 
107
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
negotiating with the seller
1 Introduce yourself 
2 Find out if they are the seller 
3 Ask ,  “ Do you have a few minutes to answer some questions ?  ” 
Now take a moment and explain a little about how you operate . 
You need to let the seller know how and why you buy . You need to 
let them know you buy one of two ways : cash or terms .  
 “ When I buy with all CASH , it is at a discount . I will fix up 
the property and sell it on a new loan to a new owner . Often , 
this requires me to do a lot of repairs and bring it up to minimum 
housing codes . Or I buy the property with terms such as owner 
financing and that usually means I will keep it as a rental . I may 
even owner finance it for one of our potential homeowners that we 
currently have approved .  ” 
If you have their interest , continue to see if it ’ s a real deal ! 
4 . Where is the property located ? 
5 . How much are you asking ? 
6 . Do you own the property free and clear ? 
7 . If YES , this is great because they can do whatever they 
want to do . 
8 . If NO , ask :  
a . What is your Loan Balance ?  
b . How many years are left on the principal balance ?  
c . How much are the monthly payments ? Does this include 
taxes and insurance ( PITI )  ?  
d . What is the least you will take as a down payment ? 
108
appointment with them to look at the property 
immediately and get a signed contract . 
Whatever you do , don ’ t procrastinate ; if 
you do , someone else will get there first and 
they will be the one making the money !  
A useful tip when negotiating : Most of 
the time you should make both a cash offer 
and a terms offer at the same time . People 
love choices and it helps them see the 
difference in regards to the cash discount 
versus terms . It also lets them decide if it is 
really cash now that they need or getting 
closer to the full price offer that they want , 
which is only available if we can get owner 
financing . 
contracts
Remember , these are SAMPLE contracts . It 
is recommended that you have your attorney 
review your contracts to at least come up with a 
good standard contract before you start preparing 
contracts . 
To be a binding contract , it must be in writing . 
You can use contracts found in proprietary 
software or get one from your local Board 
of Realtors® . You can also use a Letter of 
Intent , a one-page offer that is simple and 
9 . Roughly , how much do you think is 
needed to repair the property ? 
10 . What is the lowest you will take , on 
a cash or a term basis ? Stop and wait .  
( Remember , you have told them you are 
an investor who buys houses for cash 
to resell or for terms to hold for residual 
income )  . Let them think about it ; see 
what they say . 
11 . Have you had any offers ?  
a . If so , what were they ?  
b . Why didn ’ t you accept any ? 
12 . How long have you been trying to sell ? 
Now , you pause . Wait and see how they 
respond to your conversation . Remember , if 
someone is not motivated now , that does 
not mean they will not be motivated later . 
So , we need to let them know if it is not 
going to work for us , they can call us later if 
they do not have any luck in selling . 
Now end with this :  
 “ What will you do if you do not sell the 
property ?  ” 
This is a great way to end . It makes them 
really think ,  “ What if ?  ” However , if it 
looks positive , you will need to set up an 
109
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
helps you in negotiations when you are using a real estate agent 
and don ’ t want to burn them out when making lots of offers at once . 
Make sure they are comfortable with it .  
In order to be able to have the right to assign a contract , the 
buyer ’ s name is listed as your name and / or assigns as the buyer . 
This gives you the right to assign the contract . Always put in your 
subject to clauses – give yourself a minimum of 10 business days . 
This is for your protection . 
Closing should be a minimum of 30 days , preferably 45 to 
60 days . If the seller feels this is too long , tell him it takes about 10 
business days to get all the contractor bids completed . Tell them if it 
does not work for you , then you will back out of the contract within 
the 10-day inspection period so it doesn ’ t tie up the property . Use 
your title company or lawyer to close . Always try to have your seller 
and your buyer pay all the closing costs .  
Do not give a large deposit , even if the agent tells you to . $10 
is preferable , but you may have to give $100 . Never give the 
deposit to the seller . Always have the title company or your attorney 
hold the check . 
Here ’ s how it looks : 
Assignment of Contract 
First Contract 
• Get a signed purchase contract 
• Fax purchase contract to closing agent 
• Start marketing for your new buyer 
• Assign the contract Assignment Contract 
• Fax assignment contract to closing agent 
• Take backup offers until closed 
110
What Happens on the Day of Closing ? 
• New buyer comes to closing with all 
the money 
• Seller comes to closing to sign and 
get his / her money 
• You show up last and sign both the 
purchase contract with you as the 
buyer and the second purchase 
contract with you as the seller and 
collect your check . 
why wholesaling ? 
Wholesaling is one of the quickest ways you 
can make money in real estate investing . And 
it can work for everyone . It is not necessary 
to have great people skills to negotiate a 
wholesale deal . If you lack confidence , 
putting money in your pocket quickly will 
certainly do a lot to build confidence .  
You don ’ t have to use any of your 
money or go out and get a loan . You don ’ t 
have to spend a lot of time fixing up the 
property . And you can avoid holding costs . 
You will not have to worry that the property 
may not sell and you have to keep making 
those monthly payments . You don ’ t have the 
risk that , as you rehab the home , you may 
run into major issues with electrical wiring or 
plumbing . 
Once closed .  .  . collect your check ! 
What Happens on the Day of Closing ? 
• New buyer comes to closing with all 
the money 
• Seller comes to closing to sign and get 
his / her money 
• You show up and get your check 
Double Closing First Contract 
• Get a signed purchase contract with 
you as the buyer 
• Fax purchase contract to closing agent 
• Start marketing for your new buyer 
• Find new buyer , sign second purchase 
contract with you as the seller 
Second Contract 
• Fax second purchase contract to 
closing agent 
• Take backup offers until closed 
Once closed .  .  . collect your check ! 
111
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
Potential wholesale properties are often very easy to locate . 
You will find them in low- to middle-income neighborhoods where 
there are distressed properties and more renters than owners . If 
you happen to live in a middle-income neighborhood where none 
of these types of properties exist , get out of the area . It will open 
your eyes . Drive 20 minutes out of some cities and you will find 
yourself in a totally different market . There are varying real estate 
prices even in close geographic areas . Look in the areas where the 
working class lives . You can do it !  
In some areas , you will find that a four hundred thousand 
dollar home is a distressed property . You will see this all the time 
in California . Don ’ t be discouraged . You can still wholesale four 
hundred thousand dollar houses ! You may not do as many , but you 
can still make money from them . Just find the motivated seller with a 
distressed property or situation .  
As your understanding of wholesaling grows , you will see that 
you can apply wholesale strategies to other real estate avenues 
such as pre-foreclosures . For example , you can wholesale a preforeclosure ! However , you will find that HUD and VA will not allow 
you to put the house under contract with “ and / or assigns ” attached 
to it ( additionally , many banks will not allow an assignment of 
contract )  .  
Some investors will make an offer in the name of a trust and 
then assign their beneficial interest to the investor before closing . Be 
careful with HUD and VA foreclosures . You should never bid on the 
owner occupied ones unless you plan to LIVE in them . We are not 
saying planning on living there and later changing your mind . DO
NOT BID if it is on an owner occupied list . Why do we stress this 
so much ? Because doing otherwise can land you in jail . If the HUD
and VA properties do not sell while on the owner occupied list , they 
will be offered to all bidders . That is the time you can go in and 
make an offer through a HUD-certified agent . 
112 
Some properties you find you may never 
want to renovate . They may be so ugly , you 
think they should be torn down . But another 
investor may want it for the right price .  
On others , you may decide you will try 
to wholesale the house , but if you can ’ t make 
the money you want from wholesaling , you 
will buy the property yourself , fix it up , and 
make far more money than you planned . 
Then there will be the properties you 
want to do yourself right from the start , 
whether it is to fix the property up and sell 
it or hold on to it . You may exercise other 
techniques of real estate investing while 
holding the property . For example , you may 
rent it out and enjoy a positive cash flow 
along with the appreciation of the property . 
Or you might decide to do a lease option 
with the home , asking tomorrow ’ s value 
but having cash flow today without the 
headache of being a landlord .  
Understanding how to buy wholesale 
properties opens up a variety of exit 
strategies . The main thing you have to 
remember is you just need to DO IT ! 
Go out and look for wholesale 
properties . Make lots of offers and you will 
find a great avenue for quick cash .  
At the close of this chapter are several 
sample forms and advertisements that can 
help you get started . 
When you cannot put the offer in your 
name and / or assigns , you can leave it 
out and do a double closing . This is very 
characteristic of what many investors will 
do . Remember , some banks will allow and / 
or assigns . But you will find , for the most 
part , banks are not excited about and / or 
assigns .  
Another caution is that when you are 
dealing with HUD and VA , you may find 
they have certain stringent requirements 
about the deposit and if you can get it back . 
Find out how the system works by asking a 
HUD- or VA-certified agent who specializes 
in this kind of property . 
exit strategies
Some of you may decide that after you 
find the deal , you would rather go for the 
big money and fix it up and resell it . That ’ s 
okay .  
As you look at properties , you will be 
deciding what your exit strategy will be and 
that exit strategy can change based on the 
deal or your current situation . 
113
Guide to real estate investing
Making Quick Cash : Wholesales
assignment
The following is a suggested assignment . 
1 Target a low-income area 
2 Know the value of homes in the area using the comps 
3 Drive for dollars and market to find sellers 
4 Get a real estate professional and title company on your 
power team 
5 Make a lot of offers
6 Get a signed purchase contract with the seller in your name 
and / or assigns 
7 Find your buyer 
8 Sign an assignment of contract or a purchase contract with 
your buyer 
9 Fax the documents to a title company or real estate attorney 
10 Come to the closing and sign 
papers if doing a double 
closing 
11 Collect your check ! 
12 Work on the 30-Day Plan of Action 
below 
114
7 . Develop bird dog program , offer 
finder ’ s fee 
8 . Drive for dollars at least 3 hours per 
week 
9 . Call the “ I buy ” ads 
10 . Find and put under contract at least 
one property you can assign or 
double close in the next 30 days 
11 . Be deal driven – don ’ t care where 
you find the deals , just find good 
deals ; that ’ s all that matters 
30-day plan of action
The following is a suggested plan of action . 
1 . Set up shop 
a . Get a separate phone and fax line 
b . Get a d / b / a ( doing business as - 
fictitious name )  
c . Open a business checking account 
d . Get business cards ( can be simple… 
 “ I Buy Houses ”  ) 
2 . Locate tax assessor or county website 
3 . Market your business 
a . Signs , flyers – get 1 , 000 printed 
up 
b . Postcards for tracking vacant 
houses 
c . Run ad :  “ I Buy Houses ” 
4 . Join a real estate investment club 
5 . Choose an area to target 
6 . Find and train at least one real 
estate agent who understands this 
business and is willing to make 
multiple offers – possibly find 
at investor ’ s club 
chapter
seven
115

e have already discussed 
how you make your money 
in real estate when you buy and , 
therefore , the importance you need 
to place on buying right . To recap , 
you should never pay too much for the 
property . When you buy right , you are 
ensuring you get a great deal . And , as 
you already know , the key to finding 
a great deal is locating a motivated 
seller . But to be successful in real 
estate investing , you need to know not 
only how to find the motivated sellers 
and the great deals , but also how to 
find the money for those deals . 
In fact , in real estate investing , 
what can make or break the deal is 
the financing . So you have probably 
already been asking the common 
question many students and investors
ask :  “ Where do I get the money ?  ” 
To finance your deals , you can use 
traditional lenders such as banks and 
mortgage companies . But if you don ’ t 
have the best of credit or your debt-toincome ratio is too high , you will need 
to find alternative sources of money . 
In this chapter , we will discuss several 
creative financing options available 
to you , so no matter your situation 
or the transaction , you will have the 
resources you need to close the deal . 
GETTING CREATIVE
The more creative you are as you 
finance your deals , the more successful 
you will be . A crucial element to 
creative real estate investing is how 
W
securing
the financing
117
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
118
transaction comes from understanding the 
necessary ingredients that will satisfy the 
seller ’ s needs , while creating a great deal 
for you in the process . 
working with 
mortg age brokers
As you begin to build your power team , 
you will realize a good mortgage broker 
is essential to your being able to obtain 
financing for each transaction . You are 
looking for a creative broker who works 
with investors regularly and has many 
financing programs available . Mortgage 
brokers tend to be more creative than 
bankers since they have several sources 
for funds and a variety of loan programs 
at their disposal . Sometimes , however , you 
may find a small hometown bank will be 
eager to help you in your investing . Some of 
these hometown banks offer portfolio loans , 
a loan the bank keeps in-house and doesn ’ t 
sell to the secondary market . When a 
lender sells a loan , there are strict guidelines 
they have to follow . If you have a good 
relationship with your banker and they do 
portfolio loans , they can sometimes be more 
lenient . Otherwise , you will probably find 
more creative financing using a mortgage 
well you solve the problems of your sellers . 
Motivated sellers have a need , and as 
you satisfy this need , you create a win / 
win situation . You can make a lot of money 
helping others solve their problems . And , as 
you learn different techniques and strategies , 
you will understand terms can sometimes be 
more significant than price or equity . You 
may have heard from many well-intentioned 
people that there is no such thing as a 
no money down deal . This can become 
discouraging , especially if you have heard 
this said by a professional in the business , 
such as a real estate agent or a mortgage 
broker . You may even hear some investors 
say you have to have money to buy real 
estate . But think of it this way : These skeptics 
have not used any creative financing or no 
money down techniques themselves , so 
they do not comprehend how you can own 
a property with no money down . Having 
said that , even though many investors have 
purchased real estate with no money down , 
creative financing does not always mean 
 “ no down payment .  ” It usually refers to not 
using any of your own money . Instead , you 
want to use OPM , an acronym for Other 
People ’ s Money . Using various strategies 
and methods , as well as OPM , will afford 
you almost limitless ways to fund your deals . 
Structuring a successful no money down 
119
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
broker . Some mortgage brokers have access to private funds that 
require no qualifying by the borrower . Equity in the house is their 
only concern . It ’ s not the cost of the money that matters ; it ’ s the 
availability that counts . You need a mortgage broker whenever 
you are going to deal in short-term money , unless you plan to 
develop relationships with your own private lenders . Generally , the 
money these mortgage brokers will find for you comes from private 
individuals . The only consideration for one of these private loans 
is the Loan-to-Value ( LTV ) ratio . This short-term money is valuable 
to us as investors because you can do a loan on the value of the 
house , not what you paid for it . So if you buy right , you can borrow 
the money to both purchase the property and cover the costs to 
rehab it . You just factor these expenses into the cost of the loan . 
Again , private investors are usually only concerned about LTV ratio 
and the safety of their investment . Typically we call private money 
 “ hard money ” and these private lenders are sometimes called hard 
moneylenders . A hard moneylender lends at a low LTV , usually 60 
to 75% of the after-repair value ( ARV )  . They charge a higher interest 
rate ( could be 12 to 18% ) and points ( 1 point = 1% )  . The points 
are based on the amount you borrow and can usually be built into 
the loan . The payments are typically interest-only payments with a 
balloon payment of the principal balance due in six months to one 
year . Sometimes there are no payments and interest accrues with a 
balloon payment of principal and interest in six months . 
calling mortgage brokers
To find mortgage brokers , see if you can get a referral from a real 
estate agent or another real estate investor . Otherwise , simply open 
your newspaper or phone book and call those who sound creative . 
120
it is okay to let them run your credit and do a 
loan application so you can know just how 
they can help you and how much you can 
qualify for in purchasing real estate . 
pre-qualified vs . pre-approved
You may have been asked , particularly 
by a real estate agent ,  “ Have you been 
pre-qualified ?  ” or “ Have you been preapproved ?  ” You may have wondered what 
the difference is between the terms prequalified and pre-approved . When you 
get pre-qualified , the mortgage broker is 
looking at your income and debt to see how 
much you can afford to pay in a mortgage 
payment . Based on this information , they 
can then tell you the maximum amount of 
financing you can get . They will give you 
a pre-qualification letter stating you are 
qualified for a loan of “ X ” amount of dollars . 
This is not a guarantee they will lend you the 
money . It is simply stating how much you can 
borrow subject to verification of employment 
and income , approval of your credit , and 
an appraisal . Some sellers , particularly 
banks selling properties or individuals 
who are selling in a market where buyer 
demand is high , require a letter of prequalification before you can submit an offer . 
You don ’ t have to make an appointment 
and meet with the broker ; you just need 
to make the phone call . It takes time out of 
your busy schedule to go and meet with a 
broker only to find he / she cannot help you , 
so start with calls . When you call mortgage 
brokers , you may come across someone 
who is rude and / or someone you are not 
comfortable working with . Politely tell them 
thank you very much and hang up . Some 
students take this personally and feel if they 
had more knowledge , the broker would 
have treated them differently . But after you 
start talking with several brokers , you will 
find this simply isn ’ t true . Some will be rude 
or impersonal , but you will find many who 
will be very helpful . As you talk with these 
mortgage brokers , you will see they are 
eager to assist you in understanding what 
they can do for you . When calling mortgage 
brokers or bankers , you should never give 
them your Social Security Number . Every 
time they run a credit check , it lowers your 
score . Before you allow the broker to check 
your credit , you will want to make sure they 
can help you . If you know your score , go 
ahead and tell them what it is . Just don ’ t 
give out your Social Security Number until 
you are sure this is the broker you want to 
work with . Once you have decided this is 
the broker you are going to work with , then 
121
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
With pre-approval , you are considered a step closer to getting 
the financing . Your income , credit , and employment information is 
carefully checked . This is still not a guarantee for the loan . Other 
considerations such as the appraisal and title work will
be factored in before you obtain the loan . However , with a preapproval letter , your offer to purchase will put you in a stronger 
position with the seller , as your ability to obtain financing appears 
more solid . Also , since the loan has been “ approved ,  ” you should 
be able to close quickly . This can be very appealing to the seller . 
questions to ask mortgage brokers
When you call , introduce yourself ,  “ Hello my name is _______ . 
I am looking to buy some properties and have a few questions . 
Do you have a few minutes ?  ” If they say yes , then start asking 
questions . Remember not to give them your Social Security Number . 
What is the most you will lend on a non-owner occupied 
property ? What is the minimum amount ? In some areas of the 
country , you can purchase properties for $15 , 000 . If the minimum 
they will lend is $40 , 000 , you would want to know this . 
What is the most percentage-wise you will lend on owner 
occupied loans ? What is the most for investor loans ? We are 
talking percentage or LTV . 
Is that amount ( the amount they are willing to lend ) based 
on appraised value or purchase price ? Most of the time , they 
will say purchase price or whichever is less ( meaning appraised 
value or purchase price , whichever is less )  . We like it when they 
1
2
3
122
the property is worth fixed up and they look 
at that number rather than the as-is value . 
The next list of questions is for everyone , 
whether they loan based on appraised 
value , purchase price , or whichever is less . 
Do you allow the seller to take back a 
note ? When a seller takes back a note , 
he is holding a second mortgage , possibly 
what would have been your down payment . 
This can be one way to get in with no money 
down . Some will say “ yes ,  ” some will say 
 “ no ,  ” and others will say “ yes , but… ” The 
ones who say yes want money from you . 
They may do an 80-10-10 , meaning 80% 1st 
mortgage , 10% seller carry 2nd mortgage , 
and 10% out of your pocket . Or they may do 
an 80-15-5 , with 5% from you . The brokers 
who say they do allow the seller to take back 
a note may still want money from you . 
Verify just what they mean by asking :  
 “ So if the seller were willing to take back a 
2nd mortgage of 20% , you would give me 
an 80% 1st mortgage ? Is that correct ?  ” 
You want to know now , not just before 
closing , if they want money out of your 
pocket . 
say “ appraised value ,  ” but it is harder for 
investors to find this kind of loan . But if you 
do find one who answers appraised value , 
you will ask him / her specific questions . In 
this case , give the broker this scenario : Take 
whatever percentage they told you they 
would lend , then take off the percentage 
sign and add thousands of dollars to 
become your purchase price . In other 
words , if they told you they would lend 
you 80% , your purchase price becomes 
$80 , 000 , 90% - $90 , 000 . 00 , 70% - 
$70 , 000 . 00 . If they told you they would 
lend you 80% , say to them :  “ Let ’ s assume I
find a house that appraises for $100 , 000 . 
But my purchase price is actually $80 , 000 
Would you lend me $100 , 000 ?  ” If they 
say no , they ’ re talking purchase price or 
whichever is less ! If they say they would 
lend you $100 , 000 , then you will go one 
step further . Take $10 , 000 off the purchase 
price no matter what number you ’ re using . 
In this instance , we will drop the purchase 
price to $70 , 000 . Then ask :  “ Suppose I
get an even better deal on this house that 
appraises for $100 , 000 . Instead of paying 
$80 , 000 , my purchase price is $70 , 000 ! 
Would you lend me $100 , 000 ?  ” If they 
say yes , ask one more question :  “ Do you 
lend on the after-repair value ?  ” After-repair 
value means the appraiser says this is what 
4
123
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing 
Do you do piggybacks ? A piggyback is where the broker uses 
either the same lender , but two loans , or two different lenders . 
It is usually an 80% 1st mortgage and a 20% 2nd mortgage . That ’ s 
100% financing . The 80% 1st mortgage is usually at the normal 
investor interest rate . The 20% is typically higher ; it could be as 
much as 10% interest . Not long ago , it was easy for an investor to 
get a piggyback , but now it is harder . But if you have not purchased 
a home , this is still commonly used for owner occupied homes . 
Do you have any creative financing , private investors , or hard 
money ? If they say they do , ask them what kind of creative 
financing they have . Can they get you in with no money down ? Do 
they have access to a lot of hard money and work regularly with 
private investors ? Also , ask about the terms of the private investors 
or hard moneylenders as they can vary from lender to lender .  
Do you have any equity lenders ? Equity lenders lend a low 
LTV , usually anywhere from 60 to 70% of the appraised value . 
Typically , they are not as expensive ( point and interest wise ) as a 
hard moneylender . The loan is usually a short-term loan of one to 
two years and there could be a prepayment penalty on the loan .  
Do you offer any loans for fixing up the property ? Sometimes 
they have rehab loans to fix up the property or construction 
loans where they lend you the money to buy the property and rehab 
it . Sometimes they have Title One loans and FHA 203K loans .  
Do you have any non-conforming loans available , given the 
tight lending guidelines in place at the present time ? While 
lending guidelines are currently hampered by constraints , money 
does seem to be loosening up at the time of this writing , so we 
are including some of the types of loans that have historically 
5
7
6
8
9
124
No Doc – No documentation . This type 
of loan only requires verification of where 
you have lived for the last two years . No 
income , no assets , no employment . These 
loans have a little higher interest rate than 
conforming loans , but offer a lot more 
versatility to an investor .  
Is the loan based on the property 
itself or do you look at my income ? 
If you are buying income property , they will 
usually count 75% of the income . As long 
as your mortgage , taxes , and insurance are 
less than 75% , you should not have a lot of 
difficulty qualifying for the loan .  
Up to how many units do you lend ?  
Up to four is considered residential ; 
five or more is considered commercial . 
Commercial loans will be different and 
you don ’ t need to know how they work 
at this time . But if you do find a great 
commercial property later on , you will know 
which brokers to call back , including the 
commercial loan officer at the bank .  
What is the interest rate ? This will 
change from day to day , but it 
helps to have a ballpark number . 
been available and encourage you to ask 
your mortgage broker about them . While 
they may not all be available in today ’ s 
lending market , things change rapidly and 
a creative and knowledgeable lender will 
have some , if not all , of these loan products 
at their disposal . 

Here are some examples of non-conforming 
loans and their description : 
Stated income loans – You do not 
have to prove how much money you make . 
It originally started for business owners who 
take a lot of deductions . 
No ratio loans – No debt-to-income 
ratio . They will verify employment and 
assets , but not your income . If you are 
self-employed , they need to see a two-year 
business license or verification from a CPA
of two years employment . 
NINA – No income or asset verification . 
They will check your credit and verify you 
have a job . They will not verify where you 
are getting your down payment . It can come 
from a third party ! They don ’ t care where the 
money comes from ( cash advance , relative , 
etc )  . 
10
11
12
125
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing 
What kind of fees do you charge ? When they talk about 
points , remember one point equals one percent of the 
loan .  
Do you allow the seller to pay the closing costs ? How 
much do closing costs typically run ? They will usually 
allow the seller to pay 3% of the purchase price in closing costs .  
Do you allow some type of seller concession , such as a 
repair or decorating allowance ? Usually they will allow 
the seller to give a repair or decorating allowance that will come 
out at closing . They usually allow a certain percentage . If they tell 
you 6% , ask if the seller pays the closing costs , is that 6% total , or 
6% concession plus 3% closing cost , equaling a total of 9% ? Often , 
they allow a maximum of 6% to be paid by the seller .  
How long does it usually take to get an approval ? How 
quickly can you close ? You want to make sure you put a 
long enough timeframe in your contract . Usually make your closing 
date a little longer than the broker expects it to be .  
What would you like to see in a loan package ? Try to 
have everything they ask for to expedite the loan process .  
If the seller were to put me on the deed , could I get a 
refinance loan instead of a purchase loan ? Refinance is 
always based on appraised value . If we buy below the appraised 
value of the property , we can get in with no money down . Be sure 
to ask them if there is any “ seasoning .  ” Seasoning means you are 
required to have been on the deed for a period of time , usually six 
months to one year . 
13
14
15
16
17
18
126
allow you to transfer a mortgage to another 
property ( substitution of collateral clause ) or 
allow you to obtain a new first mortgage 
( right to subordinate clause )  . There are no 
due on sale or balloon payment provisions 
in the mortgage if you do not put them there . 
Some sellers will actually do 100% financing . 
Always ask the seller if they will carry 100% 
of the financing . Worst-case scenario , they 
tell you no . But sometimes they will say yes ! 
When trying to get the seller to create 
100% financing , you have to gain their trust . 
If they are concerned about no cash from 
you , you can help them feel more secure by 
giving something extra . 
With any mortgage or deed of trust , 
there are two basic documents . The first is 
a promissory note given by the buyer to the 
seller acknowledging the debt as well as a 
promise to pay and the terms of the note . 
The other is a security instrument called a 
mortgage or deed of trust .  
In the mortgage or deed of trust , the 
buyer who signed the promissory note 
pledges the property being financed 
as security ( collateral ) for the debt . The 
mortgage is a lien , not evidence of the 
debt . In essence , when a buyer signs the 
mortgage , he or she is saying ,  “ If I do not 
perform according to the terms of the note , 
then you can take back the property .  ” 
seller financing
What is seller financing ? Seller financing 
simply means the seller is not getting all cash 
at closing . It may mean the seller receives no 
cash , but will receive mortgage payments 
from you each month . They are the bank ! 
They did not lend you the money ; instead , 
they took a promissory note and secured 
that note with a mortgage .  
Sometimes the seller will receive some 
cash at closing from the loan you received 
from the bank and the difference between 
the loan and the purchase price in payments 
as a second mortgage . For this to work , you 
will need to find a lender who allows the 
seller to carry some of the financing .  
Seller financing is the best financing 
of all . You will find you save money by not 
having to pay fees associated with getting 
a loan , such as points and origination fees . 
Often , you can negotiate a better interest 
rate , especially when savings accounts in 
banks are receiving lower interest rates .  
And with owner financing , you can 
easily negotiate certain terms in the mortgage 
that will benefit you . For example , you can 
put special clauses in your mortgage that will 
127
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
When there is no cash given as a down payment , the seller 
may be concerned that if the property was damaged , they could 
lose money . The property itself may not be able to satisfy the debt . 
If you give them something extra , like a lien on one of your other 
properties , they may feel more secure knowing the extra collateral 
will give them some cushion . The note stays the same ; only the 
mortgage or deed of trust is changed . 
Most of the time , however , you will have a seller who wants 
some cash in their pocket . Now you have to find out what the 
needs of the seller are .  
Does the seller need some cash right now ? Or does the seller 
feel that if you have a vested interest in the property , you will take 
better care of it and make the monthly payments ? In other words , is 
the seller just looking for security ?  
If the seller needs cash and wants a hefty down payment , 
maybe the seller could subordinate his position , allowing you to 
get a first mortgage with a lender and have the seller hold a second 
mortgage . See the example below . 
FOR EXAMPLE
asking price $100K
seller willing to carry $80K mortgage
down payment $20K
you offer $100K
give seller $40K from 1st mortgage loan from the bank
seller will carry $60K 2nd mortgage
If the seller needs security , knowing that he received more money 
up front may help alleviate some of his fears . In this case , you 
may offer to give the seller more money and have him carry less . 
128
the purchase price and the assumable 
mortgage . But when the mortgage is not 
assumable or when qualification by a new 
buyer is required in order for an assumption 
to take place , there will be an acceleration 
clause in the mortgage that states if the 
property is sold , the lender has the right to 
demand payment of the remaining principal 
balance . This is sometimes referred to as the 
 “ due-on-sale clause .  ” In other words , if the 
title is transferred , the bank may decide to 
 “ call the loan due .  ” 
Back in the ’ 70s when interest rates 
began skyrocketing , people started having 
trouble selling their homes . So sellers had to 
get creative . They started letting more buyers 
assume their mortgages or they created 
wraparound mortgages . The banks wanted 
the money that had been locked into low 
interest loans to be available to lend at the 
higher market interest rates . The acceleration 
clause ( a . k . a .  , due-on-sale clause ) was a 
way of eliminating low interest loans and 
freeing up money to lend at the higher rates . 
See the example below . 
FOR EXAMPLE
asking price $100K
seller willing to carry $80K mortgage
down payment $20K
you offer $100K
give seller $60K from 1st mortgage loan from the bank
seller will carry $40K 2nd mortgage
If the seller is not comfortable in holding a 
lien in second position , then maybe you can 
give the seller even more cash and have 
a much lower mortgage . See the example 
below . If the seller is still concerned about 
holding a note in second position , you will 
need to try to find out what will work for the 
seller and still get you what you want . We 
will explore other options that may be more 
appealing to the seller shortly . 
FOR EXAMPLE
asking price $100K
seller willing to carry $80K mortgage
down payment $20K
you offer $100K
give seller $75K from 1st mortgage loan from the bank
seller will carry $25K 2nd mortgage
Due-On-Sale Clause and Land Trusts 
Sometimes the seller has a mortgage on the 
property , but they may still be willing to work 
with you on the financing . If the mortgage 
is assumable and does not require a new 
buyer to qualify , then you can assume the 
mortgage and ask the seller to carry a 
second mortgage for the difference between 
129
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
Wraparound Mortg ages 
Wraparound mortgages are an important tool in buying houses 
when there is an existing mortgage on the property . A wrap is a 
seller carry back loan that surrounds ( or wraps ) already existing 
financing . It enables the buyer to obtain financing without paying 
off the existing loan . 
The buyer ’ s mortgage and payments are based on the terms 
of the wrap , such as interest and timeframe , and have nothing to 
do with existing financing . The seller keeps the difference between 
what he or she receives from the buyer and the mortgage payment 
of the existing financing . 
To illustrate , let ’ s say you negotiate to purchase a house for 
$130 , 000 . The seller is willing to do a wrap mortgage for the 
full purchase price at 10% interest amortized over 30 years . The 
seller ’ s existing loan is based on an original loan of $80 , 000 at 7% 
interest amortized over 30 years . The seller has owned the property 
for 10 years . 
This is how it looks : 
• $130 , 000 at 10% interest amortized over 30 years = 
$1 , 140 . 84 per month 
• $80 , 000 at 7% interest amortized over 30 years = $532 . 24 
per month . 
Each month , the seller will receive $608 . 60 more than his or her 
mortgage payment . At the end of 20 years , the seller will keep the 
full $1 , 140 . 84 per month until the principal is paid off in 10 years . 
130
other low or no money 
down techniques
Assume first mortg age and have 
the seller carry a second 
One no money down technique is to assume 
the first mortgage and have the seller carry 
a second . Often , there is a huge difference 
between what you have negotiated with the 
seller as a purchase price and the assumable 
loan he or she has . This difference can 
empty your pockets quickly or put the deal 
too far out of reach . Ask the owner to carry 
a second mortgage for the difference . 
Owner takes back a note 
Another technique is to have the owner 
take back a note for a short period of time , 
allowing you to get a refinance loan instead 
of a purchase loan . A refinance is based on 
the appraised value and not the purchase 
price , so if you are buying below appraised 
value , you can get into the property with no 
money down . It can have interest accruing 
and mortgage payments or no payments 
and a balloon . However , you need to use 
caution when using this technique . Ensure 
you have a lender who can refinance 
quickly without seasoning and one who will 
base that refinance on appraised value even 
though you have not owned the property for 
very long .  
In essence , a wrap allows the buyer to 
take title to a property by combining a first 
mortgage and a second mortgage where 
the second mortgage wraps around the 
first . Sometimes it is called an all-inclusive 
mortgage ( AIM ) or an all-inclusive trust deed 
( AITD )  . 
Land Contract , Contract for
Deed , and Agreement for Deed 
The terms land contract , contract for deed , 
and agreement for deed essentially mean the 
same thing : a promise to pay . Until the debt 
is paid , the seller retains title and the buyer 
receives an equitable interest in the property . 
The buyer does not become the 
titleholder until the terms of the contract are 
satisfied , at which time the seller actually 
deeds the property to the buyer .  
A contract sale is handled by an 
escrow company that holds the Warranty 
Deed signed by the seller until the buyer 
satisfies the terms of the contract .  
One benefit of using land contracts 
or contract for deed is they can be used 
as a tool to avoid the due-on-sale clause , 
since title does not transfer until the terms 
are satisfied . Another benefit is there are 
minimum closing costs involved because 
owner financing is used . 
131
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
Split funding
With split funding , the investor offers a small amount of cash to 
close the deal , with the remaining amount due months later . No 
interest is paid and only one lump sum payment is due . Basically , it 
is a way of getting in with no down payment or with very little down 
and then having a balloon payment of the principal due later , such 
as in six months . 
The term is negotiable , but enables the investor to fix up the 
property and have it sold or refinanced before the balloon is due . 
The advantage to the seller is that a distressed property gets fixed 
up and the seller gets his or her money no later than when the 
balloon payment comes due . 
Balloon the down payment
This is similar to split funding , but you give no cash . Instead , you ask 
the seller if he or she will carry the note and wait six months or longer 
for the down payment . You will be making mortgage payments each 
month , which may relieve the owner of debt if it is a wrap mortgage 
or of management woes if the seller owns it free and clear . This can 
also solve problems the owner may have if they live out of state .  
Additionally , this will give you time to come up with the money 
if you plan to sell the property and thus pay off the debt and pocket 
the difference . Or if you are planning on keeping the property , you 
can possibly use the extra money from the rents ( your positive cash 
flow ) to come up with the down payment , or you may decide to 
refinance . 
Pay the down payment in installments 
You can ask the seller to let you pay the down payment in terms . The 
payments can be made over several months or years . Of course , 
if you are keeping the property for income , you will want to make 
sure it still has cash flow . 
132
pulling cash out for future investing or to pay 
off the loan that was placed on an existing 
property you own . 
Joint venture with the seller
Some deal types may not allow for this and 
it is recommended that you consult your local attorney for specific laws and regulations in 
your area . 
Ask the seller to let you help sell his or her 
property and split the profit between you . 
If there is a lot of equity or you can force 
the appreciation by doing a little repair , you 
and the seller can make some good money . 
Make sure you have a contract that states 
how much the split is and the terms you have 
negotiated for your protection . 
Joint venture with an investor
Let ’ s say you find a phenomenal deal , but 
you are strapped for money . You could 
bring in another investor to be the money 
partner . Often , in the commercial arena , an 
investor will bring in several other investors 
to purchase high rises , etc . 
Part ners 
When using partners , you need to have 
all your numbers worked out and the entire 
deal planned very carefully . It is customary 
to split the profit equally , but sometimes you 
may do a 40 / 60 or 30 / 70 deal . 
Subordination 
Subordination is simply moving a senior 
loan to junior position . It allows you to get 
a new mortgage , even though you already 
have seller financing in place . In other 
words , subordination occurs when the seller 
agrees to take back a second mortgage and 
allows you to get a first new mortgage on 
the property . IIt works best with properties 
carrying low or no mortgages . 
Why are sellers willing to subordinate ? 
You may find an extremely motivated seller . 
Perhaps they have a distressed property they 
cannot sell . Or they may get more money 
from you with subordination than they would 
get if they sold the property “ all cash ” to 
some other buyer . Remember , the sales price 
can sometimes mean more to the seller than 
cash . 
Substitution of collateral 
Substitution of collateral simply means you are 
taking an existing mortgage on one property 
and you are transferring it to another . In other 
words , you are substituting the collateral from 
one property to another . This can work for a 
down payment or can be used to purchase 
the property . In using substitution of collateral 
to purchase the property , you will now own 
it free and clear . You can then refinance it , 
133
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing 
How do you find a partner ? Attend your local real estate 
investment group or advertise in the newspaper . 
Important Note : When using a partner , be sure to consult with an 
attorney . It may not be in your best interest to create a partnership . 
Many people have been hurt as the result of a partner incurring 
litigation , and having judgments attached to them and their assets 
because of the partnership . It is usually best to keep them as a 
money partner where both of you are placed on the deed . This 
way , when the property is sold , you both will receive your portion 
of the profit . 
Raise the price and lower the terms 
To make seller financing work , particularly with no down payment , 
you can offer to pay more money than the seller is asking . This may 
appeal to a seller who is more concerned with price than the terms 
and doesn ’ t really need the cash . 
Lower the price and raise the interest rate 
This is often used to appeal to an investor who wants a higher 
interest rate and sees the potential of making more money if the note 
is carried over a long term . This is beneficial to you because your 
interest payments are tax deductible , and if you do sell the property , 
you owe less because of the lower price ( you have more equity in 
the property )  . Again , knowing the needs or desires of the seller can 
help you create the optimum win / win situation . 
Assume the seller ’ s obligations 
Instead of giving cash for a down payment , you can assume the 
seller ’ s financial obligations . If the seller has a payment they need 
to make , you could make the payment and count that as your down 
payment . Or maybe you could take over a credit card bill and 
spread the down payment over several months or years . 
134
The advantage of a line of credit is 
that if you need only $5 , 000 for a down 
payment or for repair costs and pull out just 
the $5 , 000 , you will only pay interest on 
that $5 , 000 . If you then pay the $5 , 000 
back , you will have no interest accruing , 
but will still have access to up to $30 , 000 
whenever you need it ! 
Trade for the down payment
Trade something you already own that has 
value for the down payment . You may have 
something of value the seller would happily 
take as a down payment . It could be 
something as simple as a boat or a vehicle . 
It may be a rundown property a motivated 
seller deeded to you . Finding the needs of 
your seller will allow you to find creative 
solutions to fund the deal . 
Use equity on an existing propert y 
You may own a property that has a lot of 
equity . Many investors will refinance that 
property and pull out the equity to be used 
as down payments or to pay cash for the 
next deal , and then refinance that property 
after it has been fixed up if they plan to keep 
it . Or they will sell the property and then use 
the excess proceeds to buy again . 
Get a line of credit
There are many different types of lines of 
credit . You may have a strong portfolio with 
your bank and can get an unsecured line of 
credit .  
Another line of credit is one that is 
secured . Possibly you have a large sum 
in the bank and you borrow against that 
amount . This may freeze up your account , 
but it can prove valuable in building a strong 
relationship with your bank for future lines 
of credit that won ’ t be secured . It can also 
improve your credit as the bank reports your 
good payment history to credit bureaus .  
Another secured line of credit may be 
taken on a property you own . This could 
be your personal residence , or it may be 
another investment property you own . It is 
usually called an equity loan and is based 
on the equity you have in the property .  
For instance , if you own a property 
worth $100 , 000 and owe $50 , 000 , the 
lender may give you $30 , 000 in a line of 
credit , which becomes a second mortgage . 
You will then have the option of pulling out 
all of the $30 , 000 at once , or you will be 
given checks to use as needed . 
135
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
Buy low and refinance to pull your cash out
If you have cash , you may want to buy low and refinance to pull 
out your cash . But if you want to go this route , remember that some 
lenders may require seasoning .  
Over the years , lenders were hurt by unscrupulous investors 
who would purchase a property , do shabby repairs , and then sell 
the property for more than the value using an appraiser who overinflated the appraisal . So many lenders started requiring seasoning . 
You may still find some lenders who don ’ t have an issue with 
seasoning , but before you pay cash , make sure you can refinance 
quickly if that is your plan . 
Use hard money 
Hard moneylenders are a critical element to you being able to have 
quick access to cash . Liquidity can make the difference between 
getting the deal and losing it . Quick closings can also help you 
negotiate much lower prices . They are also vital for an investor who 
does not have good credit .  
Hard moneylenders usually base the loan on the property itself , 
not your creditworthiness . Because they lend at a low LTV , they have 
less risk . If you don ’ t make the payments , they simply take the property 
and sell it .  
As already discussed , we can find hard moneylenders through 
mortgage brokers , but there are other ways to find these private 
investors . For instance , you can check the courthouse for private 
note holders . If you consistently see a name that doesn ’ t look like an 
institutional lender , you have probably found a hard moneylender . 
Don ’ t be confused if the note holder is in the name of a Corporation 
or LLC . Most investors who lend money will use one of these entities . 
136
factor in all the costs of the loan and can still 
make money , why wouldn ’ t you use a hard 
moneylender ? Most investors who plan to 
do rehabs will use a hard moneylender .  
As mentioned before , hard moneylenders are private investors . They lend at 
a much higher interest rate , As mentioned 
before , hard money lenders are private 
investors who lend at higher interest rates 
and typically charge points . Again , 
remember one point equals one percent of 
the loan amount .  
You would want to pay a higher interest 
rate with lower points than a lower interest 
rate with high points . For example , if you 
were to get a loan at 18% interest and 2 
points that you had for six months , your cost 
for the loan would be 1-1 / 2% per month X
6 months ( equals 9% + 2 points = 11% )  . If 
you were to get a loan at 12% interest and 
10 points for the same period of time , your 
cost for this loan would be 16% ( 1% per 
month X 6 months equals 6% + 10 points = 
16% )  .  
You may consider negotiating with the 
seller to pay the points . This could potentially 
save you money , but it really is the same 
as getting the seller to accept a lower 
purchase price . However , you will find that 
for some sellers , this is preferable to actually 
accepting a lower price . The reason is they 
You can also find hard moneylenders 
through your local real estate investment club 
and through other networking opportunities . 
For example , network with other investors you 
meet when attending auctions and calling the 
 “ I buy ” ads in the newspaper . You may come 
across a hard moneylender or someone who 
can refer you to a good one .  
Other sources for finding hard money 
include professionals associated with the real 
estate business . For example , accountants 
and CPAs have clients who are looking to 
invest their money . They may already have 
clients who hold one or more notes . Likewise , 
insurance agents have to put the lender on 
hazard insurance policies . If you know an 
agent , maybe they would look through 
their records to find the private lenders . Title 
companies and closing attorneys prepare 
closing documents for private moneylenders . 
Most should be able to give you at least one 
source for hard money .  
You can also look in the newspaper 
for hard moneylenders . Often , you can 
find people wanting to lend money in the 
classified ads of the newspaper under the 
financial , business , or real estate section . 
Sometimes they may appear as “ loan 
sharks .  ” Remember , it is not the cost of the 
money , but the availability of the money that 
makes hard money so appealing . If you 
137
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
may not want to tell family members they accepted the lower price , 
when in fact they would accept less money . 
This is something you may want to explore as you negotiate 
with the seller . The benefit of having a higher price for you is that it 
may be easier to turn around and sell the property for more money 
if it appears the purchase price was higher . 
Most hard money loans are short-term loans of six months to one 
year . The investor wants to get in and out quickly . They make their 
money on the points and when this money is freed up , they can 
lend it out again . They also want less risk and a short period of time 
fits their risk tolerance . Nevertheless , you may want to ask them if 
there is a prepayment penalty if you pay the loan off early . There 
probably won ’ t be , but it never hurts to ask . 
Wanting to protect their interest , hard moneylenders will usually 
lend 60 to 75% of the after-repair value . They usually do their own 
drive-bys to ascertain the value of the property , but they may use 
someone else , an appraiser or someone they trust , to assess the 
ARV for them .  
After you have established a good relationship with a hard 
moneylender and they feel you know what you are doing , some 
will put the money in your bank account within 24 hours . This will 
enable you to take advantage of foreclosure auctions and other 
deals that may need quick cash . And for those of you who may 
have trouble getting a loan through an institution because of credit 
issues , a hard moneylender can give you a pre-qualification letter , 
enabling you to make offers on bank owned properties and to 
sellers who insist on having a pre-qualification letter . 
The bottom line is every investor should have at least one hard 
moneylender in their pocket ! 
138
The disadvantage is if you want to 
sell one of the properties . To do so , you 
will need the lender to release it ( usually 
they will for a price ) or you will need to 
refinance . It is imperative that you get a 
partial release clause put into the mortgage 
contract to protect yourself ( consult with a 
lawyer )  . This clause permits the borrower to 
obtain a release of any one lot or parcel 
from the lien by repaying a certain amount 
of the loan . The lien will stay in place on the 
remaining properties .  
Another reason you may want a 
blanket mortgage is because once you have 
multiple loans , it becomes harder to get a 
loan . By combining several properties you 
are purchasing , you will have less loans on 
the books .  
Sometimes a lender will insist upon 
a blanket mortgage to reduce their risk . 
They lend you the money to purchase the 
property , but they want to attach the loan 
to the one purchased and a property you 
already own ! Be careful . This is not a good 
loan for you . 
When you are filling out loan 
applications , you need to be cautious . You 
have to show your debts , so those properties 
you have loans on will show up . But the 
properties you have purchased without 
institutional lending will not show up on your 
Sell off part of the propert y 
Sometimes you will buy a property that can 
be split into several useful parts . You can sell 
off part of the land or some of the houses 
and use the profit from that sale to make 
your down payment on another sale .  
For example , let ’ s say you are buying 
six houses at $25 , 000 each . You negotiate 
a 60-day close and you need 20% down . 
You sell two of the houses for $40 , 000 
each . At the simultaneous closings , you 
make your down payment of $30 , 000 from 
the profit you made from the sale of the two 
houses . 
Blanket mortg age 
A blanket loan covers more than one parcel 
or lot . It is usually used to finance subdivision 
developments . However , it can be used to 
finance the purchase of any kind of property . 
Blanket mortgages are used for multiple 
reasons . For example , some lenders have a 
minimum amount they are willing to lend . If 
the house you want to purchase is less than 
what they are willing to lend , you may want 
to combine one or more properties in a loan 
that blankets them . 
The advantage of a blanket loan is that you 
usually pay less in closing costs ( one closing 
for several properties )  . 
139
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
credit report . Even though they have equity , you may not want to list 
them as an asset . The lender may want to attach them into a blanket 
mortgage . 
Making the seller your part ner
Equity participation is when you make the seller your partner by 
giving them an interest in the property . For example , if your down 
payment was to be 20% , you can give the seller an equitable 
interest in the property of 20% instead of having to come up with the 
down payment . When you sell the property , the seller gets 20% of 
what the property sells for . To illustrate , if you purchased a property 
for $100 , 000 , you would get a mortgage of $80 , 000 and give 
the seller a 20% interest in the property . Let ’ s say that after two 
years , you sell the property for $150 , 000 . The seller would receive 
$30 , 000 ( $10 , 000 plus his initial $20 , 000 ) and you would profit 
$40 , 000 ! Win / win ! 
Equity part nership
This is similar to the equity participation made when the seller was 
your partner , but in this case , you make someone else your equity 
partner .  
Let ’ s say you are purchasing a property worth $180 , 000 for 
$120 , 000 . Your lender requires $24 , 000 for a down payment .  
You know your dad has been complaining about the low 
interest rate he has been receiving on his savings at the bank and 
that he is interested in doing some real estate investing . You sell him 
an equity share in the house . He has $12 , 000 , so you give him a 
10% share of the house . 
You also have a couple of sisters who have expressed an interest 
in doing some investing . You ask them how much they can invest . 
140
taking back a note could close the deal .  
Also , if the owner does 100% financing , 
he or she may be unable to pay the agent 
because of lack of funds . You can always 
ask ! 
Closing strategies on cash flow
propert ies 
On income-producing properties , setting 
the closing date between the 3rd and 5th 
day of the month can help you produce the 
down payment you need .  
At closing , you would get most of the 
rent for that month , plus the deposit and the 
last month ’ s rent . Taxes are usually prorated 
and the real estate tax credit could also help 
with the down . But be aware that in some 
states , the deposit is held in escrow and you 
don ’ t collect the last month ’ s rent .  
Find out what is applicable for you 
where you live . Sometimes the lender wants 
to see proof of funds and you have to bring 
money to the closing table , but you can 
put money back in your pocket afterwards . 
With seller financing , you will not have to 
worry about proof of funds . 
Create a note and sell it
There are many ways to create a note and 
many different types of notes . For example ,  
One sister has $9 , 600 , so you give 
her an 8% share in the house . Your other 
sister who just got a bonus from work has 
$2 , 400 to invest . You give her a 2% share in 
the property . Now you have your $24 , 000 
for the down payment and your family owns 
20% of the house .  
You purchase the house and sell it for 
$180 , 000 . You will have $60 , 000 profit 
from the sale . Your dad gets $6 , 000 ( plus 
his initial investment of $12 , 000 )  ; your 
sister who had an 8% share in the home 
receives $4 , 800 ( plus her initial investment 
of $9 , 600 )  ; and the sister with the bonus has 
made $1 , 200 on her initial investment of 
$2 , 400 . And you have made a handsome 
profit of $48 , 000 !  
Do you think your family might want 
to do this again ? Do you think they may 
spread the word and you will have a lot 
more people wanting to own a share in the 
equity of a house ?  
Ask the agent to take back a note for 
his commission . 
Some real estate agents may be willing 
to take back a note for their commission , 
particularly if they are having trouble selling 
the property . Most of them realize something 
is better than nothing . If their commission 
would be the down payment you need , then 
141
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
when a seller carries the financing , a promissory note is created 
with the buyer promising to pay the debt and the terms of the note . 
A mortgage or deed of trust is created as a security instrument using 
the property as collateral for the debt . When a seller holds the 
 “ mortgage ” or “ takes back a note ,  ” the seller is holding a promissory 
note and a mortgage or deed of trust . 
These notes and the security instrument can be sold to an 
investor . There are note buyers all over the country who buy notes 
on a daily basis . Most notes are sold at a discount , which is one of 
the ways a note buyer makes his or her money . 
There are many factors that affect the value of the note . The primary 
factors are : 
• The interest rate – The higher the 
interest rate , the more valuable the 
note and the higher the yield . 
• The credit of the borrower – 
The better the credit , the more the 
note buyer will pay for the note . 
• Timeframe – The shorter the term , 
the more they will pay for the note . If 
it needs to be amortized over 30 
years , then create a balloon in 10 
years . Note buyers like to get in and 
out quickly . Since they buy at a 
discount , they make money when they 
buy . 
142 
You can get creative working with notes . 
For example , you could sell a “ partial ” note 
( selling part of the payments for your down 
payment )  . To illustrate , let ’ s say you make 
an offer on a property for $150 , 000 . The 
seller owns it free and clear and is willing to 
carry the financing with 20% down at 10% 
interest amortized over 30 years . You offer 
to give the seller the $30 , 000 cash down 
payment he wants if he is willing to give 
up the first 28 monthly payments . You show 
him how this will make him more money . 
Here is how you get the $30 , 000 for the 
down and convince the seller to carry the 
financing : 
Create a $150 , 000 note at 10% interest 
= $1316 . 36 monthly payments . You 
are going to sell off the first 28 months 
of payments for $30 , 937 . 77 . This will 
give the investor who purchases the note 
$36 , 858 . 08 – a yield of 15% ! From the 
$30 , 937 . 77 , you will give the seller the 
$30 , 000 down payment . 
After 28 payments , the mortgage reverts 
back to the owner . At this time there is a 
principal balance of $147 , 916 . 97 . The 
seller already collected $30 , 000 and still 
has 332 months of payments coming ! 
• How old is the 
note ? – They like notes 
to be “ seasoned ” one to two years . A
seasoned note shows a payment 
history and provides less risk to the 
note buyer . 
• LTV – How much is the loan to value ?  
Note buyers want to see some equity 
in the property . 
• What position is the note ? – 
Typically they want a note that is in 
first position . 
• What kind of propert y ,  
condition , and location ? – 
They will take these factors into 
consideration . 
These variables will affect how much the 
note is discounted and therefore the value of 
the note ( what the note buyer ultimately will 
pay )  . Many investors will work with a seller 
to create a note that is sold at the same 
time the property is closed on and the seller 
gets cash at closing . This is a simultaneous 
close and even though it doesn ’ t have any 
seasoning , this technique can be valuable 
to the investor buying the property . 
143
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
If you added the principal balance of $147 , 916 . 97 to the $30 , 000 
down payment , the owner has already made $27 , 916 . 97 in 
addition to the remaining payments he will be receiving . Even if 
you sold the property or refinanced it at this point , the owner will 
have made $27 , 916 . 97 above the purchase price !  
If you continue making mortgage payments , the owner will 
make $263 . 27 more per month than if you were paying on a 
$120 , 000 note ( $150 , 000 purchase price minus $30 , 000 
down = $120 , 000 note at 10% interest = $1053 . 09 monthly 
payments )  . You have just created a win / win situation ! 
Make sure that when you sign the purchase contract , you put 
in the contingency :  “ Sale is subject to buyer selling 28 monthly 
payments at $1316 . 36 for a minimum of $30 , 000 .  ” Your lawyer 
can help you with contingencies . The note sale will take place 
simultaneously with the purchase of the property giving the seller the 
$30 , 000 down payment . 
1031 Tax Exchange 
In layman ’ s terms , a 1031 Tax Exchange allows an investor to pull 
his profit from one or more real estate properties to purchase other 
property without it becoming a taxable event .  
An exchange occurs when an investor buys and sells a property 
simultaneously to defer capital gains tax . Capital gains tax can be 
permanently deferred as long as an outright sale does not occur . 
The properties have to be like-kind . All real estate is considered to 
be like-kind . 
144
Grants 
There are many federal , state , and city 
grants available depending on where you 
live and what you want to do . For example , 
the government offers several grants for 
property improvements and property 
development that is intended to help lowincome families or the elderly . And there are 
grants available for rehabilitating specific 
geographical areas . 
Talk to bankers , real estate agents , and 
your city to see if they know of any grants 
available and contact your local housing 
authority to find out how government grant 
programs work . You should also network 
with investors who do rehabs or provide 
housing for the low-income population .  
You ’ ll also want to check with the 
federal government . You can go to the 
hud . gov website and look up the grants 
that are available there . HUD ( Department 
of Housing and Urban Development ) 
provides numerous grants for neighborhood 
revitalization . Additionally , the USDA ( U . S . 
Department of Agriculture ) provides loans 
and grants for rural multi-family housing for 
low-income individuals . 
Try to locate a government grant and 
loan specialist to help you take advantage 
of the various grants available . 
Qualifications of a 1031 Exchange include : 
• Must use a qualified Intermediary 
( Exchanger ) that is unrelated 
• The seller must identify the property he 
or she plans to purchase within 45 
days of closing 
• The property must be purchased within 
180 days of closing 
• The replacement property has to be 
the same or more than the property 
being sold 
• The replacement property must be held 
for a minimum of two years 
There are many things you can do when you 
implement a 1031 Exchange . For example , 
other investors may sell several properties 
at once to purchase a large commercial 
building using a 1031 Exchange . Consult 
with a tax professional for assistance with 
1031 Exchanges . 
145
Guide to real estate investing
Securing The Financing
Options / straight options 
An option is basically securing the right to purchase a property 
up to a certain time period for a specific price . There is usually 
consideration money given that can be non-refundable . You are 
paying for the right to tie up the property for a period of time for an 
agreed upon price . The seller cannot sell the property to anyone 
else during this time . You are not obligated to purchase the property ; 
you just have the right to purchase it for a certain period of time . 
Sometimes this is called a straight option .  
Straight options are commonly used by developers purchasing 
raw ground and by those investing in commercial properties . These 
developers and investors don ’ t want to purchase a property only 
to find out that after they have run tests and feasibility studies , they 
cannot build on the property or that it is not suited for what they 
want to do . Sometimes they have to get zoning changes . At the 
same time , they don ’ t want to spend all this time and money doing 
their due diligence only to find out the owner sold the property to 
someone else . 
When it comes to houses , most people only think of lease 
option . But you can sometimes secure a straight option on a house 
and assign the option for a fee . Sometimes you will find a motivated 
seller who has not been able to sell the home . You know it is because 
the seller lacks the marketing skills and you feel you could sell this 
property quickly . Using an option would allow you to do just that . 
146
REVIEW 
There are probably a thousand and one 
ways to creatively purchase real estate . But 
the first step in creative financing is solving 
the problems of your motivated seller . 
Become a problem solver ! This is an 
essential component in real estate investing . 
Think creatively as you attempt to satisfy the 
needs of your seller .  
Strive to produce a win / win situation at 
every opportunity . Sellers will work with you 
if they feel you can satisfy their needs and 
help them with their problem . Be creative . 
Sandwich lease options 
A sandwich lease option is where you buy 
with a lease option and then sell with a lease 
option . You are essentially sandwiched 
between two lease options . 
Many investors like the sandwich 
lease option because you can usually get 
in with minimal cash ( usually $100 ) and 
receive from your tenant / buyer 3 to 5% of 
the purchase price in option consideration 
money . At the same time , you can have 
positive cash flow . 
The properties involved in lease 
options are usually nice homes in great 
neighborhoods . We will learn more about 
lease options in the next chapter . Be sure 
to look into the laws of your state regarding 
lease options . 
Assignment of contract
We discussed assignment of contracts in our 
chapter on wholesaling , but , as a reminder , 
with an assignment of contract , you never 
purchase the property . You get the property 
under contract and either assign the contract 
or do a double closing . This is quick money 
with limited risk . You don ’ t have to get a 
loan or rehab the property because you 
are not purchasing the property . You find 
a great deal and wholesale it to another 
investor who does all the work . 
chapter
eight
147
Important Note : 
Be sure you contact your local real estate professional or real estate lawyer to research the appropriate documents 
that are required for all real estate transactions in your state . 
profiting by 
controlling
propert y : 
Lease Options
149 
n option is a contract that 
gives you the right to purchase 
a property for an agreed upon price 
up to a certain timeframe . This is 
called a “ straight ” option . This kind 
of transaction is called a unilateral 
contract because only the seller is 
bound by it . An option obligates the 
seller , but not the buyer . The buyer has 
the “ right ” to purchase the property , 
but does not have to .  
As we learned earlier , a straight 
option is frequently used by developers 
and buyers of commercial property . A
builder does not want to purchase raw 
ground only to find out it cannot be 
built on or that approvals to subdivide 
the property won ’ t go through . By the 
same token , the builder does not want 
to pay a lot of money doing perk tests 
and feasibility tests only to find out 
the seller sold the property to someone 
else . So the builder uses a straight 
option , an important element of which 
is consideration . The builder gives the 
seller consideration ( usually money ) 
that is frequently non-refundable for the 
right to tie up the property and lock 
in a purchase price . Another way of 
thinking about consideration is that it 
A
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
150
elements of a standard 
option contract
Elements you will always see in an option 
contract include : 
The contract must be in writing
As with all real estate contracts , an option 
must be in writing . A handshake or verbal 
agreement is not enough . You must have all 
parties on the title sign the option contract 
and date it . Be sure to check the title so you 
know who will need to sign the contract . 
Who are the individuals involved ? Who is 
the buyer and who is the seller ? 
Location of the propert y 
If the property has an address , write it 
down . It wouldn ’ t hurt to also put the parcel 
identification number in the contract . If it is 
raw ground , you may also want to put the 
legal description of the property in addition 
to the PIN number . 
Consideration 
The amount of the consideration will be in 
the option contract . This is what makes the 
contract a legal , binding contract . Usually 
the consideration is money , but it can be 
whatever the buyer and seller agree to . 
is money the buyer pays to the seller to 
have the right to purchase the property at a 
later date .  
Investors will use a straight option to 
hold on to a property for future appreciation . 
They know the potential of the area and want 
to lock in at today ’ s value . Other investors 
will get an option and sell the contract to 
another investor .  
You may find a homeowner who has 
a property he wants to sell , but is having 
trouble selling . You know you could sell the 
property quickly because you know how to 
market a property and attract buyers . So , 
you get an option to purchase the property 
and start marketing it for sale . Why would 
the seller do this ? Because the seller got the 
price he wanted and you are willing to do 
all the work . 
The idea here is that an option gives 
you control of the property without you 
having to purchase it .  
It is creative financing ! You can make 
a profit without using any of your money . 
You can quick-turn a property and make fast 
cash just like when you wholesale a deal ! 
151
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
When you are the buyer , you will want to pay as little as possible 
( perhaps as little as $10 )  . But when you are the seller , you will want 
your tenant / buyer to pay three to five percent of the property ’ s 
purchase price . 
Timeframe 
A specified timeframe is written into the option contract that gives 
the buyer a period of time to exercise the option . This timeframe will 
have a date . Any time up to that date , the buyer may exercise his 
option . This means that even though the buyer may have a five-year 
option , he can exercise it any time before that date . If he decides 
to purchase the property six months into the option , there is nothing 
stopping him from exercising the option and buying the property . 
Purchase price 
In the option contract , it will state the agreed upon price . 
what is a lease option ? 
Just as the name implies , a lease option incorporates two components : 
an option ( the right to purchase the property for a specific price 
for a certain period of time ) and a lease agreement . You have 
probably heard the term “ rent to own ,  ” which is what most people 
call a lease option . Negotiated in the contract are the particulars of 
the terms that have been agreed upon .  
A lease option is an excellent tool in controlling real estate 
and creating wealth . Gaining control over a property with relatively 
no risk empowers an investor and opens up immense opportunities 
for obtaining properties with very little money . 
Lease option vs . lease purchase 
152
• Additional Monthly Option 
Consideration – Many investors will 
charge more money for rent and give a 
credit towards the purchase if the option 
is exercised . If you do this , be careful to 
not call it “ credit ” in your contract as this 
may give the tenant / buyer an equitable 
position in the property . 
• Maintenance – Usually there is 
something in the contract that states who 
pays when something needs work . 
benefits of a lease option
There are benefits in a lease option to 
both the buyer and the seller . Let ’ s explore 
the benefits and then see how those same 
benefits will help you as an investor . 
Benefits as a buyer
The advantage of a lease option to a buyer 
who cannot qualify for a loan to purchase a 
property is that it gives him the opportunity 
to become a homeowner .  
As the buyer works to build his credit , 
most lenders consider a lease option as 
though the buyer was actually purchasing 
the property . Often , they will do a refinance 
There is a big difference between 
a lease option and a lease purchase . A
lease purchase obligates the tenant / buyer 
( lessee ) to buy the property within the term 
of the lease , whereas a lease option gives 
the tenant / buyer the right , or option , to buy 
the property and the seller ( lessor ) must sell . 
With a lease option , the tenant / buyer 
is not required to exercise the option and 
therefore is not obligated to purchase the 
property . With a lease purchase , however , 
the tenant / buyer is obligated to purchase 
the property . As a buyer , we only want to 
do lease options .  
Another term you should not be confused 
with is purchase option . A purchase option 
refers to purchasing the property with the 
exit strategy of selling it on a lease option . 
Additional components of a lease option 
You will have the same elements in a 
lease option contract as you would in a 
standard option contract , however , you must 
additionally have : 
• Lease Payments – Specified in the 
contract will be the amount of the rent 
and when the rent is due . 
• Term of the Lease – How long the 
lease is for and if it can be renewed . 
153
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
instead of a purchase loan . Usually the buyer can refinance on 
appraised value after six months . Also , prompt payments on a lease 
option by the buyer can help him qualify for a loan easier than if he 
had just been renting . A lease option can also benefit a buyer who 
does not have a lot of money for a down payment .  
As an investor / buyer , you will gain financial leverage with 
a lease option while your risk is reduced . You can control a very 
expensive and potentially profitable home with very little money of 
your own and without owning it . 
Many of these properties would normally require 10 to 30% 
of the purchase price down . Option consideration money is small 
compared to the property ’ s value and the costs that would have 
been involved had you secured a loan .  
Even if you could get a loan , it ’ s much better to make money 
without loans . You can walk away from the contract if the property 
value goes down . You control the property .  
You will accumulate equity faster than you would through 
conventional financing . This makes it even easier for you to “ buy 
right .  ” Because you are not getting financing and don ’ t “ own ” the 
property , there will be no public record ( other than a Memorandum 
of Option )  .  
You will also have increased buying power . You can get into 
a lease option with as little as $10 consideration money when you 
have a motivated seller who needs debt relief .  
Additionally , you will not have the property showing up as a 
debt on your credit report . This , in itself , will help you be able to do 
other types of transactions without this particular investment creating 
an adverse effect .  
As a buyer , you want to make sure the contract is assignable . 
You may decide to just assign the contract . Sometimes this is called 
an assignment option . You can assign a straight option or a lease 
option . You could even “ wholesale ” a lease option ! 
154
a house that is worth between $110 , 000 
and $116 , 000 according to the comps . If 
houses were appreciating at 8% per year 
and you gave your tenant / buyer a two-year 
option to purchase the property , your asking 
price would be $135 , 000 ( $116 , 000 X
1 . 08 = $125 , 280 X1 . 08 = $135 , 302 . 40 )  . 
As a seller , you will typically ask for 3 to 5% of 
the purchase price in non-refundable option 
consideration money . In our example , you 
would ask between $4 , 000 and $6 , 750 . 
If the buyer ’ s credit was horrible , you might 
want to get even more .  
You can generate more cash flow as 
you can charge higher than fair market rent . 
With the higher rental fee , some investors 
will give credit towards the purchase price . 
Again , if you do , remember to be careful that 
you call it additional option consideration , 
not credit in your contracts . You must always 
be careful to not give equitable interest in the 
property . If your tenant ( s ) default , it is hard to 
evict them if they have equitable interest . At 
that point , you might have to foreclose . 
Another benefit as a seller is you have a 
guaranteed rental income . If the buyer is 
ever late , the option is void . This is a great 
incentive for your tenant / buyer to make 
payments on time .  
Additionally , maintenance is not a 
problem . Anything under $500 , your 
Some investors will use a lease option to 
allow them to gain control of the property 
and fix it up . They either sell it with a double 
close or bring it to a point where they can 
now obtain the financing based on the 
appraised value of the home .  
You will find investors will also purchase 
rental units using a lease option . They get 
in for relatively little money and can fix 
these units up and increase rents , thereby 
forcing appreciation . Now the property will 
appraise much higher and they will likely 
have no difficulty in refinancing the property 
and possibly pulling cash out ( making sure 
they still have a positive cash flow )  !  
A lease option requires very little or 
no money and offers investors a quick and 
productive way of generating income . 
Benefits as a seller
As a seller , one of the advantages of a lease 
option is you can sell the property quickly . 
This is beneficial especially in areas that 
are experiencing a sluggish economy and 
where sellers have to wait a long time to get 
their houses sold . You have a great pool of 
buyers when you do a lease option . 
With a lease option , you can ask top 
prices and get them . Typically , investors will 
charge the higher market value and then 
add for appreciation . An example would be 
155
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
tenant / buyer will have to pay for ( stipulate this in your agreement )  . 
Usually , the tenant / buyer ( optionee ) will take better care of the 
property than a traditional tenant would . They now have the pride 
of homeownership , which will help free up your time from property 
management issues . And vacancies are rare . If the tenant / buyer 
moves out , you get to keep the consideration money .  
You collect non-refundable option consideration upfront . 
Option money is tax deferred until the option is exercised and sold , 
or forfeited . That means you have tax-deferred money you can use 
for other properties you wish to invest in . You remain on the deed 
and maintain all the tax benefits of ownership .  
As you can see , there are many advantages to doing a lease 
option for both the buyer and the seller . 
buying and selling with a lease option
Buy with a lease option 
Some investors will purchase a property using a lease option . They 
take control of the property without the financial stress of large 
down payments or having to qualify for a loan . Then , they rent the 
property out and receive a positive monthly cash flow . 
When it comes time for them to exercise their option , the 
property has increased in value and they qualify for a loan with no 
extra money out of their pocket . Or , they can simply walk away and 
not purchase the property . 
Sell with a lease option 
Other investors have purchased a home and fixed it up . They want 
a monthly income , but don ’ t want to become landlords . They sell 
using a lease option , knowing they will get more than the property is 
156 
You receive a non-refundable deposit 
collected from your tenant / buyer – 
Quick money like wholesale !  
You have a monthly income 
 ( difference between your payment 
and what you receive from your tenant / 
buyer ) – Positive cash flow like a rental !  
You receive money at the backend 
 ( difference between the option price 
you have with the seller and the option price 
you receive from your tenant / buyer ) – Large 
profit like retailing ( buy , fix , and sell )  ! 
As you can see , you can make quick money 
doing a sandwich lease option , just as you 
can when you wholesale a property . The big 
difference is instead of looking for distressed 
or “ ugly ” houses , you will be looking for nice 
homes in nice areas . For many investors , this 
makes lease options more attractive .  
You probably noticed that you would 
also receive monthly income , just like if 
you were doing a rental , except with 
considerably less headaches . And you 
can see more profit at the backend without 
having to spend a lot of time and effort 
rehabbing a property and trying to sell it , so 
you escape the risk of time and capital often 
associated with investing in rehabs . 
worth today and have a nice cash flow with 
a tenant / buyer who will take good care 
of the property . They also get some upfront 
money from the option consideration . 
Sandwich lease option 
Then there are investors who purchase using 
a lease option and then turn around and sell 
the same property using a lease option . As 
we learned earlier , this technique is known 
as a sandwich lease option where you 
are “ sandwiched ” in between two lease 
options , one with you as the buyer and the 
other with you as the seller . 
Sandwich lease options are great profit 
centers . Understanding the mechanics of a 
sandwich lease option will not only increase 
your ability to find deals and make money , 
but you will also be able to just “ buy ” using 
a lease option or just “ sell ” using a lease 
option . Sandwich lease options will be the 
focus of the rest of this section .  
Sandwich lease options are one of the 
best moneymaking tools in real estate . There 
are three ways you get paid when you do a 
sandwich lease option : 
1
3
2
157
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
who and what are we looking for ? 
What are you looking for ? Motivation ! Motivation creates the 
circumstances that create the deal .  
As discussed in Chapter 3 , you will be looking for motivated 
sellers . No matter what kind of real estate investing you do , you 
will find a motivated seller is the key to finding the deal . 
There are two kinds of motivation to sell . You are looking for 
owners who need to sell , not want to sell . 
Want to sell – problem propert ies 
Problem properties mean it is the condition of the house that is 
motivating the seller to want to sell . It may be an “ unwanted house ” 
the seller inherited . It could be a distressed house that is vacant and 
boarded up . This abandoned house may have owners who live 
out of state and can ’ t take care of it . Or it may be an “ ugly ” house 
because of all the disrepair . 
These are the types of homes we usually wholesale or rehab , 
but sometimes you may still want to do a lease option with such 
properties if you find the right deal . 
Need to sell – problem owners 
Problem owners are sellers who are distressed because of personal 
circumstances . It may be the result of a divorce or the loss of a job . 
The seller may have a lot of debt and is having trouble making house 
payments . Illness or death can create despair and the need to sell . 
Rising medical costs may create financial burdens . Any number of 
factors can create a need for debt relief , which is the number one 
motivation for a seller to do a lease option . These sellers need to 
sell . They are the types of sellers we should be targeting for lease 
options . 
158
• Nice homes in stable 
neighborhoods with little or
no equity – We are talking about 
nice homes in areas where 
families want to live . Target 
those neighborhoods . Usually these 
properties will not have much equity , but 
that works to our advantage . No equity 
can be the incentive for a motivated 
seller to do a lease option . In such a 
case , we might tell the seller :  
 “ We usually buy cash or owner 
financing , but that won ’ t work ; you owe 
too much ! One thing that might work is 
our lease option program . We can 
make payments for you and maintain 
your house until we sell it . When would 
be a good time for me to come take a 
look at it ?  ” 
• Homes priced 75% or
higher than the median sales 
price in the area – Get information 
about the median sales price for your 
area from your local Board of Realtors® . 
For example , if the median sales 
price in the area is $150 , 000 , you 
would be looking for homes priced 
$112 , 500 or higher . 
Which propert ies do you target ? 
Once you start focusing on certain 
neighborhoods and become familiar with 
them , you will have a good idea of the 
value of the homes located there . But until 
you are familiar with the prices in your target 
neighborhoods , be prepared by getting the 
comps for each area .  
Look at the comps and separately add 
up all the square footage of all the homes 
that recently sold in the area and then divide 
that total by the number of houses sold . This 
will give you the average square footage of 
homes in the area . Next , add up the selling 
price of these houses and divide that total 
by the number of houses sold . This will give 
you the average selling price of the homes 
in the area . Then take the average selling 
price and divide it by the average square 
footage figure to get the average price per 
square foot for that neighborhood .  
Do this for each neighborhood you are 
targeting . This will give you an idea of the 
value of the homes in each area . 
Now that you have that information , let ’ s 
look at what types of properties you should 
be targeting : 
159
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
• Houses with no problems or needing little 
repair – With a lease option , you do no want a lot of rehab . 
• Homes that are well located – You want to attract 
buyers . The homes should be in desirable neighborhoods . 
• The home should have a favorable layout – Again , 
you want to easily put someone into the home . 
How to evaluate neighborhoods and areas 
Here ’ s a quick look at how you might evaluate a neighborhood to 
determine the best investment strategy for a property . 
• Low-Income – Not for lease option ( they are great for 
wholesale buying !  ) 
– Attractive prices 
– Favorable price versus rent ratio – area ratio 80 / 20 
 ( 80% renters / 20% owners ) 
– Strategy – Get in and get out 
• Moderate-Income – Critical difference is homeownership 
– Homeowners 
– Tenants work in blue collar sector 
– Tighter competition for deals 
– Area ratio of ownership is 50 / 50 or 60 / 40 
– Strategy 
– Wholesale 
– Buy on terms ( owner financing )  , turn around and sell to 
buyer and be the bank
160
present time for property purchases . As well , 
there is an overabundance of housing due 
to the tremendous amount of building that 
took place a few years ago , so we have 
a perfect match up of motivated , distressed 
sellers and motivated tenants with white 
collar jobs ! 
Consider this match up carefully as 
you begin your lease option investing ! 
For the first time in many , many years , 
you can buy or control very nice houses , 
in GREAT neighborhoods , and purchase 
them at tremendous discounts as the market 
continues to self-correct or remains stalled . 
Canvas and market for lease option tenants 
( often young married couples with college 
degrees )  , and find out where they want to 
live . Then , using your multiple streams of 
income knowledge base , begin searching 
for pre-foreclosures in this market area . It ’ s 
like magic ! You find your tenant FIRST , and 
then you go find the perfect home . Your 
tenant is pre-qualified in terms of income , 
so you know that he or she can afford the 
monthly lease and the option payment ! 
And , these tenants are much more motivated 
to do whatever it takes to get their personal 
situation handled within the three year lease 
option period . 
• Middle-Income – Most are owners 
and work in high-level blue collar jobs 
– Area ratio 80 / 20 
– Strategy
– Great for purchase option 
– Retail – buy , fix , and sell 
– Rentals – Not as good cash flow , but 
have appreciation 
– Get in title 
– Urban 
– Quick-turn 
 – Don ’ t fight low-income tenants 
– Suburban 
– Hold 
– Control without owning 
– Structure favorable financing 
A New Real Estate Market Emerges : 
New Construction Lease Options
There is another area for lease options 
that has emerged over the past five years 
and this new opportunity is due to the 
over-building that occurred during the real 
estate boom that took place between 2003-
2006 . It is the lease option market for new , 
or fairly new , construction . Given the tight 
lending guidelines currently in place , there 
are many motivated and highly qualified 
tenants with good jobs , substantial cash , 
but not strong enough credit to qualify at the 
161
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
Where do you find the deals ? 
• Real estate agents or brokers – Many times , an 
agent is unable to list the home because too much is owed . Ask 
agents if they would refer those people to you . Have an agent 
pull up everything for sale higher than 75% of the median price 
for the area and target those subdivisions . Ask if the agent can 
pull up expired or aged listings . Send postcards to the expired 
listings . 
• Local newspapers – Call on FSBO and other house for 
sale ads that have been in the newspaper for a while . Ask if 
they would consider a lease option . 
• Att orneys – Many attorneys work with people who have 
personal difficulties like foreclosure , bankruptcy , divorce , and 
probate . They may know someone to refer your services to . 
• Tax liens – A tax lien can be an early detection of future 
financial problems . Check courthouse records . 
• Divorce filings and bankruptcy filings – The 
majority of foreclosures are triggered by divorce or job loss . 
Check for recent filings at the courthouse . 
• Churches and services that help senior citizens – 
They sometimes counsel people with financial difficulties . 
• “ For Rent ” ads – Calling the “ homes for rent ” ads 
in your local newspaper is an excellent way to find someone 
willing to do a lease option . You are targeting the frustrated 
162
– Free Report 
 ( can be as little as one page ) 
– Fast – Free – Immediate relief 
Important Note : See sample flyers , signs , 
and ads at the end of this chapter ! 
working with the 
motivated seller
When the owner calls , you will determine 
what kind of deal this is . When you receive 
calls from your ads and signs , you may 
find this is an “ ugly ” house even though the 
signs were placed in nice neighborhoods . 
Maybe this could be a wholesale deal if 
there is enough equity . Maybe the person 
is in pre-foreclosure and now you are 
doing a pre-foreclosure deal . Or if we find 
that the seller isn ’ t willing to sell to us at a 
significant discount , we can offer our lease 
option program . The point is you will be 
determining just what kind of deal this is 
from the information the seller gives you .  
Here ’ s how it works : First , we will 
determine if the seller is motivated and 
willing to sell at a substantial discount . 
We ’ ll start by introducing ourselves and our 
services and finding out about the seller ’ s 
situation . 
landlord . You can also drive through 
your target neighborhoods looking 
for “ For Rent ” signs . When you 
see one , get out of the car and knock 
on the door or write down the phone 
number from the sign and place a call .  
Ask if they would consider doing “ rent 
to own .  ” 
• Marketing – Marketing is the 
number one most important aspect in 
finding the motivated seller . You have to 
market your business . Magnetic signs 
on a vehicle can bring in at least four 
to five deals per year . Signs should 
be placed in the neighborhoods 
you are targeting . Send postcards 
and flyers . Don ’ t use black writing on 
white backgrounds . Instead , find 
colored paper , preferably fluorescent 
colors . Run ads in the paper .  
Advertise : 
– Quick closing 
– We provide immediate debt relief 
– Little or no equity – okay 
– Having trouble making your 
payments ? We will buy your home 
or make your payments for you 
– Behind on payments ? I can help ! 
– Foreclosure okay 
163
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options 
 “ Thank you for calling . My name is _______ and my company 
provides full service real estate solutions for any and all of your real 
estate needs . Who am I speaking with ?  ( Address them by their first 
name after this .  ) Are you the owner of the property ? Frank , in case 
we get disconnected , can I get a good contact number to call you 
back ? How did you hear about us ? Do you have a few minutes 
so I can ask you a few questions ? First of all , tell me a little about 
yourself , Frank , and your situation .  ”  
Your goal is to uncover the seller ’ s circumstance . Empathize with 
them . Remember , most of the sellers you will work with will need to 
sell their home . They are having personal problems and need your 
help . Be a problem solver . Let them know you can probably help . 
Make it a win / win situation .  
Help them understand you purchase homes just like theirs from 
banks , private individuals , and other sources on a regular basis . 
Emphasize that their situation is not unique and you have the ability 
and stability to make their payments as part of your lease option 
program . This is important for them to know . They need debt relief 
and you can help them . 
Get as much information from the seller as you possibly can 
while you have their attention . Try to make them feel comfortable . 
Calling you can be a difficult thing for them to do . Or if it makes 
you feel more comfortable , use the following questions to move the 
conversation along ( a Property Information Sheet is provided at the 
end of this chapter that will be helpful in recording answers to these 
questions )  . 
164
9 . Do you have any mortgages on the 
property or is it owned free and clear ?  
a . What is your mortgage balance ?  
If they are reluctant to tell you ,  
tell them :  “ I am here to help you 
and am willing to make an offer 
today . But in order to make an 
offer that works for you and me ,  
this is something I need to know .  ”  
b . What is your monthly payment ?  
Let them know ,  “ I need to know if 
this is in line with market rent .  
Does that include taxes and 
insurance ?  ”  
c . Are your payments current ? If they 
are not , how many payments 
have they missed ? Has the bank 
started foreclosure proceedings ?  
If they are in default , ask for them 
to have a copy of the notice they 
received from the lender when 
you arrive .  
d . Do you have any other liens on 
the property ? 
1 . Where is the property located ? 
2 . How long have you owned the 
property ? 
3 . What is your reason for selling ?  
( Listen carefully for motivation .  ) 
4 . What have you tried at this point to 
sell your property ? 
5 . Is the home listed with an agent ? 
6 . How soon do you want to sell ? Close ?  
( What they say here can give you an 
idea of their motivation .  ) 
7 . What is your asking price ? Are you 
willing to owner finance at that price ? 

8 . How did you arrive at that price ?  
( Have they had it appraised recently 
or had a CMA – a Comparative 
Market Analysis – done by a real 
estate professional ? Do they know 
what other houses are selling for 
in the area ?  ) … or , In your opinion , 
what is the appraised value of 
your property ? 
165
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
10 . Tell me about your property 
a . Number of bedrooms 
b . Number of bathrooms 
c . Square footage 
d . Construction type 
e . Year built 
f . Is the property vacant or occupied ?  
g . Is it a single family , duplex , or multi-unit ?  
h . Ask about the exterior of the home . Does it have a 
garage or a carport ? 
1 . What , if any , repairs are needed ? How much do you think it 
would cost to get the property fixed up ? 
2 . If the property is rented , you need to know how much rent is 
collected . If it is vacant , ask ,  “ Now how much did you say 
you needed ( not wanted ) in rent ?  ” 
3 . Based on the information you receive , this question may apply :  
If I can provide immediate assistance with no cost to you , 
would you sell the home for what you owe on it ? 
Also , be sure to get all the contact information you need from the 
seller . Remember that the property address may not be the address 
where the owner lives . Make sure you get the owner ’ s address and 
as many contact phone numbers as you can ( home , cell , and fax 
number )  . 
This should take no more than five to ten minutes . At this point , 
you will know just how motivated the seller is , and you may be able 
to make an offer . 
166
you are unable to give the discount we 
would need to make a profit . However , that 
doesn ’ t mean we can ’ t buy your property . 
One thing that may work is our lease option 
program where we guarantee to make your 
monthly payment for an agreeable period 
of time and then pay you close to the full 
amount of your asking price . Does that 
sound like something you might be interested 
in hearing more about ?  ” 
At this point , they will either want to work 
with you and have you come and look at 
the house , or they will be reluctant or want 
to think about it . If they are interested , set 
an appointment to meet with the seller at 
the property as soon as possible . If they 
hesitate , let them know they can think about 
it and if they are interested , to call you back . 
Don ’ t waste time with a seller who is not 
motivated ! 
Preparing to meet with the seller
• Get there early and study the 
neighborhood 
– Make sure the neighborhood is 
desirable for a family to live – is it 
well cared for ? 
– Take notice of homes and businesses 
in the area 
If you have determined it is a wholesale 
deal or pre-foreclosure , you will use the 
techniques you have learned to complete 
those types of deals . Or you may wish to 
use the following script to see if the seller will 
work with you on a lease option .  
If you are not comfortable going further 
on this , let them know you will need to 
evaluate this information and will call them 
back with what you can do to help them . 
You will still need to know the market value 
as we already talked about . If you are not 
sure , get the comps . If you have already 
figured out the value of properties in that 
area , then you are ready to go ! 
Lease option script to use with the 
seller
Always discuss motivation before money ! 
If the seller ’ s response to the motivation 
analysis reveals that we cannot purchase 
the property based on the seller ’ s inability 
to sell to us at a significant discount , then 
we say :  
 “ Normally we buy houses one of two ways : 
Either all cash at a discount or with our lease 
option program . 
I hope you can appreciate the fact that we 
can ’ t pay you cash for your property because 
167
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
• Check the exterior of the house 
– Look for things that will make this house unattractive to a 
tenant / buyer 
– If ugly , call and cancel the appointment – don ’ t waste your 
time 
Meeting with the seller
• Ask the owner to take you on a tour of the house 
– Introduce yourself – would you do me a favor and show me 
your house ? 
– Build rapport – notice nice things in the house ; praise the 
house 
– Notice things that need to be repaired or replaced – we 
want it in good condition . With a clipboard in hand , when 
you see a problem , stop and write it down – the seller will 
notice 
– Compare what you see with what the seller told you over the 
phone 
• If there are problems with the house , say :  
 “ You have a lovely home . However , there are some things 
we need to address before we can put it into our lease option 
program .  ( Such as… )  ” 
• If the property is beautiful , say :  
 “ I ’ ve got some great news . You have a lovely home that would 
fit nicely into our lease option program . Let ’ s sit down so I can 
discuss with you exactly how the program works . What we 
do is purchase nice homes just like yours by guaranteeing a 
long-term lease with an option to purchase by an agreed upon 
168
things to agree 
on with the seller
Price 
 “ You know , the first thing we have to agree 
on is price . As I mentioned on the phone , 
we don ’ t have to have a huge discount , but 
we can ’ t pay retail . How much do you have 
to have ?  ” You need to have a price . Once 
price is agreed upon , write it down . 
Lease option term length 
 “ How long would you like us to make your 
payments and keep it in good condition ?  ” 
You want to get as long as possible . If they 
ask ,  “ how long is normal ?  ” Say :  “ The length 
of time that we need to pay for the house 
in full varies on an individual deal basis , 
however , we normally like 60 months . Will 
that work for you ?  ” 
You are looking for at least 36 months . 
Ask for more , but be willing to settle for less . 
If they say they won ’ t go longer than 24 
months , ask ,  “ How about if we do it for 
24 months with the right to extend for 12 
months ? Will that work ?  ” Write down the 
agreed upon timeframe , payment amount 
and when you will start making payments . 
Your monthly payment has to be at or below 
average market rent to create a monthly 
spread for cash flow . Try to defer payments 
as long as you can . 
date and at an agreed upon price . This 
program allows us to pay you much 
closer to your full asking price while 
providing you with solutions for your 
immediate and future financial needs .  
We have a list of carefully selected 
families who are looking to own a 
nice home like yours but unfortunately , 
they lack the ability to do so without 
a little help . The families we work with 
are unable to purchase a home 
because they either have no credit , 
some bumps in their credit , or they 
lack the 20% down payment that most 
conventional lenders require for them 
to buy a home .  
What we do is carefully screen these 
families to make sure they are potential 
owners and not renters . It is our 
experience that owners take pride in 
their home and maintain it at much 
higher standards than renters , and I
am sure that you would agree .  
The reason this program has been 
so successful for us is because it creates 
a solution where everybody wins .  ” 

169
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options 
 “ We would like to put your property into our program and 
make our first payment in 60 days .  ”  
If they object :  “ The reason we need 60 days is because we 
need to find a qualified buyer . We don ’ t want to stick just anyone 
into your home . We need to screen them .  ”  
Once you have agreed on the three things ( price , term , and 
payments )  , you are going back to the office to do the paperwork .  
 “ I ’ ll turn this paperwork in and get the contracts drawn up . I ’ m going 
to take this information back to the office . Can we meet tomorrow 
night ?  ”  
Now you can go back home and prepare the paperwork . The 
first contract you write up will be the hardest one you will ever do . 
But by doing this at home , you will have time to think of what you 
want to do .  
Once you start making offers , you ’ ll soon find that the contract 
will be easy for you . You may even find yourself keeping extra blank 
contracts in you car to complete on the spot .  
However , for now , if you need an attorney ’ s advice or help in 
drawing up the contract , this will give you that opportunity . 
contracts and documents to 
use as the buyer in a lease option
The contract you will want to use as a buyer is the Residential Lease 
with Option to Purchase Contract . It is one contract versus the two 
contracts that you will use as a seller – an Option to Purchase 
Contract and a Residential Lease Agreement Contract . Contracts 
and documents ( samples of some of these are included in the 
manual )  : 
170
and receive all of your money back . You will 
want to put at least 20 business days to give 
you a full month . If the seller cannot vacate 
the property that quickly , adjust the contract 
accordingly . Do not record this document 
unless your seller is not living up to the terms 
agreed upon in the contract . By recording 
this document , you may trigger the due-onsale clause . 
Memorandum of Option 
This document will give you first right of refusal 
and prevent your seller from trying to sell the 
property out from underneath you to another 
buyer or to further encumber the property . 
It also protects your equity if the property 
goes to foreclosure . A Memorandum of 
Option signed by you and recorded clouds 
the title . If it is signed by both parties and 
notarized , it carries more weight ! Once a 
Memorandum of Option is recorded , any 
new liens placed on the property will be in 
junior position . 
Assignment of Option 
This document is used to assign all rights 
and interest of the option from the seller 
to the buyer . This will allow you to assign 
your option to your tenant / buyer when they 
exercise their option . 
Propert y Information Sheet
You should have already completed a 
property information sheet as you talked 
with the seller at his or her house . 
Authorization to Release 
Information 
The owner ’ s signature on this authorization 
allows you to contact the owner ’ s lender or 
insurance company . 
Letter of Instructions to the 
lender / title / escrow
This informs the lender as to why the 
payments and coupons are to be sent to a 
different entity . 
Residential Lease with Option to 
Purchase 
Included in your manual is a sample 
Residential Lease with Option to Purchase 
Contract . You will notice that the lease 
agreement is for one year with the right 
to extend the term four times for a total of 
five years . If the seller agrees to a longer 
timeframe , you may want to put that number 
in instead of one year . Look at item 24 . That 
is a protection to you if you do not find a 
tenant buyer . You can back out of the contract 
171
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
Addendum to Lease / Lease Option Agreement
This is optional . It would be used if there were changes to be made 
to the monthly payment because of rising cost to the seller . For 
example , it allows changes to be made to the monthly payment 
based on increases in the taxes , insurance , homeowner ’ s association 
fees , etc . You would probably not want to use this document as a 
buyer . 
Exercise of Option 
This form is generally used with the exercise of an option . 
A Contract for Sale and Purchase 
This is to ensure that if the owner were to die , you would be able to 
still exercise your option to purchase the property . 
Sellers Disclosure 
Have the seller fill this form out to disclose if the property has any 
problems . 
Important Note : Be sure you contact your local real estate professional 
or real estate lawyer to research the appropriate documents that are 
required for all real estate transactions in your state . 
bulletproof your option with your seller
What protection do you have if the seller doesn ’ t live up to the terms 
of the contract ? How can you add protection to your option ? 
Record the Memorandum of Option 
We have already discussed recording a Memorandum of Option . 
172
obligates one party ( in this case , the buyer ) 
on another agreement ( such as a promissory 
note to the lender )  .  
A mortgage or deed of trust can actually 
be recorded to secure the performance 
of any agreement , including a lease 
option . You would be using a Performance 
Mortgage or a Performance Deed of Trust , 
which is simply a modified version of a 
mortgage or deed of trust , to secure your 
option . You , as the buyer , will now hold a 
lien to the property . Your position is secured 
by the lien , establishing that you have an 
ownership interest in the property . The seller 
will be unable to sell the property until the 
lien is taken care of .  
If the seller refuses to sell the property 
to you and is in default of the terms of the 
Option to Purchase Contract , you potentially 
could foreclose on the property . Each state 
may have varying opinions in reference to 
your position of being able to foreclose ( it is 
always up to the judge ’ s interpretation of the 
law )  .  
In essence , if you were to start 
foreclosure proceedings , the seller would 
then have to go to court to protect his 
property from being foreclosed on . This is a 
much better predicament to have the seller 
in , rather than you having to go to court to 
It will put a cloud on the title . If it has been 
signed and notarized by both the buyer and 
seller , it will carry more weight . 
The seller can still sell the property if 
there is a Memorandum of Option recorded , 
but any buyer purchasing the property will 
have evidence that the title is clouded . Most 
likely that would discourage a buyer from 
purchasing the property . If the buyer did 
purchase the property , he or she would have 
to honor your option . There is always the 
chance that the buyer may try to not live up 
to the terms of the contract and you would 
have to take him or her to court . 
Record a mortg age or deed 
of trust
You may want to also consider recording a 
mortgage or deed of trust on the property . 
That may sound strange as you did not go 
out and get a loan on the property , nor is the 
owner financing the deal for you .  
A mortgage or deed of trust is a security 
instrument that is used to secure payments 
on a promissory note . It is a lien , securing 
collateral for the note . When a buyer signs 
the mortgage or deed of trust , he is saying ,  
 “ If I do not perform according to the terms 
of the note , then you can take back the 
property .  ” The mortgage or deed of trust 
173
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
force the seller to perform according to the terms of the Option . 
Also , by placing a lien on the property , it will make any new liens 
that may attach to the property subordinate to your lien . 
Escrow closing documents 
What would you do if the seller dies or fades out of the picture ? How 
will you get him to sign the deed ? If he died , that is an impossible 
feat . If he merely vanished , you would have to try to find the owner . 
Instead of having that become a nightmare for you , you should 
have your title company or attorney set up an escrow right from the 
very beginning . The seller will sign the deed ( a warranty deed in 
most states )  , the Purchase Contract , and the escrow / closing agent 
instructions to be held in escrow until you are ready to exercise your 
option . When you exercise your option and purchase the property , 
the title company or attorney handling the escrow will give you the 
deed , which will be recorded ( putting you on the title and making 
you the owner of the property )  . 
bulletproof your option 
with your tenant / buyer
We have already alluded to the fact that you want to make sure you 
do not give your tenant / buyer any equitable interest . If your tenant / 
buyer is in default of the terms of the Lease Agreement , you have the 
right to evict him . If the tenant / buyer wants to stay in the property and 
goes to court , he may argue he has equitable interest in the property . 
If the judge believes your lease option is a seller / buyer relationship 
rather than a landlord / tenant relationship , then your lease option is 
considered an installment contract , or a contract for deed . 
174
Never give more than a one-year
lease option 
Never give your tenant / buyer ( or any 
tenant ) more than a one-year lease option . 
If the lease option is to be longer , then 
give him or her the right to renew up to 
two times , if it were a three-year option . 
Sign new Lease Agreements and Option to 
Purchase Contracts each time your tenant / 
buyer renews . 
Use correct terminology on 
your contracts 
In some of our examples in this chapter , we 
have used the word “ credit ” because it will 
aid in learning the material and help you 
remember to “ add ” those figures in when 
working on calculations , however do not 
use the word “ credit ” in any of your actual 
lease option contracts / agreements . Instead , 
use the words “ option consideration .  ” Some 
investors will use “ option consideration ” 
instead of “ credit ,  ”  “ landlord ” instead of 
 “ seller ,  ” and “ tenant ” instead of “ buyer ” in 
their contracts to help protect them against 
the tenant / buyer having equitable interest in 
the property . Consult with your lawyer for 
help in drafting the appropriate language 
for your contracts .  
If this were to happen , you would 
have to foreclose in order to get the tenant / 
buyer out of the property . We have already 
discussed how that can be time-consuming 
and expensive , depending on the state in 
which you live . 
To avoid giving your tenant / buyer 
equitable interest in the property , you may 
want to do the following ( consult with an 
attorney for assistance )  : 
Always use two contracts 
When you are the seller of a lease option , 
you want to use two separate contracts : the 
Residential Lease Agreement and an Option 
to Purchase Contract with your tenant / 
buyer . Make sure the lease does not refer 
to the option . 
You pay taxes and insurance 
You should always pay the taxes and 
insurance for the property . If the tenant / 
buyer pays them , it may appear as a sale . 
Always get a security deposit
Since sellers do not get security deposits , 
whereas landlords do , your landlord / tenant 
relationship is more secure . 
175
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
finding tenant / buyers for the deal
First , you will need to start marketing to find a tenant / buyer . Later 
on , you will have to build a database from the calls you receive 
and from referrals . Your tenant / buyer will be one of the best to give 
referrals because they are excited about the prospects of finally 
being able to purchase a home . As far as they are concerned , they 
own the house . 
Step-by-step marketing plan 
The following offers a suggested marketing plan to help you locate 
your tenant / buyer . 
1 . Run an ad in the paper under “ Houses for Rent ” and “ Houses 
for Sale ” – Your ad should run Friday , Saturday , and Sunday 
or Saturday , Sunday , and Monday . Rent to Own Good area ,  
Huntersville 2 story , double car garage $1145 / month + 
Deposit 
2 . Post signs in the area – “ Why rent ? Own for less !  ” 
3 . Place a “ Rent to Own ” sign on the property – You will get a 
lot of calls from people driving through the neighborhood . 
There may also be neighbors who have family members who 
need a place to live . 
4 . Put flyers on bulletin boards – Post flyers in grocery stores , 
laundromats , restaurants , or anywhere there is a bulletin board 
that allows public postings . 
176
3 Ask them if they were looking to rent or 
to buy if you could make that possible for 
them . If they say rent :  
 “ I ’ m sorry , but one of the qualifications 
is that you are looking to buy the house 
provided you like it .  ” 
If they are only wanting to rent , don ’ t waste 
your time ; end the call .  
If they say buy or rent to own :  “ Great ! 
You ’ ve called the right number . How much 
of a deposit do you have to put toward the 
purchase of your next home ?  ”  
You are looking for between 3 to 5% 
of the purchase price , but if they offer more , 
say :  “ Great ! That ’ s just the deposit we were 
looking for .  ”  
Otherwise , get their name , number , 
and deposit amount . Add them to your buyer 
database . Let them know you will call them 
when something becomes available that fits . 
4 . How much of a payment can you 
afford ? – You want to make sure they 
can afford the rent you will be 
charging . 
5 . How much rent are you paying 
now ? – Is there a huge gap between 
what they are paying now and what 
they say they can afford ? You may 
5 . Send postcards to tenants in apartment 
buildings or hand out flyers – Get a 
list from a mailing service or look up 
addresses of the complexes in a 
reverse directory from the library or 
off the Internet . It will not have all the 
occupants who are living there , only 
the ones with phone numbers . But 
in the book form , it will probably have 
all of the addresses . You can send out 
postcards offering ,  “ Why rent when 
you can own ?  ” 
When the potential 
tenant / buyer calls 
When they call , you will need to take control 
of the situation . 
1 . Get their name and phone number 
and where they are currently living . 
2 . Ask them how they heard about 
you – Now you can track which ad or 
marketing technique has a higher 
success ratio . Also , you may have 
used different phrases in different 
advertisements and you can see which 
ones are working better for you . 
177
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options 
want to find out why they can afford so much more .  
Otherwise you may have a tenant / buyer who cannot 
afford to pay you the full rent each month . 
6 . Obtain the name and phone numbers of present and 
previous landlords – Never just get the number of the present 
landlord . They may want to get rid of the tenant . The 
previous will be more truthful . 
7 . How many people will be living with you ? How many 
bedrooms do you need ? – Is the home large enough for 
their family ? 
8 . What area are you looking to buy in ? – If you don ’ t have 
any properties available in that area , let them know :  “ I 
don ’ t have any properties in that area right now , but I should 
soon .  ” Look in that area and start calling to see if you can 
work out a deal . 
9 . Put all their information into a database , including name ,  
telephone number , deposit amount , payment they can 
afford , names and contact information for present and 
previous landlords , number of people , and bedrooms 
needed . 
Now you can give them the property address and have them drive 
by and look at the house and the neighborhood . You do not want 
to waste time driving over to the house only to be stood up because 
they did not like the area . Tell them you are taking a lot of calls on 
the property , so if they are interested , they need to call back as 
quickly as possible . 
178 
You should consider looking for at least 
$1 , 000 . If they offer less , say “ I can ’ t hold 
the house for that – normally we collect 
$1 , 000 .  ” 
Second approach – open house 
Schedule a time that you can be at the 
house for an “ open house .  ” Tell each of your 
potential tenant / buyers to meet you at that 
same time and how much deposit to bring . 
Let everyone walk through the home at 
the same time . This can create a bidding 
war . Don ’ t follow them around ! Wait in the 
kitchen as discussed before .  
Or you can arrive a few minutes late . 
You should have several people anxiously 
awaiting your arrival . You will have a 
clipboard with a list attached of those who 
have called . You will have blank rental 
applications under the list . Look at the list 
you have compiled and call out the first 
name on the list . Take the person or couple 
that answers to the name through the house . 
Have them fill out the rental application and 
collect a deposit that will be refunded if you 
do not lease the house to them . If they do 
not want to give you a deposit , throw their 
application in the trash . You want serious 
buyers . After you have finished with the first 
person , call the next name on the list and do 
the same thing . 
MEETING WITH YOUR 
POTENTIAL TENANT / BUYER
When your potential tenant / buyer calls 
back with a favorable response after taking 
a look at the property , arrange a time to 
meet each other at the property . Tell him or 
her to bring a checkbook because you will 
be collecting a deposit . 
There are two approaches that investors 
like to use when meeting a tenant / buyer at 
the house . 
Firstapproach – personal showing
You schedule a time and meet them at the 
house . The last thing you want to do is give 
them a sales presentation . Open the house 
and invite them inside to take a look :  “ Feel 
free to walk through the house ; I ’ ll be in the 
kitchen .  ” When they come back in , close 
your newspaper and look up ; they will feel 
compelled to tell you what they liked about 
it . If they don ’ t say anything , you can say ,  
 “ Great house – what do you like ?  ”  
If they say ,  “ It ’ s great ! How much is 
the deposit ?  ” You say :  “ How much are 
you prepared to give me today to hold the 
property ?  ” They will usually give you more 
than what you would have asked ! 
179
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
No matter which approach you decide to use , once you have the 
deposit , cash the check at their bank . The remaining deposit will 
be collected when paperwork is signed . You will then give the keys 
and possession of the property to the tenant / buyer . 
how do i qualify them ? 
Let the mortgage broker help you “ pre-qualify ” your new buyer / 
tenant . Once you have the rental applications , give them to the 
mortgage broker on your team that specializes in loans for people 
with bad credit . Ask the broker if it looks like they will be able to 
qualify for a loan within the next year or two . Remember that their 
credit may be terrible now , but they may qualify later if they work 
hard to not have any more late payments . Your broker will have an 
idea if that is possible . And , of course , if they are doing a lease 
option , it will give them a better chance of being approved for the 
financing . 
What do you do if they have horrendous credit ? You don ’ t 
have to lease option the property to them . But if they are the only 
interested buyer for the property and you are willing to give them a 
chance , you may want to ask for a larger deposit .  
Since the consideration money is non-refundable , you should 
explain to them that your mortgage broker does not think they will 
be able to exercise their option and purchase the property at a later 
date because of their credit . You may even want to have them sign 
a document stating that they understand the implications of losing 
the consideration money . Use caution , as you don ’ t want to have 
to go through the trouble of evicting a tenant because they are in 
default of the lease agreement . 
180
the property . If the tenant / buyer ever defaults 
on the terms of the lease agreement , you 
can evict them and the option becomes null 
and void .  
If they have equitable interest in the 
property and you try to evict them , and the 
tenant / buyer fights the eviction and takes 
you to court , the judge may rule that because 
they have equitable interest in the property , 
you cannot evict them . You are now faced 
with having to foreclose to get them out .  
In some states , foreclosure can be 
lengthy and costly . It is advisable that even 
if you are offering a two-year lease option , 
that you put into the contract a one-year 
option that can be renewed for one more 
year if the tenant / buyer has made the lease 
payment on time each month . The reason 
you want only a one-year option is because 
if you have to evict the tenant / buyer and 
you go before a judge , the judge may attack 
the validity of a lease greater than one 
year . The judge may see it as you actually 
carrying the financing in the case . Again , 
you would have to foreclose to remove the 
tenant / buyer . You will need to get a deposit 
in addition to the consideration money to 
keep the landlord / tenant relationship in 
check . 
You will also want to talk to their current 
and previous landlords , check out their 
references , and verify employment . If you 
feel you don ’ t know how to do this , you can 
hire a service to do it for you . 
contracts and 
documents to use as the 
seller in a lease option
Rental Application 
Get as much information as you can to 
determine if they are going to be able to 
qualify for the property . 
Authorization to Release 
Information 
You want the authorization to have their 
credit checked . This is a huge determining 
factor as to whether or not this buyer will be 
able to perform and exercise the option . 
Residential Lease Agreement
You are using two contracts when you are 
the seller in a lease option . The first is a 
Residential Lease Agreement and the second 
is an Option to Purchase Contract . The 
reason you use two as a seller is to not give 
your tenant / buyer any equitable interest in 
181
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
Option to Purchase Contract
This is what makes it a lease option . Without the option contract , 
you have simply entered into a lease agreement . The option gives 
your buyer the right to purchase the property , but not the obligation . 
It is what makes this transaction a lease option or “ rent to own .  ” If 
the lease agreement is not fully executed , such as payments made 
on time , the option becomes null and void . 
Option to Purchase Disclosure 
This disclosure is a protection for you . It basically states the tenant / 
buyer has been made aware that there are legal and financial 
implications to the lease option and that he / she has been advised 
to seek legal counsel . It also states they are aware that if they default 
on the lease agreement , the option is void and they have no rights 
to the property . It further states that they will not receive money back 
except for their deposit . It states that the landlord has not made any 
representations or disclosure “ as to the property , its ownership , the 
condition , the neighborhood , or the value of the property .  ” This is a 
powerful document to protect you . 
Addendum to Option to Purchase Contract
This contract states the option consideration is non-refundable and 
states what terms the tenant / buyer has to adhere to in order to get 
the deposit back . 
Addendum to Lease / Lease Option Agreement
This is an optional contract and should only be used in cases where 
you as the seller may need to have some of the terms changed at a 
future date ( such as the lease payments being raised because you 
anticipate you will incur rising prices on property taxes or rising 
interest rates on a loan that does not have a fixed rate )  . This is usually 
182
Let ’ s see what everyone makes . 
The seller at closing receives the purchase 
price of $235 , 000 + consideration of 
$100 minus monthly credit of $13 , 200 
( $1 , 100 X 12 ) for a profit of $221 , 900 
minus any liens on the property . 
You received $5 , 000 consideration 
from your tenant / buyer . You paid $100 
consideration to the seller . You had a profit 
up front of $4 , 900 !  ( Great competition for 
a wholesale deal .  ) 
Then , each month , you collected 
$1 , 500 from your tenant / buyer and paid 
$1 , 100 to the seller for a profit of $400 
per month . You had a positive cash flow 
of $4 , 800 per year !  ( This is excellent 
competition for rentals .  ) Next , at closing , 
you receive the difference between your 
tenant / buyer ’ s purchase price of $262 , 500 
and the $235 , 000 you pay the seller minus 
the rent credit of $7 , 200 and the option 
consideration credit of $5 , 000 that you give 
to your tenant / buyer . You are also given rent 
credit of $13 , 200 . Your profit at closing is 
$28 , 500 . That is money you made at the 
back end of the deal .  ( No rehabbing , but 
great profit !  ) Your total profit is $38 , 200 . 
Can you see how a lease option can 
beat a wholesale deal , a rental , and a 
rehab deal ? Let ’ s do another example . 
only used if you have actually purchased the 
property . Most of the time , you will not have 
any need to use this addendum . 
EXAMPLES OF HOW TO MAKE MONEY
IN A LEASE OPTION
You are probably thinking ,  “ Show me how 
I make money !  ” So let ’ s take a look at some 
examples . 
Example # 1 
You negotiate to pay the seller $235 , 000 . 
The house is worth $250 , 000 and you 
have a one-year option . The houses in the 
area are appreciating at 5% per year . 
The seller wants $1 , 100 per month , but 
will credit you the full $1 , 100 towards the 
purchase price .  
You sell the home to your tenant / buyer 
for $262 , 500 ( 5% above the $250 , 000 
market value ) on a one-year lease option . 
You want $1 , 500 per month , of which you 
will give a credit of $600 per month ( 40% )  . 
How much profit do you make ? 
EXAMPLE
seller receives you receive tenant / buyer pays
purchase price $235 , 000 $262 , 500 $262 , 500
consideration $100 $5 , 000 $5 , 000
rent $1 , 100 / per month $1 , 500 / per month $1 , 500 / per month
credit $1 , 100 / per month $600 / per month
183
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
Example # 2 
You find a house worth $180 , 000 . You get a four-year lease option 
to purchase it for $168 , 000 . You have less than 10% equity in the 
home ! But properties in your area are appreciating at 8% per year . 
Your payments are $1 , 050 per month . You pay the owner $500 
in consideration money .  
You find a tenant / buyer to purchase the home for $200 , 000 
( based on a current value of $180 , 000 , the home will be worth 
$208 , 372 . 50 !  ) on a three-year option . Your tenant / buyer ’ s 
payments are $1 , 400 a month . You collect $8 , 000 non-refundable 
option consideration money . 
EXAMPLE
seller receives you receive tenant / buyer pays
purchase price $168 , 000 $200 , 000 $200 , 000
consideration $500 $8 , 000 $8 , 000
rent $1 , 050 / per month $1 , 400 / per month $1 , 400 / per month
credit $200 / per month $200 / per month 
At closing , the seller receives $168 , 000 plus $500 
consideration collected earlier minus $7 , 200 ( $200 X 36 months ) 
rent credit = $161 , 300 minus any liens on the property .  
You receive $8 , 000 consideration from your tenant / buyer 
minus $500 consideration money you pay to the seller , for a quick 
profit of $7 , 500 !  ( Think wholesale .  ) Each month , you receive 
$1 , 400 per month in rent and pay the seller $1 , 050 for a profit of 
$350 per month and a total of $12 , 600 after three years !  ( Think 
rental income .  )  
At closing , you receive the difference between your purchase 
price of $168 , 000 and the $200 , 000 your tenant / buyer pays to 
you minus $5 , 000 consideration money and $7 , 200 rent credit . 
Your profit at closing is $19 , 800 .  ( Think retail - same profit as many 
rehab jobs .  ) Your total profit is $39 , 900 ( $7 , 500 + $12 , 600 + 
$19 , 800 )  . 
184
The seller has been collecting rent of $500 / 
month per unit even though the going rents 
in the area are averaging $560 per month . 
You agree to pay him $2 , 800 per month . 
He wants $1 , 000 option consideration 
money . Multi-units are appreciating at 5% 
per year .  
You find a tenant / buyer who is willing 
to pay you $400 , 000 for a two-year 
option . You want $3 , 200 per month and 
$15 , 000 consideration money .  
At closing , the seller receives 
$320 , 000 plus the $1 , 000 consideration 
money collected earlier for a profit of 
$321 , 000 minus any liens on the property . 
EXAMPLE
seller receives you receive tenant / buyer pays
purchase price $320 , 000 $400 , 000 $400 , 000
consideration $1 , 000 $15 , 000 $15 , 000
rent $2 , 800 / per month $3 , 200 / per month $3 , 200 / per month
credit no credit no credit 
You collect immediate cash of 
$15 , 000 in consideration money minus the 
$1 , 000 you paid to the seller for a profit 
of $14 , 000 !  ( Quick money like wholesale .  ) 
Each month , you receive a positive cash 
flow of $400 without any of the headaches 
of being a landlord for a total of $9 , 600 
after two years .  ( Beats doing rentals !  )  
At closing , you receive the difference 
between your purchase price of $320 , 000 
and the $400 , 000 that your tenant / buyer 
pays to you minus $15 , 000 consideration 
money that is credited to your buyer . 
And that was on a home that did not even 
have 10% equity ! As you can see , lease 
options work great even if there isn ’ t much 
equity . You created the equity by asking 
tomorrow ’ s value .  
It is imperative that you keep up with 
property values and the appreciation for your 
area . Remember that certain neighborhoods 
may increase in value faster than others . 
Become a real estate expert . Pay 
attention to what is going on in the areas 
you are farming . Talk to city planners , 
agents , and appraisers . Ask them questions 
that will help you become familiar with the 
real estate environment .  
You need to know what is happening 
economically . All these things will affect 
not only the value of the properties , but the 
appreciation as well . 
Example # 3 
Lease options can work on multi-unit 
properties . You may want to buy with a 
lease option and just collect rents and 
exercise your option to purchase it before 
the time period runs out . Or you could do a 
sandwich lease option .  
For example , let ’ s say you find an 8-unit 
complex . The seller is a tired landlord and is 
willing to sell the property to you on a threeyear lease option for $320 , 000 . You feel 
the property is worth $375 , 000 . 
185
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
Your profit at closing is $65 , 000 .  ( Do you think you would rather 
do this than rehabs ?  ) Total profit is $14 , 000 + $9 , 600 + 
$65 , 000 = $88 , 600 !  ! Let ’ s do one more ! 
Example # 4 
You find a distressed seller who is willing to sell you the house for 
$50 , 000 if you will just take over the payments . Houses in the area 
are selling for $57 , 000 .  
You give her $100 consideration and your rent each month 
covers her payment of $350 . You have a five-year option to 
purchase the property . Properties in the area are appreciating at 
7% per year .  
You find a tenant / buyer who will pay your $65 , 000 asking 
price on a two-year option . You collect $3 , 000 consideration 
money and rents of $700 per month with $200 as credit towards 
the purchase price .  
At closing , the seller receives her $50 , 000 asking price minus 
$100 consideration credited towards the purchase .  
You get $3 , 000 from your buyer in consideration money 
minus the $100 you gave the seller for a profit up front of $100 . 
You receive a positive cash flow of $350 per month for a total of 
$8 , 400 after two years .  
At closing , you receive the difference between your purchase 
price of $50 , 000 and the $65 , 000 your tenant / buyer pays to you 
minus $3 , 000 consideration money that is credited to your buyer 
and $4 , 800 rent credit . Your profit at closing is $7 , 200 . 
EXAMPLE
seller receives you receive tenant / buyer pays
purchase price $320 , 000 $400 , 000 $400 , 000
consideration $1 , 000 $15 , 000 $15 , 000
rent $2 , 800 / per month $3 , 200 / per month $3 , 200 / per month
credit no credit no credit
Your total profit for the deal is $18 , 500 . 
186
Now let ’ s see what your total profit would 
be . You receive a total of $5 , 900 up front 
( $3 , 000 from your first buyer minus your 
$100 consideration money and $3 , 000 
from your second buyer )  + rents of $16 , 800 
and $7 , 200 at closing for a total profit of 
$29 , 900 ! 
The benefit of having a tenant / buyer 
not exercise their option is that you can 
keep their option consideration money . If 
the second buyer couldn ’ t buy it and you 
had another buyer for one more year ( since 
you had a five-year option )  , you could make 
even more money . 
Lease options work for 
fixer-uppers , too ! 
Let ’ s say you find a distressed property that 
you want to purchase , fix up , and sell . You 
don ’ t have the money for the down payment 
and are also concerned about all the fees 
you would have to pay in order to get 
financing . One solution would be a lease 
option . For a minimal amount down , you 
can gain control of the property , rehab it , 
and then turn around and sell it .  
Suppose you find a property that is 
really “ ugly ” and you don ’ t like to do major 
rehab . Maybe you want to do the deal , but 
you are just too busy and don ’ t have the time 
required to rehab the house . Or perhaps 
This is on a house that had only $7 , 000 in 
equity !  
Let ’ s put a twist on this scenario . After 
two years , your tenant / buyer gets a job 
transfer and moves out of state . He gave you 
enough notice that as he was moving out , 
your new tenant / buyer was moving in . Let ’ s 
keep things simple and leave the terms the 
same . $65 , 000 purchase price , two-year 
option ( you still have three years left on your 
five year option )  , $3 , 000 consideration 
and $700 a month rent with $200 being 
credited towards the purchase price .  
After two years , your new tenant / 
buyer exercises her option and purchases the 
property . Let ’ s see how the numbers work out :  
You receive $3 , 000 up front from your 
first tenant / buyer minus $100 you gave 
to the seller . You collected an additional 
$3 , 000 in consideration money two years 
later from your second buyer . At closing , 
you receive the difference between your 
purchase price of $50 , 000 and the 
$65 , 000 your tenant / buyer pays to you 
minus $3 , 000 consideration money that is 
credited to your second buyer and $4 , 800 
rent credit .  
Your profit at closing is $7 , 200 . 
187
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
you may have just decided after learning about lease options that 
you never want to fix up a property again ! What are your options ? 
One option is to do a sandwich lease option on a fixer-upper . You 
just market that you have a distressed property to find the tenant / 
buyer who is looking for this kind of deal . 
Needs Rehab ! Rent to own , $0 down , you fix . Phone # 
Investor special ! Sweat Equity for down . Phone # 
Be sure your lease agreement stipulates that the tenant is to complete 
the work before he or she moves in and periodically check on the 
property to see how things are progressing . If the house is livable 
and just needs a little fix-up , you could go ahead and let your 
tenant / buyer move in . If you do , you will want something in writing 
concerning the terms both of you have agreed to . Additionally , you 
might want to calculate how many repairs are to be accomplished 
each month . The repairs would be on a list with a completion date 
next to each repair . You would check every month to see that the 
repairs were completed and initial both your copy and your tenant / 
buyer ’ s copy . If the repairs are not finished by the completion date 
each month , then your tenant / buyer will be in default on the terms 
of the lease . You may want penalties such as a given amount paid 
extra because they are in arrears of accomplishing the tasks of 
repairs rather than evict them . Either way , you will want an ironclad 
lease agreement that has been approved by your attorney . 
Many investors also use the lease option to “ fix ” a mistake 
they made . They may have bought a house to rehab , but find they 
underestimated the repair work and holding time . Now it ’ s winter , 
the market has slowed down , and they need to unload the house . 
They ’ ve already taken a big hit on their profit and will lose even 
more money if they have to wait four to five months longer to get the 
188
2 . Only do lease options in highly 
desirable neighborhoods 
a . $75K to $220K in most areas – 
work in 75% of the median sale 
price and higher 
b . Be aware of what the market 
rent is 
c . Make sure you can rent it to cover 
your payment to the seller 
3 . Know the value of homes in your target 
neighborhoods 
a . Find out what homes are selling 
for 
b . Blow up a map for your target 
neighborhoods 
c . Get the comps and put the 
numbers on your map 
4 . Have time to find your tenant / buyer 
a . Try to make the date you start 
making payments be a minimum 
of 30 days after the seller vacates 
the property , but preferably get 
60 days 
5 . Have a long enough agreement with 
the seller 
a . The lease option contract with 
the seller should be at least 
36 months , but preferably try to 
house sold . By using a lease option , they 
can sell the house quickly and for top dollar . 
Everywhere in America , there are people 
desperately wanting to purchase a home , 
but because of credit issues or new jobs , 
they cannot qualify . You can solve their 
problem and make money ! 
To illustrate the profit potential , let ’ s look 
at three ways to buy a house with a fair 
market value of $110 , 000 ! In the following 
example , NOI is Net Operating Income . 
We hope you are excited about the 
income potential of lease options and 
sandwich lease options . A sandwich lease 
option is creative financing for both the 
buyer and the seller ! 
13 steps to being
successful in lease options
1 . Get into the property with very little 
money 
a . No big deposit to seller 
b . No repairs 
c . No agents
189
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options 
get a 60-month timeframe ( remember you put a date , not 
how many months , in the contract ) 
6 . Have the title checked 
a . Order a preliminary title search ( you are looking for 
any liens or judgments that would prevent the 
conveyance of the property ) 
7 . Record a Memorandum of Option 
a . Memorandum – There is an option to purchase this 
property ; if more information is needed , contact ( your 
name and #  ) – If both you and the seller sign the 
Memorandum of Option before a notary and record 
it , any lien attaching will be in junior position to your 
option 
Buy & Rent Buy & Lease Sandwich Lease 
Option 
$875 rent $1 , 100 rent Collect $1 , 100 pay $750 rent 
$10 , 500 / year rent $13 , 200 / year rent Make $350 / month x 12 = 
$4 , 200 
-5% vacancy No vacancy No vacancy 
-5% repairs No repairs No repairs 
-$2 , 500 taxes -$2 , 500 taxes No taxes 
-$300 insurance -$300 insurance No insurance – additional 
insured 
-$450 water -$450 water No water 
-$1 , 800 heat and 
lights No heat and lights No heat and lights 
$4 , 400 NOI $9 , 950 NOI 
-$7 , 509 mortgage -$7 , 509 mortgage 
-$3 , 109 negative 
cash flow 
$2 , 441 positive 
cash flow $4 , 200 positive cash flow 
8 . Do not lease option small houses under 1 , 000 sq feet 
a . It limits the number of tenant / buyer prospects 
 ( a 3 bedroom / 2 bath is preferred ) 
190 
you on the insurance policy ,  
tell him :  “ We are not talking 
about taking you off the 
property ; we are talking 
about putting us on – we 
do have an interest in it !  ”  
g . If the seller still won ’ t put 
you on the policy , tell him you 
will have to wait one more 
month to make the payment 
11 . Try to make seller ’ s payment 
directly to the lender 
a . Get a copy of the payment 
coupon book and have the 
seller do a change of 
mailing address to your Post 
Office box 
b . Have the seller sign the Letter 
of Instructions to the Lender 
c . Get an Authorization to 
Release Information Form 
signed 
d . If the seller objects to you 
making payments to the 
lender , be sure to let the seller 
know that it is company policy 
to never make payments if the 
seller isn ’ t paying the loan ( but 
you can keep collecting 
payments from your tenant /  
buyer ) 
9 . Do lease options in your company ’ s 
name 
a . Gives credibility / asset 
protection 
b . Corporation or LLC 

10 . Have the seller change his 
insurance policy 
a . The policy should be 
changed from an owner 
occupied to non-owner 
occupied / landlord policy 
b . If the owner-occupied 
insurance policy remains in 
place and it is now a non- 
owner occupied property ,  
the insurance company will 
likely not pay a claim 
c . Try to be listed as an 
additional insured 
d . Be sure to recommend a 
tenant policy to your 
tenant / buyer 
e . Give a letter explaining to 
the tenant their need to be 
insured 
f . If the seller does not want 
191
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
12 . Don ’ t do repairs 
a . To seller : Anything under $500 ,  
you don ’ t have to worry about ;  
anything major , you will be 
responsible for . 
b . To buyer : This is your house .  
Because of this , anything under 
$500 , you will need to take care 
of . However , we realize this is still 
not in your name yet , so you won ’ t 
need to worry about anything over 
$500 . 
13 . Always give yourself the right to 
extend for another year or more 
how to do a lease option
1 . Market your business – Get people calling you ! 
a . Tell everyone what you are doing 
b . Place ads in the paper 
c . Use signs , flyers , postcards , and magnetic signs 
2 . Screen the seller – Determine what kind of deal this is 
a . How much are the payments ? 
b . How much do they owe ? 
c . What is the condition of the house ? 
d . Why are they selling ? 
192
8 . Reach an agreement – Get the 
paperwork done 
a . Property Information Sheet 
b . Authorization to Release 
Information 
c . Letter of Instruction to the 
Lender / Title Escrow 
d . Residential Lease with Option to 
Purchase 
e . Memorandum of Option 
f . Assignment of Option 
g . Addendum to Lease / Lease 
Option Agreement 
h . Exercise of Option 
i . Contract For Sale and Purchase 
j . Sellers Disclosure 
k . Prepare to open up escrow to 
hold the signed deed , purchase 
contract , escrow instructions 
9 . Title work ordered 
10 . After paperwork done – Find your 
tenant / buyer 
11 . Advertise – Rent to own 
12 . Screen tenant / buyer 
a . Rental application 
b . Authorization to Release 
Information
3 . Screening will determine if it is a lease 
option 
a . Not a lot of equity 
b . Payments are current 
c . No repairs 
d . Market rent to payment ratio – 
Market rent will cover payment 
4 . If it looks like a lease option 
a . Go to the script :  “ However ,  
one thing that might work is our 
lease option program ” 
5 . If they say yes 
a . Go look at the area 
b . Inspect the neighborhood 
c . Inspect the property 
6 . If it looks good 
a . Keep appointment 
b . If it doesn ’ t , do not proceed ;  
cancel the appointment ! 
7 . Have the seller take you through the 
house 
a . Use a clipboard to write down any 
repairs 
b . Settle on three things : price ,  
timeframe of L / O , and payment 
start date 
193
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
13 . Complete paperwork with tenant /  
buyer 
a . Rental Application 
b . Authorization to Release Information 
c . Residential Lease Agreement 
d . Option to Purchase 
e . Option to Purchase Disclosure 
f . Addendum to Option to Purchase 
g . Addendum to Lease / Lease 
Option Agreement 
14 . Collect tenant / buyer consideration money and collect rent 
POINTS TO CONSIDER
Lease options provide another great opportunity for you to make 
money and be successful in real estate . A lease option is a multiprofit center . You can get quick cash from the consideration you 
collect up front just like investors who wholesale properties . Plus , 
you can have a positive cash flow , sometimes more than if you 
had purchased the property and rented it out . And you can make 
even more money when the option is exercised , without all the 
headaches and risks that are associated with doing rehabs .  
Lease options can be done in almost every market in the 
country . There are always going to be people who are having 
personal challenges in their lives and need debt relief and they are 
always going to be looking for a solution .  
Sometimes their situation may seem hopeless as they have no 
equity in the property . They can ’ t sell the property because they cannot 
pay the agent or closing costs . Or they don ’ t have time to wait for an 
194
6 Put “ Rent to Own ” on business cards , 
posters , signs , etc . 
7 Advertise in the newspaper :  “ I will 
buy your house or make your 
payments .  ” 
sample car magnet ads 
( Your name ) 
Buys Houses
Cash or Terms
232-555-9969
We
Buy Houses
Cash or Terms
490-555-0932
agent to sell the property . They are struggling 
to find the money to pay the mortgage each 
month . They are falling farther and farther 
behind . They feel a deep sense of urgency 
to get rid of the payments that are weighing 
heavily on them . They need help now ! 
You can solve their problems and help 
them ! Use a lease option to turn a bad 
circumstance into a win / win situation . 
ASSIGNMENT
The following is a suggested assignment . 
1 Call at least 10 Houses for Rent or 
FSBOs that have been on the market 
a long time . 
2 Make copies of questions to ask . 
3 Drive 10 blocks each way looking for 
houses for rent . 
4 Use an Internet search engine to look 
for houses for rent . You will find a lot 
of websites . 
5 Create a website to market what you 
do . 
195
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
We
Buy Homes
Any Area / Condition
Cash or Terms
404-555-9459
Selling your house ? 
talk to us
first
566-555-2344
sample newspaper ads
Wanted Wanted Real Estate Real Estate 
Payment Assistance Can ’ t Sell Your House ? 
We Buy and Lease Houses 
Bryson 800-555-6598
196
I ’ ll Buy Your Home 
FAST !  !  ! 
Behind on Payments ? 
Here ’ s your immediate solution : 
• Fast Closing 
• Instant Debt Relief Area Specialist Buys 
• No maintenance Real Estate 
• Foreclosure Help Little or No Equity OK 
• No Equity ? No Problem ! Cash or Terms 
• No Commissions 
•Prices Quoted By Phone
24 hour FREE recorded message 
www . helpisontheway2u . com
Corporate Leases Needed 
Ask for Perry 800-555-2475 
Behind on Payments ? 
Don ’ t Delay , Call Today
No Equity ? I can Help ! 
Call Jordan 
800-555-8852 
Behind on Payments ? 
Free Report
Call today for free consultation 
Need Immediate Help ? 
800-555-8755
How to Sell 
Your Home in 
3 Days or Less ! 
Any Area or Condition 
Ask for Jack 800-555-8566 
Your ads should be in the newspaper every day !  
( You can ’ t catch any fish if your line is not in the water .  ) 
197
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
sample SIGNS AND FLYERS
198
PUT YOUR PROPERTIES ON “ AUTO PILOT ”  
WITH OUR PERFECT TENANT PROGRAM
Dear Property Owner :  
How would you like all 
the benefits of investment 
property ownership without any of the headaches ? 
Our company will lease 
your property on a longterm basis , guarantee the 
monthly payments , take over the maintenance , and deal with all of the management headaches ! Just tell us where to send 
the monthly rent check . 
For a no-obligation 
proposal , please call 
Michael or Patricia at 
800-555-5555 
or visit our website at 
www . yourwebsite . com 
and never be faced with 
problem tenants , late 
payments , vacancies , maintenance calls , 
evictions , and other management 
nonsense . Thank You ! 
Your Name 
SAMPLE POSTCARDS 
We ’ ll Buy Your Home ! 
fees 
or points or
COMMISSIONS OBLIGATION 
• PRICES QUOTED BY PHONE
• ANY AREA , ANY CONDITION
• BEHIND ON PA YMENTS ? 
• LITTLE OR NO EQUITY ? 
• FACIN G FORECLOSURE ?  
WE PROVIDE VALUABLE INFORMATION… 
YOU NEVER KNOW WHEN YOU OR A FRIEND MIGHT NEED OUR HELP ! 
KEEP THIS CARD ! 
800-555-5555 www . yourwebsite . com
NO
199
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
SAMPLE PROPERTY INFORMATION SHEET 
200
SAMPLE AUTHORIZATION TO RELEASE INFORMATION
Date _____________________________
Lender Name _______________________Lender Address ___________________________
Lender City , ________________________State , Zip_________________________________
RE : Account or Loan Number : _____________________________ 
Borrower Name : ______________________Borrower Name : ________________________
Borrower SSN_________________________ Borrower SSN_________________________
To Whom It May Concern : 
I / We hereby authorize you to release any and all information regarding my loan , including loan status , interest 
rate , payoff amount , amount of monthly payment , late charges , penalties and fees ( if applicable )  , and any other 
information about our account that might otherwise be protected through the Right of Financial Privacy Act of 1978 , 
Fair Credit Reporting Act , or any other federal , state , local , or lender regulations to : 
Your Name , Your Title , Your Company Name 
It is requested that this information be faxed immediately to : Your Fax Number 
It is understood that a photocopy of this form or facsimile will also serve as authorization . 
_________________________________ _________________________________
Borrower ’ s Signature Date Borrower ’ s Signature Date 
_________________________________ _________________________________
Printed Name Printed Name 
State of _________________________ County of _______________________ 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this ________day of ________ , 20___ by John and Jane 
Seller , who is / are personally known to me or who has / have produced __________________________________
_____________ as identification . 
Notary 
 ( Seal ) My Commission Expires : 
SAMPLE
201
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
SAMPLE LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS TO LENDER
April 10 , 2006
American Lending 
Payment Processing 
P . O . Box 123 Phoenix , AZ 87555 
Re : Loan # 123456789 1234 
Power Ranch Road Orlando , 
FL 12345 
To Whom It May Concern : 
Please be advised that we have retained a management company in Florida to collect the rents 
and make the loan payments on the above-described property and loan . The company is : 
XYZ Realty 
1234 Orange Blvd . 
Orlando , FL 12345 
Beginning with the check due on July 1 , 2006 , your check will come directly from XYZ Realty . 
Please send future statements or notices requiring changes in the amount of the payment directly 
to them . 
Thank you for your help and attention to this matter . 
Sincerely , 
John and Jane Seller , Owner 
SAMPLE
202
SAMPLE RESIDENTIAL LEASE WITH OPTION
THIS AGREEMENT made and entered into on April 10 , 2006 by and between John and Jane Seller ( landlord / 
owner )  , hereinafter referred to as “ Lessor ”  , and XYZ Realty ( tenant / buyer )  , hereinafter referred to as “ Lessee ”  . 
Lessors lease to Lessees all the goods and chattels detailed in the inventory designated as Schedule “ A ” 
annexed hereto and specifically made a part hereof , and also that certain dwelling house situated at and more 
particularly described as follows : 
1234 Power Ranch Road 
Orlando FL 12345 
Legal Description : 
To Be Attached . 
Together with all appurtenances for a period of one year to commence on April 10 , 2006 through April 09 , 
2007 with the right to four ( 4 ) consecutive terms of the original term with Lessee ’ s notification to Lessor in writing 
thirty ( 30 ) days prior to end of term . 
1 . RENT . Lessees agree to pay , without demand , to Lessors as monthly rent for the demised premises , the sum 
of $710 . 00 , in which the payments are due on or before the tenth ( 10th ) day of each month . The first payment 
will be due on or before July 10 , 2006 . 
2 . SECURTIY & OPTION . Upon the execution of this lease , the Lessee ’ s shall pay unto the Lessors , the first 
month ’ s rent as well as the sum of $100 . 00 as security for the faithful performance by Lessees of the terms 
hereof , to be returned to Lessees , without interest , on the full and faithful performance by them of the provisions 
hereof , plus the sum of $100 . 00 as down payment for the option to purchase the aforementioned property . 
This sum is non-refundable . 
3 . USE . The Lessees shall use the premises hereby leased exclusively for a private residence . Lessees shall 
be permitted to access the above dwelling for the purpose of showing the property to perspective tenants , 
contractors , and partners . 
4 . PERSONAL PROPERTY . All personal property placed or moved in the premises above described shall be at 
risk of the Lessees or owner thereof , and Lessors shall not be liable for any damage to said personal property , 
or to the Lessees arising from any act of negligence of any co-tenant or occupants of the building or of any 
other person whomsoever . 
5 . COMPLIANCE . The Lessees shall promptly execute and comply with all statutes , ordinances , rules , orders , 
regulations , and requirements of the federal , state , and city governments and of any and all their departments 
and bureaus applicable to said premises , for the correction , prevention , and abatement of nuisances or other 
grievances , in , upon , or connected with said premises during said term . 
6 . FIRE . Lessee will not allow any items on or in the dwelling , which will endanger the habitants or the premises . 
That in the event the premises are destroyed or so damaged by fire or other unavoidable casualty as to be 
unfit for occupancy or use , then the rent hereby reserved , or a fair and just proportion thereof , according to the 
nature and extent of the damage sustained , shall , until the said premises shall have been rebuilt or reinstated , 
be suspended and cease to be payable , or this lease shall , at the election of the Lessor , thereby be determined 
and ended , provided , however , that this agreement shall not be construed so as to extend the term of this lease 
or to render the Lessor liable to rebuild or replace the said premises . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
203
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
Guide to real estate investing
Profiting By Controlling Property : Lease Options
7 . ACCEPTANCE . Lessees hereby accept the premises in the condition they are in at the time beginning of 
this lease and agree to maintain said premises in the same condition , order , and repair as they are at the 
commencing of said term , excepting only reasonable wear and tear . Lessee agrees to pay for all repairs costing 
less than $500 . 00 each month arising from the use thereof under this agreement , and to make good to said 
Lessors immediately upon demand any damage to water apparatus , or electric lights or any fixture , appliances 
or appurtenances of said premises , or of the building , caused by any act of neglect of Lessees , or of any person 
or persons in the employ or under the control of the Lessees . In the event of any default by Lessor or then in 
addition to any other remedies available to Lessee at law or in equity Lessee shall have the option to terminate 
this lease and all rights by giving written notice of intention to terminate , via certified mail . 
8 . TERMS OF CONTRACT . It is understood and agreed between the parties hereto that time is of the essence 
of this contract and this applies to all terms and conditions contained herein . Lessees shall have the unqualified 
right to sublet and / or assign , sell , transfer , and convey any rights which the Lessee or their administrators , 
successors , executors , and heirs may have in this contract to a third party without written notice . Any assignment 
will release Lessees from any liability , as new assignee will accept all rights , obligations , and responsibilities 
agreed upon in this agreement between Lessor and Lessees . 
9 . NOTICE . It is understood and agreed between the parties hereto that written notice by certified mail or 
delivered to the premises hereunder shall constitute sufficient notice to the Lessees and written notice by certified 
mail or delivered to the office of the Lessors shall constitute sufficient notice to the Lessors , to comply with the 
terms of this contract . The Lessor ’ s mailing address is 
P . O . Box 4 , Orlando , FL 12345 . 
10 . RIGHTS . The rights of the Lessors under the foregoing shall be cumulative , and failure on the part of the 
Lessors to exercise promptly any given rights hereunder shall not operate to forfeit any of the said rights . 
11 . UTILITIES . The Lessees shall be responsible for the payment of all utility bills ( water , electricity , telephone , 
etc .  ) and specifically including , but not limited to glass breakage and all doors and screens . The Lessors will be 
responsible for all structural repairs , meaning the roof , exterior walls , foundation , and to pay all repairs costing 
greater than $500 . 00 per incident . In the event Lessor is delinquent on any payments required under this 
agreement to include repairs and maintenance , Lessee shall have the right to make such payments as necessary 
to cure defaults or make said repairs on behalf of the Lessor . Any payments made by Lessee will be credited to 
Lessee on a two to one basis ( 2 to 1 )  . The closing agent will apply said credit towards the purchase price at 
the time of closing . 
12 . REPAIRS . The Lessees will permit the Lessors or their agent , at any reasonable time , to enter said premises 
or any part thereto for the purpose of exhibiting the same or making repairs thereto . 
13 . RECOVERY . If either party of this agreement shall bring legal action for enforcement of said agreement , the 
prevailing party shall recover the cost of the proceedings including reasonable attorney fees . 
14 . EMINENT DOMAIN . If the leased premises , or any part thereof are taken by virtue of eminent domain , 
this lease shall expire on the date when the same shall be so taken and the rent shall be apportioned as of said 
date . Lessee shall be entitled to FULL refund of any option consideration money and security deposits . 
15 . BENEFIT . All covenants and agreements of this lease shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the 
heirs , executors , administrator , and assigns of the Lessor and Lessee , without affecting the restrictions imposed 
by Section 3 hereof . 
SAMPLE
204
16 . RIGHT TO EXTEND . Lessee shall have the right to extend the agreement for six ( 6 ) months , for an additional 
fee of $1 . 00 . 
17 . CHATTELS . The said Lessees hereby pledge and assign to the Lessors all the furniture , fixtures , goods , and 
chattels of said Lessees which shall or may be brought or put on said premises as security for the payment of 
the term herein reserved . 
18 . VALIDITY . It is expressly agreed between the parties that if any clause of this lease be found unconscionable 
it shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this lease . 
19 . ENTIRE AGREEMENT . Neither party has made any representation or promise , except as contained herein . 
Any and all modifications to this agreement must be in writing and signed by Lessee / Lessor and / or assigns . 
20 . INSPECTIONS . Real property taxes on the property , both general and special assessments , if any , for the 
current fiscal year shall be prorated for the close of escrow and be paid by the Lessor . Also , the Lessors shall 
provide the Lessees with a certificate from a licensed and bonded exterminator showing that there is no evidence 
of termite infestation in improvements on said property . Should termite eradication be required , the Lessors shall 
perform the same at their own expense . The Lessees shall examine the leasehold premises to determine that the 
premises are in good and inhabitable condition , as are the condition of the electrical , plumbing , and heating 
system , and if they are not , said leasehold period shall not commence until the premises are in such inhabitable 
condition . In addition , the Lessees shall examine said premises and prepare a list of those items damaged at 
the commencement of the leasehold period . Lessees agree to notify Lessor immediately upon first discovery 
any signs of serious dwelling problems to include leaking roof , dysfunctional heating / air conditioning systems , 
spongy floor , crack in foundation , moisture in ceiling , leaking water heater , or evidence of termites . 
21 . PURCHASE . Lessees shall have the option to purchase said premises for the purchase price of $85 , 000 . 00 . 
This option may be exercised at any time during the lease period upon notice to the Lessors in writing by 
certified mail . The Lessees shall place with ABC Title Company ( title company / attorney )  , the option payment 
specified in paragraph ( 2 ) above paid by the Lessees to the Lessor in escrow as earnest money towards the 
purchase of said property . 
SAMPLE
chapter
nine
205
Important Note : 
Many states have laws regarding “ consulting ,  ” disclosure , and home equity purchases if the owner is in foreclosure . 
Consult with your attorney . 
hat kind of visions does 
the word “ foreclosure ” 
evoke ? Are you having thoughts of a 
homeowner falling behind in his house 
payments ? Do you see the courthouse 
steps with people frantically bidding 
on a property that is being auctioned 
off ? Or are you picturing a family 
being removed from their house by the 
sheriff with their belongings thrown all 
over the lawn ? Not a pretty image . 
Indeed , foreclosure is a harsh reality 
literally thousands of people throughout 
America are facing . You may recall 
seeing a vintage melodrama where 
the heroine is strapped to the railroad 
track and the villain is standing 
nearby , dressed in black . The villain 
is holding the deed to the heroine ’ s 
father ’ s house . You see the train in the 
distance coming down the track , closer 
and closer . All the heroine has to do 
is agree to marry the villain and she 
will no longer be in bondage , and her 
father ’ s home will be safe . It sounds a 
little far-fetched , no doubt ! But the truth 
is there are many people who feel like 
they are stuck on that railroad track 
and the train is barreling down on 
them . They need help – now ! But they 
are going through such a wide array 
of emotions , they simply cannot think 
clearly . They have either exhausted 
all of their resources and / or they 
simply don ’ t know what to do . There 
are many reasons a homeowner may 
W
Becoming a 
problem solver : 
Foreclosures
207
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
208
differ from state to state , there are basically 
two main types of foreclosures : judicial and 
non-judicial . 
Judicial Foreclosure
Judicial foreclosure is used in mortgage 
states , or “ lien theory ” states . The usual 
procedure when a loan is in default is for the 
lender ( mortgagor ) to send a Notice of Intent 
to Foreclose ( sometimes called a “ Demand 
Letter ”  ) to the borrower ( mortgagee )  . The 
letter lets the homeowner know the loan is 
in default and the lender intends to take 
action if the owner doesn ’ t bring the loan 
current . It will include the amount due . If the 
homeowner does not respond to the terms 
set forth in the Notice of Intent to Foreclose , 
the lender files a lawsuit , called a Complaint 
for Foreclosure , against the borrower . Next , 
a Lis Pendens (  “ lawsuit pending ”  ) is filed . 
The Lis Pendens signals the beginning of the 
foreclosure process and is a legal recording 
of the warning notices sent to any interested 
parties who may have claim against the 
property or its ownership . After a period of 
time , a court hearing date is set for the sale 
of the property . The Lis Pendens is officially 
served as a summons by the court and 
delivered to the homeowner by the sheriff . 
In “ lien theory ” states , the Lis Pendens is the 
first indication to the public that a property 
lose his home to foreclosure , but foreclosure 
is usually the consequence of escalated 
financial problems . These financial 
problems are almost always the direct result 
of circumstances that have happened in the 
life of the homeowner . Distressed situations 
such as job loss , divorce , death , or illness 
can cause the homeowner to become 
financially strapped and delinquent with 
his mortgage payments . No matter what 
the cause , foreclosure creates a motivated 
seller . As you work to solve the homeowner ’ s 
problem , you may be able to not only help 
them out of an untenable situation , but also 
make some good money in the process . 
what is foreclosure ? 
This section is intended to be a general summary 
of the foreclosure process and it is recommended 
that you consult legal counsel for laws and 
mortgage regulations in your jurisdiction . 
Foreclosure is the legal process whereby a 
creditor forces the sale of a property that 
was pledged as a security for debt owed 
to the creditor when that debt has not been 
paid . Usually the creditor is the “ bank ” or 
lending institution . While there are several 
kinds of foreclosures and the process can 
209
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
is in foreclosure . Other documents are filed in the courthouse until 
the last document , the Final Judgment of Foreclosure , triggers a 
Notice of Sale detailing the time , date , and place of the sale . At 
the sale , the highest bidder gets the property . In some states , it is 
now the new buyer ’ s property . But in other states , there is a “ right of 
redemption ” period that can last from 30 days to one year . In some 
states , the mortgagee is allowed to remain in the home until the right 
of redemption period has passed . The time sequence for all of these 
steps can vary from state to state . 
Non-Judicial Foreclosure 
Non-judicial foreclosure is used in trust deed states , or “ title theory ” 
states . Instead of a mortgage , the borrower ( trustor ) gives a deed 
of trust to the trustee ( usually an attorney ) to hold for the lender 
( beneficiary )  . When the borrower is in default of the loan , the lender 
instructs the trustee to file a Notice of Default .  
A Notice of Default is the initial start of the foreclosure process 
and is filed in the county recorder ’ s office . It is public record , giving 
notice that a property is in foreclosure . An equitable period of 
redemption follows the Notice of Default . This period can vary from 
state to state , but it is usually 60 to 90 days .  
After that , the sale is advertised as a Notice of Trustee Sale . A
short time later , the auction is held and the sale goes to the highest 
bidder . There is no redemption period after the auction . 
Find Out the Process Where You Live 
It is important for you to learn how the foreclosure process works in 
the state where you live and / or are purchasing properties and the 
timeframes involved . 
To get this information , you can contact a title company or a 
foreclosure attorney and ask them to explain the process for your 
210
timeframes . If you are ever under the wire 
and need a few more days ( and the auction 
is still several days away )  , you may want to 
contact the attorney ’ s office or lender to see 
if they would still accept the money to cure 
the loan and stop the foreclosure .  
If you are having trouble finding 
this information out , but have seen an 
advertisement of the sale , contact the person 
who is handling the sale , such as the attorney ’ s 
office or sheriff ’ s office . In some states , it is the 
sheriff who conducts the sale and you will 
find information about the upcoming auctions 
posted in the sheriff ’ s office . 
Check the Laws of Your State 
As you can see , every state has specific 
procedures in handling foreclosures . If you 
feel as though you need more information 
about the system where you live , you can 
go to the law library at your courthouse and 
ask for your state ’ s laws on foreclosure . And 
remember , check to see if there are relevant 
laws for your state ( for example , some states 
require a contract that gives the owner a 
5-day “ right of rescission ”  )  . You can also 
check with an attorney or competent title 
company . You will want to comply with your 
state ’ s statutes and laws . 
state . You want to make sure you understand 
the timeframes involved , especially from the 
initial time when the default notice is filed 
at the courthouse until the auction . Ask the 
title company or foreclosure attorney what 
that initial filing is called and where this 
information is filed in your courthouse .  
You also want to know how many times 
the notice is advertised in the newspaper , 
and if this advertisement is only in a legal 
publication or if it will also appear in the 
legal section of the classifieds in your local 
newspaper . If it appears only in a legal 
publication , get the name of the publication 
and information on how you can purchase 
a copy .  
You also want to know the amount of 
time you have to “ cure ” the loan before 
the auction and stop the foreclosure . For 
instance , in Georgia , the auction is held 
once a month on a Tuesday . The Friday 
night after the attorney ’ s office closes , it 
becomes too late to cure the loan and stop 
the auction . In the state of Washington , it is 
ten days before the auction . 
The important thing is you do not want 
to spend a lot of time and energy working 
hard to stop a foreclosure only to find out 
you have just one more day to cure the 
loan , even if the auction is not scheduled 
for another week . Always know your 
211
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
the three phases of foreclosure
Now that you know the two main types of foreclosure and are 
familiarizing yourself with your state ’ s laws and processes regarding 
foreclosures , let ’ s take a look at the three phases of foreclosure you 
are going to come across . 
When most people talk about foreclosure , they are referring 
to one of the three phases of foreclosure . In the beginning of this 
section , you were asked what kind of visions the word “ foreclosure ” 
evokes . The information that followed was written explicitly to 
illustrate these three phases of foreclosure .  
For example , the homeowner falling behind in his house 
payments demonstrates the first phase , which is before the auction . 
The people on the courthouse steps bidding frantically on the 
property is the second phase of foreclosure , the auction itself . And 
the family being removed from their house by the sheriff exemplifies 
the third phase of foreclosure , after the auction , when families lose 
their homes . 
We want to impress upon you that foreclosure is not a pretty 
picture . You are in the people business . Real estate investing is 
working with people and the people you will be working with in the 
foreclosure market are real people experiencing a financial crisis 
that could literally cause them to be out on the streets . 
The three main causes of foreclosure tend to be divorce , 
job loss , and unexpected medical problems . As you work in the 
foreclosure market , you will have the opportunity to help people who 
are devastated by the circumstances they are now in . Right now , 
they are stuck on the proverbial railroad track with the train barreling 
down on them . You can step in and give them a helping hand . 
212
they will not only sell you the property at a 
huge discount , but they may also be willing 
to “ be the bank ,  ” meaning you do not have 
to go out and get a loan from traditional 
sources .  
Other areas will not have that problem , 
but it may still be hard for you to buy at 
the auction if they require all cash . This is 
another reason why it ’ s important to find 
out the rules and regulations for foreclosure 
auctions where you live before you go to 
an auction . You are interested in finding out 
how much you have to come up with on the 
day of the auction , what kind of deed you 
will get , and if there is a redemption period . 
All these things may affect whether you want 
to buy at the auction .  
It is also important for you to research 
the properties that you are interested in 
purchasing at the auction . Let ’ s go through 
an example to see why .  
On Saturday morning , you see a 
notice in the newspaper of a foreclosure 
auction being held Thursday morning . You 
know the area where the house is located . 
Houses there are selling from $85 , 000 to 
$90 , 000 . The bank is owed $22 , 000 .  
You jump in the car and drive to the 
property . It doesn ’ t look bad ! It just needs 
a little paint and cleanup . You notice it is 
vacant , so you leap out of the car to look 
As you put people first and work to 
solve their problems , you should have more 
deals than you can even handle . 
Phase 1 – Before the Auction 
The first phase is before the auction , when 
you are dealing with an owner of a property 
that is being foreclosed on by the lender . The 
owner is in default of his mortgage or deed 
of trust . When you hear someone say they 
are “ in foreclosure ,  ” they are likely referring 
to the pre-foreclosure stage , which is before 
the auction . This is the area of foreclosure 
that will be your main focus . 
Phase 2 – At the Auction 
The second phase is at the auction . This is 
where the property is put up for sale to the 
public through an auction . Many investors 
will purchase properties at the auction and 
find some really great deals . However , for 
many investors , it is too hard to compete 
with the “ big guys ” who have a lot of cash 
at these auctions . In some areas of the 
country , these “ big guys ” will literally bid the 
property up , possibly for more than it is even 
worth , simply to keep the “ little guys ” out of 
their territory .  
If you live in an area like that , you may 
want to network with the “ big guys ” to see if 
they will sell you some properties . Sometimes 
213
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
through the windows . You are surprised to see it looks pretty nice . 
Even the carpet appears to be in good shape . Now you are really 
excited ! 
Thursday arrives and you head over to the courthouse for the 
auction . You get the winning bid of $32 , 500 ! You spruce up the 
home and put a FSBO sign in the front yard . You get your asking 
price of $85 , 000 . You go to the closing eager to pick up your 
check . You should have a profit of about $45 , 000 after subtracting 
repairs and closing costs . Wow ! Real estate investing is great ! 
At the closing , you look at the check . It ’ s for only $1 , 450 ! What 
happened ?  ! Someone made a mistake !  
Actually , it was you who made the mistake . A big mistake ! 
Because you neglected to do any research other than look at the 
house , you didn ’ t know there was a first mortgage lien of $42 , 750 
and back taxes of $800 on the property ! It was , in fact , the second 
mortgage that was foreclosing . You were fortunate ( even though 
you may not be thinking that right now ) because you could have 
paid more than the house was worth ! 
The lesson : Never buy at an auction unless you do your due 
diligence . Buying a property at an auction does not guarantee a 
clear title . There may be some liens that will stay attached to the 
property . Usually , any junior liens are wiped out through the auction 
process . However , some liens that have been filed in junior position 
move into senior position , such as tax liens . 
You should always do a preliminary title search 
before you purchase a propert y . 
Another thing you have to be careful of is the fact that many times , 
you cannot get into the house . The bank does not own it . Sometimes 
an investor will approach the owner the day before the auction 
and be able to see the inside ( don ’ t count on that happening !  )  . 
214
foreclosure properties to look into . These 
properties have gone through the foreclosure 
process and are now offered through a 
bidding process . To make an offer on one 
of these properties , you will need to have a 
HUD-certified broker make the offer for you . 
And because this is so important , it bears 
repeating : Make sure you do not bid on 
the owner-occupied list unless you plan to 
live in the home . Some students are eager 
to buy as owner-occupied because they can 
get in with less money or they are afraid 
they may not get the deal if they don ’ t get in 
early . But whatever you do , DO NOT bid 
on a property that is on the owner-occupied 
list unless you are definitely going to live in 
it . Wait until it appears on the open bid . 
You can view HUD , VA , and other 
foreclosures on the HUD website at www . 
hud . gov / homes / homesforsale . cfm . 
Another Phase 
There is one more phase of foreclosure 
where you can purchase a property . If 
you live in a state where there is a right 
of redemption after the auction , you can 
still pursue purchasing a property . A few 
investors focus on that period by contacting 
the owners to have them waive their right of 
redemption and negotiate with the bank to 
discount the note . 
But realize the night before the auction , the 
owner may trash the house and do some 
pretty serious damage in a very short period 
of time . If you buy at an auction , always bid 
on it as though it was in horrible condition . 
Always look at the worst-case scenario ; 
hopefully , you will be pleasantly surprised . 
Phase 3 – After the Auction 
The third phase is after the auction if the 
bank has taken the property back . The 
property is now a “ foreclosure .  ” Sometimes 
a foreclosure is referred to as an REO
property ( real estate owned – by a bank ) 
or a repo ( bank repossession )  . You may be 
able to buy directly from the bank if you 
approach them within two or three days . 
After that , they will list the property with an 
agent .  
In some areas of the country , investors 
find great deals on bank-owned properties . 
In other areas , the bank wants too much 
and doesn ’ t budge much . But even in the 
areas where they overprice the foreclosures , 
understand that if the properties do not sell 
and have been on the books for a long 
period of time , the bank will start coming 
down in their prices .  
Additionally , as we discussed in 
Chapter Three , there are HUD and VA
foreclosures as well as other government 
215
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
Many investors are successful doing this . But as mentioned earlier , 
your main focus is going to be on pre-foreclosures . You will find 
there is much more flexibility when you work in the pre-foreclosure 
market . 
PRE-FORECLOSURES
Why buy a pre-foreclosure ? First of all , there are tremendous 
opportunities to make money in the pre-foreclosure market . Secondly , 
you can find foreclosures everywhere . With the increase of corporate 
downsizing , divorce rates , and consumer debt , more people are 
facing a financial crisis . And that means every day , there are new 
foreclosures being filed . This can create an abundance of new 
leads every month . Thirdly , with pre-foreclosures , there is greater 
potential for making money while still helping people . 
Buying pre-foreclosures is an exciting way to make money . 
You can buy the property under market value and make a profit 
immediately . You can obtain instant equity with very little money . 
And you can purchase a pre-foreclosure without having great credit . 
You may not even have to get a loan to obtain a pre-foreclosure . 
Many times , the owner will literally deed you the house . The owner 
is walking away and would rather have you get the house than 
the bank . Of course , the arrears still have to be paid to stop the 
foreclosure , but this can mean a great deal for you , and it has 
happened for some of our students . You have already learned the 
key to finding deals is to find a motivated seller . Well , people in 
foreclosure are highly motivated . They need debt relief ! You can 
help them and make good money doing so . 
When you purchase a pre-foreclosure , you do not have to 
go out and get financing . You are curing the loan by paying the 
arrearage and fees that have accumulated . To do so , you may be 
thinking ,  “ How do I come up with the money ?  ” Some investors use 
216
system is locating the pre-foreclosures . There 
are many ways to find them . The following 
are some we have found to be quite 
effective . 
County court house 
The county courthouse provides a wealth of 
information . You can look up divorce cases , 
bankruptcies , judgments , delinquent taxes , 
probate , lawsuits , and… pre-foreclosures ! 
To find people in pre-foreclosure , what 
you look for will depend on where you live . 
In mortgage states (  “ lien theory ” states )  , the 
public filing of the default is a Lis Pendens . 
The process of foreclosure is much longer in 
a judicial state . You will want to search the 
lawsuits for foreclosures , usually looking for 
a Lis Pendens . In trust deed states , the first 
public notice is a Notice of Default . But the 
name can vary slightly depending on the 
state where you live . This is one area where 
your prior research into the applicable 
procedures for your state will come in handy . 
For example , you would look for a Notice 
of Default in states like California and Utah . 
In Arizona , the document filed is called a 
Notice of Trustee Sale . In Colorado , it is 
called a Notice of Election and Demand . 
And still other states will not file anything in 
the courthouse ; their first notice to the public 
is in a publication . 
a cash advance from a credit card or from a 
line of credit . Others will use “ hard ” money . 
But regardless of the source used , the nice 
thing about pre-foreclosures is the amount 
it normally takes to stop the foreclosure is 
much less than your down payment would 
have been on such a property . You don ’ t 
even have to qualify for a loan . In fact , many 
loans are cured with between $3 , 000 and 
$10 , 000 . Now this doesn ’ t mean you won ’ t 
come across one that may be $50 , 000 to 
cure . However , the deals are out there and 
most pre-foreclosures can be cured with very 
little capital . 
Many investors have found partner 
investors who fund the money and then split 
the profit . Still others will assign the contract 
( think wholesale !  ) to another investor . 
the system for buying
pre-foreclosures
Now , let ’ s look further into pre-foreclosures 
by reviewing the system for buying a preforeclosure . It all starts with knowing where 
to find them ! 
Step 1 – Finding Pre-Foreclosures 
The first step in working the pre-foreclosure 
217
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
The information in your courthouse may also be available to you 
online . Contact your courthouse and ask them if you can access the 
information you ’ re seeking online and get the appropriate website 
address .  
You can also go to www . netronline . com and click on “ Public 
Records Online .  ” Now click on your state . Go to your county and it 
will show you if it is online or not ( you ’ ll see an option to “ Go to Data 
Online ”  )  . If available , click on this link and search for the appropriate 
documents . To help familiarize yourself with this process , we have 
included an assignment at the end of this chapter for you to do . It 
will help you know how to search in a county website and what kind 
of information you may find . Then you will feel comfortable going 
through your own county courthouse records online .  
You should also be aware that tracking other filings in the 
courthouse , such as divorce cases , bankruptcies , etc .  , can help 
you find pre-foreclosures . The major cause of foreclosure is divorce . 
Sending postcards asking someone going through divorce if they 
would consider selling their property may help you find a person 
in foreclosure . Likewise , tax liens indicate some kind of financial 
duress , and so does bankruptcy . These are all indicators you may 
want to be aware of when looking for distressed sellers , some of 
whom may be in the beginning stages of foreclosure . 
Title company 
For those of you who live in states where title companies are 
predominantly used to handling the closings , you are in luck ! Title 
companies are eager to give investors information .  
For example , in an effort to promote their title business , they will 
help agents “ farm ” an area . Farming is a term used in the real estate 
industry to describe concentrating or focusing on an area , whether 
geographically or by type or size of property ( single family residence , 
218
company provides and if they charge a fee . 
You ’ ll usually find that the more you use them 
to close your deals , the more they will do for 
you for free . 
Legal publications or the legal 
notice section of your local 
newspaper
If you live in a state where the first 
indication of foreclosure is the publishing 
of the foreclosure in a legal publication or 
newspaper , then you will need to know 
which publication ( s ) it will appear in . You 
can also look for lawsuits filed that may 
indicate a foreclosure . 
Attorneys 
Attorneys , quite often , get information 
about foreclosures on a daily basis . They 
frequently market to these homeowners 
offering bankruptcy as a solution to stop the 
foreclosure . If you have a relationship with 
an attorney who would be willing to share 
that information , you may be able to reach 
owners before your competition even knows 
about their pending foreclosure . 
Bankruptcy 
Many investors will walk away from a deal 
if they see it is in bankruptcy . But if you 
know there is good equity in the property , 
condo , up to 4 units , 5 to 10 acres , out of state 
owners , etc .  )  . Title companies will pull up lists 
of these kinds of properties for agents to farm . 
The agent will then use the list for marketing 
campaigns to find prospective sellers . The 
title company provides this customer service 
hoping the agent will encourage their clients 
to use the title company to handle the closing . 
Well , what do investors do ? They buy 
real estate ! So most title companies want 
your business as well . Ask them if they can 
pull up a list of properties in foreclosure for 
you . A number of them will actually already 
have a list prepared each week that they 
give to real estate agents and other investors . 
Remember , you may also want the title 
company to pull up other information 
for you . For example , they can help you 
farm other areas you may be focusing on . 
Sometimes they can pull up comps for you . 
And a number of title companies will even 
print out labels for your target area ( preforeclosures , out of the area owners , etc .  )  . 
The title company on your power team can 
also do preliminary title searches , which 
you will need them to do before purchasing 
a pre-foreclosure .  
Ask what kind of services the title 
219
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
you may be able to pick the property up in a few months with little 
competition . That ’ s because most bankruptcies temporarily stop the 
foreclosure , but once the homeowner is out of court , the foreclosure 
will start up again . 
Talk to the homeowner and let them know you are glad they 
were able to stop their foreclosure . Let them know that if the court 
dismisses the case , you would still be interested in purchasing the 
home . If the foreclosure process has not started , you could still 
send postcards offering to buy their home . When the bankruptcy is 
completed , they may be calling you ( sometimes even before !  )  . 
Banks 
Sometimes banks have clients who are willing to deed the house 
back to the bank in lieu of foreclosure . However , this may not be in 
the bank ’ s best interest , especially if there are other liens associated 
with the property .  
If you have a good relationship with the bank and they trust you 
will take good care of their client , they may refer the client to you . 
Once you have established a pattern of purchasing foreclosures 
from them , they may give you the opportunity to purchase properties 
at a discount after an auction , before they turn those properties over 
to a Real estate professional to sell . 
Real estate professionals 
Real estate professionals often know early on that a home is being 
foreclosed on or that the owner is having financial difficulties and 
may soon be in foreclosure . You will probably need to pay the 
agent ’ s commission in such a case .  
If you find a pre-foreclosure at the courthouse and , in driving 
by the house , you see an agent sign out front , contact the agent . Let 
them know you are a real estate investor and noticed the home is in 
foreclosure . 
220
Marketing
One of the most powerful tools to find 
someone who is in pre-foreclosure is to 
market that you offer solutions to such a 
problem . Marketing is simply spreading the 
word : 
• Car Magnets – This is an effective 
way to get the word out that you buy 
foreclosures . Our students have had 
great response to magnetic car signs . 
They are usually inexpensive and last 
a long time . Check with your 
automobile insurance agent to make 
sure you have the correct coverage 
( in this case , your vehicle may be 
considered a “ company ” car and you 
will need that put into the policy )  . 
• Newspaper Ads – Advertising 
in the newspaper can be expensive .  
Sometimes you can get discounts 
through your real estate investment 
club . Make an ad that is different to 
attract attention . 
• Signs – Make them as large as you 
can . They need to be easily readable 
from a distance . 
Tell them you would like to make an 
offer . Ask them to contact the owner and let 
them know you may be able to help them 
and to see if the owner would like to take a 
look at the offer . 
What you are trying to accomplish here 
is to make sure your offer will be presented . 
If you submit a “ low ” offer , the agent may just 
disregard it or be embarrassed to present it 
to the owner ( even though , by law , an agent 
must present all offers )  . By having the owner 
 “ agree ” to look at the offer , you now have 
an agent who will present it to the owner .  
If you feel your offer is too complicated 
for the agent to explain , you can ask to be 
present when the offer is presented to the 
owner or to be on a conference call with 
the agent and owner when the offer is 
presented . 
Internet
There is an abundance of websites 
offering their services to help you locate 
pre-foreclosures . However , the drawback 
with some foreclosure services is that the 
information they offer is sometimes old . 
221
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
• Flyers – Create flyers letting homeowners know what you 
can do for them . Leave flyers on both the front and back 
doors of the house if no one answers the door . 
• Mailings – This is a numbers game . Just because you 
haven ’ t received a response to one mailing does not mean 
your mailings are not working . You need to send repeat 
letters . It may take four to five letters before you get a 
response . 
• Postcards – A postcard takes only fifteen seconds to get 
your message across . Make it simple to get their attention .  
Use bullets and bright color backgrounds . 
• Chamber of Commerce – Business owners often 
belong to the Chamber of Commerce . Sometimes businesses 
fail and the business owner may be falling behind on his 
or her mortgage payments . Put an ad in the newsletter the 
Chamber of Commerce sends out . 
• Website – Create a website . Keep it simple . Sometimes you 
can put one up for free ! Put your website address on all of 
your marketing materials . 
Be consistent ! You need to consistently market your business . If you 
knock on enough doors , you will get someone to open the door and 
let you in . If you keep making phone calls and leaving messages , 
eventually someone will answer or return your call . If you keep 
mailing letters , you will get results . 
222
up , even if the majority of the city is selfcorrecting . We discussed this early in this 
book but if you need a refresher , return to 
Chapter 2 : Understanding Market Analysis 
& Evaluation . In almost any city there will 
be neighborhoods / zip codes that continue 
to experience higher demand due to good 
school districts and nice houses . This is where 
you want to go to look for foreclosures ! 
Considering the number of new 
construction homes that are in foreclosure 
status at the present time , there should be 
few repairs to make to these properties . 
However , if there are issues that are 
cosmetic ( such as a need for a refurbishment 
of landscaping , painting , etc .  , we are 
including some information in this area to 
help you calculate the way these repairs 
need to affect your purchase price and 
calculations . To figure out true equity , take 
the FMV / after-repair value ( ARV )  , which is 
determined by the comps . 
Then , subtract : 
• The principal balance of the mortgage
• All costs to bring the loan current 
and stop the foreclosure ( include back 
payments , attorney fees , court fees , 
and late penalty fees ) 
Step 2 – Determining Value 
The default notices will tell you how much is 
owed , which will help you determine if this is 
a deal worth pursuing or not . But sometimes , 
depending on the attorney , information 
about what is owed may not be included . 
What you are trying to figure out is if there is 
enough equity for you to want to do the deal . 
Of course , this is just a quick calculation , as 
there can be other circumstances affecting 
the value of the home .  
First , you will need to know property 
values for homes in the area . Get the comps 
if you don ’ t know . Then determine what the 
gross profit would be by subtracting the 
amount owed on the property in default 
from the market value of the home . This gives 
you the approximate equity in the house . 
Remember this is just a ballpark number . 
There are other things to factor in , as 
you will find out later .  
Also remember that pre-foreclosure is 
the best time to buy if there is equity in the 
property . To determine value , first use a rule 
of thumb – never pay more than 70% of 
value when dealing with a self-correcting 
market . You need a minimum of 30% equity 
in the property to cushion your deal if more 
self-correction takes place after your closing . 
As well , target the neighborhoods in your 
city where property values are going 
223
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
• Any other liens , taxes , and / or judgments 
• Repairs , if any 
• Title work and title insurance 
This would give you the equity . Remember , equity is not profit . It is 
simply the means to the profit . If you were to fix the property and 
sell it , you would have closing costs , holding costs , and selling costs 
that you would subtract from the equity to calculate your profit . 
From the equity , you would subtract your closing costs as a 
seller , and holding costs ( figure how long to rehab plus how long 
to resell = holding time )  . Once you have holding time , subtract that 
many months of taxes , insurance , utilities , outside maintenance , and 
mortgage or interest payments ; the selling costs ; the agent ’ s fee if 
you use an agent ; and advertising fees if applicable . Whatever is 
left over would be your profit . 
There are also other factors to consider . For example , if the 
owner put down a large down payment , obviously that would make 
the home worth more than the loan amount . And if you live in a 
market that is rapidly increasing in value ( and there is a tremendous 
rise in prices in certain neighborhood markets !  )  , you may find that 
in less than one year , there would be a lot of equity in a property . 
Whatever you do , though , don ’ t spend hours at the courthouse 
researching to see what was owed or what liens may be on the 
property . You could spend all that time only to find out the owner 
has already cured the loan or that they aren ’ t willing to talk to you . 
You need to contact the owner before you spend too much time on 
any particular deal . Just try to get a general idea of what kind of 
equity may be in the home first . Then , if you think it may be worth 
pursuing , the next step will be contacting the owner . 
224
comfortable with you and showing up in 
fancy clothes , driving an expensive car won ’ t 
do that . Bring a clipboard with the paperwork 
you have and your information sheet . 
When you knock on the door , there 
are two approaches you might use ( be sure 
to first review any applicable state laws 
regarding approaching homeowners in 
foreclosure )  . 
The first method is the gentle approach . 
Knock on the door and introduce yourself . 
Let the homeowner know you are looking 
to buy a house in the neighborhood and 
someone said their house might be available 
for sale .  
At this point , they may tell you it has 
already been taken care of and slam the 
door .  
How did they know you knew the 
house was in foreclosure ? Do you think other 
investors have already contacted them ?  
Or , they may politely tell you the house 
is not for sale . Now you have a couple 
of choices . You can thank them for talking 
to you , hand them your business card , and 
suggest that if they change their mind , 
to please call you . Or you could say the 
reason you thought their house was for sale 
is because , according to public records , 
their house is in foreclosure . 
Step 3 – Contacting the Owner
This is quite often easier said than done . 
The owner may be hesitant to open the 
door or answer the phone . Remember , they 
are experiencing an array of emotions . Try 
to picture how you or a loved one might 
feel if you were in this same situation . There 
are bill collectors and creditors bombarding 
them . The foreclosure clock is ticking . 
They are facing losing their home . Some 
homeowners handle this with denial , while 
others are angry and many are in anguish . 
They may be tossing the mail directly into 
the trash and hiding from the outside world . 
Still , somehow you need to make contact 
with the owner . Knocking on doors is always 
the most effective way . But if they don ’ t 
answer the door , leave a note letting them 
know you can help them . Send letters or 
postcards . Make phone calls . Be persistent 
in trying to contact them . 
The following offers some tips 
on approaching owners
Approaching the owner at the door – what 
to say : 
When you are meeting with the owner , 
be sure to go in casual attire . Don ’ t drive 
the fancy car . You want the owner to feel 
225
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures 
At that point , they might invite you in to talk with them . Ask to 
see the house . Ask questions about the house and how long they 
have lived there , etc . At some point , ask them if they are current 
with their mortgage payments . They could lie to you , but most will 
tell you exactly what is going on in their lives . 
The other method is the direct approach
There are actually several direct approaches you may want to use 
( be sure to see the Important Note below before proceeding with 
any of these approaches )  . We have provided a couple options for 
using the direct approach below . 
Introduce yourself . Ask ,  “ Are you Mrs . _______ ?  ” You want to ask 
this early because you need to make sure you are speaking with the 
homeowner and not their parent or child .  
 “ I noticed your house is in foreclosure . I may be able to help you . 
Have you considered selling your home ?  ”  
 “ Hello , I ’ m _________ . Forgive me for intruding , but are you the 
person who may lose their home because of foreclosure ? I am here 
to see if I can help you . I ’ ve helped many people in your situation . 
May I speak with you for a few minutes ?  ”  
 “ Hello , I ’ m ____________ , are you _______ ? I buy houses on the 
courthouse steps every month . I was wondering if you would be 
interested in selling before the auction . I can pay cash .  ”  
 “ Hi , I ’ m ____________ , are you Mrs . _______ ? In my business , I
read the legal notices daily and noticed you are in default of your 
mortgage . I ’ ve helped many people by purchasing their home and 
stopping the foreclosure . Would you be interested ?  ” 
226
skip to Step 4 – Meeting with the Owner . 
Important Note : States have different rules 
about assisting people in foreclosure or 
buying property in foreclosure . This will affect 
your approach . Be sure to always check 
the specific laws of your state regarding 
foreclosures first and any rules about 
approaching homeowners in foreclosure . 
Approaching the owner by mail – 
what to send 
Other ways to approach the owner include 
using notes , postcards , and letters to 
generate response .  
For example , if the owner doesn ’ t 
answer the door , leave a handwritten note 
( which you have prepared ahead of time ) on 
the door . We have found that handwritten 
notes get the most attention because they 
seem so personal .  
Or you could contact the owner by 
sending a letter . Better yet , use a postcard , 
which is cheaper and can get their attention 
without counting on them to open an 
envelope . Indicate what you can do for 
the owner . Most owners will need cash to 
relocate and pay debts . They are concerned 
with their credit .  
So specify in the postcard , using bullets 
to make your points quickly , that you may be 
able to stop the foreclosure , save their credit , 
and give them cash to move and pay bills . 
Another approach that is gentle , but direct :  
 “ Hi , I ’ m ____________ , are you Mr . 
______________ ? Great ! I work with XYZ
Company . We help people who are having 
difficulties with their lenders . According to 
public records , your mortgage company 
has filed papers with the county to start 
procedures to take your home from you .  
Every day we help people just like 
you . We understand how challenging your 
situation is . We provide solutions to people 
in situations like yours . We can negotiate 
with the bank for forbearance , examine 
your ability to refinance your mortgage , or 
buy your home with cash . We can help you 
with moving expenses . 
Most importantly , we work to stop the 
foreclosure and save your credit . 
We offer a free , no obligation 
consultation to help you learn what your 
options are and how we can help . We can 
explore which solution may be best for you . 
When would be a good time to meet with 
you ?  ” 
At this point , the owner may be interested 
enough to invite you in to discuss what you 
can do for them . If that happens , you can 
227
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
Many investors have been successful using campaigns that 
combine multiple approaches . For example , some investors created 
a campaign that used both flyers and postcards and a simple system 
for delivering them .  
Each week , when the default notices were filed , they would 
go to the courthouse , make a list , and map out the houses in 
foreclosure . Then , they would hire a college student to drive to 
each house and put a flyer on the door . Every week , they followed 
up with a postcard that had the same message as the flyers ( such 
as “ Avoid the stigma of foreclosure – this could be your last chance 
to get help from someone who cares !  ”  )  . 
The important thing with your mailings is to be consistent and 
repetitive . You will find you do not always get a response from the 
first letter you send , but that ’ s to be expected . You need to follow 
up with more letters . You may want to use the exact same message 
each time like the students above did , or you may want to send 
different letters with each mailing . This can take some time to keep 
track of the people you are sending letters to and which letters 
you sent . Create a database that will help you keep detailed , but 
efficient records . 
A couple of tips to help you increase your response : 
• Handwrite materials – As we mentioned previously , 
handwritten materials seem more personalized and often get 
more attention . Many investors simply don ’ t have the 
time to handwrite postcards or letters , but if you do take the 
time to handwrite your materials , make sure they are neat and 
easy to read . It is best to use your name on the letter because a 
company name can make the owner apprehensive . If you 
decide to send letters , handwritten or not , handwrite the 
envelopes to improve response . 
228
• Lawsuit – If you find a lawsuit 
filed by the creditor ( usually in judicial 
foreclosures )  , go to the courthouse and 
check to see what address was used 
to serve the papers . Also , check with 
the County Tax Assessor ’ s office . See 
if they have a different mailing address 
than the house being foreclosed on . 
They may have a forwarding address . 
• Post Office – Send a letter to the 
vacant address . Write or stamp on the 
envelope : DO NOT FORWARD , 
RETURN ADDRESS CORRECTION
REQUESTED . This is a request to the 
Post Office to not forward the mail , 
but instead return it to you with the new 
address if they have one available . 
• Phone Directories – Use a phone 
directory to try to find the owners of 
abandoned homes and use reverse 
directories to look up neighbors ’ phone 
numbers by their address . 
• State Motor Vehicle 
Departm ent –
Contact the State Motor Vehicle 
Department to see if the person in 
pre-foreclosure has a current driver ’ s 
license and address . Also find out 
• Overnight mailers get
noticed – 
If you know the owner is still living in 
the home , you may want to overnight 
him or her a letter . It will get opened 
quickly . You may want to include a 
contract that is already filled out , 
offering to give the seller $5 , 000 .  
Some investors have used overnight 
mailers and put them between the 
screen and door with great results . 
If the house is abandoned 
Often , the owner has moved out and 
the house is now vacant . In this case , 
you will need to know how to find the 
owner . 
Here are some ways to locate owners of 
abandoned properties : 
• Neighbors – Knock on neighbor ’ s 
doors . Quite often they know how 
to reach the owner . If you have trouble 
finding neighbors at home , use a 
reverse directory and put in the street 
name . You will see all the neighbors 
living on that street who have listed 
phone numbers . Call them . 
229
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
if any cars are registered in his or her name and what the 
registration address is . 
• Voter Registration Records – Check voter registration 
records in the county of the property owner ’ s last residence .  
See if the owner has re-registered within the same county . If 
so , get the address . 
• Private Detective or Skip Trace – A private detective 
can often locate the owner within a few hours . 
Approaching the owner by phone – what to do 
Your goal is to meet with the owner , so ask for the owner , but make 
sure you do not sound like a bill collector .  
Sometimes the person answering the phone , who may be the 
owner himself , will tell you the owner isn ’ t home . If that happens , 
simply ask the person you ’ re speaking with when they expect the 
owner to return . Let him know you help people who are having 
trouble making their house payments and you would really like 
to help the owner . Ask him to please give the owner your phone 
number . If you think you may be talking to the owner himself , ask ,  
 “ Do you think the owner might want to talk with me about this ?  ” Find 
out when it would be a good time to catch the owner at home .  
If the person answering the phone identifies himself as the 
owner , ask when he could meet with you . If he seems hesitant , 
indicate that in order for you to determine if you can help , you will 
need to meet with him . Ask him to have these documents available 
for your meeting : 
230
know when , how , or through whom a great 
opportunity may arise . 
When a homeowner calls you , always 
ask for the name and number of the person 
calling . If you get disconnected , you will 
have the information needed to return the 
call . And ask them how they heard about 
you ( this will help you determine which 
marketing tool is the most effective in 
bringing you the calls )  . 
Then ask them to tell you about their 
situation and what you can do to help them . 
Make sure you listen to what they are saying . 
If after listening to them , they haven ’ t given 
you the following information , ask !  ( You may 
also want to use the following questions if 
you were to knock on a door and be invited 
in .  ) 
Questions to ask the owner
• Do you have an attorney ?  ( If yes , get 
the attorney ’ s name and phone number .  
Ask what their attorney has advised 
them to do . This is important for you to 
know before you proceed any further .  ) 
• When did you purchase the home ? 
• How much did you pay for the home ? 
• The default information 
• Information showing ownership of the 
property 
• Property tax records 
• Any letters or other correspondence 
from the bank 
• Mortgage and loan documents 
• Other liens and debts attached to the 
property 
• Insurance policies 
Screening calls 
You will often have someone in preforeclosure call you in response to your 
marketing , such as the postcards you have 
mailed . As you screen calls , you are looking 
for motivated sellers . These are sellers who 
need to unload this house in order to get on 
with their lives .  
You will also have people call on your 
ads and other marketing materials who are 
not motivated . Don ’ t be discouraged if some 
of your callers are not good prospects ; keep 
marketing and networking . You need to let 
everyone know you buy houses ; you never 
231
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
• How much was the loan for ? 
• How much do you owe now ? 
• When did you get the loan ? 
• What is the lender ’ s name ? 
• How many payments are you behind ? 
• What is the monthly payment ? 
• Does this include taxes and insurance ? 
• Have you been served with a foreclosure notice ? 
• Have you spoken to or been in contact with anyone at the 
bank ? 
• How much money does the bank need to bring the loan 
current ? 
• Do you have any other mortgages or liens on the property ? If 
they answer yes , ask :  
– What other mortgages or liens do you have ?  
– Are you behind on payments ?  
– When was the mortgage or lien recorded ?  
– What was the original balance ?  
– Are they foreclosing or trying to collect ? 
232
Ask them to tell you 
about the house
Again , really listen to what they are saying . 
You can expect that they will tell you the 
basic details about the house , such as the 
square footage , style of the house , number 
of bedrooms and baths , if it has a garage 
or carport , and any special features or 
amenities . But you also want to know about 
the condition of the property . Ask them how 
much work it will take to get it fixed up . 
Also ask : 
• What are your plans ? 
• Would you consider selling your 
home ? 
• Would you consider moving if I
helped you with the moving expenses 
and down payment on a new place ? 
• Do you have any family you could 
move in with ? 
• Who do I need to contact ? Get the 
names and contact information . 
• How is the condition of the home ? 
• Do you have a current appraisal and 
survey ? 
• What do you think the home is worth ? 
• Do you still live in the home ? 
• Are you current with your property 
taxes ? 
• How much are your taxes ? 
• Do you owe the IRS any money ? 
• Have you spoken with anyone else 
about this problem ? 
• Is your home listed with an agent ? 
• Have you signed any contracts or 
anything else related to the house ? 
• Do you own any other properties ?  
If they do , ask for the address or 
addresses of the other properties , and 
if they are behind on any payments 
for those properties . 
233
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
If they seem uncomfortable answering these questions , let them know 
you need this information to determine how you can help them . 
Many homeowners will open up to you . They want to know 
what you can do for them . They want to know how you can help . Let 
them know you can purchase their home quickly ; you have worked 
with owners in all kinds of situations . But to be able to make an 
offer , you need to know what the home is worth , how much they 
owe , and what their expectations are . 
To get this message across , you might say :  
 “ We can purchase your home quickly , often within a week . 
We have worked with owners in similar situations as yours . Many 
have had very little or no equity in their homes . We can still buy 
the home . For us to make an offer , we will need to evaluate the 
condition of the property and what it is worth . You probably already 
know what is needed to make the house presentable to sell . We 
will take care of the repairs . We will also need to know what you 
owe and what you want from the sale .  ” 
Then say :  
 “ Tell me a little bit about your home and situation .  ” 
You want to know why they need to sell their home . One of the 
reasons we stress listening to the owner so much in this manual 
is because if you truly listen to them , you will find they will often 
tell you the reason they have to sell . As they tell you about their 
circumstances , you need to understand what is happening in their 
lives . Try to determine the difference between what they want and 
what they need . If you were in this situation , what would solve your 
problem ? 
234
owner by listening to what they have to 
say and helping them feel comfortable with 
you and your ability to help them . You will 
also learn a great deal by asking all the 
questions above .  
Once you have the information from 
them about the property and their thoughts 
on its value and condition , your next step is 
to see what kind of offer they might accept 
– how motivated are they ? 
Use one or more of these questions :  
 “ Would you sell me your home for what you 
owe on it ?  ”  
 “ If I were to pay cash and close quickly , 
what is the least you would accept ?  ”  
 “ If I take over your home and let you stay 
until you need to move , would you be ready 
to sign papers today ?  ”  
 “ If you were to sign the paperwork today , 
you could just start over and be free of the 
hassles this house is causing . Would that be 
of help to you ?  ” 
If they are behind on their payments , ask :  
 “ How many months are you behind ?  ” 
Some things you can tell them ( after listening !  ) 
would be :  
 “ Would it help if I started making payments 
on __ ( date ) ____ ?  ” Or ,  “ I can take over your 
house immediately and make your payments 
to relieve you of that burden .  ” 
If you feel there is enough equity in the 
property :  
 “ I can give you money to move and get 
settled into a place you can afford .  ” Or ,  “ If 
I were to take over your home immediately , 
so you can move , would that help you ?  ”  
 “ I can understand how frustrating it must be 
to owe so much that you cannot even afford 
to pay the costs to sell your home . We have 
helped many people who were also in a 
similar situation . We have purchased homes 
with little or no equity .  ” 
Finding out their “ needs ” 
As we mentioned , your goal is to not only 
evaluate the property and opportunity 
through this call , but to also find out exactly 
what needs the owner has that you can fill . 
You will go a long way in accomplishing 
this if you can establish rapport with the 
235
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures 
 “ Have you received anything from the bank yet ?  ”  
 “ If I came in and made up your back payments , how soon can you 
move ?  ” Or ,  “ Have you been looking for a place that better fits your 
budget for now ?  ” 
You need to give them some hope . Remind them this is only a 
temporary situation .  
As you talk with them , go through the property information 
sheet and write down the information they are giving you . Be sure 
to have a blank paper next to it so you can listen and write down 
what they are telling you . You will find that if you let them talk , not 
only will you usually learn much more about what is going on , but 
you will also make them feel more comfortable with you .  
You are a problem solver and they need to understand you can 
help them . 
Get the appointment
By now you should have built rapport with the seller , you know what 
he may be willing to do , you are getting close to figuring out or 
have already figured out what you can do to help him out get out 
of his current situation , and you will have a good idea about how 
motivated he is .  
In your phone conversation , you will have already introduced 
the concept of you taking over the payments on the property and you 
will know if he may be receptive to this . If you feel this is a potential 
deal , your goal at this point should be to get an appointment . 
Ask the seller when you can come over and meet with him . Make 
sure all of the owners will be at the meeting , if at all possible . If 
one is out of state , try to set up a conference call with that person 
236
or maybe you ’ ll decide you do not want to 
go any further with this deal . If you choose 
to not get involved , call the owner back and 
let him know of your decision and why .  
If you do decide this looks like a great 
opportunity to make money and help the 
owner , then you may want to drive by 
the house before the appointment . Look 
over the neighborhood and if you still feel 
like this property has potential , keep your 
appointment . If not , call the owner and 
cancel the appointment , explaining why . 
Paperwork checklist for
pre-foreclosures 
Plan ahead and have all the documents you 
need in a file folder that you can take with 
you to your meeting with the seller . 
When you meet with the seller , you 
will determine if you can do something with 
the property . If you decide you want the 
property , then use the following documents : 
• Authorization to Release Information – 
Get this signed so the lender will talk to 
you . A sample is provided at the end of 
this chapter . When contacting the lender , 
you want the payoff department . While 
on the phone with the payoff department , 
ask : 
at some point . Let the person you talk with 
know you will need everyone who is on the 
deed to sign the paperwork in order for you 
to purchase the property . You want some 
dialogue going on between those who are 
in ownership of the property .  
Also , try to have the meeting at the 
house that ’ s being sold . Sometimes there may 
be extenuating circumstances that cause the 
first meeting to be somewhere else . That ’ s 
okay . Just remember it is preferable to meet 
at the house so you can see the inside of 
the home .  
Ask the owner to gather all the 
information he can about the house and 
the mortgage before the meeting ( payment 
stubs or statements , copy of the mortgage / 
deed of trust , letters and correspondence 
from the bank if in pre-foreclosure , property 
tax information , copy of the deed , etc .  )  . 
Before you meet with the seller 
Before meeting with the seller , you will 
want to get the comps if you are not familiar 
with the area . This will help you determine 
if there is good equity , little equity , or no 
equity in the property .  
You may find that the homeowner owes 
quite a bit more than the property is worth . 
If so , you would have to then consider if it 
was worth doing a short sale ( we ’ ll learn 
more about short sales later in this section )  , 
237
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
– How much is the principal balance ? 
– How much are the monthly payments ? 
– Does that include PITI ? 
– Is the mortgage current ? 
– What is the interest rate ? 
– Is it a fixed rate or variable rate ? 
– Is there a prepayment penalty ? 
– Also , order a payoff quote ( what amount will pay the loan 
off ) and have them fax the quote to you . This quote is usually 
good for 30 days . If they are behind in payments , order a 
reinstatement quote . Ask how much would it cost to get the 
loan back on track . 
• Standard Purchase and Sales Agreement – This is the purchase 
contract between you and the seller . Once this is signed , you 
will fax a copy to the title company and order a preliminary 
title search . You can have it notarized , but it is not necessary . 
• Residential Lease with Option to Purchase – This is an important 
document if you plan to bring the loan current to take over the 
payments . 
• Seller ’ s Property Disclosure – This is an important document to 
have the seller fill out , disclosing the condition of the property . 
Get a copy from your local Board of Realtors® . 
• Bill of Sale – Use a Bill of Sale if personal property is involved 
( such as a refrigerator , washing machine , dryer , range , etc .  )  .  
A sample Bill of Sale is provided at the end of this chapter . 
238
• Are their utilities current ? 
• Do they need cash ? 
• What do they need the cash for ? 
Don ’ t just jump from question to question . 
Listen to what they are saying and they may 
answer these questions without you even 
asking them . However , realize that these 
are the types of things you need to know in 
order to try to find the right solution . 
Whatever you do , you need to establish 
credibility . The owner needs to feel he can 
trust you . He needs to know you can help 
him . Never say anything that isn ’ t true . DO
NOT make promises you can ’ t keep . Be very 
clear about what you can and cannot do .  
You may find owners who are in denial . 
If so , you need to help them face the fact 
they will lose the property if they don ’ t do 
something . The train is barreling down on 
them , picking up speed . That roof over their 
head will soon be gone . Whatever equity 
they have worked so hard to build will be 
gone . Their credit will be destroyed .  
Have they talked with anyone else 
about the foreclosure ? Realize they may 
have been approached by other investors . 
Additionally , attorneys often receive lists 
of people in foreclosure and market their 
services to them . 
• Affidavit and Memorandum of 
Agreement – If you are concerned 
the seller may sell the property to 
someone else before you close , this 
document would create a “ cloud ” on 
the title . A sample is provided at the 
end of this chapter . 
Step 4 – Meeting with the Owner
As you meet in person with the seller , pay 
careful attention to what they say . They 
may even reveal more information to you in 
person than they did on the phone .  
If they are willing to talk , try to find 
out what is happening . Attempt to find out 
why they stopped making payments . Try to 
determine what their needs are by asking 
questions . 
• Have they tried to get a loan ? 
• Are they planning on moving ? 
• Do they have a place to go ? 

• Do they need help to move ? 
• Are creditors harassing them for 
money ? 
239
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures 
Are they about to declare bankruptcy ? If they have talked with 
an attorney , you may need to explain bankruptcy is only a temporary 
quick-fix . Once the bankruptcy is done , foreclosure continues and 
credit is damaged even more .  
Have they talked with a real estate professional ? Often , the 
agent does not get the home sold in time and the house gets 
foreclosed on . If they are thinking of listing the house and will not 
commit to working with you , suggest they exclude you on the listing 
if they end up using an agent ( basically , this exclusion indicates 
that you and the seller have been in discussions about possibly 
purchasing the property prior to the agent getting the listing ; if you 
end up purchasing the property , the agent doesn ’ t get a commission 
since you are listed as an “ excluded ” buyer )  . That way , when they 
realize the agent will not get the home sold in time , they can call 
you to purchase the house and they can avoid paying commissions . 
Look at the owner ’ s records 
At your meeting with the seller , you will want to look at the materials 
you ’ ve asked him to have ready .  
Look at the tax records to get the legal description of the 
property . Write this description down exactly as it is written , even if 
there are mistakes ( it ’ s better to get an actual copy of it )  . 
Look at the deed . Are there other owners of the property that are 
going to need to be involved in this sale ?  
Find out what the zoning is and if the owner has a survey and 
a termite report .  
Look at the mortgage statements to find the lender ’ s name , 
address , and the account number . If the owner is behind in payments , 
be sure to look at any letters from the lender . Often , you will find a 
contact person for you to talk to . See if the owner will let you make 
a copy of their paperwork . 
240
at the bank and would rather you get the 
property than the bank . Or they feel if they 
deed the property to you , they will be rid of 
the financial obligations haunting them . 
Regardless , you will want to be sure 
to get a letter authorizing you to talk to 
and negotiate with the lender and / or 
attorney concerning the mortgage . This is 
the Authorization to Release Information 
document discussed previously . Have the 
seller sign this document . You will want to 
confirm with the lender what it will take 
to cure the loan and how much is left on 
the principal balance , but you will need 
the letter from the owner for the lender or 
attorney to release this information to you .  
Do not forget that interest accrues daily 
and the amount it would take to stop the 
foreclosure now will be different than what 
it will be in two weeks . 
Step 5 – Analyze and Inspect the 
Propert y 
If you haven ’ t already asked , ask the owner 
what he thinks the property is worth and 
what he is willing to sell it for . 
Walk through the house and , if possible , 
do a thorough inspection of the property , 
preferably during the day . Turn lights on and 
off , flush toilets , and turn on the water to 
check the water pressure . Take a flashlight 
You ’ ll also want to know when the seller can 
move out . They may need “ moving money .  ” 
Write down the terms the two of you have 
agreed upon . This will help you in writing 
your purchase contract .  
Are there any other liens , mortgages , 
deeds , judgments , or encumbrances on the 
property ? Find out exactly how much they 
owe . Remember it is possible that they ’ ll lie 
to you , but usually they don ’ t . Many times 
their mind is so fogged , they simply cannot 
think clearly and they just forget ! That ’ s 
one of the reasons why you want to get as 
much information as possible . You will verify 
everything later .  
Let them know you may be able to help 
them by stopping the foreclosure and saving 
their credit . If they need money to move , you 
can pay their first month ’ s rent and deposit 
( pay this directly to the new landlord ; do not 
hand the seller the cash or they may spend it 
on something else )  . You can give them cash 
after they have moved out . 
The main thing you need for them to 
understand is that you will work to stop the 
foreclosure by bringing it current and by 
making the payments until such time as the 
property sells or you refinance it .  
As we said before , sometimes they 
just want out and will deed the property to 
you . They are walking . They may be angry 
241
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
and look under the sinks , noting any damage you see . Look for water 
stains on the ceiling . Also , look at the condition of the roof . Find 
out how old the roof is and if they have had any leaks . Determine 
what kind of heat is in the home . Ask about the electrical system 
and the plumbing . Ask the owner what he thinks it will cost to repair 
the damage . With experience , you will be able to make an offer at 
this point , with contingencies included to help protect yourself while 
you verify the information . 
Step 6 – Sign the Paperwork
If both you and the seller decide to move forward , you will have 
him or her sign the appropriate documents . The most important 
documents you will do at this time are the purchase contract ( with 
contingencies included in the addendum to protect yourself – consult 
with your lawyer ) or the residential lease option contract , and an 
authorization to release information document . The reason you 
would want to get the property under contract is to allow you time 
to perform your due diligence without the risk of losing the property , 
but if you are not comfortable writing up a contract to purchase , 
then just have the letter of authorization signed . With it , you will be 
able to verify the information about the property and the owner ’ s 
situation .  
Some investors , while they are in the seller ’ s home , will make a 
call to the lender ’ s automated system to help validate the information 
they are putting into the purchase contract . The mortgage statements 
will also prove to be helpful .  
Using the information you have gathered from the owner and 
from inspecting the property , make an offer . You will want to put the 
property under contract to prevent another investor from slipping in . 
You will put in escape clauses to limit your risk . Some “ subject to ” 
clauses you might want to use are : 
242
• This contract is subject to buyer being 
able to stop the foreclosure . 
• Create a contract that spells out 
the terms you have negotiated with 
the owner . Sometimes you create 
this contract during the negotiation .  
As you tell the owner what you 
can do for him , write it down in the 
addendum . For example , you might 
write in the addendum : 
– Buyer to pay seller ’ s first month ’ s 
rent and deposit for an apartment 
up to $1 , 000 . 
• If you plan on bringing the loan 
current and taking over the payments , 
then you would want to “ buy ” with a 
lease option . That way you will not 
have to get a loan to “ purchase ” the 
property . By doing this , you would 
gain control of the property and you 
would use various exit strategies . 
• If there is a lot of equity and you don ’ t 
have enough cash to cure the loan 
and give the seller more money , you 
could give the seller some money now 
and in the addendum put : 
– Buyer to bring loan current and 
make payments until buyer sells the 
property or refinances . 
• Sale is contingent upon buyer ’ s 
partner ’ s approval . 
• Sale is contingent upon buyer ’ s 
approval of title report . 
• Sale is contingent upon buyer ’ s 
approval of inspection of property . 
• Buyer shall have access to the 
property for the purpose of 
inspections and showing the property 
to prospective occupants . 
• Buyer to receive a key upon signing 
the offer ( if vacant )  . 
• Buyer may assign this contract to any 
person or corporation prior to closing . 
• Seller is aware that buyer is buying 
the property at a discount . 
• Seller is aware that buyer intends to 
make a profit . 
• Buyer to pay all costs incurred at 
closing .  ( Seller doesn ’ t have money !  ) 
• The liabilities for this property shall 
be for the property itself and shall not 
exceed beyond that . 
243
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
• You may want to have your attorney help you prepare a 
contract you can later use as a template for all preforeclosure contracts you write , if you work in an area or 
areas where the same rules and laws apply to your contract .  
( Note : Many states require you provide the seller with a 
 “ Notice of Cancellation .  ” In California , this is mandatory .  
It gives the homeowner a period of time , usually three to five 
days , to back out of the deal . This period is known as the 
 “ right of rescission .  ”  ) 
• Have all owners who are on the deed sign the contract . 
Protect yourself by having the owners sign a Letter of 
Agreement and Addendum . Again , regardless of whether 
or not you are at the contract stage , make certain you have 
the owner sign the authorization letter , allowing the bank or 
attorney to release information to you . 
This contract is subject to buyer being able to stop
the foreclosure
Create a contract that spells out the terms you have negotiated with 
the owner . Sometimes you create this contract during the negotiation . 
As you tell the owner what you can do for him , write it down in the 
addendum . For example , you might write in the addendum : 
• Buyer to pay seller ’ s first month ’ s rent and deposit for an 
apartment up to $1 , 000
If you plan on bringing the loan current and taking over the payments , 
then you would want to “ buy ” with a lease option . That way you 
will not have to get a loan to “ purchase ” the property . By doing this , 
you would gain control of the property and you would use various 
exit strategies . 
244 
If you have not yet talked with the 
lender or the attorney who is handling 
the foreclosure , you need to do that right 
away . With the authorization letter signed 
by the owner , you should be able to get 
the pertinent facts about the money owed 
on the property . Some larger institutional 
lenders may take a little while longer to give 
you the information you need , so be sure 
to contact them as soon as possible . Also , 
with the authorization letter , you will order a 
reinstatement quote and a payoff quote from 
the lender .  
Sign the purchase contract as soon as 
you and the owner feel comfortable . Again , 
you should tie up the property quickly to 
prevent other investors from getting the deal . 
With your contingencies in your addendum , 
you and your attorney can limit your risk .  
As you get comfortable doing 
foreclosures , you will always want to get 
all of the documentation up front . Many 
investors will immediately file the warranty 
deed to protect their interest in the property . 
You will find that if there is a problem with 
the property and you decide not to go 
forward , you can deed the property back to 
the owner . 
If there is a lot of equity and you don ’ t have 
enough cash to cure the loan and give 
the seller more money , you could possibly 
give the seller some money now and in the 
addendum put : 
• Buyer to bring loan current and make 
payments until buyer sells the property 
or refinances
Step 7 – Verify the Information 
Now that the property is tied up , verify the 
information . You will want to confirm loan 
balances , amount of payment , and other 
liens . You will also check the title ( order title 
work and insurance if possible )  , and order 
any inspections you may wish to do . This is 
all part of doing your due diligence .  
Quickly go to the courthouse and 
check the title . If the title looks good , order 
a title report and title insurance . Some title 
companies will not issue title insurance on a 
home with an existing mortgage , but try to 
get title insurance whenever possible ( it is a 
protection to you )  . If you cannot , make sure 
you have a competent title company and , if 
everything looks good after the preliminary 
search , quickly file the warranty deed . If you 
have found a lot of liens and judgments , get 
out of the contract . 
245
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
What to do if there is not enough equity 
Sometimes you may find there is not enough equity in the property 
because of junior liens and judgments . What do you do ?  
You could throw up your hands and walk away . Or you could 
contact the junior lien holders and negotiate with them to discount 
their liens . At auction , most junior liens are wiped away . And most 
lien holders understand what they are doing when they file the lien . 
The lien was filed because they were unable to collect a debt . They 
realize they may never collect the money . 
When you talk with them , let them know you were thinking of 
buying this home that ’ s in foreclosure , but because of all the liens 
and judgments , there just isn ’ t enough equity in the property to do 
so . You want the lien holder to know there are other liens , some of 
which may have been filed before his ! This usually gives the lien 
holder more incentive to work with you . 
Tell him that because of his junior lien , there is no equity , but 
if he will sell the note at a discount , you may be able to make it 
work . Expect the lien holder to go down to at least 50% of the lien . 
Lately we have seen a lot of junior lien holders taking 10 to 20% of 
the lien . That ’ s as low as ten cents on the dollar ! 
Step 8 – Closing
Be certain you have done all your due diligence . Verify the 
information you have and make sure you approve of the terms and 
conditions you will get if you purchase the house .  
You will want to make sure you do all of the following : 
• Get a title search 
• Have an inspection done on the 
house 
246
it . Once the deed is recorded , the home is 
yours ! Make the monthly payments until you 
can get a new loan or sell the home .  
If you want to cure the loan by bringing 
it current , make sure you have the lease 
option contract signed and the letter of 
Memorandum of Option to record . Verify 
you have the correct amount the lender 
needs to bring the loan current and stop the 
foreclosure . Usually you have to submit a 
cashier ’ s check . You will give the money to 
the lender or attorney to stop the foreclosure , 
or your title company or attorney will do this 
for you . Often , you will be under a time 
crunch and need to hand carry the check 
to the attorney ’ s office or to the courthouse 
before the auction ! 
• Once all this paperwork is completed , 
copies of the appropriate paperwork 
will be sent to the appropriate 
companies and a copy of all of the 
paperwork will be kept in your files .  
You will also make sure the seller has 
a copy of all the paperwork , as well 
the title company or attorney who is 
handling the closing . 
• Receive the payoff amount from the 
lender 
• Negotiate with any other lien holders , 
if applicable , and have a commitment 
from the lien holder to sell the note at 
a discount 
• Look at bids for repairs 
• Have the money or OPM to cure the 
loan ( see Exit Strategies coming up 
next in this chapter ) 
If this has been completed and you know 
this is a property you want , you are ready 
to close . Your title company or attorney will 
help you do this .  
You will now have the seller ( s ) sign any 
remaining documents , such as the purchase 
contract and / or lease option contract 
( remember to put your contingencies in the 
addendum )  . Any documents that need to be 
notarized will be signed in front of a notary . 
If you have not already done so , you will 
need to have the owner sign the warranty 
deed ( you can get one from your title 
company or attorney )  . Immediately record 
the deed or have the title company record 
247
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
EXIT STRATEGIES
Now that you are familiar with the steps in the pre-foreclosure 
process , let ’ s discuss several exit strategies you can employ : 
• You can “ buy ” with a lease option , bringing the loan current 
and stopping the foreclosure . You will take over the 
payments until you either sell the property or , if you plan to 
keep it , refinance the property . 
• You can bring in a “ money ” partner who will fund the deal 
and split the profits . 
• You can assign the contract to another investor ( wholesale 
deal )  . 
• If you have a long timeframe until the auction and the owner 
has signed a lease option contract , you can fix it up and 
retail it before the timeframe has elapsed . 
• Or after fixing it up , you can refinance it ( on appraised 
value ) and then lease option the property to your buyer . 
What do you do if you feel this is too tight of a deal or the property 
is in a marginal area ? In this case , sometimes a short sale may 
work . A short sale is where the bank is willing to take less than what 
is owed on the property . You will have to get a loan to purchase 
the property ( we will discuss short sales in more detail in a moment )  . 
Perhaps you should just forget doing the deal . There will be 
times that a seller will beg you to take the property . You know 
there are risks involved and you are not comfortable with making 
any guarantees . Or , maybe this particular property is located in 
248
of foreclosure . We may be able to stop the 
ship from sinking . But I cannot guarantee 
you will not lose your house to foreclosure .  ” 
You will change the wording to fit the 
situation ( for example , if the reason is the 
location of the property )  . Just be careful with 
how you word things . You do not want to 
offend anyone , nor hurt your reputation .  
You may find , however , that you are 
able to help these people even though you 
are normally not comfortable with taking 
on this kind of deal . Just be sure you do 
not promise anything you cannot do . If 
you promise , and there are problems , you 
will have to make good on your promise 
regardless of the expense . 
Rarely should you do deals where you 
cannot promise that you can help the seller . 
But , if you do one and you are successful , 
you may want to do more . It can feel great 
if you are able to help someone when there 
is nowhere else for them to turn . 
Forbearance 
You may sometimes be negotiating with the 
seller ’ s lenders for forbearance .  
Forbearance is where the lender works 
with the homeowner to modify the existing 
loan and avoid foreclosure ( e . g .  , the lender 
might put the arrears at the backend of the 
mortgage , creating a longer time period in 
an area that is marginal , yet there is a lot 
of opportunity for doing a lease option and 
being able to help distressed sellers . What 
do you do then ? 
Start with letting them know what you can 
do :  
 “ One thing that might work is to have you 
lease option the property to us and we will 
try to keep you out of foreclosure . We may 
be able to stop the ship from sinking .  ” 
Let them know you make no guarantee :  
 “ Because there is no equity ( or little equity ) 
in your home , I cannot guarantee that 
we can make your payments or stop the 
foreclosure from happening . I will have you 
sign a paper stating you understand that we 
are not promising we will be able to make 
your payments or keep the home from going 
into foreclosure . We are in the business of 
buying and selling homes . This is what we 
do every day for a living . We have a large 
database of buyers and may be able to 
help you . We have helped others in your 
situation . But because there is not enough 
equity , I cannot make you any guarantees . 
As I said before , if you lease option the 
property to us , we will try to keep you out 
249
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
which to pay off the mortgage )  . Or the lender may allow the owner 
to pay a certain amount extra each month to make up the back 
payments . Sometimes they will put the back payments along with 
late penalty fees into a new loan . Many times you can use that to 
your benefit . 
Here is an example of what you might say :  
 “ Our company helps many people / families who are behind on 
their payments and facing foreclosure . What we do is come in , 
make up their back payments and guarantee we will make their 
payments on time every month .  
Our goal is to get a family / person pre-qualified to buy this 
house and sell it , or rent to own it and sell it ASAP , and close 
out your loan . We would like for you to work out a reduced 
reinstatement / forbearance to lower the amount of money we have 
to come up with out of pocket to keep the loan current , as we are 
helping several families . Who do we need to talk with to get the 
forbearance package ?  ” 
As you can see , if the bank will work with you on a forbearance 
package , you will not have to worry ( if the owner is behind in 
payments ) about how you would come up with the money to bring 
the loan current . Forbearance can “ buy ” you time .  
Some investors will offer forbearance to build rapport with the 
owner who is defaulting on their loan . They do it because they 
realize most owners who work out forbearance with the lender 
will fall behind again , especially if they agreed to pay more each 
month . If they fell behind with a lower payment , how will they be 
able to keep making a larger payment ? Thus , an investor who has 
already helped the owner will likely be the first person he or she 
will contact when problems arise again . 
250
caused them to have this hardship ? Have they 
tried to work something out ( forbearance )  ? 
Have they filed bankruptcy ? If they have , 
what is the status ? Are they willing to sell 
the property and receive no money ? 
To be able to qualify the property for 
a short sale , the lender will be looking at 
the owner who is in default . They will want 
to know the financial situation of the owner 
and if they have any assets they can sell to 
pay off the loan . Typically , the owner has 
experienced extreme financial hardship and 
does not have the means to cure the loan , 
nor the ability to sell the home and pay off 
the outstanding balance of the loan .  
You will also want them to know what 
condition the property is in . Does it need 
repairs ? If the property needs extensive 
repairs , sending bids and pictures can 
support your request for a short sale . 
Even if the property doesn ’ t need a lot of 
repairs , what is the neighborhood like ? Have 
properties been depreciating in value ? How 
is the economy ? What do the surrounding 
homes look like ? These conditions should be 
factored in if they are negative situations . 
Working with the lender
Just like in our pre-foreclosure process , for 
you to proceed with talking to the lender 
Short Sales 
A short sale , as mentioned earlier , is where 
the lender takes less than what is owed on 
the property as payment in full . The lender 
is taking a “ discount .  ”  
Information you will want to know to 
see if the property is a candidate for a short 
sale includes whether or not there is little or 
no equity in the property .  
Look at all the mortgages . What kind 
are they ( conventional , FHA , VA )  ? What is 
owed on each one ? Are there any other 
liens or judgments ? What is the as-is value of 
the property ? Identifying and estimating the 
amount it will take to pay off the mortgages 
and liens will be your first step in qualifying 
the property for a short sale . 
Be aware that if the first mortgage is 
a FHA or VA loan , there may be certain 
criteria that will affect you being able to 
do a short sale . For example , with an FHA
loan , they will not accept a short sale unless 
the second mortgage agrees to receive 
$1 , 000 to $2 , 000 as full payment for the 
second loan .  
You will also need to know who the 
lenders are and how to contact them . You 
need to know all the owners who are on the 
deed and their situation . Why are they in 
default ? What kind of financial circumstances 
251
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
about a short sale , the first two documents you will need the owner 
to sign will be the Authorization to Release Information and the 
Purchase and Sale Contract . 
The bank will not release information to you without signed 
authorization from the owner . Additionally , the bank does not want 
to see the seller getting any money . The contract needs to show this 
and that the buyer pays all closing costs . 
The next step is to contact the Loss Mitigation Department 
( or whatever the lender calls it )  . Different banks may use different 
terminology for the department that handles properties that are in 
default ( other names may be foreclosure department , short sale 
department , reinstatement department , etc .  )  , so you will need to find 
out the right department name at the bank you are dealing with . 
When you contact the bank , you will need to talk to the person 
handling the account and fax them the signed authorization letter . 
Let this person know you are interested in purchasing John and 
Tammy Maxwell ’ s house , but because of its condition , you are only 
able to pay $_______________ . 
Or you might tell them :  
 “ I am trying to help John and Tammy Maxwell . They are trying to sell 
their home and I am willing to purchase the home . However , there 
is a problem . My agent ran the comps for the area and they owe 
more than the home is worth ! 
I am willing to help John and Tammy get out of foreclosure , but I can ’ t 
pay more than the house is worth . Would you consider taking less 
than what is owed ? What do I need to do ?  ” 
The lender will provide instructions on what you will need to 
send them . They may even send you a short sale package that 
252
have already given them a hardship letter 
from the seller .  
Also key in getting the bank to accept 
a short sale will be the BPO ( Broker ’ s Price 
Opinion )  . The lender will send a real estate 
broker to the property to assess the value . 
The lender wants to know what the property 
is really worth . If you meet with the broker at 
the property , you can point out the problems 
and give him or her a copy of your short 
sale package with the pictures , comps , list 
of repairs , etc .  
Note that a short sale takes a lot of 
negotiating and usually takes longer to close . 
And not every lender will be agreeable to 
your terms . But if the lender realizes the 
short sale will save them the money and 
time it would take them to foreclose on this 
property , rehab it , and resell it , they may be 
willing to take a discount . 
If you don ’ t want to bother with a short sale 
with the first lien holder , you can often create 
a lot of equity if there are junior liens . For 
example , if the first is foreclosing , it is usually 
easy to get junior liens to discount their notes . 
And if the house is foreclosed on , the junior 
lien is usually eliminated , thus the junior lien 
holder would rather discount the note and 
get something rather than nothing . 
lets you know what you need to do . It will 
probably include the contract , a “ net sheet ,  ” 
a hardship letter , and a financial statement 
for your seller to fill out . Again , the lender 
wants to see the owner is unable to make 
the payments and that he has no assets to 
repay the loan . The hardship letter is telling 
the lender how much financial trouble the 
owner is in .  
You will then fax the lender a copy of 
the contract along with the comps for the 
area , and any other documents the lender 
has requested . 
If the property is in disrepair , you will include 
a long list of repairs needed to make the 
property marketable , your highest bid , and 
some pictures showing how bad the house 
looks .  
Otherwise , give as much negative 
information as you can , such as information 
about the local economy if things are not 
going well , in addition to problems with the 
neighborhood , etc . 
Many times you can get the bank to 
come down considerably on the price 
owed .  
For the seller ’ s sake , you should work to 
get a commitment from the bank to waive its 
right to a deficiency judgment . The lender 
should not have a problem with this as you 
253
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
Short sale checklist
The following is a checklist of items you will need to get together 
for a short sale : 
• Hardship letter * 
• Completed financial statement * 
• Signed Purchase Contract 
• Current value of property ( include appraisal or comps ) 
• Estimated Net Sheet or Preliminary HUD1 ( ask the title 
company to help you ) 
• Outstanding / delinquent taxes 
• Last two months of pay stubs * 
• Last two years of income tax returns * 
• Last two months of bank statements * 
• Mortgages ( include lender ’ s name , 
account numbers , phone numbers , 
name of contact , and payoff amount ) 
• Net demographic info 
• Bid for repairs 
* This is information about the seller 
254 
Complete paperwork 
Get your contract and documents 
signed . Have a notary available for 
documents that need to be notarized .  
Close the deal if you are 
purchasing the propert y 
The title company or attorney will help you 
close the deal .  
Now closed , the propert y is 
yours Determine your exit 
strategy and market the property to find 
your buyer .  
Or “ buy ” the propert y 
using a lease option Record a 
Memorandum of Option and choose your 
exit strategy . 
As you have learned , pre-foreclosure 
provides you the opportunity to purchase 
properties at a discounted price and provide 
solutions for homeowners in trouble . Houses 
are being foreclosed on every day all across 
America . This produces constant leads and 
gives you an endless supply of properties 
and opportunities .  
As you work to help these homeowners 
who are struggling through challenging 
situations , you can make good money . You 
will also feel the satisfaction of having helped 
someone move on with his or her life . 
REVIEW 
Now that we know our exit strategies , let ’ s 
do a quick review of the steps to doing 
pre-foreclosure deals : 
Find deals by targeting 
motivated sellers 
Locate distressed sellers through marketing 
and networking . Check legal publications or 
the courthouse for sellers in pre-foreclosure . 
Pre-qualify seller and propert y 
On the phone , gather the information 
needed by listening and asking questions . 
Get the comps . If the seller sounds like they 
want to work with you , make an appointment . 
Meet with the seller and inspect the home 
and the mortgage paperwork .  
Negotiate a win-win 
situation You can solve the seller ’ s 
problem by offering debt relief and / or a 
quick closing so they can move on with 
their life .  
Do your due diligence 
Contact the lender to verify payoff . 
Order a preliminary title search . Crunch 
your numbers to make sure this is still a 
good deal . Complete your inspections . 
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
7
255
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
There will be times your heart will feel pain as you witness 
some of the circumstances these people are in . On occasion , there 
may not be enough equity to give them any money , but you can 
still help them by taking over the payments and saving their credit . 
Foreclosure is horrendous on their credit report . It will take years for 
them to recover .  
Short sales can help sellers when they owe more than the house 
is worth . They are easier to negotiate with the lender when the 
house is in need of repairs and is in foreclosure , or when the loan 
is delinquent with little or no equity . You create equity by getting the 
loan ( s ) discounted .  
Sometimes you will not be able to help a homeowner at all . 
This can be heart-wrenching . But other times , you will be able to 
help them out of a desperate situation . 
There will be times you may want to purchase the house and let 
them live there and lease option the house back to them . Whatever 
you do , the recommendation is to NEVER let them stay in the home . 
You are setting yourself up to fail . As much as you may like the 
homeowner , if he falls behind in his payments and you try to evict 
him , you ’ ll be the one in trouble . Who do you think the judge 
is going to think is the “ big , bad wolf ?  ” YOU ! You are the one 
who took advantage of this poor , innocent homeowner at a time of 
hardship . The judge may even rule the owner can have his house 
back ( at your expense )  , and may even have you pay huge fines . 
We want you to help people . Just make sure you don ’ t do it at your 
own expense .  
If you are not sure what to do , seek legal advice . Always get 
title work and title insurance if possible . 
The bottom line : Investing in pre-foreclosures can be rewarding , 
both financially and emotionally . Become a problem solver and 
create win / win situations ! 
256
5 . When that page opens , look at the 
navigation bar where it gives the 
following options : 
– Election 
– Motor Vehicle 
– Recording 
– Clerk to BoCC 
– Home
6 . Click on “ Recording ”  ( this will pull 
up the Recording Department for El 
Paso county ) 
7 . Scroll down and click on “ Recorded 
Documents ” 
8 . You will see : 
– Deeds 
Written documents 
for the transfer of real estate . 
– Deeds of Trust 
Legal documents , similar to 
mortgages , in which 
property is used as security 
for an obligation owed by a 
borrower . In the State of 
Colorado , a third party , the 
Public Trustee , is appointed 
as a regulatory official . 
assignment
The following is a suggested assignment . 
This valuable exercise will help familiarize 
you with how to access information on preforeclosures online and help you get more 
comfortable with searching your own county 
courthouse records online in the future . The 
steps provided here were accurate at the 
time of printing . The exact steps may change 
since webmasters often update website 
information , however , the basic information 
should still be available on the site and able 
to be found in a similar matter to what you 
see here . 
1 . Go to www . netronline . com
2 . Click on “ Public Records Online ” and 
then choose Colorado (  “ CO ”  ) from 
the state list . Click on “ El Paso ” in the 
county directory
4 . Click “ Go to Data Online ” for the 
recorder ’ s office
257
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures 
– DD Form 214 
Documents which state an individual ’ s 
military record . 
– Subdivision & Condominium Plats 
Instruments which show the legal boundaries of 
lots , blocks , and easements , at the time of 
recording , within a subdivision . 
9 . Click on “ Public Trustee ”  ( in blue under the topic Deeds 
of Trust ) 
10 . In the Public Trustee page ’ s top navigation bar , you will 
see in yellow writing : 
– Public Trustee Home 
– Election and Demand List 
– Weekly Sale List
11 . If you clicked on “ election and demand list ,  ” you would 
see a listing of properties that are in pre-foreclosure . If 
you clicked on “ weekly sale list ,  ” you would see the 
properties that were auctioned that week . 
12 . Before you click on either one of those topics ( or go 
back if you already have !  )  , scroll down the page 
and you will see that a wealth of information is 
provided via links on the left hand side of the page .  
Topics include Foreclosure Policies and Procedures ,  
Important Notice to Homeowners in Foreclosure ( PDF 
document )  , Frequently Asked Questions , and more , as 
well as sample forms . While this information is all about 
the foreclosure process and timeframes in Colorado and 
258
the redemption period applicable to 
that state , it does represent the type of 
information you might be able to find 
on the link for your state . 
13 . Now see if you can access this 
information on your county website ! 
deeds written documents for the transfer of real estate
deeds of trust legal documents , similar to mortgages , in which property is used as securtiy for an obligation owed by a borrower . In the State of Colorado , a third party , the Public Trustee is 
appointed as regulatory official . 
DD form 214 documents which state an individuals military record
subdivision & 
condominium 
plats
instruments which show the legal boundaries of lots , blocks , and easements , at the time of 
recording , within a subdivision . 
259
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
SAMPLE AUTHORIZATION TO RELEASE INFORMATION
I / We hereby authorize you to release to __________________________any and all information that they may 
require for the purpose of a credit transaction or loan transfer , mortgage payoff balances , lease / purchase , foreclosure 
information , etc . You may reproduce this document to acquire reference from more than one source . Should a contract 
between the parties come about as a result of this report , rental , option to purchase lease / purchase , purchase sell 
agreement , etc .  , this authorization to issue a credit report shall continue until the expiration date of such agreement . 
Thank You . 
Name : ____________________________________ Date of Birth _____________________________
Social Security # _____________________________ Phone ( H ) _______________________________
Phone ( W ) ________________________________
Current Address ____________________________________________________________________________
City ______________________________________ State_____Zip_____How long ? ______________
Previous Address ____________________________________________________________________________
Employer __________________________________ How long ? _______________________________
Driver ’ s License # ___________________________
Signature __________________________________ Date ___________________________________
Name : ____________________________________ Date of Birth _____________________________
Social Security # _____________________________ Phone ( H ) _______________________________
Phone ( W ) ________________________________
Current Address ____________________________________________________________________________
City ______________________________________ State_____Zip_____How long ? ______________
Previous Address ____________________________
Employer __________________________________ How long ? _______________________________
Driver ’ s License # ___________________________
Signature __________________________________ Date ___________________________________
SAMPLE
260
SAMPLE BILL OF SALE
For the sum of $____________________ ( ________________________________________________ Dollar ( s )  ) 
_____________________________________ sell to __________________________________
the following items , considered personal property : 
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
The above items were owned by __________________ and will become the possessions of __________________ on 
or before _____________ . 
These items are in ‘ as-is ’ condition and no claims as to their usefulness are offered or expected . 
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
_____________________________
Seller Buyer
_____________________________
Seller Buyer
_____________________________
Date of Sale
SAMPLE
261
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
SAMPLE AFFIDAVIT AND MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
STATE OF _____________________________
COUNTY OF ___________________________
The undersigned , being duly sworn , deposes and says : 
1 . An Agreement was entered into on the ______ day of _________ by and 
between _______________________ ( Buyer ) and _______________________________ ( Sellers ) 
for the purchase and sale of certain real property , located at ________________________________________________ . 
2 . The closing of the purchase and sale of said real property is to takeplace on or about 
the _______ day of ___________________ , 2006 . 
3 . For further information , please contact _________________________________ at the
following address and telephone : ___________________________ . 
FURTHER AFFIANT SAYETH NOT . 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this ______day of ____________________________
by______________________________ , personally known to me or proven by satisfactory evidence . 
_____________________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC , STATE OF ____________________
My Commission Expires ___________________ ( SEAL ) 
SAMPLE
262
SAMPLE NEWSPAPER AD
Behind on Payments ? 
Don ’ t Delay , Call Today
No Equity ? I can Help ! 
Call Jordan 
800-555-8852 
Behind on Payments ? 
Free Report
Call today for free consultation 
Need Immediate Help ? 
800-555-8755
How to Sell 
Your Home in 
3 Days or Less ! 
Any Area or Condition 
Ask for Jack 800-555-8566 
SAMPLE CAR MAGNET AD 
( Your name ) 
Buys Houses
Cash or Terms
232-555-9969
first
We
Buy Homes
Any Area / Condition
Cash or Terms
404-555-9459
263
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
SAMPLE LETTERS AND FLYERS
YOUR HOME IS SCHEDULED TO BE SOLD ON : 
_______________________________
DATE FILED : __________________________
DOCUMENT #  : ________________________
Dear Homeowner : 
You may not be aware of this , but your home has been recorded for sale by
public foreclosure auction with the __________ County Recorder ’ s office . 
I stopped by today to speak with you about the options available to help in
this most unfortunate time . 
Your mortgage company cannot give you legal advice and may not offer
information to help you save your home . However , they must comply with
government rules and timelines that pertain to any programs available for
your loan . 
TIMING IS EVERYTHING !  !  ! 
TAKE ACTION NOW TO SAVE YOUR HOME !  !  ! 
YOUR PROMPT ATTENTION TO THIS MATTER IS CRITICAL !  !  ! 
Take advantage of our experience . We specialize in solving your real estate
problems . Foreclosure is not the only alternative available to you . There is
always a positive solution . 
CALL TODAY FOR A NO COST , NO OBLIGATION 
CONSULTATION !  ! 
John Jones : 555-555-5555
SAMPLE
264
SAMPLE LETTERS AND FLYERS ( CONTINUED ) 
STOP YOUR FORECLOSURE ! 
_______________________________
Dear Homeowner : 
Your mortgage company cannot give you legal advice and may not
offer to help you save your home . However , they must comply with
government rules and timelines that pertain to any programs
available for your loan . 
TIMING IS EVERYTHING !  !  ! 
TAKE ACTION NOW TO SAVE YOUR HOME !  !  ! 
YOUR PROMPT ATTENTION TO
THIS MATTER IS CRITICAL !  !  ! 
Take advantage of our experience . We specialize in solving your
real estate problems . Foreclosure is not the only alternative
available to you . There is always a positive solution and we can
help you find it ! 
Call or e-mail us today for a no cost , no obligation consultation ! 
Call John Jones at 555-555-5555 , 
or e-mail name @ mywebaddress . com
SAMPLE
265
Guide to real estate investing
Becoming A Problem Solver : Foreclosures
SAMPLE LETTERS AND FLYERS ( CONTINUED ) 
PRE-FORECLOSURE BENEFITS PROGRAM
_______________________________
• STOP YOUR FORECLOSURE NOW
• SELL YOUR HOME – FOR LESS THAN YOU OWE WITHOUT PENALTIES
• STAY IN YOUR HOME “ FOR FREE ” UNTIL IT SELLS
• RECEIVE UP TO $1 , 000 FOR MOVING EXPENSES
• ELIMINATE TAX LIABILITIES
• ELIMINATE MORTGAGE LIABILITIES
• NO FORECLOSURE NOTATION ON YOUR CREDIT REPORT
• AVOID PUBLIC FORECLOSURE PROCEEDINGS
• CREDIT REPAIR
FORECLOSURE IS NOT YOUR ONLY OPTION ! 
It is possible to work with almost any foreclosure challenge , but time is of the essence . 
Contact us today to learn about your options ! We have a team of professionals – 
mortgage lenders , attorneys , debt reduction specialists , and credit repair experts – to 
provide comprehensive , professional advice regarding your foreclosure status and 
mortgage . Also part of our team is XYZ Realty Company , one of the most respected real
estate brokerage firms in the area . It takes a well-versed and qualified professional to 
handle these matters . We can help . We offer tangible solutions . 
CALL TODAY FOR A NO COST , 
NO OBLIGATION CONSULTATION !  ! 
John Jones – 555-555-555
SAMPLE
266
chapter
ten
267 

ave you ever felt like the “ cat 
got your tongue ?  ” Or maybe 
instead , you felt like you had mothballs 
stuck in your mouth . You know what 
you want to say , but it ’ s hard to say 
it . Or maybe you feel intimidated 
when you talk with the seller . To be 
a successful investor , you need to be 
able to negotiate . How do you get 
over the fear of not knowing what to 
say or how to say it ? As with anything , 
practice makes perfect . Very few 
people are skilled at negotiating when 
they first start out . If you happen to be 
one of the few who are , great ! But if 
you happen to be like most beginning 
investors , this section will help you 
gain the skills necessary to help you 
become a great negotiator . It really 
isn ’ t that hard once you understand a 
few simple concepts . 
practice talking
to get over fears
First , you need to practice talking with 
people . When you wanted to learn 
how to ride a bike , did you study how 
to do it ? No . Instead , you probably 
just hopped on the seat and tried to 
ride the bicycle . You may have fallen 
a few times , but you got back up 
and tried again . You may have had 
someone help you at first , and then 
as you started pedaling , that person 
H
Negotiating
with 
confidence
269
Guide to real estate investing
Negotiating With Confidence
270
seller doesn ’ t like you or have confidence 
in what you can do , you will have a hard 
time getting the deal . The seller just wants 
to know you can help him or her . If you 
haven ’ t listened , you will not be able to 
know the needs of the seller . Ask questions 
to understand what will or won ’ t work for the 
seller . Remember , as you become a problem 
solver , you will have sellers wanting to work 
with you . When the seller trusts you and 
believes in you , it will not be hard getting 
the deal closed . 
communication 
and salesmanship
As you practice talking to people and 
listening to them , you are fine-tuning your 
communication skills and salesmanship . 
Communication is vital to being able to 
negotiate . We have said several times that 
real estate is a people business . That ’ s
because no matter what you do in real 
estate , you will be dealing with people . 
Good communication skills involve actively 
listening to what is being said . You don ’ t 
worry about what you plan to say next , but 
rather you focus on what the other person 
is really saying , both in words and in body 
language . A common technique used to let 
let go of the bike . You were exhilarated ! 
You could ride a bike ! The same is true with 
getting over your fear of talking with sellers . 
Start by calling For Sale By Owners . As you 
call , ask them to tell you about the house 
they have for sale . Let them talk , while you 
listen ! Then ask some questions . If calling 
FSBOs is frightening , remember what we 
said before : try to imagine the worst thing 
possible that could happen . Probably the 
worst thing would be you feeling like you 
stuck your foot in your mouth as you were 
talking to the seller . Then what ? You don ’ t 
get the deal ? If you had never made the call , 
you wouldn ’ t be getting the deal anyway . 
So what did you lose ? 
Absolutely nothing ! If the seller is truly 
motivated , he won ’ t care if you fumble over 
a few words . The more you keep calling and 
talking to people , the easier it will become . 
listen to the seller
Second , negotiation begins with listening . 
Your motivated seller does not care how 
well you articulate what you can do . You 
can know how to buy wholesale or do a 
rehab . You may also know how to help 
people in pre-foreclosure and understand 
the mechanics of lease options . But if the 
271
Guide to real estate investing
Negotiating With Confidence
the person know you are truly hearing what they are saying is to 
paraphrase what they told you . You respond ,  “ If I understand you 
correctly , you are saying .  .  .  ” and then repeat in your own words 
what they have just said . When they have confirmed you are 
correct , then you can reflect on the implications of what has been 
said . Sometimes there will be sensitive issues the seller may not feel 
comfortable discussing . When the topic or question arises , give the 
seller time by being quiet . The silence can seem like a long time , but 
wait for the seller to answer or finish what they are trying to say . You 
want the seller to feel safe and comfortable with you . Do not judge 
them , but respect their feelings , whether you agree with them or 
not . At the same time , it is essential you state your position and what 
you want . Before you start negotiating , you should have already 
analyzed the property and have a limit to what you are willing to 
pay or know the terms you need to make the deal good for you . 
Whatever you do , don ’ t go beyond your limit . You will need to be 
careful to not let emotions get in the way , but you can try to create a 
win / win situation where you both feel satisfied with the transaction . 
So what does salesmanship have to do with investing in real estate ? 
When you are able to buy right , you have succeeded in “ selling ” 
the owner as to the price and / or terms of the deal . 
Selling skills have a lot to do with relationship skills . A
fundamental principle of selling is that people make decisions based 
on their feelings rather than the facts . This is why it is so critical you 
listen to what the seller is telling you . As you understand the seller ’ s 
needs ( some of which may only be “ perceived ” by the seller ) and 
solve the problem ( s )  , you should be able to close the deal . Certain 
basic selling techniques will help you in negotiating with a seller . 
First , identify who the decision maker is . This is the person you will 
want to talk to . That doesn ’ t mean ignoring another person in the 
room ; it just means knowing you are not wasting your time when 
272
The Introduction
When you are meeting with the seller , be 
friendly and shake their hand . Introduce 
yourself . Get their name . Make them feel 
at ease . Get them talking about themselves . 
The Blast
In sales , the blast is to grab the client ’ s 
attention . It is short , but gets their interest . In 
real estate , you want the seller ’ s attention . 
Often a comment or a question will engage 
their interest and participation in the 
conversation . 
The Probe
You want to gather information . Not only do 
you want to know facts about the property , 
but you are also looking for what motivates 
the seller . You are trying to discover the 
needs of the seller . These needs may not 
always be logical needs , but rather may be 
emotional . As you listen and ask questions , 
you will be better able to negotiate a win / 
win situation . Remember , you take control of 
the conversation by asking questions . Your 
questions can reflect your genuine interest 
in the seller ’ s needs and not only help you 
understand what the seller is feeling , but also 
help the seller realize their situation . There 
are two kinds of questions : open-ended 
questions and close-ended questions . The 
the person who will be making the decision 
isn ’ t even there . Second , know what your 
competition is doing . How are the other 
investors handling foreclosures , rehabs , 
and other investments ? Third , you need to 
recognize objections can mean opportunity . 
Often , people just need more information . 
You will need to educate the seller about 
your proposal and how this will benefit him 
or her . 
the anatomy of 
a presentation
The five elements of an effective sales 
presentation are : 
1 . The Introduction
2 . The Blast
3 . The Probe
4 . The Information
5 . The Close
Let ’ s see how using these five elements of a 
presentation in real estate investing will help 
you negotiate with the seller . 
273
Guide to real estate investing
Negotiating With Confidence
open-ended questions start with words like “ what ,  ”  “ why ,  ”  “ where ,  ”  
 “ when ,  ” and “ how .  ” They invite the seller to explain his or her 
feelings . This is critical in revealing the seller ’ s needs to you and , at 
the same time , helping the seller recognize those needs . The closeended questions usually have short answers like yes or no and can 
move the conversation in the direction you want it to go . 
The Information
Now that you have gathered information from the seller , it ’ s your 
turn to let them know what you can do for them . In sales , whenever 
a concept is presented , it is presented with a related statement of 
a benefit . Sellers are moved by their feelings and the two major 
feelings motivated sellers usually relate to are getting rid of their pain 
or looking forward to moving on with their lives . Once you have 
explained the benefit , you can ask a simple close-ended question 
to allow the seller to acknowledge the benefit . 
For example , a benefit you might present is :  
 “ Joe , I can bring your loan current , stop the foreclosure , and 
save your credit .  ” 
The question you might use to help the seller acknowledge the 
benefit could be :  
 “ If I stop the foreclosure and save your credit , would that help 
you ?  ” 
If the seller acknowledges the benefit , then they believe it will benefit 
them . 
274
REVIEW
• To be a successful investor , you need 
to be able to negotiate
• Practice makes perfect – Practice 
talking with people to get over your 
fears
– Start by calling For Sale By 
Owners
– Ask them to tell you about their 
house and their circumstances
• Negotiation begins with listening
– If you haven ’ t listened , you will not 
be able to know the needs of the 
seller
– Ask questions to understand what 
will or won ’ t work for the seller
• Communication is vital to being able 
to negotiate
– Good communication skills involve 
actively listening to what is being 
said
– Focus on what the other person is 
really saying , both in words and in 
body language
– Paraphrase what they told you – 
 “ If I understand you correctly , you 
are saying .  .  .  ” 
The Close
The close is when you present your offer . In 
real estate , it is getting the seller to make a 
commitment and sign the contract . You ask 
for what you want when you make your offer . 
Often , you can make two offers for the seller 
to choose from , either one making a great 
deal for you . With time , you will become an 
expert at negotiating . And once
you have closed a deal or two , you will be 
less intimidated . You will be able to bring 
things up as a matter of conversation . If the 
seller asks a question and you don ’ t know the 
answer , you will answer with confidence :  
 “ That ’ s a great question . I don ’ t know the 
answer to that right now , but I will get 
back to you .  ” 
Of course , sometimes you will have a “ nonnegotiable ” seller . The seller is simply not 
motivated . As you learn more and gain more 
confidence on the phone , you will be able to 
eliminate “ non-negotiable ” sellers quickly . But 
don ’ t take it to heart if you make a mistake 
and miss one . Occasionally , even to an 
experienced investor , the seller will appear to 
be motivated over the phone . After meeting 
with the seller , you may find they are simply 
not as “ motivated ” as they once appeared to 
be . Don ’ t waste time on a seller who is not 
motivated . Move on to the next deal . 
275
Guide to real estate investing
Negotiating With Confidence
• Know the terms you need to make the deal good for you
– Don ’ t go beyond your limit
– Don ’ t let emotions get in the way
• Basic selling techniques will help you in negotiations
– Identify who the decision maker is
– Know what your competition is doing
– Recognize objections can mean opportunities
Do not get hung up on the mechanics of the presentation . The 
most important thing is to listen to the seller and practice talking to 
sellers and investors . In time , you will feel the exhilaration of being 
successful at negotiating . You may even discover one of the things 
you enjoy most about real estate investing is the negotiation ! 
276
chapter
eleven
277
Please Note : 
We cannot give you legal advice . It is highly recommended that you have your attorney review all contracts .  
s an investor , the critical factor 
in getting a deal is to make 
an offer . You can read books , listen 
to tapes , and attend several training 
workshops or investment club meetings . 
But if you don ’ t make offers , you will 
never make money in real estate . 
By now you should have learned 
how to analyze properties , where 
to find deals , and how to negotiate 
deals . But regardless of how much 
knowledge and understanding of real 
estate investing you may have , if you 
are not making offers , you will not be 
doing any deals . 
The simple fact is the more offers 
you make , the more you increase the 
likelihood of getting an offer accepted . 
And that means more deals for you . 
You should set a goal of at least 
five offers per week . Many investors 
make 30 to 40 offers per week . But 
regardless of whether you are making 
five offers per week or 40 , you need 
to be consistently making offers .  
Any offer you make should be one 
that works for you . Don ’ t worry if you 
are offering considerably less than 
the seller is asking . The offer needs to 
be one that will make money for you , 
whether you are planning on keeping 
the property or going for quick cash . 
In some areas of the country , it is 
essential to quickly tie up the property . 
If you take time to fully analyze the 
property , you could lose the deal to 
A
making
an offer : 
The Contract
279
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
280
not become binding unless the seller accepts 
the offer and signs the contract . If the seller 
does not agree to the exact terms of the 
offer , then there is no binding contract . The 
seller actually has three choices when an 
offer is made : 
The seller can agree to all of the 
terms of the offer and sign the 
contract . The offer would now be a 
binding contract . 
The seller can agree to some of 
the terms of the offer , but not all of 
the terms . The seller would then make a 
counteroffer , stating what terms he or she 
does not agree with . At this point , there 
is no binding contract . 
Important note : If the buyer does not 
agree to the terms the seller has put in 
the counteroffer and the buyer makes a 
counteroffer himself , the seller is free to 
negotiate with any potential buyer . Many 
beginner investors assume because they are 
countering the seller ’ s counteroffer , the seller 
is locked into dealing with them . In reality , 
the contract will become binding only if the 
buyer accepts the seller ’ s counteroffer . If the 
buyer counters , the seller is no longer bound 
to the contract . 
another investor . If you live in an area where 
properties sell within a few days of being 
on the market , you can tie up the property , 
using contingencies in your addendum to 
allow you time to do your due diligence .  
Always remember that if you use 
protection clauses in your contracts , you 
and your lawyer can establish ways to limit 
your risks and back out of the deal if you 
find you don ’ t want to buy the property . An 
example of an escape clause is ,  “ This offer 
is subject to buyer ’ s partner ’ s approval .  ” 
For most beginners in real estate investing , 
making that first offer is quite frightening . If 
you are feeling nervous about making an 
offer , then we would suggest your first offer 
be at least 30 percent below market value . 
Put in an escape clause and if for some 
reason your offer is accepted , you should 
have a great deal ! Worst-case scenario is 
you realize this is not a property you want 
and you back out of the deal . After making 
two or three offers , your confidence will 
increase and you will find you can make 
several offers per week easily . 
the offer vs . the contract
The contract is usually written as an offer 
with the buyer ’ s signature . The contract does 
1
2
281
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract 
The seller can reject the offer . 
BASIC REQUIREMENTS OF A CONTRACT
A real estate purchase contract is a bilateral contract where the 
seller agrees to sell and the buyer agrees to buy . There are certain 
key elements in creating a valid and binding contract . 
The contract must be in writing
All real estate contracts must be in writing to be enforceable . A
handshake or verbal agreement is not enough . If a buyer makes 
an offer and the seller verbally accepts the offer and then backs 
out , there is no binding contract . 
There needs to be mutual assent / consent
All part ies must agree to the contract . 
Who are the individuals involved ? 
Who is the buyer and who is the seller ? The contract must 
identify the parties . 
Signatures
To be a valid contract , it must be signed by both buyer and 
seller . All parties on the title must sign the contract and date it . 
Be sure to check the title so you know who will need to sign the 
contract . If one of the parties on title fails to sign the contract , 
the contract will not be enforceable . The party signing the 
contract must be of legal age and sound mind . 
3
282
where you may put the specifics of 
what you have negotiated with the 
seller and where you can put clauses to 
protect you as a buyer . Remember , the 
addendum is powerful . It can override 
anything that may be in the contract . If 
there is something in the contract that 
is contrary to what you want , address 
that item in the addendum . A standard 
phrase in an addendum is :  “ The terms 
and conditions of this addendum shall 
prevail in the event of a conflict with the 
terms and conditions of the attached 
Agreement of Sale .  ” 
Sample Clauses and 
Contingencies
1 . Sale is subject to Buyer ’ s partner ’ s 
approval . 
2 . Sale is subject to inspection 
acceptable to Buyer prior
to closing . 
3 . Seller to pay Buyer ’ s closing costs . 
4 . Buyer reserves the right to show the 
property to prospective occupants 
prior to closing ; Seller agrees to 
permit access upon reasonable notice 
at any time . 
Location of the propert y
Identify the property . If the property has 
an address , write it down . It wouldn ’ t 
hurt to also put the parcel identification 
number in the contract . If it is raw 
ground , you may want to
include the legal description of the 
property in addition to the PIN number . 
Consideration
The amount of the consideration is not 
important , but to be a valid contract , 
there must be consideration . This is what 
makes the contract a legal , binding 
contract . Usually the consideration is 
money , but it can be whatever the buyer 
and seller agree to . When you are the 
buyer , you will want to pay as little as 
possible . It is not uncommon for the 
consideration to be ten dollars . When 
you are the seller , you will want a larger 
deposit than what you will be willing to 
pay as a buyer . 
The addendum
If you use a real estate agent , they may 
insist you use their standard contract , but 
you can use the addendum to address 
your needs . The addendum gives you 
the flexibility of adding clauses , terms , 
and conditions to your contract . It is 
283
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
5 . All escrow deposits to be transferred to Buyer at no charge .  
Escrow shortages to be made up by Seller at closing . 
6 . Sale is subject to Buyer obtaining suitable financing
and Buyer ’ s approval of all terms . 
7 . Sale is subject to Buyer inspecting the property , all leases 
and tenants , and Buyer ’ s approval of the same . All new 
tenants must be approved by Buyer in writing . 
8 . Seller will deliver property to Buyer at closing with the same 
occupancy and rent roll at the time of contract . If there are 
added vacancies , Seller will make up lost rent . 
9 . Property will be in broom-clean condition at closing and 
Seller guarantees that all mechanics like air conditioners , 
appliances , hot water heaters , heating units , electric and 
plumbing fixtures , etc . will be in good working order . 
contract for purchase and sale
The contract you would use as a buyer is the Contract for Purchase 
and Sale . A sample is included in this chapter along with an 
explanation of how to fill in each of the blanks . There is also a 
blank version at the end of the chapter . 
POINTS TO CONSIDER
• Make the offer that works for both you and the seller
• If your offer is turned down , don ’ t take it personally
284 
*  * Please note that we cannot give you legal 
advice and that it is highly recommended 
that you have your attorney review all 
contracts .  *  * 
HOW TO FILL OUT A CONTRACT FOR 
PURCHASE AND SALE
The following offers a guideline for filling 
out the Contract for Purchase and Sale ( see 
corresponding numbers within the blanks in 
the sample purchase contract on the previous 
pages )  . A blank Contract for Purchase and 
Sale follows as well . Please note that we 
cannot give you legal advice and that it is 
highly recommended that you have your 
attorney review all contracts . 
Seller ’ s name 
If the property is held jointly , all 
owners to include all owners of the 
property . If the property is held by a husband 
and wife , you would put the husband ’ s full 
name and the wife ’ s full name ( example : Joe 
Seller and Mary Seller )  .  
Buyer ’ s name 
The individual ( s ) or entity ( s ) purchasing the property . When advisable , put 
 “ and / or assigns ” after your name . 
• Use partner , inspection , and finance 
clauses in your addendum
• When you need to make an offer 
before you have had sufficient time 
to inspect the property , tie it up with 
a contract ( with appropriate 
protection clauses ) and then see if it 
works for you 
• Don ’ t be afraid to ask for what you 
want
• Leave room for negotiating on the 
price
• Don ’ t be afraid if more than one 
offer is accepted – with your 
protection clauses in the addendum 
( consult with your attorney )  , you can 
limit your risk by establishing ways 
to back out if you are not comfortable 
with working several properties at one 
time ( with time , your comfort level will 
increase ) 
• You will not make any money if you 
do not make offers ! 
1
2
285
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract 
Legal description 
This is the legal description as recorded in the county 
courthouse . Sometimes the legal description is quite lengthy and 
if you made a small error or omission , the contract could become 
invalid . It is usually best to put “ To be supplied at closing by XYZ
Title Company ( or attorney )  .  ”  
Street address 
Put the exact street address , street , city , state , and zip code . 
If you have the tax identification number , you may want to add that 
also .  
Items included 
Anything you want to ask for that is not affixed to the 
property , such as the refrigerator , stove , garage door opener , 
washing machine , and lawnmower .  
Purchase price 
This is the price you are offering to purchase the property for .  
Cash deposit ( s ) to be held in escrow 
This is the deposit or “ earnest money .  ” Put the name of the 
company or person that will hold the deposit in escrow here . These 
funds can be held by the seller or agent , but you should insist on the 
deposit being held by your title company or attorney .  
Amount of cash deposit 
This is the amount of the cash you will deposit . You will want 
to make this as small as possible , preferably no more than $100 
unless there are extenuating circumstances . 
3
4
5
6
7
8
286 
Approximate present 
principal balance 
The approximate balance left owed on the 
mortgage you are assuming . You can get this 
from the seller . The exact balance will not be 
necessary , as it will change prior to closing . 
If you are not assuming the mortgage , put 
N / A .  
Purchase money 
mortg age 
This can be financing held by the seller or 
obtained from a lender . In this space , put 
the interest rate of the new mortgage .  
Principal amount of 
This is the amount you are 
financing through the new mortgage .  
Other 
This is where you would list other 
forms of payments , such as trade of services 
or goods , or any other creative financing . 
Balance to close 
If you need to bring cash to the 
closing , you would put that here . If you 
have negotiated well with the seller , or have 
creative financing , the amount to close could 
be zero .  
Promissory note 
You may want to delete this phrase 
( from II . a )  :  “ and promissory note to be held 
in same escrow as additional earnest Buyer ’ s 
default in the amount of $___________ .  ” 
If you need a larger deposit , phrase as 
an alternative to giving more cash down . 
Your title company or attorney can hold the 
promissory note in escrow .  
Subject to assumption 
of mortg age in favor of 
If you plan to assume the mortgage , indicate 
the lender ’ s name in the space provided . If 
you do not plan to assume the mortgage , 
then put in N / A .  
Interest rate 
Put the interest rate of the loan to 
be assumed or N / A if you are not assuming 
the loan .  
Principal and interest 
This is the amount of the monthly 
payment that includes the principal and 
interest . You should be able to get this 
information from the seller . If you are not 
assuming the loan , put N / A . 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
287
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
Total ( item 6 under Purchase Price ) 
This is the total of section a , b , c ,  & d of the Payment section . This 
dollar amount should be the same as the Purchase Price . 
Financing section ( items 18 , 19 , and 20 ) 
This is if any of the payment is to be financed by a third party . If the 
financing is not met within the timeframe and / or the interest goes 
higher than is listed in 18 , the contract is null and void if you as the 
buyer cancel the contract within the specified timeframe . If you are 
paying cash or / and assuming the mortgage , you would put N / A
in 18 to 20 .  
Interest rate 
Put the maximum interest rate you would accept .  
Years 
The timeframe the loan is to be amortized 
( example : 30 years )  .  
Principal amount 
This is the amount of the new loan .  
Time for Acceptance and Effective Date 
You need to set a specific period of time that the offer is 
valid . After that date , it becomes null and void . You want the seller 
to make a decision . Otherwise the seller may wait to see if they 
get a better offer . Usually 24 hours is sufficient time for the seller 
to come to a decision unless there are extenuating circumstances , 
such as a spouse / owner being out of town . You would put a date 
and time , such as “ July 31 , 2005 at 5 : 00 p . m .  ” If the seller needs 
more time , he / she will indicate that to you and you can extend the 
timeframe if you desire to . 
18
19
20
21
288 
Acquiring approvals 
This is where you specify the exact 
use of the property . It may be residential , 
rental , or some other use . You may want to 
change the zoning and if you were unable 
to obtain the zoning change , you could get 
out of the contract .  
Special clauses 
This is where you would put “ See 
attached addendum .  ” You will always want 
to attach an addendum to protect yourself . 
The balance of this contract has terms that 
protect the buyer . Become familiar with 
the contract . If you are using a real estate 
agent , you will probably use their contract . 
Remember that the most important thing is to 
attach a separate addendum to the contract 
that has provisions to protect you as the 
buyer . 
NOTE : In the last paragraph , where it 
talks about a brokerage fee , this is only 
applicable if you are using an agent . If you 
are not using an agent , you can delete this 
paragraph , or put N / A in the blanks or 
cross it out with your initials and the seller ’ s 
initials .  
Closing date 
The day , month , and year . Be 
sure to check your calendar to make sure 
the closing date does not fall on a Saturday 
or Sunday . It typically takes 30 to 60 days 
to close on a property . Check with your 
lender to make sure you give yourself plenty 
of time . Depending on the property , it may 
take a longer time . When purchasing rental 
property , you should plan on closing on the 
3rd , 4th or 5th day of the month since most 
landlords collect rent on the 1st and you 
will get the deposits and prorated rents at 
closing .  
Restrictions 
If there are any restrictions on the 
property , they would be listed in this section 
as “ other .  ” Usually there are no restrictions , 
but if there are any , this is where you would 
put them .  
For the purpose of 
Here , you would put the purpose 
of the property , such as residential , legal 
duplex , etc . 
22
23
24
25
26
289
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
SAMPLE CONTRACT FOR PURCHASE AND SALE 
PARTIES : _________1__________ , as Seller , and ________2__________ , as Buyer , hereby agree 
that the Seller shall sell and Buyer shall buy the following legally described property . 
I . DESCRIPTION :  
( a ) Legal description of real estate : ____________3______________ 
( b ) Street address , if any , of the Property being conveyed is : 
_________________________4____________________________ 
( c ) Personal property including all buildings and improvements on the property and all right , title , 
and interest of Seller in and to adjacent streets , roads , alleys and rights-of-way , and : 
____________________5__________________________ . 
II . PURCHASE PRICE $_______6______________
PAYMENT :  
( a ) Cash Deposit ( s ) to be held in escrow by ________7_______ in the amount of $_____8________ 
and promissory note to be held in same escrow as additional earnest Buyer ’ s default in the amount of
$______9_________ .  
( b ) Subject to assumption of mortgage in favor of ______10______ bearing interest at __11___% 
perannum and payable as to principal and interest $__12___ per month , having an approximate 
present principal balance of $_____13______ .  
( c ) Purchase money mortgage and note bearing interest at ____14___% on terms set forth herein 
below , in the principal amount of $_______15_________ .  
( d ) Other : ______________________16______________________________________ 
( e ) Balance to close ,  ( U . S . Cash , certified or cashier ’ s check ) subject to adjustments and prorations : 
$_____17_______ . 
TOTAL $_______6___________ .  
( f ) All funds held in escrow shall be placed in an interest bearing account at the direction of Buyer , 
with interest accruing to the benefit of Buyer and either applied toward the purchase price at closing 
or returned to Buyer in the event and for any reason the transaction does not close . 
SAMPLE
290
III . FINANCING : If the purchase price or any part thereof is to be financed by a third party loan , 
this Contract for Purchase and Sale is conditioned upon the Buyer obtaining a firm commitment 
for said loan within sixty days from the date hereof , at an interest rate not to exceed __18__% ; 
for ___19__ years ; and in the principal amount of $____20________ . Buyer agrees to make 
application for , and to use reasonable diligence to obtain said loan . Should Buyer fail to obtain 
same or to waive Buyer ’ s rights hereunder within said time , Buyer may cancel Contract and receive
escrow money . 
IV . TITLE EVIDENCE : Within twenty days from the date of Contract , Seller shall , at his expense , 
deliver to Buyer or his attorney , in accordance with Paragraph XI , a title insurance commitment 
with fee owner ’ s title policy premium to be paid by Seller at closing . 
V . TIME FOR ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE : If this offer is not executed by both 
of the parties hereto on or before _____21________ , the aforesaid deposit ( s ) shall be , at the 
option of the Buyer , returned to him and this offer shall thereafter be null and void . The date of 
Contract shall be the date when the last one of the Seller and Buyer has signed this offer . 
VI . CLOSING DATE : This transaction shall be closed and the deed and other closing papers 
delivered on or before______ 22_________ , unless extended by other provisions of Contract , or 
by written agreement of the Parties . 
VII . RESTRICTIONS , EASEMENTS , LIMITATIONS : The Buyer shall take title subject only 
to : Zoning , restrictions , prohibitions , and other requirements imposed by governmental authority ; 
Restrictions and matters appearing on the plat or otherwise common to the subdivision ; Public 
utility easements of record ; Taxes for year of closing and subsequent years , assumed mortgages , 
and purchase money mortgages , if any ; other : ________________23__________________
provided , however , that none of the foregoing shall prevent use of the property for the purpose of
_________________24________________ . 
VIII . OCCUPANCY : Seller represents that there are no parties in occupancy other than Seller , 
but if Property is intended to be rented or occupied beyond closing , the fact and terms thereof 
shall be stated herein , and the tenant ( s ) shall be disclosed pursuant to Paragraph XVII . Seller 
agrees to deliver occupancy of Property at time of closing unless otherwise specified below . 
SAMPLE
291
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
IX . ASSIGNABILITY : Buyer may assign this Contract and be released of all liability . 
X . TYPEWRITTEN OR HANDWRITTEN PROVISIONS : Typewritten or handwritten 
provisions inserted herein or attached hereto as Addenda shall control all printed provisions in 
conflict therewith . 
XI . EVIDENCE OF TITLE : Within twenty days from the date hereof , Seller , at Seller ’ s sole cost 
and expense , shall cause a title insurance company mutually acceptable to the Parties to issue and 
deliver to Buyer an ALTA Form B title commitment accompanied by one copy of all documents 
affecting the Property , and which constitute exceptions to the Title Commitment . Buyer shall give 
Seller written notice on or before twenty days from the date of receipt of the Title Commitment , if 
the condition of title as set forth in such Title Commitment and survey is not satisfactory in Buyer ’ s 
sole discretion . In the event that the condition of title is not acceptable , Buyer shall state which 
exceptions to the Title Commitment are unacceptable . Seller shall , at its sole cost and expense , 
promptly undertake and use its best efforts to eliminate or modify all unacceptable matters to the 
reasonable satisfaction of Buyer . In the event Seller is unable with the exercise of due diligence to 
satisfy said objections within thirty days after said notice , Buyer may , at its option :  ( i ) extend the 
time period for Seller to satisfy said objections ,  ( ii ) accept title subject to the objections raised by 
Buyer , without an adjustment in the purchase price , in which event said objections shall be deemed 
to be waived for all purposes , or ( iii ) rescind this Agreement , whereupon the deposit described herein 
shall be returned to Buyer and this Agreement shall be of no further force and effect . 
XII . EXISTING MORTGAGES TO BE ASSUMED : Seller shall furnish to Buyer within twenty 
days from execution hereof a statement from all mortgagee ( s ) setting forth principal balance , method 
of payment , interest rate , and whether the mortgage ( s ) is in good standing . If a mortgage requires 
approval of the Buyer by the mortgagee in order to avoid default , or for assumption by the Buyer of 
said mortgage , and :  
( a ) the mortgagee does not approve the Buyer , the Buyer may rescind the contract , or 
( b ) the mortgagee requires an increase in the interest rate or charges a fee for any reason in excess 
of $500 . 00 , the Buyer may rescind the Contract unless Seller elects to pay such increase or excess . 
Seller and Buyer each shall pay 50% of any such fee . Buyer shall use reasonable diligence to obtain 
approval . The amount of any escrow deposits held by mortgagee shall be credited to Seller . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
292
XIII . PURCHASE MONEY MORTGAGES : The purchase money note and mortgage , if any , 
shall provide for a thirty day grace period in the event of default if it is a first mortgage and a fifteen 
day grace period in the event of default if a second mortgage ; shall provide for right of prepayment 
in whole or in part without penalty ; shall be assumable ; and shall not provide for acceleration or 
interest adjustment in event of resale of the Property . Said mortgage shall require the owner of the 
encumbered Property to keep all prior liens and encumbrances in good standing . 
XIV . CURRENT SURVEY : Within fifteen days from the date hereof , Seller , at Seller ’ s sole 
cost and expense , shall furnish a current survey of the Property prepared and certified by a duly 
registered Land Surveyor . The survey as to the Property shall :  
( a ) Set forth an accurate legal description ; and 
( b ) Locate all existing easements and rights-of-way ( setting forth the book and page number of the 
recorded instruments creating the same )  , alleys , streets ; and 
( c ) Show any encroachments ; and 
( d ) Show all existing improvements ( such as buildings , power lines , fences , etc .  )  ; and 
( e ) Show all dedicated public streets provided access and whether such access is paved to the 
property line ; and 
( f ) Show the location of any easements necessary for the furnishing of off-site improvements ; and 
( g ) Be certified to the Seller , the Buyer , the Title Company and any lender that may be involved 
in the transaction . In the event the survey or the recertification thereof shows any encroachments 
of any improvements upon , from , or onto the Property , or on or between any building set-back 
line , a property line , or any easement , except those acceptable to Buyer , in Buyer ’ s sole discretion , 
said encroachment shall be treated in the same manner as a title defect under the procedure set 
forth of notice thereof . 
SAMPLE
293
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
XV . TERMITES : The Buyer , within time allowed for delivery of evidence of title and examination 
thereof , or no later than ten days prior to closing , whichever date occurs last , may have the 
improvements inspected at Buyer ’ s expense by a certified pest control operator to determine whether 
there is any visible active termite infestation or visible existing damage from termite infestation in 
the improvements . If Buyer is informed of either or both of the foregoing , Buyer will have ten days 
from date of notice thereof within which to have all damages , whether visible or not , inspected 
and estimated by a licensed building or general contractor . Seller shall pay valid costs for treatment 
and repair of all damage up to 1 1 / 2% of Purchase Price . Should such costs exceed that amount , 
Buyer shall have the option of canceling Contract within five days after receipt of contractor ’ s repair 
estimate by giving written notice to Seller , or Buyer may elect to proceed with the transaction , in 
which event Buyer shall receive a credit at closing of an amount equal to 1 1 / 2% of said Purchase 
Price . Termites shall be deemed to include all wood destroying organisms . 
XVI . INGRESS AND EGRESS : Seller warrants that there is ingress and egress to the Property 
sufficient for the intended use as described in Paragraph VII hereof the title to which is in accordance 
with Paragraph XI above . 
XVII . LEASES : Seller shall , not less than fifteen days prior to closing , furnish to Buyer copies of all 
written leases and estoppel letters from each tenant ( if any ) specifying the nature and duration of 
said tenant ’ s occupancy , rental rates and advanced rent , and security deposits paid by tenant . In the 
event Seller is unable to obtain such letter from each tenant , the same information shall be furnished 
by Seller to Buyer within said time period in the form of a Seller ’ s affidavit , and Buyer may thereafter 
contact tenants to confirm such information . Seller shall deliver and assign all original leases to 
Buyer at closing . 
XVIII . LIENS : Seller shall , both as to the Property and personally being sold hereunder , furnish to 
Buyer at time of closing an affidavit attesting to the absence , unless otherwise provided for herein , 
of any financing statements , claims of lien or potential lienors known to Seller and further attesting 
that there have been no improvements to the Property for ninety days immediately preceding date 
of closing . If the property has been improved within said time , Seller shall deliver releases or waivers 
of all mechanic ’ s liens , executed by general contractors , subcontractors , suppliers , and material 
men , in addition to Seller ’ s lien affidavit setting forth the names of all such general contractors , 
subcontractors , suppliers , and material men and further reciting that , in fact , all bills for work to the 
Property which could serve as a basis for a mechanic ’ s lien have been paid or will be paid at closing . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
294
XIX . PLACE OF CLOSING : Closing shall be held in the county wherein the Property is located , 
at the office of the attorney or other closing agent designated by Buyer ; provided , however , that if a 
portion of the purchase price is to be derived from an institutional mortgagee , the requirements of 
said mortgagee as to time of day , place and procedures for closing , and for disbursement of mortgage 
process , shall control , anything in this contract to the contrary notwithstanding . 
XX . TIME : Time is of the essence of this Contract . Any reference herein to time periods of less than 
six days shall in the computation thereof , exclude Saturdays , Sundays , and legal holidays , and any 
time period provided for herein which shall end on a Saturday , Sunday , or legal holiday shall extend 
to 5 : 00 p . m . of the next business day . 
XXI . DOCUMENTS FOR CLOSING : Seller shall furnish deed , closing statement , mechanic ’ s lien 
affidavit , assignments of leases , and any corrective instruments that may be required in connection 
with perfecting the title . Buyer shall furnish mortgage , mortgage note , security agreement , and 
financing statement . 
XXII . EXPENSES : State documentary stamps which are required to be affixed to the instrument 
of conveyance , intangible tax on and recording of purchase money mortgage to Seller , and cost of 
recording any corrective instruments shall be paid by Seller . Documentary stamps to be affixed to the 
note or notes secured by the purchase money mortgage , cost of recording the deed , and financing 
statements shall be paid by Buyer . 
XXIII . PRORATION OF TAXES : Taxes for the year of the closing shall be prorated to the date of 
closing . If the closing shall occur before the tax rate is fixed for the then current year , the apportionment 
of taxes shall be upon the basis of the tax rate of the preceding year applied to the latest assessed 
valuation . Subsequent to the closing , when the tax rate is fixed for the year in which the closing 
occurs , Seller and Buyer agree to adjust the prorating of taxes and , if necessary , to refund or pay , as 
the case may be , an amount necessary to effect such adjustments . This provision shall survive closing . 
XXIV . PERSONAL PROPERTY INSPECTION , REPAIR : Seller warrants that all major appliances , 
heating , cooling , electrical , plumbing systems , and machinery are in working condition as of six days 
prior to closing . Buyer may , at his expense , have inspections made of said items by licensed persons 
dealing in the repair and maintenance thereof , and shall report in writing to Seller such items as found 
not in working condition prior to taking of possession thereof , or six days prior to closing , whichever 
is first . Unless Buyer reports failures within said period , he shall be deemed to have waived Seller ’ s 
warranty as to failures not reported . Valid reported failures shall be corrected at Seller ’ s cost with funds 
therefore escrowed at closing . Seller agrees to provide access for inspection upon reasonable notice . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
295
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
XXV . RISK OF LOSS : If the improvements are damaged by fire or other casualty prior to closing , 
and the costs of restoring same does not exceed 3% of the assessed valuation of the improvements so 
damaged , cost of restoration shall be an obligation of the Seller and closing shall proceed pursuant 
to the terms of Contract with costs therefore escrowed at closing . In the event the cost of repair or 
restoration exceeds 3% of the assessed valuation of the improvements so damaged , Buyer shall have 
the option of either taking the Property as is , together with either the said 3% or any insurance 
proceeds payable by virtue of such loss or damage , or of canceling the Contract and receiving of 
deposit ( s ) made hereunder . 
XXVI . MAINTENANCE : Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph XXIV , between Effective 
Date and Closing Date , all personal property on the premises and real property , including lawn , 
shrubbery , and pool , if any , shall be maintained by Seller in the condition they existed as of Effective 
Date , ordinary wear and tear excepted , and Buyer or Buyer ’ s designee will be permitted access for 
inspection prior to closing in order to confirm compliance with this standard . 
XXVII . PROCEEDS OF SALE AND CLOSING PROCEDURE : The deed shall be recorded upon 
clearance of funds and evidence of title continued at Buyer ’ s expense , to show title in Buyer , without 
any encumbrances or change which would render Seller ’ s title unmarketable from the date of the last 
evidence , and the cash proceeds of sale shall be held in escrow by Seller ’ s attorney or by such other 
escrow agent as may be mutually agreed upon for a period of not longer than five days from and 
after closing date . If Seller ’ s title is rendered unmarketable , Buyer shall within said five day period , 
notify Seller in writing of the defect and Seller shall have thirty days from date of receipt of such 
notification to cure said defect . In the event Seller fails to timely cure said defect , all monies paid 
hereunder shall , upon written demand therefore and within five days thereafter , be returned to Buyer 
and , simultaneously with such repayment , Buyer shall vacate the Property and recovery same to the 
Seller by special warranty deed . In the event Buyer fails to make timely demand for refund , he shall 
take title as is , waiving all rights against Seller as to such intervening defect except as may be available 
to Buyer by virtue of warranties , if any , contained in deed . 
XXVIII . ESCROW : Any escrow agent receiving funds is authorized and agrees by acceptance thereof 
to promptly deposit and to hold same in escrow and to disburse same subject to clearance thereof 
in accordance with terms and conditions of Contract . Failure of clearance of funds shall not excuse 
performance by the Buyer . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
296
XXIX . ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS : In connection with any litigation including appellate 
proceedings arising out of this Contract , the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover reasonable 
attorney ’ s fees and costs . 
XXX . DEFAULT BY SELLER : In the event that Seller should fail to consummate the transaction 
contemplated herein for any reason , except Buyer ’ s default :  ( i ) Buyer may enforce specific performance 
of this Agreement in a court of competent jurisdiction and in such action shall have the right to recover 
damages suffered by Buyer by reason of the delay in the acquisition of the Property , or ( ii ) may bring 
suit for damages for breach of this Agreement , in which event , the deposit made hereunder shall be 
forthwith returned to Buyer , or ( iii ) declare a default , demand and receive the return of the deposit . All 
rights , powers , options , or remedies afforded to Buyer either hereunder or by law shall be cumulative and 
not alternative and the exercise of one right , power , option , or remedy shall not bar other rights , powers , 
options or remedies allowed herein or by law . 
XXXI . DEFAULT BY BUYER : In the event Buyer should fail to consummate the transaction contemplated 
herein for any reason , except default by Seller or the failure of Seller to satisfy any of the conditions 
to Buyer ’ s obligations , as set forth herein , Seller shall be entitled to retain the earnest money deposit , 
such sum being agreed upon as liquidated damages for the failure of Buyer to perform the duties and 
obligations imposed upon it by the terms and provisions of this Agreement and because of the difficulty , 
inconvenience , and uncertainty of ascertaining actual damages , and no other damages , rights or remedies 
shall in any case be collectible , enforceable , or available to Seller other than as provided in this Section , 
and Seller agrees to accept and take said deposit as Seller ’ s total damages and relief hereunder in such event . 
XXXII . MEMORANDUM OF CONTRACT RECORDABLE , PERSONS BOUND , AND NOTICE : 
Upon the expiration of the inspection period described in paragraph XXXVI , if Buyer has elected to 
proceed with purchase of the property , the parties shall cause to be recorded , at Buyer ’ s option and 
expense , in the public records of the county in which the property is located , an executed Memorandum 
of Contract as attached hereto . This Contract shall bind and inure to the benefit of the Parties hereto and 
their successors in interest . Whenever the context permits , singular shall include plural and one gender 
shall include all . Notice given by or to the attorney for either party shall be as effective as if given by or 
to said party . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
297
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
XXXIII . PRORATIONS AND INSURANCE : Taxes , assessments , rent , interest , insurance , and 
other expenses and revenue of the Property shall be prorated as of date of closing . Buyer shall have 
the option of taking over any existing policies of insurance on the Property , if assumable , in which 
event premiums shall be prorated . The cash at closing shall be increased or decreased as may be 
required by said prorations . All references in Contract to prorations as of date of closing will be 
deemed date of occupancy if occupancy occurs prior to closing , unless otherwise provided for herein . 
XXXIV . CONVEYANCE : Seller shall convey title to the Property by statutory warranty deed subject 
only to matters contained in Paragraph VII hereof and those otherwise accepted by Buyer . Personal 
property shall , at the request of Buyer , be conveyed by an absolute bill of sale with warranty of title , 
subject to such liens as may be otherwise provided for herein . 
XXXV . UTILITIES : Seller shall , at no expense to Seller , actively work with Buyer to assist Buyer 
in obtaining electricity , water , sewage , storm drainage , and other utility services for development of 
the Property . 
XXXVI . ENGINEERING PLANS AND STUDIES : Upon the execution hereof , Seller shall furnish 
to Buyer all engineering plans , drawings , surveys , artist ’ s renderings , and economic and financial 
studies which Seller has , if any , relating to the Property , and all such information may be used by 
Buyer in such manner as it desires ; provided that in the event Buyer fails to purchase the Property for 
any reason other than Seller ’ s default , all such information shall be returned to Seller together with 
any information that Buyer may have compiled with respect to the Property . 
XXXVII . INSPECTION OF PROPERTY : Buyer shall have sixty ( 60 ) days from the date hereof to 
determine the elevation , grade , and topography of the Property and to conduct engineering and soil 
boring tests as the Buyer deems necessary in order to determine the usability of the Property . Buyer 
may in its sole and absolute discretion , give notice of termination of this Agreement at any time prior 
to the expiration of the sixty day inspection period , and upon such termination , all deposits held in 
escrow shall be returned to Buyer . 
XXXVIII . PENDING LITIGATION : Seller warrants and represents that there are no legal actions , 
suits , or other legal or administrative proceedings , including cases , pending or threatened , or similar 
proceedings affecting the Property or any portion thereof , nor has Seller knowledge that any such 
action is presently contemplated which might or does affect the conveyance contemplated hereunder . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
298
XXXIX . SURVIVAL OF REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES : The representations and 
warranties set forth in this Contract shall be continuing and shall be true and correct on and as of 
the closing date with the same force and effect as if made at that time , and all of such representations 
and warranties shall survive the closing and shall not be affected by any investigation , verification , or 
approval by any party hereto or by anyone on behalf of any party hereto . 
XL . ACQUIRING APPROVALS : The obligation of Buyer to close is conditioned upon Buyer having 
acquired all the necessary approvals and permits to use the property for ____________________ . 
XLI . OTHER AGREEMENTS : No prior or present agreements or representations shall be binding 
upon any of the Parties hereto unless incorporated in this Contract . No modification or change in 
this Contract shall be valid or binding upon the Parties unless in writing , executed by the Parties to 
be bound thereby . 
XLII . SPECIAL CLAUSES : 
___________________________ ___________________________ 
Buyer Seller 
___________________________ ___________________________ 
Buyer Seller 
___________________________ ___________________________ 
Date Date
BROKERAGE FEE : Seller agrees to pay the registered real estate Broker named below , at time 
of closing , from the disbursements of the proceeds of sale , compensation in the total amount of 
________ of gross purchase price of _______________ for his services in effecting the sale by 
finding a Buyer , ready , willing , and able to purchase pursuant to the foregoing Contract . In the event 
Buyer fails to perform and deposit ( s ) is retained , 50% thereof , but not exceeding the Broker ’ s fee 
above computed , shall be paid to the Broker as full consideration for Broker ’ s services including costs 
expended by Broker , and the balance shall be paid to Seller . If the transaction shall not be closed 
because of refusal or failure of Seller to perform , the Seller shall pay said fee in full to Broker on 
demand . Seller agrees to indemnify , defend , and hold Buyer harmless from and against all claims or 
demands with respect to any brokerage fees or agent ’ s commissions or other compensation asserted 
by any person or entity in connection with this agreement or the transaction contemplated herein . 
___________________________ ___________________________
Broker ( s ) Date
___________________________ ___________________________
Seller ( s ) Date 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
299
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
SAMPLE CONTRACT FOR PURCHASE AND SALE ( Continued ) 
PARTIES : ___________________ , as Seller , and __________________ , as Buyer , hereby agree 
that the Seller shall sell and Buyer shall buy the following legally described property . 
I . DESCRIPTION :  
( a ) Legal description of real estate : _________________________ 
( b ) Street address , if any , of the Property being conveyed is :  
( c ) Personal property including all buildings and improvements on the property and all right , title , 
and interest of Seller in and to adjacent streets , roads , alleys , and rights-of-way , and : ___________
___________________________________ . 
II . PURCHASE PRICE $____________________ PAYMENT :  
( a ) Cash Deposit ( s ) to be held in escrow by ______________ in the amount of $____________ 
and promissory note to be held in same escrow as additional earnest Buyer ’ s default in the amount 
of $______________ .  
( b ) Subject to assumption of mortgage in favor of ____________ bearing interest at _____% per 
annum and payable as to principal and interest $_____ per month , having an approximate present 
principal balance of $___________ .  
( c ) Purchase money mortgage and note bearing interest at _______% on terms set forth herein 
below , in the principal amount of $________________ .  
( d ) Other : ____________________________________________________________ 
( e ) Balance to close ,  ( U . S . Cash , certified or cashier ’ s check ) subject to adjustments and prorations : 
$____________ . TOTAL $_________________ .  
( f ) All funds held in escrow shall be placed in an interest bearing account at the direction of Buyer , 
with interest accruing to the benefit of Buyer and either applied toward the purchase price at closing 
or returned to Buyer in the event and for any reason the transaction does not close . 
III . FINANCING : If the purchase price or any part thereof is to be financed by a third party loan , 
this Contract for Purchase and Sale is conditioned upon the Buyer obtaining a firm commitment for 
said loan within sixty days from the date hereof , at an interest rate not to exceed ____% ; for ____ 
years ; and in the principal amount of $__________ . Buyer agrees to make application for , and to 
use reasonable diligence to obtain said loan . Should Buyer fail to obtain same or to waive Buyer ’ s 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
300
rights hereunder within said time , Buyer may cancel Contract and receive escrow money . 
IV . TITLE EVIDENCE : Within twenty days from the date of Contract , Seller shall , at his expense , 
deliver to Buyer or his attorney , in accordance with Paragraph XI , a title insurance commitment with 
fee owner ’ s title policy premium to be paid by Seller at closing . 
V . TIME FOR ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE : If this offer is not executed by both 
of the parties hereto on or before _________ , the aforesaid deposit ( s ) shall be , at the option of the 
Buyer , returned to him and this offer shall thereafter be null and void . The date of Contract shall be 
the date when the last one of the Seller and Buyer has signed this offer . 
VI . CLOSING DATE : This transaction shall be closed and the deed and other closing papers 
delivered on or before ________ , unless extended by other provisions of Contract , or by written 
agreement of the Parties . 
VII . RESTRICTIONS , EASEMENTS , LIMITATIONS : The Buyer shall take title subject only 
to : Zoning , restrictions , prohibitions , and other requirements imposed by governmental authority ; 
Restrictions and matters appearing on the plat or otherwise common to the subdivision ; Public utility 
easements of record ; Taxes for year of closing and subsequent years , assumed mortgages , and purchase 
money mortgages , if any ; other : ___________________________ provided , however , that none of 
the foregoing shall prevent use of the property for the purpose of ________________________ . 
VIII . OCCUPANCY : Seller represents that there are no parties in occupancy other than Seller , but 
if Property is intended to be rented or occupied beyond closing , the fact and terms thereof shall be 
stated herein , and the tenant ( s ) shall be disclosed pursuant to Paragraph XVII . Seller agrees to deliver 
occupancy of Property at time of closing unless otherwise specified below . 
IX . ASSIGNABILITY : Buyer may assign this Contract and be released of all liability . 
X . TYPEWRITTEN OR HANDWRITTEN PROVISIONS : Typewritten or handwritten 
provisions inserted herein or attached hereto as Addenda shall control all printed provisions in 
conflict therewith . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
301
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
XI . EVIDENCE OF TITLE : Within twenty days from the date hereof , Seller , at Seller ’ s sole cost 
and expense , shall cause a title insurance company mutually acceptable to the Parties to issue and 
deliver to Buyer an ALTA Form B title commitment accompanied by one copy of all documents 
affecting the Property , and which constitute exceptions to the Title Commitment . Buyer shall give 
Seller written notice on or before twenty days from the date of receipt of the Title Commitment , if 
the condition of title as set forth in such Title Commitment and survey is not satisfactory in Buyer ’ s 
sole discretion . In the event that the condition of title is not acceptable , Buyer shall state which 
exceptions to the Title Commitment are unacceptable . Seller shall , at its sole cost and expense , 
promptly undertake and use its best efforts to eliminate or modify all unacceptable matters to the 
reasonable satisfaction of Buyer . In the event Seller is unable with the exercise of due diligence to 
satisfy said objections within thirty days after said notice , Buyer may , at its option :  ( i ) extend the 
time period for Seller to satisfy said objections ,  ( ii ) accept title subject to the objections raised by 
Buyer , without an adjustment in the purchase price , in which event said objections shall be deemed 
to be waived for all purposes , or ( iii ) rescind this Agreement , whereupon the deposit described 
herein shall be returned to Buyer and this Agreement shall be of no further force and effect . 
XII . EXISTING MORTGAGES TO BE ASSUMED : Seller shall furnish to Buyer within twenty 
days from execution hereof a statement from all mortgagee ( s ) setting forth principal balance , method 
of payment , interest rate , and whether the mortgage ( s ) is in good standing . If a mortgage requires 
approval of the Buyer by the mortgagee in order to avoid default , or for assumption by the Buyer 
of said mortgage , and :  
( a ) the mortgagee does not approve the Buyer , the Buyer may rescind the contract , or 
( b ) the mortgagee requires an increase in the interest rate or charges a fee for any reason in excess 
of $500 . 00 , the Buyer may rescind the Contract unless Seller elects to pay such increase or excess . 
Seller and Buyer each shall pay 50% of any such fee . Buyer shall use reasonable diligence to obtain 
approval . The amount of any escrow deposits held by mortgagee shall be credited to Seller . 
XIII . PURCHASE MONEY MORTGAGES : The purchase money note and mortgage , if any , shall 
provide for a thirty day grace period in the event of default if it is a first mortgage and a fifteen day 
grace period in the event of default if a second mortgage ; shall provide for right of prepayment 
in whole or in part without penalty ; shall be assumable ; and shall not provide for acceleration or 
interest adjustment in event of resale of the Property . Said mortgage shall require the owner of the 
encumbered Property to keep all prior liens and encumbrances in good standing . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
302
XIV . CURRENT SURVEY : Within fifteen days from the date hereof , Seller , at Seller ’ s sole cost and 
expense , shall furnish a current survey of the Property prepared and certified by a duly registered 
Land Surveyor . The survey as to the Property shall :  
( a ) Set forth an accurate legal description ; and 
( b ) Locate all existing easements and rights-of-way ( setting forth the book and page number of the 
recorded instruments creating the same )  , alleys , streets ; and 
( c ) Show any encroachments ; and 
( d ) Show all existing improvements ( such as buildings , power lines , fences , etc .  )  ; and 
( e ) Show all dedicated public streets provided access and whether such access is paved to the property 
line ; and 
( f ) Show the location of any easements necessary for the furnishing of off-site improvements ; and 
( g ) Be certified to the Seller , the Buyer , the Title Company and any lender that may be involved in 
the transaction . In the event the survey or the recertification thereof shows any encroachments of 
any improvements upon , from , or onto the Property , or on or between any building set-back line , 
a property line , or any easement , except those acceptable to Buyer , in Buyer ’ s sole discretion , said 
encroachment shall be treated in the same manner as a title defect under the procedure set forth of 
notice thereof . 
XV . TERMITES : The Buyer , within time allowed for delivery of evidence of title and examination 
thereof , or no later than ten days prior to closing , whichever date occurs last , may have the 
improvements inspected at Buyer ’ s expense by a certified pest control operator to determine whether 
there is any visible active termite infestation or visible existing damage from termite infestation in 
the improvements . If Buyer is informed of either or both of the foregoing , Buyer will have ten days 
from date of notice thereof within which to have all damages , whether visible or not , inspected 
and estimated by a licensed building or general contractor . Seller shall pay valid costs for treatment 
and repair of all damage up to 1 1 / 2% of Purchase Price . Should such costs exceed that amount , 
Buyer shall have the option of canceling Contract within five days after receipt of contractor ’ s repair 
estimate by giving written notice to Seller , or Buyer may elect to proceed with the transaction , in 
which event Buyer shall receive a credit at closing of an amount equal to 1 1 / 2% of said Purchase 
Price . Termites shall be deemed to include all wood destroying organisms . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
303
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
XVI . INGRESS AND EGRESS : Seller warrants that there is ingress and egress to the Property 
sufficient for the intended use as described in Paragraph VII hereof the title to which is in accordance 
with Paragraph XI above . 
XVII . LEASES : Seller shall , not less than fifteen days prior to closing , furnish to Buyer copies of all 
written leases and estoppel letters from each tenant ( if any ) specifying the nature and duration of 
said tenant ’ s occupancy , rental rates and advanced rent , and security deposits paid by tenant . In the 
event Seller is unable to obtain such letter from each tenant , the same information shall be furnished 
by Seller to Buyer within said time period in the form of a Seller ’ s affidavit , and Buyer may thereafter 
contact tenants to confirm such information . Seller shall deliver and assign all original leases to 
Buyer at closing . 
XVIII . LIENS : Seller shall , both as to the Property and personally being sold hereunder , furnish to 
Buyer at time of closing an affidavit attesting to the absence , unless otherwise provided for herein , 
of any financing statements , claims of lien or potential lienors known to Seller and further attesting 
that there have been no improvements to the Property for ninety days immediately preceding date 
of closing . If the property has been improved within said time , Seller shall deliver releases or waivers 
of all mechanic ’ s liens , executed by general contractors , subcontractors , suppliers , and material 
men , in addition to Seller ’ s lien affidavit setting forth the names of all such general contractors , 
subcontractors , suppliers , and material men and further reciting that , in fact , all bills for work to the 
Property which could serve as a basis for a mechanic ’ s lien have been paid or will be paid at closing . 
XIX . PLACE OF CLOSING : Closing shall be held in the county wherein the Property is located , 
at the office of the attorney or other closing agent designated by Buyer ; provided , however , that if a 
portion of the purchase price is to be derived from an institutional mortgagee , the requirements of 
said mortgagee as to time of day , place and procedures for closing , and for disbursement of mortgage 
process , shall control , anything in this contract to the contrary notwithstanding . 
XX . TIME : Time is of the essence of this Contract . Any reference herein to time periods of less than 
six days shall in the computation thereof , exclude Saturdays , Sundays , and legal holidays , and any 
time period provided for herein which shall end on a Saturday , Sunday , or legal holiday shall extend 
to 5 : 00 p . m . of the next business day . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
304
XXI . DOCUMENTS FOR CLOSING : Seller shall furnish deed , closing statement , mechanic ’ s lien 
affidavit , assignments of leases , and any corrective instruments that may be required in connection 
with perfecting the title . Buyer shall furnish mortgage , mortgage note , security agreement , and 
financing statement . 
XXII . EXPENSES : State documentary stamps which are required to be affixed to the instrument 
of conveyance , intangible tax on and recording of purchase money mortgage to Seller , and cost of 
recording any corrective instruments shall be paid by Seller . Documentary stamps to be affixed to 
the note or notes secured by the purchase money mortgage , cost of recording the deed , and financing 
statements shall be paid by Buyer . 
XXIII . PRORATION OF TAXES : Taxes for the year of the closing shall be prorated to the date 
of closing . If the closing shall occur before the tax rate is fixed for the then current year , the 
apportionment of taxes shall be upon the basis of the tax rate of the preceding year applied to the 
latest assessed valuation . Subsequent to the closing , when the tax rate is fixed for the year in which 
the closing occurs , Seller and Buyer agree to adjust the prorating of taxes and , if necessary , to refund 
or pay , as the case may be , an amount necessary to effect such adjustments . This provision shall 
survive closing . 
XXIV . PERSONAL PROPERTY INSPECTION , REPAIR : Seller warrants that all major appliances , 
heating , cooling , electrical , plumbing systems , and machinery are in working condition as of six 
days prior to closing . Buyer may , at his expense , have inspections made of said items by licensed 
persons dealing in the repair and maintenance thereof , and shall report in writing to Seller such 
items as found not in working condition prior to taking of possession thereof , or six days prior to 
closing , whichever is first . Unless Buyer reports failures within said period , he shall be deemed to 
have waived Seller ’ s warranty as to failures not reported . Valid reported failures shall be corrected at 
Seller ’ s cost with funds therefore escrowed at closing . Seller agrees to provide access for inspection 
upon reasonable notice . 
XXV . RISK OF LOSS : If the improvements are damaged by fire or other casualty prior to closing , 
and the costs of restoring same does not exceed 3% of the assessed valuation of the improvements so 
damaged , cost of restoration shall be an obligation of the Seller and closing shall proceed pursuant 
to the terms of Contract with costs therefore escrowed at closing . In the event the cost of repair or 
restoration exceeds 3% of the assessed valuation of the improvements so damaged , Buyer shall have 
the option of either taking the Property as is , together with either the said 3% or any insurance 
proceeds payable by virtue of such loss or damage , or of canceling the Contract and receiving of 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
305
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
deposit ( s ) made hereunder . 
XXVI . MAINTENANCE : Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph XXIV , between Effective 
Date and Closing Date , all personal property on the premises and real property , including lawn , 
shrubbery , and pool , if any , shall be maintained by Seller in the condition they existed as of Effective 
Date , ordinary wear and tear excepted , and Buyer or Buyer ’ s designee will be permitted access for 
inspection prior to closing in order to confirm compliance with this standard . 
XXVII . PROCEEDS OF SALE AND CLOSING PROCEDURE : The deed shall be recorded upon 
clearance of funds and evidence of title continued at Buyer ’ s expense , to show title in Buyer , without 
any encumbrances or change which would render Seller ’ s title unmarketable from the date of the last 
evidence , and the cash proceeds of sale shall be held in escrow by Seller ’ s attorney or by such other 
escrow agent as may be mutually agreed upon for a period of not longer than five days from and 
after closing date . If Seller ’ s title is rendered unmarketable , Buyer shall within said five day period , 
notify Seller in writing of the defect and Seller shall have thirty days from date of receipt of such 
notification to cure said defect . In the event Seller fails to timely cure said defect , all monies paid 
hereunder shall , upon written demand therefore and within five days thereafter , be returned to Buyer 
and , simultaneously with such repayment , Buyer shall vacate the Property and recovery same to the 
Seller by special warranty deed . In the event Buyer fails to make timely demand for refund , he shall 
take title as is , waiving all rights against Seller as to such intervening defect except as may be available 
to Buyer by virtue of warranties , if any , contained in deed . 
XXVIII . ESCROW : Any escrow agent receiving funds is authorized and agrees by acceptance thereof 
to promptly deposit and to hold same in escrow and to disburse same subject to clearance thereof 
in accordance with terms and conditions of Contract . Failure of clearance of funds shall not excuse 
performance by the Buyer . 
XXIX . ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS : In connection with any litigation including appellate 
proceedings arising out of this Contract , the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover reasonable 
attorney ’ s fees and costs . 
XXX . DEFAULT BY SELLER : In the event that Seller should fail to consummate the transaction 
contemplated herein for any reason , except Buyer ’ s default :  ( i ) Buyer may enforce specific performance 
of this Agreement in a court of competent jurisdiction and in such action shall have the right to 
recover damages suffered by Buyer by reason of the delay in the acquisition of the Property , or ( ii ) 
may bring suit for damages for breach of this Agreement , in which event , the deposit made hereunder 
shall be forthwith returned to Buyer , or ( iii ) declare a default , demand and receive the return of the 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
306
deposit . All rights , powers , options , or remedies afforded to Buyer either hereunder or by law shall 
be cumulative and not alternative and the exercise of one right , power , option , or remedy shall not 
bar other rights , powers , options or remedies allowed herein or by law . 
XXXI . DEFAULT BY BUYER : In the event Buyer should fail to consummate the transaction 
contemplated herein for any reason , except default by Seller or the failure of Seller to satisfy any 
of the conditions to Buyer ’ s obligations , as set forth herein , Seller shall be entitled to retain the 
earnest money deposit , such sum being agreed upon as liquidated damages for the failure of Buyer to 
perform the duties and obligations imposed upon it by the terms and provisions of this Agreement 
and because of the difficulty , inconvenience , and uncertainty of ascertaining actual damages , and no 
other damages , rights or remedies shall in any case be collectible , enforceable , or available to Seller 
other than as provided in this Section , and Seller agrees to accept and take said deposit as Seller ’ s total 
damages and relief hereunder in such event . 
XXXII . MEMORANDUM OF CONTRACT RECORDABLE , PERSONS BOUND , AND 
NOTICE : Upon the expiration of the inspection period described in paragraph XXXVI , if Buyer 
has elected to proceed with purchase of the property , the parties shall cause to be recorded , at Buyer ’ s 
option and expense , in the public records of the county in which the property is located , an executed 
Memorandum of Contract as attached hereto . This Contract shall bind and inure to the benefit 
of the Parties hereto and their successors in interest . Whenever the context permits , singular shall 
include plural and one gender shall include all . Notice given by or to the attorney for either party 
shall be as effective as if given by or to said party . 
XXXIII . PRORATIONS AND INSURANCE : Taxes , assessments , rent , interest , insurance , and 
other expenses and revenue of the Property shall be prorated as of date of closing . Buyer shall have 
the option of taking over any existing policies of insurance on the Property , if assumable , in which 
event premiums shall be prorated . The cash at closing shall be increased or decreased as may be 
required by said prorations . All references in Contract to prorations as of date of closing will be 
deemed date of occupancy if occupancy occurs prior to closing , unless otherwise provided for herein . 
XXXIV . CONVEYANCE : Seller shall convey title to the Property by statutory warranty deed subject 
only to matters contained in Paragraph VII hereof and those otherwise accepted by Buyer . Personal 
property shall , at the request of Buyer , be conveyed by an absolute bill of sale with warranty of title , 
subject to such liens as may be otherwise provided for herein . 
XXXV . UTILITIES : Seller shall , at no expense to Seller , actively work with Buyer to assist Buyer 
in obtaining electricity , water , sewage , storm drainage , and other utility services for development of 
the Property . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
307
Guide to real estate investing
Making An Offer : The Contract
XXXVI . ENGINEERING PLANS AND STUDIES : Upon the execution hereof , Seller shall furnish 
to Buyer all engineering plans , drawings , surveys , artist ’ s renderings , and economic and financial 
studies which Seller has , if any , relating to the Property , and all such information may be used by 
Buyer in such manner as it desires ; provided that in the event Buyer fails to purchase the Property for 
any reason other than Seller ’ s default , all such information shall be returned to Seller together with 
any information that Buyer may have compiled with respect to the Property . 
XXXVII . INSPECTION OF PROPERTY : Buyer shall have sixty ( 60 ) days from the date hereof to 
determine the elevation , grade , and topography of the Property and to conduct engineering and soil 
boring tests as the Buyer deems necessary in order to determine the usability of the Property . Buyer 
may in its sole and absolute discretion , give notice of termination of this Agreement at any time prior 
to the expiration of the sixty day inspection period , and upon such termination , all deposits held in 
escrow shall be returned to Buyer . 
XXXVIII . PENDING LITIGATION : Seller warrants and represents that there are no legal actions , 
suits , or other legal or administrative proceedings , including cases , pending or threatened , or similar 
proceedings affecting the Property or any portion thereof , nor has Seller knowledge that any such 
action is presently contemplated which might or does affect the conveyance contemplated hereunder . 
XXXIX . SURVIVAL OF REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES : The representations and 
warranties set forth in this Contract shall be continuing and shall be true and correct on and as of 
the closing date with the same force and effect as if made at that time , and all of such representations 
and warranties shall survive the closing and shall not be affected by any investigation , verification , or 
approval by any party hereto or by anyone on behalf of any party hereto . 
XL . ACQUIRING APPROVALS : The obligation of Buyer to close is conditioned upon Buyer having 
acquired all the necessary approvals and permits to use the property for ____________________ . 
XLI . OTHER AGREEMENTS : No prior or present agreements or representations shall be binding 
upon any of the Parties hereto unless incorporated in this Contract . No modification or change in 
this Contract shall be valid or binding upon the Parties unless in writing , executed by the Parties to 
be bound thereby . 
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
308
XLII . SPECIAL CLAUSES : 
___________________________ ___________________________ 
Buyer Seller 
___________________________ ___________________________ 
Buyer Seller 
___________________________ ___________________________ 
Date Date
Deposit ( s ) under II ( a ) received ; if check , subject to clearance , and terms hereof are accepted . 
By : ____________________________________________________________ ( Escrow Agent ) 
BROKERAGE FEE : Seller agrees to pay the registered real estate Broker named below , at time 
of closing , from the disbursements of the proceeds of sale , compensation in the total amount of 
________ of gross purchase price of _______________ for his services in effecting the sale by 
finding a Buyer , ready , willing , and able to purchase pursuant to the foregoing Contract . In the event 
Buyer fails to perform and deposit ( s ) is retained , 50% thereof , but not exceeding the Broker ’ s fee 
above computed , shall be paid to the Broker as full consideration for Broker ’ s services including costs 
expended by Broker , and the balance shall be paid to Seller . If the transaction shall not be closed 
because of refusal or failure of Seller to perform , the Seller shall pay said fee in full to Broker on 
demand . Seller agrees to indemnify , defend , 
and hold Buyer harmless from and against all claims or demands with respect to any brokerage fees 
or agent ’ s commissions or other compensation asserted by any person or entity in connection with 
this agreement or the transaction contemplated herein . 
___________________________ ___________________________
Broker ( s ) Date
___________________________ ___________________________
Seller ( s ) Date
SAMPLE
glossary
309
Glossary of General Real Estate Terms
Abandon
A 
– To choose not to exercise or sell an option before it expires ; to voluntarily 
relinquish the rights of property ownership . 
Abstract ( of Title ) – A historical summary of all the recorded transactions that affect 
the title to the property . An attorney or a title company will review an abstract of title to 
determine if there are any problems affecting the title to the property . All such problems 
must be cleared before the buyer can be issued a clear and insurable title . 
Acceleration Clause – A provision in a loan contract that allows the lender to demand 
full and immediate repayment of the entire loan balance if the contract is breached or 
conditions for repayment occur . 
Addendum – Clauses that are added to the end of a contract which supersede what is 
written in the contract . 
Adjustable Rate Mortgage ( ARM ) – Also known as a variable rate mortgage . 
A mortgage with an interest rate that may change , usually in response to changes in the 
Treasury bill rate or the prime rate . 
Adjustment Period – This is the length of time for which the interest rate is fixed on 
an adjustable rate mortgage . Therefore , if the adjustment period is six months , then the 
interest rate will remain fixed for six months , after which time it will adjust . 
Agent – Generally , someone who acts on behalf of another for a fee . In real estate , the 
term refers to a person with a real estate license who works under the authority of a real 
estate broker . 
Agreement of Sale – A written , signed agreement between the seller and the purchaser 
in which the purchaser agrees to buy certain real estate and the seller agrees to sell upon 
terms of the agreement . Also known as contract of purchase , purchase agreement , offer 
and acceptance , earnest money contract , or sales agreement . 
Amortization – A gradual paying off of a debt by regular periodic installments which 
pay principal and interest over a specified period of time . 
Annual Percentage Rate ( APR ) – The effective rate of interest for a loan per year . 
This rate is typically higher than the note rate because it takes into account closing costs . 
This is one way to compare loan programs offered by different lenders . Caution : the APR 
is sometimes computed differently by different lenders and can be misleading . 
311
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
Appraisal – An opinion or estimate of the value of a property at a given date . 
Appreciation – Increase in value of a property . 
Arm ’ s Length Transaction – Typically , a transaction between two related or affiliated 
parties that is conducted as if they were unrelated , so that there is no question of a conflict 
of interest . 
Arrears – The amount of debt that is overdue or unpaid . A payment that is made past 
its due date . 
Assessment – A local tax levied against a property for a specific purpose such as for 
streetlights . 
Asset – Anything of value that can be converted into cash or used to pay a debt . 
Assign – To transfer interest . 
Assignee – Individual to whom a title , claim , property , interest , or right has been 
transferred . 
Assignment Clause – A sales contract with an assignment clause allows the buyer to 
transfer the interest in the property ( i . e .  , the right to buy it at the given rates and terms ) to 
another party . 
Assignor – The one who transfers a title , claim , property , interest , or right to another 
person . 
Assumable Mortgage – A mortgage loan that allows a new homebuyer to take 
over the obligation of making loan payments with no change in the terms of the loan . The 
lender has to be notified and agree to the assumption . The lender may require the buyer to 
qualify for the loan and may charge an assumption fee . The seller should obtain a written 
release from the lender stating clearly that he / she is no longer liable to make mortgage 
payments . 
Assumption – Assuming a mortgage is taking over the repaying of the debt from the 
seller . 
312
B
Balloon ( payment ) Mortgage – Usually a short-term , fixed-rate loan which involves 
small payments for a certain period of time and one large payment for the remaining 
amount of the principal at a time specified in the contract . Example : A balloon mortgage 
for $25 , 000 has interest only payments for 5 years at 12% ( $250 per month )  , with the 
full principal of $25 , 000 due and payable after 5 years . 
Bankruptcy – The financial inability to pay one ’ s debts when due . The debtor surrenders 
his assets to the bankruptcy court . An individual typically files for Chapter 7 ( all debts 
wiped out ) or Chapter 13 ( establishes a payment plan to pay off debts )  . A bankruptcy 
stays on an individual ’ s credit report for seven years . 
Beneficiary – The person who receives or is eligible to receive the benefits resulting 
from certain acts . For example , if you set up a land trust for a property you own , you are 
the beneficiary . 
Bid – An offer of a specific amount of money in exchange for products and services , as 
in an auction . 
Bi-weekly Mortgage – A mortgage that requires half the normal monthly payment 
every two weeks . Over the course of the year , 26 half-payments are made , which is 
equivalent to 13 full mortgage payments . As a result of this extra payment , the loan 
amortizes much faster than a loan with normal monthly payments . 
Blanket Mortgage – Mortgage covering more than one piece of property ( e . g .  , a 
developer subdivides a tract of land into lots and obtains a blanket mortgage on the whole 
tract )  . 
Book Value – The value of an asset as shown in the financial records of an individual 
or corporation . Book value may differ substantially from market price . 
Borrower ( Mortgagor ) – One who applies for a loan secured by real estate and is 
responsible for repaying the loan ( mortgage )  . 
Broker – An individual or firm that acts as an intermediary between a buyer and seller , 
usually charging a commission . 
Buy-Back Agreement – An agreement specifying conditions under which the seller 
agrees to repurchase the property , usually for a stated price and within a stated time limit . 
313
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
Buy Down – Obtaining a lower interest rate ( buying down the rate ) by paying additional 
points to the lender . The lower rate may apply for the full duration of the loan or for just the 
first few years . A buy down may be used to qualify a borrower who would otherwise not 
qualify . This is because a buy down results in lower payments , which are easier to qualify 
for . Example : A very popular buy down is the 2-1 buy down . If the interest rate on the note 
is 9% , the buy down results in the rate being 7% ( 9%-2% ) for the first year , 8% ( 9%-1% ) for 
the second year , and 9% thereafter . 
Buyer ’ s Broker – An agent hired by a buyer to locate a property for purchase . The 
broker represents the buyer and negotiates with the seller ’ s broker for the best possible 
deal for the buyer . 
Buyer ’ s Market – Market conditions that favor buyers ( e . g .  , there are more sellers 
than buyers in the market )  . As a result , buyers have ample choice of properties and 
may negotiate lower prices . A buyer ’ s market may be caused by an economic slump or 
overbuilding . 
C
Capital – Money used to generate income . 
Capital Gains – Profit earned from the sale of real estate or the amount by which an 
asset ’ s selling price exceeds its initial purchase price . A seller may defer taxes on the 
capital gain of his / her primary residence by buying a higher priced residence within two 
years . 
Cap Rate – Rate used to determine the present value of property with future earnings . 
Caps ( interest ) – Consumer safeguards that limit the amount the interest rate on an 
adjustable rate mortgage may change per year and / or over the life of the loan ( see also 
Interest Cap )  . 
Caps ( payment ) – Consumer safeguards that limit the amount monthly payments on an 
adjustable rate mortgage may change . 
Cash Flow – The amount of cash derived over a certain period of time from an incomeproducing property . Cash receipts minus cash payments over a given period of time . The 
cash flow should be large enough to pay the expenses of the income-producing property 
( mortgage payment , maintenance , utilities , etc .  )  . 
314
Caveat Emptor – A legal term meaning “ let the buyer beware .  ” The buyer must examine 
the property and buy at his / her own risk . Example : A property may be offered in an “ asis ” condition with no expressed or implied guarantee of quality or condition . 
Certificate of Occupancy – Document issued by a local governmental agency that 
states a property meets the local building standards for occupancy and is in compliance 
with public health and building codes . This document is normally required by a lender 
prior to closing the loan . 
Certificate of Title – An opinion rendered by an attorney as to the status of title to a 
property , according to the public records . This certificate does not hold the same level of 
protection as title insurance . 
Chain of Title – Chronological order of conveyance of a parcel of land from the 
original owner to the present owner . An abstractor can research title to property going 
back to the date the property was granted to the United States . 
Chattel – Personal , tangible , moveable property . The same as personal property . Not 
real estate . 
Clear Title – A marketable title , free of liens and legal questions as to the ownership of 
the property . Most lenders require a clear title prior to closing . 
Closing – 1 ) The act of transferring ownership of a property from seller to buyer in 
accordance with a sales contract ; 2 ) the time when a closing takes place ; 3 ) the process 
of signing the documents to transfer property . 
Closing Costs – Expenses incurred by the buyer and seller in a real estate or mortgage 
transaction over and above the price of the property . There are two types of costs : 
recurring and non-recurring . Non-recurring costs are one-time transactional costs , which 
include : discount and origination points ; lender fees – underwriting , processing , document 
preparations , flood certificate , tax service , wire transfer , courier , etc .  ; title insurance fees ; 
escrow ; attorney or closing agent fees ; recording fees ; inspection and appraisal fees ; and 
real estate brokerage commissions . Recurring fees are costs associated with owning the 
property and they recur month after month . These costs may include hazard insurance , 
interest , property taxes , mortgage insurance ( PMI )  , and association fees . A pro-rated amount 
of these fees may have to be paid at closing , including : pre-paid interest – interest charges 
from the date of closing to the end of the month ; property taxes if due ; and hazard insurance , 
fire insurance , or homeowner ’ s insurance ( has to be paid for one year )  . Mortgage insurance 
( PMI ) may be required if the loan amount is more than 80% of the value of the property . In 
the past , a whole year of PMI had to be paid up front , however , in recent years , many PMI
companies only require 1-2 months up front . Mortgage insurance premiums are normally 
paid every month with the loan payment . An impound account may need money to be set 
up for future payments . 
315
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
Closing Statement – The settlement statement that discloses all of the financial 
information of the transaction for the buyer and seller including all costs . 
Cloud on Title – An outstanding claim or encumbrance that , if valid , would affect or 
impair the owner ’ s title . Compared with clear title . 
Collateral – Assets pledged by a borrower to secure a loan or other credit , and subject 
to seizure in the event of default . 
Commission – The fee charged by a broker or agent when selling real estate . 
Comparative Market Analysis ( CMA ) – A comparison of sales prices of similar 
properties in a given area for the purpose of determining the fair market value of a 
property . Also referred to as “ comps .  ” 
Conditional Commitment – A written document provided by a lender agreeing to 
make a loan provided certain conditions are met by the borrower prior to closing . 
Consideration – Anything of value given to induce another to enter into a contract . 
Earnest money deposit on a sales contract is consideration . 
Construction Loan – A short term loan to pay for the construction of buildings or 
homes . They typically provide periodic disbursements to the builder as each stage of the 
building is completed . When construction is completed , a “ take-out ” or permanent loan is 
used to pay off the construction loan . 
Contingency – Conditions that must be satisfied before the buyer can close the purchase 
of a property . Contingencies are generally outlined in the purchase contract between the 
buyer and seller . Example : The buyer has 14 days to remove the property contingency 
under the sales contract . In this case , the buyer has 14 days to inspect the property and 
request the seller to perform repairs . If the buyer is not satisfied with the condition of the 
property or if the buyer and the seller cannot agree on repairs , the buyer may back out of 
the contract with no penalty . After 14 days , the buyer no longer has the right to back out 
with no penalty as a result of a problem with the condition of the property . 
Contract – A binding agreement between competent parties to do or not do certain 
things for consideration . To have a valid contract for the sale of real estate there must be : 
1 ) an offer , 2 ) an acceptance , 3 ) competent parties , 4 ) consideration , 5 ) legal purpose , 
6 ) written documentation , 7 ) description of the property , and 8 ) signatures by principals 
or their attorney-in-fact . 
Contract of Sale – Same as the Agreement of Sale . 
Contract Sale or Deed – A real estate installment selling arrangement where the buyer 
may occupy the property , but the seller retains the title until the agreed upon sales price 
has been paid . Also known as an installment land contract . 
316
Contract to Purchase – An agreement of sale detailing the transaction and 
submitted by the buyer to the seller . 
Conventional Loan – Any mortgage loan other than a VA or FHA loan . A
conventional loan may be conforming or non-conforming . 
Convertible ARM – Some variable rate loans come with options to convert them 
to a fixed rate loan based on a pre-determined formula , during a given time period . 
For example , the 1-year T-bill adjustable may be converted to a fixed during the first 
five years on the adjustment date . This means you could convert during the 13th , 
25th , 37th , 49th , and 61st months of the loan . 
Conveyance – The transfer of title of real property from one party to another . 
Co-op – A multi-unit housing complex where the residents own stock in the building 
instead of individual units . 
Corporation – An association of one or more shareholders having its own legal 
entity separate from the individual shareholders . 
Covenant – A written agreement or restriction on the use of land or promising 
certain acts . Homeowner ’ s associations often enforce restrictive covenants governing 
architectural controls and maintenance responsibilities . However , land could be 
subject to restrictive covenants even if there is no homeowner ’ s association . 
Credit Report – A report detailing a borrower ’ s credit history , including payment 
history on revolving accounts ( e . g .  , credit cards )  , installment accounts ( e . g .  , car loan )  , 
late payments , bankruptcies , and recent inquiries . It can be obtained by prospective 
lenders with the borrower ’ s permission to determine his or her creditworthiness . A
credit report also includes information found from public records , including tax liens 
and judgments . 
D
Debt-to-Income Ratio – The ratio , expressed as a percentage , which results 
when a borrower ’ s monthly payment obligation on long-term debts is divided by his 
or her net effective income ( FHA / VA loans ) or gross monthly income ( conventional 
loans )  . 
317
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
Deed – A written document by which title to real property is transferred from one owner to 
another . The deed should contain an accurate description of the property being conveyed , 
should be signed and witnessed according to the laws of the state where the property is 
located , and should be delivered to the buyer at closing . 
Deed of Trust – Used in many states instead of a mortgage to secure the payment of a 
note . In a deed of trust , there are three parties – the borrower , the trustee , and the lender 
( or beneficiary )  . The deed to a property is held by a trustee instead of the borrower . 
Deed Restriction – A clause in a deed that limits the use of land . Example : A deed 
might require that a road cannot be built on the land . 
Default – Failure to meet legal obligations in a contract such as the failure to make the 
monthly mortgage payment . 
Defective Title – Any recorded instrument that would prevent a grantor / seller from 
giving a clear title . Example : The seller has a contractor lien on the property that was filed 
when he / she failed to pay the contractor for the kitchen remodel . The seller may obtain 
clear title by paying the contractor and removing the lien . 
Delinquency – Failure to make payments on time . This can lead to foreclosure . 
Depreciation – Decline in the value of a house due to wear and tear , obsolescence , 
adverse changes in the neighborhood , or any other reason . 
Disclosure – Statement of fact ( s ) concerning the condition of the property for sale and 
the surrounding area . In most states , the buyer is protected by disclosure laws requiring 
sellers to divulge certain information about the property ( e . g .  , if the property is in a special 
studies zone )  . 
Discount Points – Fees paid to a lender to reduce the interest rate . 
Documentary Tax Stamps – Stamps affixed to a deed showing the amount of 
transfer tax paid . 
Down Payment – The part of the purchase price paid in cash up front , reducing the 
amount of the loan or mortgage . Example : John buys a house for $100 , 000 and obtains 
a loan for $80 , 000 . His down payment is $20 , 000 . 
Due on Sale Clause – A clause in the deed of trust or mortgage that states that the 
entire loan is due upon the sale of the property . 
318
E
Earnest Money – A deposit made by a buyer of real estate towards the down payment 
to evidence good faith . This money is typically held by the real estate broker or the escrow 
company . 
Easement – The right to use the land of another for a specific purpose . Easements may 
be temporary or permanent . Example : The utility company may need an easement to run 
electric lines . 
Eminent Domain – The right of the government or a public utility to acquire private 
property for public use by condemnation , with proper compensation to the owner . 
Encumbrance – A legal right or interest in land that affects a good or clear title and 
diminishes the land ’ s value . It can take numerous forms such as zoning ordinances , 
easement rights , claims , mortgages , liens , charges , a pending legal action , unpaid 
taxes , or restrictive covenants . An encumbrance does not legally prevent transfer of the 
property to another . A title search is all that is usually done to reveal the existence of such 
encumbrances , and it is up to the buyer to determine whether he wants to purchase with 
the encumbrance or what can be done to remove it . 
Equal Credit Opportunity Act ( ECOA ) – A federal law that requires lenders and 
other creditors to make credit equally available without discrimination based on race , 
color , religion , national origin , age , sex , marital status , or receipt of income from public 
assistance programs . 
Equity – The property value minus what you still owe ( e . g .  , the mortgage balance and 
any other loans / liens against the property )  . 
Escheat – The reversion of property to the state in the event that the owner dies without 
leaving a will and has no legal heirs . 
Escrow – An account held by the lender into which a homeowner pays money for taxes 
and insurance . 
Eviction – The lawful removal of an occupant and her / his belongings from a property . 
Fannie Mae / Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) – Purchases loans from 
lenders , then sells them as FNMA mortgage backed securities on Wall Street . 
319
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
F
Farmer ’ s Home Administration ( FmHA ) – An agency within the U . S . Department 
of Agriculture that makes and insures loans for rural housing and farms . 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) – Government agency that 
supervises and insures accounts . 
Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) – A government agency within HUD that 
administers and insures mortgage loans for private lending agencies . 
Fee Simple ( Fee Absolute or Fee Simple Absolute ) – Absolute ownership of 
real property . Owner is entitled to the entire property with unrestricted power of disposition 
during the owner ’ s life and upon his death , the property descends to the owner ’ s designated 
heirs . 
FHA Loan – This program provides mortgage insurance to protect lenders against the risk 
of default on loans to qualified buyers . A loan insured by the FHA is open to all qualified 
home purchasers . The FHA does not make loans to borrowers , it does not process loans , 
and it does not build or insure houses . While there are limits to the size of FHA loans , they 
are generous enough to handle moderately-priced homes almost anywhere in the country . 
FICO Score – The FICO score is a three-digit number , ranging from 300 to 850 , that is 
assigned to your credit based on a formula developed by Fair , Isaac & Company . Credit 
scores are reported by three major credit bureaus , Equifax , Experian , and TransUnion . 
Scores are not the same on each bureau ’ s report because each bureau places a slightly 
different value on different items . It is in your best interest to know your FICO score 
because it is a key factor in determining if you get a mortgage , whether you can refinance 
your home at a favorable rate , or whether or not you can get a new credit card . Your 
FICO score can also determine whether or not you can finance a new car , buy insurance , 
or even get a job . 
Fiduciary – A person in a position of trust or responsibility with the legal authority and 
duty to make decisions regarding financial matters on behalf of the other party . Example : 
A real estate broker is a fiduciary for his / her clients . 
Finance Charge – Interest charged by a lender . 
Fixed Rate Mortgage ( FRM ) – The mortgage interest rate will remain the same 
throughout the term of the mortgage for the original borrower . 
320
Forbearance – A lender ’ s postponement of foreclosure in order to give the borrower 
time and an opportunity to make up for overdue payments . 
Foreclosure ( Repossession ) – A legal sale of property forced by the lender when 
the borrower defaults on the mortgage loan . 
Freddie Mac / Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) – 
Purchases loans from the Federal Reserve and the Federal Home Loan Bank Systems , then 
sells them as FHLMC mortgage backed securities on Wall Street . 
Free and Clear – A property that has no liens ( see also Clear Title )  . 
FSBO ( For Sale By Owner ) – A property for sale that is not listed with a real estate 
broker and therefore will not be listed on the Multiple Listing Service ( MLS )  . 
G
Grace Period – The time period between the due date of a mortgage payment and the 
date when late charges are assessed . For example , payments due on the first of the month 
may have a 14 day grace period , meaning that fees will be charged if payment is not 
received by the fifteenth . 
Graduated Payment Mortgage ( GPM ) – A mortgage that has lower payments 
initially ( with potential negative amortization ) that increase each year until the loan is fully 
amortized . Intended for young people with low current income but greater anticipated 
future income . 
Grantee – That party in the deed who is the buyer or recipient . 
Grantor – That party who is the seller or the giver . 
H
Hard Moneylender – Lenders who use private money to make loans with borrowers 
who have trouble getting loans via conventional methods . There is usually a very high 
interest rate associated with hard moneylenders . 
321
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
Home-Improvement Loan – A loan used to finance home improvements . It may or 
may not require a mortgage or collateral . 
Homeowner ’ s Association – An association of homeowners that oversees the 
common areas of the development and its rules and regulations . 
Homestead – Status provided to a homeowner ’ s principal residence in some states that 
protects the home against judgments up to specified amounts . 
Homestead Exemption – Available in some states – this causes the assessed value 
of a principal residence to be reduced by the amount of the exemption for the purposes 
of calculating property tax . 
Home Warranty Plan – Private insurance insuring a buyer against defects ( usually in 
plumbing , electrical , appliances , and heating systems )  . It is typically purchased at the time 
of closing and can cover both new and used homes . 
Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) – A U . S . government agency 
established to implement certain federal housing and community development programs . 
I
Improvements – Additions to raw land such as buildings , streets , etc . that add value 
to the land . 
Income Approach – A method used by an appraiser to estimate the value of rental 
property based on the income it generates over the life of the structure , discounted to 
determine its present value . 
Income Property – Real estate that generates rental income . 
Ingress and Egress – The right to go in and out over a piece of property but not the 
right to park on it ( see also Easement )  . 
Inspection – An examination of a property or building to determine condition or quality 
for a particular purpose such as an assessment of structural or termite damage . Also used 
to confirm that the property meets the standards of the contract . 
Installment Sale – See Land Contract . 
322
Interest Cap – A limit on the amount that the interest rate for an adjustable rate mortgage 
can change , regardless of how much the index changes . Most ARMs have a cap on both 
the amount it can increase or decrease at any periodic adjustment interval and a life-long 
cap that limits the amount the interest rate can vary over the life of the loan . The two interest 
caps are sometimes called a “ periodic cap ” and a “ life cap .  ” 
Interest Rate – The percentage rate on a principal amount charged by a lender for the 
use of a sum of money . 
Investor – One who makes investments .  
J
Jumbo Loan – Loan size that is larger than the limit established by Fannie Mae or 
Freddie Mac . 
Junior Lien – When a property is foreclosed , lenders are repaid in a particular order , 
established by the loan documents . The lender with the first claim to repayment is said to 
hold the first mortgage and a lender whose repayment order is after the first claimant is 
said to hold a junior , or subordinate lien . 
Junior Mortgage – All mortgages / liens subordinate to the first mortgage . In the case 
of a foreclosure , a senior mortgage will be paid prior to a junior mortgage . 
Land Contract – A real estate installment selling arrangement whereby the buyer may use 
and occupy land , but ownership of the property is not transferred until all the payments 
have been made . 
L
Landlord – The owner of real property who rents or leases to another party . 
Land Trust – Used to maintain the property owner ’ s anonymity . Only the Trustee is named 
in public records ; you , the Beneficiary , are not named . 
Lease – An agreement giving the right to occupy property for a specific period of time 
for a specific amount . 
323
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
Lease Option – An agreement giving the renter the option to purchase the property . 
Lease with Option to Purchase – A lease under which the lessee has the right to 
purchase the property . The option may run for a portion of or for the full length of the lease . 
Lessee – A person who leases a property from its owner ; tenant . 
Lessor – A person who rents property to another under a lease ; landlord . 
Lien – A claim against the property for the payment of a debt , judgment , mortgage , or 
taxes . A lien must be satisfied when the property is sold . Example : Unpaid contractors may 
file a mechanic ’ s lien . 
Lis Pendens – “ Lawsuit Pending .  ” 
Loan Application – A document required by a lender prior to loan approval . The 
application includes detailed information about the borrower ( s )  , his / her / their finances , 
and the property . 
Loan Origination Fee or Points – A one-time fee charged by a lender or broker 
connected with originating a loan . This is different from discount points , which are used 
to buy down the rate of interest . 
Loan-to-Value Ratio ( LTV ) – The relationship of the loan amount to the price ( or 
value ) of the property . 
m
Manufactured Home – Homes built in a factory-controlled environment that meet strict 
HUD codes . They are brought to the property site and are assembled there . 
Margin – A fixed number added to the index to compute the rate on an adjustable rate 
mortgage . 
Market Value – The highest price a buyer would pay and the lowest price a seller 
would accept on a property . Market value may be different from the price a property 
could actually be sold for at a given time . 
Mortgage – A written legal agreement that creates a lien against a property as security 
for the payment of a debt ; a loan to pay for real estate that usually includes interest rates 
and a payment schedule . 
Mortgage Banker – Specializes in originating , selling , and servicing loans . They 
generally sell their loans to investors , but may continue to service them . 
324
Mortgage Broker – An individual or company which brings borrowers and lenders 
together for the purpose of loan origination , but which does not originate or service the 
mortgages . They are paid a fee by the borrower or the seller at the closing . 
Mortgagee – The lender . 
Mortgagor – The borrower . 
Motivated Buyer – Any buyer with a strong circumstance or reason to buy . 
Motivated Seller – Any seller with a strong circumstance or reason to sell . 
Multiple Listing Service ( MLS ) – A group of brokers joined together in a marketing 
organization for the purpose of pooling their respective listings . In exchange for a 
potentially larger audience of buyers , the brokers agree to share commissions . The listings 
are pooled by using a computerized network . 
n
Negative Amortization – An increase in principal balance that occurs when the 
monthly payments do not cover all of the interest cost . The interest cost that is not covered 
by the payment is added to the unpaid principal balance . 
Net Operating Income ( NOI ) – The amount of income you have left after you deduct 
operating expenses ( but before deducting interest and taxes )  . NOI does not include debt 
service ( mortgage payment )  . 
Non–Assumption Clause – Statement in a mortgage contract forbidding the 
assumption of the mortgage without the prior approval of the lender . 
Noncompliance – Failure to comply or obey . 
Non–Conforming Loan – A loan that does not meet Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae 
standards . Notary Public – One authorized to take acknowledgments of certain types of 
documents such as deeds , contracts , and mortgages . 
Note – A legal document that obligates a borrower to repay a mortgage loan at a 
specified interest rate during a specified period of time or on demand . 
Notice of Default – A formal notice to a borrower declaring that a default has occurred 
and legal action may be taken . 
325
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
O
Offer – An expression of willingness to purchase a property at a specified price . 
Offeree – One who receives the offer . When the buyer makes an offer to the seller , the 
seller is an offeree . 
Offeror – One who makes the offer . When the buyer makes an offer to the seller , the 
buyer is an offeror . 
Option – The right to buy a property at a specific price within a specific time period . 
Optionee – One who receives or purchases an option . 
Optionor – One who gives or sells an option . 
Option to Purchase – An agreement giving the right to buy a property at a specific 
price within a specific time period . 
Oral Contract – A verbal agreement . Verbal agreements for the sale or use of real 
estate are normally unenforceable . 
Origination Fee – A fee charged by a lender for processing a loan application , 
expressed as a percentage of the mortgage amount . 
Owner Occupant – A tenant of a residence who also owns the property . 
Owner of Record – The individual named on a deed that has been recorded at the 
county recorder ’ s office . 
p
Paper – A mortgage , deed of trust , or land contract provided in lieu of cash . 
PITI – Abbreviation for principal , interest , taxes , and insurance , which may be combined 
in a single monthly mortgage payment . 
Plat – A plan or map of a specific land area . 
Plat Book – A public record containing maps of land , showing the division of the land 
into streets , blocks , and lots and indicating the measurements of the individual parcels . 
326
Points – Fees paid to lenders at the beginning of a loan . 1 point = 1% of the loan 
amount . On a $100 , 000 loan , 1 point is $1 , 000 . Points may be further classified into 
origination points or discount points . 
Portfolio Loan – A loan held ( not sold ) by banks as an investment . 
Power of Attorney – A written document authorizing another to act on his or her 
behalf ; called an “ Attorney in Fact .  ” One does not need to be a licensed attorney to act as 
an attorney in fact , but power of attorney forms are powerful legal documents that should 
be used only under advice of a licensed attorney at law . 
Prepaid Interest – Interest paid before it is earned . Prepaid interest is the interest 
charged to borrowers at closing to pay for the cost of borrowing for a balance of the 
month . For example , if a loan closes on the 19th of the month and the first payment is 
due on the 1st of the following month , the lender will charge 12 days of prepaid interest . 
Prepayment – Full or partial payment of the principal before the due date . This might 
occur if the borrower makes extra payments , sells the property , or refinances the existing 
loan . 
Prime Rate – The lowest commercial interest rate charged by a bank on short term loans 
to their most creditworthy customers . 
Principal – The outstanding balance on a loan . 
Private Mortgage Insurance ( PMI ) – Mortgage insurance provided by non–
government insurers that protects a lender against loss if the borrower defaults . In the event 
the borrower doesn ’ t have a 20 percent down payment , lenders will allow a smaller down 
payment – as low as 2 percent in some cases . With the smaller down payment loans , 
however , borrowers are usually required to carry private mortgage insurance . Private 
mortgage insurance payments are normally made annually or monthly . 
Probate – Court process to establish the validity of the will of a deceased person . Also , 
the process by which an executor ( if there is a will ) or a court-appointed administrator ( if 
there is not a will ) manages and distributes a decedent ’ s property . 
Pro Forma – Projected financial statements based on assumptions . 
Promissory Note – A signed legal document that acknowledges the existence of a 
debt and the promise to repay it . 
Prorate – To divide proportionately , so as to determine actual amounts owed by the 
buyer and seller at closing . For example , if property taxes for a month are $300 and the 
seller owned the property for the first 10 days while the borrower owned the property 
for the remaining 20 days , the property taxes owed would be prorated so that the seller 
would pay $100 ( $300 x 10 / 30 ) and the buyer would pay $200 ( $300 x 20 / 30 )  . 
327
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
Public Sale – An auction of property open to the general public . A public sale generally 
requires notice ( advertising ) and must be held in a place accessible to the general public . 
Purchase – To buy or to obtain property in exchange for money . 
Purchase Agreement – See Agreement of Sale . 
Purchase Money Mortgage – A mortgage used to finance the purchase of a 
property . 
Q
Qualifying – The process of determining whether a buyer is financially able to assume 
a mortgage by checking credit history , present and previous employment , and any other 
sources that may help determine the buyer ’ s financial capability . 
Quiet Title ( Action ) – A court action to establish ownership of property . 
Quitclaim Deed – A deed that transfers whatever interest or title the maker of the deed 
may have in the particular parcel of land . A quitclaim deed is often given to clear the title 
when the grantor ’ s interest in a property is questionable . By accepting such a deed , the 
buyer assumes all the risk . Such a deed makes no warranties as to the title , but simply 
transfers to the buyer whatever interest the grantor has . 
R
Real Estate Broker – A licensed individual who arranges the buying and selling 
of real estate for a fee . A broker usually owns his own real estate company or is in a 
management position . 
Real Property – Land including trees , minerals , and any permanent fixtures attached 
to it . 
Realtor® – A real estate professional who is a member of the National Association of 
Realtors® . 
Recording – The act of entering into a book of public records instruments affecting title 
to the real property . A lender requires that a deed of trust or a mortgage be recorded to 
evidence the debt against the property . 
328
Recording Fees – Money paid to the lender for recording a home sale with the local 
authorities , thereby making it part of the public records . 
Red–Lining – Illegal practice of discriminating based on geographic location when 
providing loans or insurance coverage . 
Refinance – Obtaining a new mortgage loan on a property already owned , often to 
replace existing loans on the property . 
Refinancing – Repaying an existing loan from the proceeds of a new loan on the same 
property . 
Restrictive Covenants – Private restrictions limiting the use of real property . Restrictive 
covenants are created by deed and may “ run with the land ,  ” binding all subsequent 
purchasers of the land , or may be “ personal ” and binding only between the original seller 
and buyer . 
Right of First Refusal – The right to purchase a property under terms and conditions 
made by another purchaser and accepted by the seller . For example , if the Smiths make 
an offer of $120 , 000 on a property and the seller accepts the offer subject to the Wilsons ’ 
right of first refusal , the Wilsons have the right to buy the property for $120 , 000 . 
Rollover Loan – A loan that is amortized over a long period of time ( e . g .  , 30 years )  , 
but the interest rate is fixed for a short period ( e . g .  , 5 years )  . The loan may be extended 
or rolled over , at the end of the shorter term , based on the terms of the loan . 
S
Sales Agreement or Sales Contract – See Agreement of Sale . 
Second Mortgage – A subordinated lien , created by a mortgage loan , over the 
amount of a first mortgage . Second mortgages generally carry a higher rate than a first 
mortgage since they represent a higher risk for an investor . Mortgages are generally 
recorded in the order of the date they are placed . 
Section 1031 – The section of the IRS code that deals with tax-free exchanges of certain 
property . General rules for tax-free exchanges are the properties must be exchanged , 
similar , and used for business or as an investment . 
Section 8 Housing – Privately owned rental units participating in the low-income 
rental assistance program . Landlords receive subsidies on behalf of qualified low-income 
tenants , allowing the tenants to pay a limited proportion of their incomes toward the rent . 
329
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
Seller Financing – The seller of the property agrees to hold a mortgage and accept 
monthly payments instead of receiving their money in one lump sum . 
Sheriff ’ s Deed – A deed given at the sheriff ’ s sale in the foreclosure of a mortgage . 
Single Family Housing ( SFR ) – A general term originally used to distinguish a 
house designed for use by one family from an apartment house . More recently , used to 
distinguish a house with no common area from a planned development or condominium 
( e . g .  , townhouses , detached units )  . 
Special Warranty Deed – The grantor does not warrant against title defects arising 
from conditions that existed before he / she owned the property . The seller warrants that 
he / she has done nothing to impair title . 
Subordination – A loan in a lower priority . Example : A second mortgage is subordinate 
to a first . 
Substitution of Liability – When assuming a mortgage , you are now liable for the 
loan . 
Survey – Map made by a licensed surveyor who measures land and charts its boundaries , 
improvements , and relationship to the property surrounding it . 
Sweat Equity – Value added to property due to improvements made by the owner . 
T
Tax Lien – Lien for nonpayment of taxes . 
Tax Sale – Public sale of a property at an auction by a government authority as a result 
of non-payment of taxes . 
Tenancy at Will – A tenancy arrangement in which one party ( the tenant ) occupies real 
estate with the permission of the owner , for an unspecified period of time . The tenant may 
decide to leave the property at any time or must leave at the landlord ’ s will . 
Tenancy for Years – Created by a lease for a fixed term such as six months , two 
years , etc . 
Tenancy in Common – Ownership of a property by two or more persons , each 
of whom has an undivided interest , without the right of survivorship . Upon the death of 
one of the owners , the ownership share of the deceased is inherited by the beneficiary 
designated on the owner ’ s will . 
330
Time is of the Essence – Legal phrase in a contract requiring all references to specific 
dates and times noted in the contract be interpreted exactly . 
Title – A legal document establishing evidence of ownership . 
Title Insurance – An insurance policy that protects the insured against loss arising from 
a property ownership dispute . Title insurance policies are typically obtained for the buyer 
and the lender . 
Title Report – A document indicating the current state of title . The report includes 
information on the current ownership , outstanding deeds of trust or mortgages , liens , 
easements , covenants , restrictions , and any defects . 
Title Search – An examination of the public records to determine the ownership 
and encumbrances affecting the property . Tract – A parcel of land , generally held for 
subdividing . 
Trust Deed – See Deed of Trust . Trustee – A party who is given legal responsibility via 
a deed of trust to hold property in the best interest of or “ for the benefit of ” another . The 
trustee is one placed in a position of responsibility for another , a responsibility enforceable 
in a court of law . 
U
Underwriting – The decision whether to make a loan to a potential homebuyer based 
on credit , income , employment history , assets , etc . Unencumbered Property – Real estate 
with free and clear title . 
Unimproved Property – Land that has received no development . VA Loan – Home 
loan guaranteed by the U . S . Veterans Administration , enabling a veteran to buy a home 
with no money down . 
331
Guide to real estate investing
Glossary
V
Valuation – An estimation of value of a property , as determined by various factors . 
Variable Rate Mortgage – See Adjustable Rate Mortgage . 
W
Waiver – The voluntary renunciation , abandonment , or surrender of some claim , 
right , or privilege . 
Warranty Deed – A deed that guarantees the title from the seller to the buyer . 
Wraparound Mortgage – The seller creates a new mortgage for the buyer that 
includes the remaining amount on the current mortgage AND the remaining purchase 
price amount . The new mortgage “ wraps around ” the current mortgage . The seller is still 
responsible for the first mortgage . The buyer will essentially pay both mortgages ( one held 
by the bank and one held by the seller ) using one monthly payment given to the seller . 
Z
Zoning – Areas may be zoned to specify use of a property , e . g .  , residential , commercial , 
agricultural . These zoning ordinances are normally enforced by the city or the county . 
