The Education System in India
by Dr . V . Sasi Kumar [ 1 ] 
In the Beginning
In ancient times , India had the Gurukula system of education in which anyone who wished to study went to a teacher ' s ( Guru ) house and requested to be taught . If accepted as a student by the guru , he would then stay at the guru ' s place and help in all activities at home . This not only created a strong tie between the teacher and the student , but also taught the student everything about running a house . The guru taught everything the child wanted to learn , from Sanskrit to the holy scriptures and from Mathematics to Metaphysics . The student stayed as long as she wished or until the guru felt that he had taught everything he could teach . All learning was closely linked to nature and to life , and not confined to memorizing some information . 

The modern school system was brought to India , including the English language , originally by Lord Thomas Babington Macaulay in the 1830s . The curriculum was confined to “ modern ” subjects such as science and mathematics , and subjects like metaphysics and philosophy were considered unnecessary . Teaching was confined to classrooms and the link with nature was broken , as also the close relationship between the teacher and the student . 

The Uttar Pradesh ( a state in India ) Board of High School and Intermediate Education was the first Board set up in India in the year 1921 with jurisdiction over Rajputana , Central India and Gwalior . In 1929 , the Board of High School and Intermediate Education , Rajputana , was established . Later , boards were established in some of the states . But eventually , in 1952 , the constitution of the board was amended and it was renamed Central Board of Secondary Education ( CBSE )  . All schools in Delhi and some other regions came under the Board . It was the function of the Board to decide on things like curriculum , textbooks and examination system for all schools affiliated to it . Today there are thousands of schools affiliated to the Board , both within India and in many other countries from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe . 

Universal and compulsory education for all children in the age group of 6-14 was a cherished dream of the new government of the Republic of India . This is evident from the fact that it is incorporated as a directive policy in article 45 of the constitution . But this objective remains far away even more than half a century later . However , in the recent past , the government appears to have taken a serious note of this lapse and has made primary education a Fundamental Right of every Indian citizen . The pressures of economic growth and the acute scarcity of skilled and trained manpower must certainly have played a role to make the government take such a step . The expenditure by the Government of India on school education in recent years comes to around 3% of the GDP , which is recognized to be very low .  
 
 “ In recent times , several major announcements were made for developing the poor state of affairs in education sector in India , the most notable ones being the National Common Minimum Programme ( NCMP ) of the United Progressive Alliance ( UPA ) government . The announcements are ;  ( a ) To progressively increase expenditure on education to around 6 percent of GDP .  ( b ) To support this increase in expenditure on education , and to increase the quality of education , there would be an imposition of an education cess over all central government taxes .  ( c ) To ensure that no one is denied of education due to economic backwardness and poverty .  ( d ) To make right to education a fundamental right for all children in the age group 6–14 years .  ( e ) To universalize education through its flagship programmes such as Sarva Siksha Abhiyan and Mid Day Meal .  ”  ( Wikipedia : Education in India ) 

The School System
India is divided into 28 states and 7 so-called “ Union Territories ”  . The states have their own elected governments while the Union Territories are ruled directly by the Government of India , with the President of India appointing an administrator for each Union Territory . As per the constitution of India , school education was originally a state subject —that is , the states had complete authority on deciding policies and implementing them . The role of the Government of India ( GoI ) was limited to coordination and deciding on the standards of higher education . This was changed with a constitutional amendment in 1976 so that education now comes in the so-called concurrent list . That is , school education policies and programmes are suggested at the national level by the GoI though the state governments have a lot of freedom in implementing programmes . Policies are announced at the national level periodically . The Central Advisory Board of Education ( CABE )  , set up in 1935 , continues to play a lead role in the evolution and monitoring of educational policies and programmes . 

There is a national organization that plays a key role in developing policies and programmes , called the National Council for Educational Research and Training ( NCERT ) that prepares a National Curriculum Framework . Each state has its counterpart called the State Council for Educational Research and Training ( SCERT )  . These are the bodies that essentially propose educational strategies , curricula , pedagogical schemes and evaluation methodologies to the states ' departments of education . The SCERTs generally follow guidelines established by the NCERT . But the states have considerable freedom in implementing the education system . 

The National Policy on Education , 1986 and the Programme of Action ( POA ) 1992 envisaged free and compulsory education of satisfactory quality for all children below 14 years before the 21st Century . The government committed to earmark 6% of the Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) for education , half of which would be spent on primary education . The expenditure on Education as a percentage of GDP also rose from 0 . 7 per cent in 1951-52 to about 3 . 6 per cent in 1997-98 . 

The school system in India has four levels : lower primary ( age 6 to 10 )  , upper primary ( 11 and 12 )  , high ( 13 to 15 ) and higher secondary ( 17 and 18 )  . The lower primary school is divided into five “ standards ”  , upper primary school into two , high school into three and higher secondary into two . Students have to learn a common curriculum largely ( except for regional changes in mother tongue ) till the end of high school . There is some amount of specialization possible at the higher secondary level . Students throughout the country have to learn three languages ( namely , English , Hindi and their mother tongue ) except in regions where Hindi is the mother tongue and in some streams as discussed below . 

There are mainly three streams in school education in India . Two of these are coordinated at the national level , of which one is under the Central Board of Secondary Education ( CBSE ) and was originally meant for children of central government employees who are periodically transferred and may have to move to any place in the country . A number of “ central schools ”  ( named Kendriya Vidyalayas ) have been established for the purpose in all main urban areas in the country , and they follow a common schedule so that a student going from one school to another on a particular day will hardly see any difference in what is being taught . One subject ( Social Studies , consisting of History , Geography and Civics ) is always taught in Hindi , and other subjects in English , in these schools . Kendriya Vidyalayas admit other children also if seats are available . All of them follow textbooks written and published by the NCERT . In addition to these government-run schools , a number of private schools in the country follow the CBSE syllabus though they may use different text books and follow different teaching schedules . They have a certain amount of freedom in what they teach in lower classes . The CBSE also has 141 affiliated schools in 21 other countries mainly catering to the needs of the Indian population there . 

The second central scheme is the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education ( ICSE )  . It seems that this was started as a replacement for the Cambridge School Certificate . The idea was mooted in a conference held in 1952 under the Chairmanship of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad , the then Minister for Education . The main purpose of the conference was to consider the replacement of the overseas Cambridge School Certificate Examination by an All India Examination . In October 1956 at the meeting of the Inter-State Board for Anglo-Indian Education , a proposal was adopted for the setting up of an Indian Council to administer the University of Cambridge , Local Examinations Syndicate ' s Examination in India and to advise the Syndicate on the best way to adapt its examination to the needs of the country . The inaugural meeting of the Council was held on 3rd November , 1958 . In December 1967 , the Council was registered as a Society under the Societies Registration Act , 1860 . The Council was listed in the Delhi School Education Act 1973 , as a body conducting public examinations . Now a large number of schools across the country are affiliated to this Council . All these are private schools and generally cater to children from wealthy families . 

Both the CBSE and the ICSE council conduct their own examinations in schools across the country that are affiliated to them at the end of 10 years of schooling ( after high school ) and again at the end of 12 years ( after higher secondary )  . Admission to the 11th class is normally based on the performance in this all-India examination . Since this puts a lot of pressure on the child to perform well , there have been suggestions to remove the examination at the end of 10 years . 

Exclusive Schools
In addition to the above , there are a relatively small number of schools that follow foreign curricula such as the so-called Senior Cambridge , though this was largely superseded by the ICSE stream elsewhere . Some of these schools also offer the students the opportunity to sit for the ICSE examinations . These are usually very expensive residential schools where some of the Indians working abroad send their children . They normally have fabulous infrastructure , low student-teacher ratio and very few students . Many of them have teachers from abroad . There are also other exclusive schools such as the Doon School in Dehradun that take in a small number of students and charge exorbitant fees . 

Apart from all of these , there are a handful of schools around the country , such as the Rishi Valley school in Andhra Pradesh , that try to break away from the normal education system that promotes rote learning and implement innovative systems such as the Montessori method . Most such schools are expensive , have high teacher-student ratios and provide a learning environment in which each child can learn at his / her own pace . It would be interesting and instructive to do a study on what impact the kind of school has had on the life of their alumni . 

State Schools
Each state in the country has its own Department of Education that runs its own school system with its own textbooks and evaluation system . As mentioned earlier , the curriculum , pedagogy and evaluation method are largely decided by the SCERT in the state , following the national guidelines prescribed by the NCERT . 

Each state has three kinds of schools that follow the state curriculum . The government runs its own schools in land and buildings owned by the government and paying the staff from its own resources . These are generally known as government schools . The fees are quite low in such schools . Then there are privately owned schools with their own land and buildings . Here the fees are high and the teachers are paid by the management . Such schools mostly cater to the urban middle class families . The third kind consists of schools that are provided grant-in-aid by the government , though the school was started by a private agency in their own land and buildings . The grant-in-aid is meant to help reduce the fees and make it possible for poor families to send their children . In some states like Kerala , these schools are very similar to government schools since the teachers are paid by the government and the fees are the same as in government schools . 

The Case of Kerala
The state of Kerala , a small state in the South Western coast of India , has been different from the rest of the country in many ways for the last few decades . It has , for instance , the highest literacy rate among all states , and was declared the first fully literate state about a decade back . Life expectancy , both male and female , is very high , close to that of the developed world . Other parameters such as fertility rate , infant and child mortality are among the best in the country , if not the best . The total fertility rate has been below the replacement rate of 2 . 1 for the last two decades . Probably as a side-effect of economic and social development , suicide rates and alcoholism are also very high . Government policies also have been very different from the rest of the country , leading to the development model followed in Kerala , with high expenditure in education and welfare , coming to be known as the “ Kerala Model “ among economists . 

Kerala has also always shown interest in trying out ways of improving its school education system . Every time the NCERT came up with new ideas , it was Kerala that tried it out first . The state experimented with the District Primary Education Programme ( DPEP ) with gusto , though there was opposition to it from various quarters , and even took it beyond primary classes . The state was the first in the country to move from the traditional behaviorist way of teaching to a social constructivist paradigm . It was mentioned in the National Curriculum Framework of NCERT in the year 2000 , and Kerala started trying it out the next year . The transaction in the classroom and the evaluation methodology were changed . Instead of direct questions that could be answered only through memorizing the lessons , indirect questions and open ended questions were included so that the student needed to think before answering , and the answers could be subjective to some extent . This meant that the students had to digest what they studied and had to be able to use their knowledge in a specific situation to answer the questions . At the same time , the new method took away a lot of pressure and the children began to find examinations interesting and enjoyable instead of being stressful . A Comprehensive and Continuous Evaluation ( CCE ) system was introduced along with this , which took into consideration the overall personality of the student and reduced the dependence on a single final examination for deciding promotion to the next class . At present , the CBSE also has implemented CCE , but in a more flexible manner . 

Kerala was also the first state in the country to introduce Information Technology as a subject of study at the High School level . It was started in class 8 with the textbook introducing Microsoft Windows and Microsoft Office . But within one year the government was forced to include Free Software also in the curriculum by protests from Free Software enthusiasts and a favorable stance taken by a school teachers association that had the majority of government teachers as its members . Eventually , from the year 2007 , only GNU / Linux was taught in the schools , and all computers in schools had only GNU / Linux installed . At that time , perhaps even today , this was the largest installation of GNU / Linux in schools , and made headlines even in other countries . Every year , from 2007 onwards , about 500 , 000 children pass out of the schools learning the concepts behind Free Software and the GNU / Linux operating system and applications . The state is now moving towards IT Enabled Education . Eventually , IT will not be taught as a separate subject . Instead , all subjects will be taught with the help of IT so that the children will , on the one hand , learn IT skills and , on the other , make use of educational applications ( such as those mentioned below ) and resources in the Internet ( such as textual material from sites like Wikipedia , images , animations and videos ) to study their subjects and to do exercises . Teachers and students have already started using applications such as Dr . Geo , GeoGebra , and KtechLab for studying geometry and electronics . Applications like Sunclock , Kalzium and Ghemical are also popular among teachers and students . 

The initiative taken by Kerala is now influencing other states and even the policies of the Government of India . States like Karnataka and Gujarat are now planning to introduce Free Software in their schools , and some other states like Maharashtra are examining the option . The new education policy of the Government of India speaks about constructivism , IT enabled education , Free Software and sharing educational resources . Once a few of the larger states successfully migrate to Free Software , it is hoped that the entire country would follow suit in a relatively short time . When that happens , India could have the largest user base of GNU / Linux and Free Software in general . 