Coeducation in History
World history shows a clear preference for the education of boys over girls ; the education of girls , when it existed , was usually informal and at home . In most ancient societies , such as Greece , India , and Egypt , organized educational systems were for boys only . The education of women in general was rare ; coeducation even more so . Sparta , a Greek city-state , was one of the few places in the ancient world with organized schooling for girls as well as boys . Although the two were separate , many historians believe that both schools were very similar in nature . Most education in Sparta was of a physical nature ; the goal of a Spartan education was to create ideal soldiers and strong young women who would bear strong babies .  [ 1 ] 

Before the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , most schools were single-sex . In cases like one room schoolhouses in frontier America , coeducation was necessary from a practical standpoint ; a single teacher was responsible for the education of all children in a given area , and separation by age or sex was impractical . In England , the first public boarding school to become coeducational was Bedales School founded in 1893 by John Haden Badley and coeducational since 1898 . The Scottish Dollar Academy claims to be the first coeducational boarding school in the UK ( in 1818 )  . In the 1960s , many Western countries shifted to coeducation . Not only was coeducation a less expensive way of schooling children , but it also supported the thrust towards gender equality . In 1972 , U . S . schools made coeducation mandatory in public schools . 

Institutions of higher education have also been historically for men only . In most countries , when women were given the option of a higher education , their only choice was to attend an all-female college . 

Coeducation Within Primary and Secondary Schools
In many countries , schools were historically for boys only . Where girls were allowed to attend school , they rarely continued past primary schools . In western Europe , coeducation was first introduced at the urging of Protestant groups who wanted both girls and boys to be able to read the Bible . The Quakers helped to promote coeducation in the British colonies . Scandinavian countries were some of the first to embrace coeducation ; Danish schools were coeducational in the eighteenth century , and Norwegian schools became coeducational by law in 1896 . Other countries were slower to embrace coeducation ; Germany did not provide hardly any secondary schooling for girls until the end of the nineteenth century . When separate girls ' secondary schools were introduced , they were vastly inferior to boys ' schools .  [ 2 ] 

Coeducation is less prevalent in the Middle East , where religious and cultural values restrict the interaction of males and females . While some primary schools are coeducational , most are separated by gender . In the United Arab Emirates , for example , most primary and all secondary schools are not coeducational .  [ 3 ] 

Coeducation Within Institutions of Higher Learning
The United States
The first coeducational institution of higher education in the United States was Franklin College in Lancaster , Pennsylvania , established in 1787 . Its first enrollment class in 1787 consisted of 78 male and 36 female students . Among the latter was Rebecca Gratz , the first Jewish female college student in the United States . However , the college began having financial problems and it was reopened as an all-male institution . It became coed again in 1969 under its current name , Franklin and Marshall College . 

The longest continuously operating coeducational school in the United States is Oberlin College in Oberlin , Ohio , which was established in 1833 . The first four women to receive bachelor ' s degrees in the United States earned them at Oberlin in 1841 . Later , in 1862 , the first African-American woman to receive a bachelor ' s degree ( Mary Jane Patterson ) also earned it from Oberlin College . 

The University of Iowa was the first public or state university in the United States to become coeducational , and for much of the next century , public universities ( and land grant universities in particular ) would lead the way in higher education coeducation . Many other early coeducational universities , especially west of the Mississippi River , were private , such as Carleton College ( 1866 )  , Texas Christian University ( 1873 )  , and Stanford University ( 1891 )  . 

At the same time , according to Irene Harwarth , Mindi Maline , and Elizabeth DeBra ,  " women ' s colleges were founded during the mid- and late-nineteenth century in response to a need for advanced education for women at a time when they were not admitted to most institutions of higher education .  "  [ 4 ] Notable examples are the prestigious Seven Sisters . Of the seven , Vassar College is now co-educational and Radcliffe College has merged with Harvard University . Wellesley College , Smith College , Mount Holyoke College , Bryn Mawr College , and Barnard College remain single-sex institutions . 

China
The first coeducational institution of higher learning in China was the Nanjing Higher Normal Institute , which was later renamed National Central University in 1928 and Nanjing University in 1949 . For thousands of years in China , education , especially higher education , was the privilege of men . In the 1910s , women ' s universities were established such as Ginling Women ' s University and Peking Girl ' s Higher Normal School , but coeducation was still prohibited . 

In 1920 , Nanjing Higher Normal Institute began to recruit female students , and later that year the first eight coeducational Chinese women students were enrolled . In the same year Peking University also began to allow women audit students . After 1949 , when the Communist Party of China controlled mainland China , almost all schools and universities became coeducational . However , in later years , many girl schools and women colleges have again emerged . 

Europe
In Europe , coeducation was more easily accepted in institutions of higher learning than it was in secondary education . In England , the University of Cambridge established Girton College for women in 1869 and Newnham College followed in 1872 . The London School of Economics was also one of the first to open its doors to women in 1874 . Women were first allowed to matriculate in Germany in 1901 . By 1910 , coeducation was becoming more widespread ; women were admitted into universities in The Netherlands , Belgium , Denmark , Sweden , Switzerland , Norway , Austria-Hungary , France , and Turkey .  [ 5 ] 

The Middle East
While most schools in the Middle East remain single-sex , coeducation has become more accepted . In Iran , for instance , the prestigious Tehran University is open to both sexes . From 2002 to 2006 , women accounted for sixty percent of entrants to the University .  [ 6 ] 

In other countries , such as Saudi Arabia , strict adherence to the rules of Islam forbids the intermingling of males and females , and schools are single-sex only . In Afghanistan under Taliban rule , girls were forbidden to receive an education . After the fall of the Taliban in 2001 , women became equal to men in the eyes of the government , but the education of females is still unacceptable to many rural citizens . Girls ' schools have been burned down , and girls poisoned for attempting to go to school .  [ 7 ] The education of women is becoming more accepted in much of the Middle East , but even with additional opportunities , middle eastern women continue to struggle against inequality and oppression . 

Arguments Against Coeducation
At the end of the twentieth century , there begun a movement back to single-sex education . Advocates of single-sex education , where male and female students attend separate classes or attend separate schools , cite studies that show students from single-sex environments outperform those from coeducational schools . Others advocate single-sex education on the basis of tradition or religious and cultural values . In 2002 , based on bipartisan support and evidence supporting single-sex education , the U . S . revoked the mandatory coeducation policy and provided three million dollars of funding for single-sex schools . 

Sex Differences in the Brain
Many supporters of single-sex education hold that it can help students learn more effectively . The practitioners of single-sex school state that boys and girls learn differently because of structural differences between male and female brains . Studies on male and female brains indicate that males and females process information using different sections of their brains . This is evidenced in the ways males and females approach problem solving . For instance , when men are asked to give directions , they access the left hippocampus , and often use abstract concepts such as north and south . Women , on the other hand , access the cerebral cortex , and typically refer to landmarks that can be seen or heard to navigate . Advocates of single-sex education argue that these differences mean that the best method of instruction differs for males and females ; a technique that engages girls in the subject matter may bore boys , and vice versa .  [ 8 ] 

Gender Roles
From a pro-coeducation standpoint , single-sex institutions are inherently unequal . Advocates of coeducation argue that gender stereotypes are reinforced and that single-sex education accentuates gender based educational limitations and discrimination by not offering courses like cheer-leading or home economics to boys , or football or wood shop to girls . 

Those who support single-sex education insist that this is not the case , and that single-sex institutions actually promote the subversion of gender roles . Margrét Pála Ólafsdóttir , an Icelandic educator who introduced single-sex kindergarten to Iceland in 1989 , stated :  " Both sexes seek tasks they know . They select behavior they know and consider appropriate for their sex . In mixed [ coed ] schools , each sex monopolizes its sex-stereotyped tasks and behavior so the sex that really needs to practice new things never gets the opportunity . Thus , mixed-sex schools support and increase the old traditional roles .  "  [ 9 ] In this view , for example , in a single-sex school it would be less intimidating for a girl to choose to play the trumpet than it would in a coeducational school where trumpets were already being played mostly by boys . 

Socialization
Critics of single-sex education argue that without the presence of the opposite sex , students are denied a learning environment representative of real life . This deprives them of the opportunity to develop skills for interaction with peers of all genders in their work environment and fosters ignorance and prejudice towards the other gender . 

However , defenders argue that socialization does not depend on the two genders being placed physically together , but is rather a matter of educating children in habits such as respect , generosity , fairness , loyalty , courtesy , and so forth . From a single-sex perspective , this can be done with more success knowing the distinct tendencies and learning style differences of boys and girls . It is also argued that mixing of the sexes ( particularly with adolescents ) creates distraction , increased sexual harassment , and teenage pregnancy , all of which interfere with the quality of education . 

Academic Success of Coeducation Versus Single-Sex Education
A number of studies have been done researching the effects of coeducation and single-sex education . In 2002 , the National Foundation for Educational Research was commissioned in England to study academic performance as it relates to coeducation and school size . In a study of nearly three thousand high schools ( grades nine through 12 )  , they found that both sexes did better academically in single-sex schools . Single-sex schools also helped to counter gender stereotypes at all-girl schools , where girls were more likely to take courses in advanced mathematics or sciences . This was not the case with boys ; boys in single-sex schools were actually less likely to take courses in cooking than those in coeducational schools . Other studies have shown that students in single-sex schools academically outperformed students in coeducational schools . A study done by Marlene Hamilton showed that , in Jamaica , girls from single-sex schools did the best academically , followed by boys from single-sex schools , boys from coeducational schools , and , lastly , girls from coeducational schools .  " Before and after " studies done at schools that switched from coed to single-sex also reported improved academic performance . 