11 , 500-year-old infant remains reveal ancient population
Ashley Strickland-Profile-Image
By Ashley Strickland , CNN

Updated 2141 GMT ( 0541 HKT ) January 5 , 2018
Ancient remains of infants were found at the Upward Sun River base camp depicted here . 
Ancient remains of infants were found at the Upward Sun River base camp depicted here . 
Story highlights
DNA from a 11 , 500-year-old infant skeleton revealed a previously unknown ancient population
The Ancient Beringians , as well as all Native Americans , can be traced to one population that migrated from Asia 
( CNN ) The skeletons of two ancient infants , who lived and died in Alaska 11 , 500 years ago , are helping tell the story of a previously unknown population called the Ancient Beringians , according to a study published in the journal Nature on Wednesday . This is the first genomic evidence that all Native Americans can be traced back to the same population that migrated using a land bridge . 

Both infants found in the burial pit at Upward Sun River , in the Tanana River valley in central Alaska , were female . The local indigenous community gave them the symbolic names Xach ' itee ' aanenh t ' eede gaay ( sunrise child-girl ) and Yełkaanenh t ' eede gaay ( dawn twilight child-girl )  . 
Ancient skull may belong to earliest known tsunami victim
Ancient skull may belong to earliest known tsunami victim
The first child was between 6 and 12 weeks old when she died , and the other was premature , not having had the chance to live , at 30 weeks of development . DNA suggests that they were related , like first cousins . 
Researchers were able to sequence the genome of sunrise child-girl , referred to in the study as USR1 , using her DNA . She was revealed to be closely related to Native Americans , but in a distinct way . 
USR1 ' s DNA led the researchers to determine that they had found a previously unknown genetic population of Native Americans , which they dubbed Ancient Beringians , that represent the oldest known genetic lineage of Native Americans to date , according to Eske Willerslev , study co-author and professor at the University of Copenhagen .  
 " It changes our understanding of the timing of events that formed the genetics of Native Americans ,  " Willerslev wrote in an email . 
Beringia was the land bridge that once connected Siberia and Alaska . It has long been thought that the peopling of the Americas happened when a group migrated from East Asia 34 , 000 years ago , using the land bridge , to form the first population of ancestral Native Americans . 
The Upward Sun River discovery site in Alaska . 
The Upward Sun River discovery site in Alaska . 
But when , and how , had been unresolved . Any evidence that there was a single founding population for the Americas was indirect .  
 " There are limited ancient human remains in the Americas , and only very few have undergone genomic analysis ,  " Ben Potter , study co-author and department of anthropology chair and professor at the University of Alaska Fairbanks , wrote in an email .  " This represents the first genetic data from the last Ice Age in Beringia . Prior to this study , we did not know that this Ancient Beringian population existed . We had evidence of the other branch leading to North and South Native Americans , and indirect evidence for a single founding population . So our findings show that the early history of ancestral Native Americans is more complex than previously known .  " 
Ancient Egyptian &  # 39 ; s wooden toe is sophisticated prosthetic
Ancient Egyptian ' s wooden toe is sophisticated prosthetic
The new data allow the researchers to test and develop models for when and where population splits occurred . 
Willerslev explains it like this : About 34 , 000 years ago , a population began separating from the Asians , but genetic exchanges continued until 25 , 000 years ago -- which may suggest that by then , they were in Alaska . The new data put that shift at 10 , 000 years earlier than previously thought . 
About 25 , 000 years ago is also when this group met another population of people who were more related to modern Europeans than to Asians . This is how the Ancient Beringians came to be . 
Excavation of the Upward Sun River infants . 
Excavation of the Upward Sun River infants .  
 " By 20 , 000 years ago , contemporary Native American ancestors diversify from the Ancient Beringians , likely moving south of the North American ice caps and forming the two major Native American lineages all contemporary Native Americans as we know of belong to : the northern and southern branches ,  " Willerslev said .  " The northern branch moves north into Alaska and replace or absorb the Ancient Beringians sometimes after 11 , 500 years ago . After that time some of the northern branch members meet some Siberians and mix with them .  " 
Researchers are still testing scenarios for where the split occurred between Ancient Beringians and other Native Americans who populated the Americas , whether it was in Asia or East Beringia / Alaska . 
Potter has directed research at the Upward Sun River since 2006 , where researchers are investigating who lived at the site and when , including burials and a residential camp . The ancient people who lived at the site are associated with the Denali complex of culture in Alaska , meaning they lived in Alaska , the Yukon Territory and northern British Columbia from at least 12 , 500 to 6 , 000 years ago , Potter said . 
Follow CNN Health on Facebook and Twitter
See the latest news and share your comments with CNN Health on Facebook and Twitter . 

Based on what they ' ve learned at the site , these people , including the Ancient Beringians , hunted bison , elk , hare , squirrels and birds . There is also the earliest evidence of " salmon exploitation " in the Americas . Even though they lived through climate and vegetation changes over 6 , 000 years , they adapted their strategy from using organized hunting parties , processing the game they caught and delivering it to centrally located base camps , like the Upward Sun River site . 
But what happened to the Ancient Beringians ?  
 " We don ' t know ,  " Potter said .  " We are limited by very few genetic samples of ancient North American populations , and we would need samples from peoples in the region to ascertain to what extent Ancient Beringian gene-flow occurred with neighboring peoples . It is possible that incoming Athabaskan ancestors , who are widespread throughout the region today , replaced or absorbed the Ancient Beringians inhabiting that area .  " 