INTRODUCTION
In the years 1970–1990 , Exeter Archaeology carried out excavations on 89 sites within the
boundary of the City of Exeter , and also undertook 64 building recording projects . The work was
of the greatest importance , fundamentally altering understanding of the Roman occupation of the
city , and adding greatly to knowledge of the Anglo-Saxon , medieval and later town . In some
respects ( such as the Unit ’ s early development of techniques for detailed building recording , and
in the application of a wide approach to the past , integrating excavated evidence with that from
documentary , cartographic and other sources )  , this work was in the forefront of urban
archaeology in Britain in the 1970s and 1980s . Collectively , the excavations still amount to the
largest archaeological project by far ever undertaken in Devon . Some of those of the early 1970s
were conducted with large teams of labour – 50 or more people , mainly volunteers , in the style
of contemporary excavations at Winchester , Norwich and York . Excavation continued with a
smaller team of professional staff , with hardly a weekday without excavation over the entire 20-
year period . The enormous volume of artefactual and ecofactual material recovered from these
excavations is of primary importance in the study of such topics as the Roman and medieval
economy of Devon , or the material culture of South-West England since Roman times . 
Subsequent excavations in the city have not matched the remarkable volume of material
recovered in these years . 
During that 20-year period only one of the 89 excavations ( Cathedral Close : Bidwell 1979 ) and
two of the building projects ( St Martin ’ s church : Blaylock and Westcott 1989 ; the Guildhall : 
Blaylock 1990 ) were published , although monographs presented studies of the animal bones , the
medieval and later finds , and the Roman finds ( Maltby 1979 ; Allan 1984 ; Holbrook and Bidwell
1991 )  . In other cases the researcher wishing to gather information from these excavations will
need to examine summary accounts , or work from the archives forming their primary records . 
The present document has been prepared to guide the researcher through this very substantial
body of material . It lists and maps the sites excavated , indicates what has appeared in print
relating to each one , briefly outlines the principal findings , records the locations and reference
numbers of the different components of the archive , and offers a summary of the artefactual and
ecofactual material , now held almost entirely by the RAMM . 
The document is presented in two parts , with the list of RAMM material ( Appendix 1 ) included
on disc in Part I . Part II is in A3 format and comprises the maps and table of sites excavated . 
THE SITE ARCHIVES
Location of the archives
Site archive material is either held by RAMM or at EA offices . Much of the paper archive held
by RAMM is currently stored at the Devon Record Office as RAMM is closed for refurbishment . 
RAMM has provided a detailed listing of the finds & paper archive they hold , which is included
as Appendix I . A thorough search has been carried out at EA offices at the Custom House for
archive material relating to these sites .  ( There are some discrepancies between EA and RAMM
records relating to archive material held at RAMM . Notes to this effect are included in the table . 
It will not be possible to resolve these queries until RAMM re-opens , as access is very limited at
present .  ) 
2
Gaps in the record
Although the archive is almost entire , there are a few missing groups of record , mostly relating to
minor sites . This material may in fact be at the RAMM , having been stored there ( in Hems
Basement ) during the period when EA was part of the museum ( Exeter Museums Archaeological
Field Unit )  . There are a number of sites for which EA has old records stating that the paper
archive was stored in Hems basement , but the sites do not appear on the current RAMM list of
site archives . Some sites were known by several names , especially when long-term excavations
extended into new areas ; all known names for a site have been included in the table . In addition , 
there are boxes of material on the RAMM archive list for which no description of contents is
given . It is likely that at least some of these contain ‘ missing ’ material . Notes to this effect have
been included in the table where relevant . 
Finds
All the finds from these excavations are held by RAMM . A detailed listing of the collection , and
of the paper archive held by RAMM , is included as Appendix I .  ; a summary is included in the
table . The number of entries for each site is stated ; each entry consists of one bag or more
contained within a box . The same box may have been listed several times for each site entry and
the box may contain finds from multiple sites . The box numbers for the finds and the location at
the DRO of the paper archive boxes are included in Appendix I . 
Photographs at EA
Until recently EA kept the black and white film negatives and contact prints , and slides , of sites
even if the archive was formally deposited with a museum ; thus much photographic material is
still held at EA . Black and white film negatives / contact prints are filed numerically by film 
( negative / contact print ) number , whereas slides are usually stored by site on slide hangers in a
filing cabinet , or in the original slide boxes . There are indexes for both film and slides . 
Black and white negatives listed in the table are stored , with an attached contact sheet , in a filing
cabinet on the ground floor of the Custom House . Some of the negatives listed may be for
building recording work carried out at the same site . 
Information given in the table about the black and white negatives was obtained from an
alphabetical index ; the numbers given in the table are the film numbers . In each case the
presence of the negatives and contact prints was checked . A rapid search through the folders
containing the photographic registers ( containing descriptions of each photograph ) suggests that
some of these are missing or contain very basic information . 
For about a third of the sites no information has been found as to the whereabouts of negatives
and corresponding photographic registers . The current cataloguing system at EA for black and
white film appears to have been devised in the late 1970s / early 1980s , although it includes some
earlier sites that were catalogued retrospectively . It appears that other early sites were not entered
into this system and it is not known what happened to the photographs . 
3
The majority of colour slides located relating to the sites are stored on hangers in filing cabinet 2 , 
which also contains box files of slides relating to the sites . Slides have only been located in detail
for about a quarter of the sites . It is possible that others are with the paper archive at RAMM . 
Drawings at EA
The Drawing collection consists of original site drawings or later worked / inked versions . Some
site drawings are with the paper archive ( i . e . in a site file )  ; others are rolled and stored in boxes . 
The Primary Archive spreadsheet at EA lists inked drawings stored in vertifiles . A set of
photographic prints ( bromides ) of final drawings is stored by site number in lever-arch files
labelled ‘ Drawing Prints ’  . 
SOURCES OF ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Mapping
The mapping is derived from the Exeter UAD ( Urban Archaeological Database )  , which was also
checked for additional information relating to the sites . 
Bibliography
The bibliographic information is based on a gazetteer compiled by EA which includes all annual
summaries of Exeter excavations published in national period journals , with any locally
published sources . It also incorporates EAAC ( Exeter Archaeological Advisory Committee ) 
reports , which are stored at EA unless stated otherwise . The crucial importance of these reports
should be emphasised . Written by the Unit Director , they were compiled with much care , and
offer very detailed accounts , supported by finished drawings . They will often be the best overall
summary of an excavation or building record . 
WORK IN PROGRESS , 2011
At the time of writing ( March 2011 ) efforts are being made on a number of fronts to bring some
of the most important material from 1970–90 to publication . In approximate order of
completeness they are : 
1 . Monograph on excavations at Exe Bridge , including a study of the standing monument 
( S . W . Brown )  . Project 56 .  ( Approaching completion ; publication projected end 2011 / first
half 2012 )  . 
2 . Volume on Exeter ’ s Elizabethan inventories ( J . Crocker )  . Joint project with the Devon & 
Cornwall Record Society . Due for publication early summer 2011 . See list of
documentary studies . 
3 . Report on 38 North Street , an exceptionally important house ( J . Thorp )  . Archive 221 . 
Well advanced . Aiming for publication in Proc Devon Archaeol . Soc . for 2011 . 
4 . Paper on Exeter Castle combining excavations and surveys of standing fabric of 1970–90 
( archives 82 , 87 , 99 , 179 , 210 , 211 , 262 , 276 ) with post-1990 work ( S . Blaylock , R . A . 
Higham & A . Passmore )  . Core of paper including excavation account and major
discussion complete . Will be offered to Archaeol . J . 
5 . Paper on Great Moor , Sowton ( Alcock & Thorp )  . Draft text & graphics completed March
2011 . 
4
6 . Book on Exeter ’ s Underground Passages & water supply , combining documentary study
with excavated evidence & EA ’ s analysis of the monument .  ( Prof . Mark Stoyle , 
University of Southampton )  . Started Jan 2011 , publication 2013 / 14 . 
7 . Joint project led by Bournemouth University ( Prof M . Maltby , Dr E . Hambledon ) 
studying animal bones from Exeter , 1975-2010 . Post-grad researcher in post from 2010 , 
work proceeding , but eventual scope and product uncertain at this stage . 
8 . Joint project led by University of Exeter ( Dr Chris Knusel ) on entire collection of Exeter
human remains since 1970 . Due to begin late 2011 . 
THE FUTURE
This project has confirmed our opinion that , with a few exceptions , the Exeter Archaeology
archive of 1970–90 is in an ordered state , and can be used with profit by future researchers . 
Some progress has been made towards publication of many of these sites . In this final section a
subjective judgment is offered regarding the significance of selected aspects of this large body of
work , drawing attention to matters which are especially deserving of future publication . 
International significance
1 . The Roman legionary fortress
A prodigious amount of work has already been invested in the fortress . Every fragment of its
plan has been carefully mapped ; finished site plans exist for most sites ; detailed stratigraphic
reports exist for 24 of the 26 sites with relevant features ( The Acorn was not covered ; Market
Street was excavated subsequently ) and the dating evidence and artefactual record have been
drawn together . Overviews by Bidwell and Henderson record developing perceptions of
understanding of the monument . What is lacking is a published report providing accounts of each
site . This should be an achievable goal , and one of significance throughout the Roman Empire . 
This must also rank among the very highest among the desiderata of the region ’ s archaeology . 
2 . Late medieval and early modern housing
Those who have visited Exeter Archaeology over the years from other archaeological and
conservation bodies have been astonished by the Unit ’ s building records ; those of 1970–90 must
rank as among the most important in any town or city in Britain . No equivalent record could be
created nowadays : many were made in their most instructive state – as houses were being
demolished . It is unthinkable that such losses would be contemplated today . The archaeological
records of these many important structures , with their contribution to understanding of urban
character , the development traditional building forms and practices , changing building materials , 
and many other themes , richly deserve publication . 
3 . The city defences
The exceptional research potential of the defences of Exeter has been spelled out by Professor
Mark Stoyle ; the combination of good preservation of the wall ( 70% survives ) with one of the
great urban archives , and with much excavation and fabric survey makes this an extremely
rewarding field of study . Again , much detailed fabric survey has been carried out ( perhaps as
much as or more than in any other southern English town )  , and a wall survey has been submitted
to English Heritage , but no publication exists which would communicate the results of
archaeological study to a specialist or to a wider audience . 
5
4 . Post-medieval finds
It comes as a surprise to anyone from Devon engaged in historical archaeology in N . America
that the artefacts of Plymouth and Exeter have strong international significance ; indeed the
audience for this sort of archaeology is larger over there than here . The sole publication on this
subject ( Allan 1984 ) has been out of print for 20 years ; none of the finds since 1980 has been
published . There is a need to provide an update , presenting a synopsis of material found 1980–
2010 ; Duncan Brown ’ s updating of the original Platt & Coleman-Smith publication of the
Southampton collection illustrates the kind of product to which we aspire . 
5 . The bell foundries
The succession of bronze foundries at Exeter , spanning the period from c . 1250-1720 , is widely
recognized as the finest series in Britain , and since the first national research priorities for postmedieval Britain were drawn up in the 1990s their publication has been identified on a number of
occasions as a high research priority . This remains the case . 
National significance
A selection of areas will be itemized briefly without detailed justification
6 . The Roman town
Exeter is one of the most extensively explored of the Roman civitas capitals but the results have
not been disseminated . 
7 . Evidence for the cloth industry and other industries
The Exeter evidence for the cloth industry , with rich documentary and cartographic sources
alongside some major excavated evidence ( for example from Cricklepit and the Dry House )  , is
nationally significant , especially for the early modern period . 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This survey has been funded by English Heritage and Devon County Council ’ s Historic
Environment Service ; we wish to thank Nick Russell and Frances Griffith , the respective
representatives of these two bodies , for their work in advocating and initiating this project , for
their vigorous support of the exercise throughout , and for acting as monitors . 
We also wish to thank Tom Cadbury and Jenny Durrant of the RAM Museum for their help in
making available the archives held there , and at a particularly busy stage in the redevelopment of
the museum . 
The maps are the work of Tony Ives of Exeter Archaeology