Cammy Brothers
David Abulafia ( a cura di )  , The Mediterranean
in History , Thames & Hudson , London 2003 , 
320 pp .  , ill . 
W . V . Harris ( a cura di )  , Rethinking the
Mediterranean , Oxford University Press , Oxford 2005 , xxii + 414 pp .  , ill . 
In the last five years there has been a reawakening
of interest in the legacy of Fernand Braudel 
( 1902-1985 )  , the great French historian who established the field of Mediterranean studies with
his book La Méditerranée et le Monde méditerranéen
à l ’ époque de Philippe II ( Paris 1949 ) 1 
. The most
monumental demonstration of this revival is the
large and impressive volume produced by
Nicholas Purcell and Peregrine Horden , The Corrupting Sea : A Study of Mediterranean History ( Oxford 2000 )  , only the first of a promised two volumes . While its complexity and ambition defy
easy summary , in basic terms the book aims to
provide a critical counterpoint to Braudel ’ s vision
by focusing on local ecologies , and specifically on
human interaction with the natural environment
in the diverse areas of the Mediterranean . Although the authors ’ point of departure is a critical
assessment of Braudel , in many ways – such as
their decision to take on three thousand years of
history and thousands of miles of geography –
their debt to him is undeniable . The book has already been widely reviewed , and it is not my intention to do so here , however both of the books
to which I will now turn , David Abulafia ( ed .  )  , The
Mediterranean in History ( London 2003 ) and W . V . 
Harris ( ed .  )  , Rethinking the Mediterranean ( Oxford
2005 )  , respond not only to the Braudel tradition
but also to this more recent , and equally ambitious enterprise2 
. These books , in their lack of interest in questions of material culture , challenge
the historian of art or architecture to consider
how to engage with this vibrant intellectual discourse . 
Both books begin with a question . Abulafia ’ s introduction ,  “ What is the Mediterranean ?  ”  , is itself a question ; he writes ,  “ The question does not
admit of a straightforward answer ”  ( p . 11 )  . For
Harris , it is ,  “ How useful is the Mediterranean
Sea as an intellectual construct ? And how should
it be studied ?  ”  ( p . v )  . The distinct aims and audiences of the two edited books determine how
these questions are differently addressed . In Abulafia ’ s book , an international team of seven historians and one geographer provide answers by
means of historical narrative , telling the tale of the
Mediterranean with broad strokes ranging from
prehistory to the present . The approach is well
suited to the broad audience being addressed , for
whom the details of the historiographical debate
surrounding the region are less important than
the outlines of its historical developments . The
book makes an implicit claim for Mediterranean
unity , in the division of chapters by chronology
rather than by region . The only division acknowledged by the book ’ s organization is between the
Christian and Islamic worlds , which merit distinct
chapters . Harris ’ s book , which grew out of a conference organized in response to The Corrupting
Sea , is addressed to a specialized audience already
familiar with the current debates and recent literature . The authors do not answer questions but
pose new ones , in many case provoked by a critical response to claims made by Horden and Purcell . 
David Abulafia is a preeminent and prolific scholar , the first professor of Mediterranean Studies at
Cambridge University , and the author of numerous books on aspects of Mediterranean trade , religion , politics and history . In The Mediterranean
in History he has compiled essays by eight international scholars into a volume that aims to define
the physical , geographical , political , economical , 
and historical aspects of the Mediterranean for a
non-specialist reader . Unlike Horden and Purcell , 
whose five parts , and twelve chapters are not
chronological or regional but thematic , Abulafia
neatly divides his book into nine chronological
sections , from prehistory to the present . The essays have in common an accessible , lively tone and
clear prose . Such a multi-authored , chronological
approach has the advantage of illustrating the significance of the longue durée without requiring
that any single scholar be in command of so much
history and geography at once . It confirms
Braudel ’ s conviction that if there is one region
that must be studied in all of its history to be understood in any single moment , it is this one . 
In homage to Braudel and perhaps to Horden and
Purcell , the book begins with geography .  “ The
Physical Setting ” by Oliver Rackham provides a
thorough account of the land , weather , and agriculture ; however the disconnection of the account
from its historical consequences seems at odds
with the concerns in the rest of the book . Other
chapters belong more precisely within the
chronological framework . Inevitably , however , 
such broad chapters as Michel Balard ’ s “ A Christian Mediterranean : 1000-1500 ” cannot do justice
to the diverse circumstances in , for example , 
Granada before 1492 or Istanbul after 1453 . Here
one sees how the decision to divide by chronology rather than geography , while making the case
for unity , provokes the specialist reader to search
for counter-examples and exceptions to any broad
claims . Molly Greene ’ s chapter on “ Resurgent Islam : 1500-1700 ” helps to correct for the volume ’ s
overwhelming focus on Northern , Christian parts
of the Mediterranean . Yet the chapter begins with
various Arab military incursions , rather than , for
example , medical or scientific advances . On the
whole however Greene ’ s essay presents a well balanced account of developments in the eastern and
western parts of the Muslim Mediterranean from
Andalusia to the Ottoman Empire . The last chapter , by Abulafia , boldly takes the story into the
twenty-first century . While insightful and admirably wide-ranging , given the pertinence of this
region ’ s history to contemporary geo-politics , I
could not help wishing there were more focus on
issues such as immigration , identity politics , and
the definition and boundaries of Europe , and less
on tourism . 
The volume ’ s connecting threads are provided by
the editor , in brief intermezzi positioned between
the chapters , which outline the major themes and
suggest the broad direction of the narrative . 
These concise and graceful essays are an unusual
and effective alternative to the typical synopses of
the forthcoming chapters typically found in the
introduction . The book is much enriched by the
illustrations , presented in high quality color , and
adorning almost every page . For a historian of art
or architecture , of course , the inclusion of illustrations principally for the purpose of adornment is
itself a problem , and one inadequately resolved
through the use of lengthy captions . Particularly
frustrating from this viewpoint is that the captions , although often informative , rarely identify
the image directly ( a list is found at the end of the
book , however )  . Also confounding the specialist is
the absence of footnotes , which are replaced by 
 “ suggestions for further reading ” at the back of
the book . Despite these quibbles , both the general and specialized reader will be continuously
thankful for the lavish quality of the book ’ s production , which accompany its commercial aims . 
For the reader keen for a deeper account of Abulafia ’ s own research , it is accessible in compressed
form through a collection of his essays , Mediterranean Encounters , Economic , Religious , Political , 
1100-1550 ( Aldershot 2000 )  . In contrast to his edited volume , these essays present a specialized and
nuanced account of individual moments across
the Mediterranean . Abulafia ’ s characterization in
the preface is illuminating ; of his primary concern
with human interaction he writes ,  “ It has seemed
to me vitally important to set side by side studies
of the treatment of religious minorities and studies of trade and high politics . It is not just that
they took place within the same chronological
span , and within much the same geographical
area . It is also the case that politics , religion and
the economy in the medieval Mediterranean
formed a continuum . Historians have to keep reminding themselves of what is obvious , but too
often ignored : that their own compartmentalisation of the past was not matched in the minds of
those they are examining ”  . This volume offers an
excellent complement to Abulafia ’ s edited book , 
demonstrating how the trends described in the
general essays manifest themselves in particular
historical and geographical circumstances . 
W . V . Harris , a professor of History at Columbia
University and specialist in the ancient world , 
takes a different approach to editing Rethinking the
Mediterranean , seeking not unity but diversity in
the essays he includes . His own essay ,  “ The
Mediterranean and Ancient History ”  , suggests
that he is far more interested in questioning the
intellectual construct of the Mediterranean than
in confirming its relevance . He raises a number of
crucial questions , in the form of a critique of The
Corrupting Sea . How was the region regarded by
its inhabitants ? To what extent has a cultural unity ever existed ? 
Other authors also challenge claims made by
Horden and Purcell , and the premises on which
their claims depend . Michael Herzfeld , a sociologist , takes the most detached view of the field in 
 “ Practical Mediterraneanism : Excuses for Everything , from Epistemology to Eating ”  , considering
why it exists at all and by whom it has been constituted . As he recognizes , at stake is no less than
the definition of the Western tradition ; he writes
with reference to assumptions about the Mediterranean or what he calls “ ontological truisms ”  ,  
 “ They serve as a point of entry into a politics of
knowledge that includes in its purview the constitution of what we are pleased to call ‘ the West ’  ”  
( p . 47 )  . David Abulafia brings into question the
uniqueness of the Mediterranean in his essay 
 “ Mediterraneans ”  , by considering the possibility
that other seas such as the Caribbean and the Indian Ocean may be analyzed according to
Braudel ’ s method . Another essay ,  “ The East-West
Orientation of Mediterranean Studies and the
Meaning of North and South in Antiquity ”  , by
G . W . Bowersock , considers the various geographical divisions used by historians and their motivations . He begins with the observation that while
historians have persistently employed East and
West as divisions ( which as he notes correspond to
the Arabic terms “ Maghrib ” and “ Mashriq ”  )  , the
more meaningful ones for travelers have always
been North and South . He cites a handwritten
note in Edward Gibbon ’ s personal copy of the De05 Brothers-Abulafia 10-03-2006 16 : 25 Pagina 1
cline and Fall of the Roman Empire , now at the
British Museum , in which he wrote ,  “ The distinction of North and South is real and intelligible ; 
and our pursuit is terminated on either side by the
poles of the Earth . But the difference of East and
West is arbitrary , and shifts round the globe ”  ( pp . 
168-169 )  . However , as Bowersock observes , the
ancients had no knowledge of the North and
South Poles , and thus their own divisions between
East and West formed the basis for our own . 
Problems of categories , divisions and exclusion
make up a common bond between two essays on
different subjects : Susan E . Alcock ’ s “ Alphabet
Soup in the Mediterranean Basin : The Emergence of the Mediterranean Serial ”  , and Roger S . 
Bagnall ’ s “ Egypt and the Concept of the Mediterranean ”  . Alcock employs numerical data to analyze the boom that has taken place over the past
twenty years in journals devoted to the Mediterranean3 
. Most marked among the characteristics
of these diverse journals seems to be their inability to include articles and authors of the range and
diversity their titles promise . Particularly troubling is the near absence in these journals of contributions by authors from Islamic areas of the
Mediterranean , or articles about those regions . 
Arabic summaries were included in the shortlived “ Mediterranean Studies ”  , and the “ Journal
of Mediterranean Studies ” plans to include them , 
but there has been no sustained presence of Arabic contributions or abstracts in any of these journals . In the words of the editors of the “ Journal of
Mediterranean Archaeology ”  :  “  [ … ] we have so far
published nothing ( since nothing has been submitted to us ) from the African shores of the
Mediterranean , other than Egypt [ … ] We would
gladly welcome the opportunity to include more
articles dealing with the Roman , Byzantine , Islamic , Ottoman , Medieval and Early Modern archaeology of the Mediterranean world ”  ( p . 330 )  . 
The result , writes Alcock , is an “ anxiety about the
politics of representation ”  . Just within the field of
archaeology , Alcock notes that no single periodical has succeeded in attracting all of the subfields
that the Mediterranean category might imply : for
example ,  “ Classical ”  ,  “ Egyptian ”  ,  “ European prehistoric ”  ,  “ North African ”  ,  “ Biblical ”  ,  “ Near
Eastern ”  ( p . 334 )  . 
The specific problem of Egypt is taken up by Bagnall , who begins by considering the exclusion of
Egypt from The Corrupting Sea in light of the politics both of academia and of the contemporary
world . It is an exclusion typical of the field of
Classical studies itself , but also corresponds , as
Bagnall observes , to Egypt ’ s “ own self-representation ” as “ neither African , nor Asian , nor Mediterranean ”  . In post-independence Egypt , Bagnall
notes , claims of Mediterranean identity serve as a
counter to pan-Arabism , whereby “ Mediterranean ” becomes a substitute for “ European ”  ( pp . 
345-346 )  . 
The final section of the book provides an unusual
opportunity for Horden and Purcell to reply to
the foregoing criticism , not defensively but with
reflection . They observe that their reviews have
come from scholars in fields that “ already ‘ have ’ a
Mediterranean as a unit of study ”  , and thus worry
that “ we have preached to the converted ”  ( p . 349 )  . 
While they engage a number of criticisms , they
have no adequate reply to the one most pertinent
from the discipline of architectural history : B . D . 
Shaw ’ s characterization of their approach as “ so
fluid and so dynamic ” that it cannot settle on 
 “ fixed systems and structures ” such as “ the city , 
the state , the army , and the church and mosque ”  
( p . 447 )  . Their own self-criticism is that they were
unable to take account of the Ottoman Mediterranean ( p . 361 )  . 
Despite the range and diversity of the essays included in these two volumes , there are a number
of substantial exclusions , both disciplinary and geographic . In Abulafia ’ s volume , the absence of any
discussion of the many illustrations within the text
itself makes obvious that none of the contributors
have even a slight art historical orientation . While
Harris does include an archaeologist , Susan Alcock , in his volume , she has written not about archaeology but about scholarship . This lack of interest in material culture – in the physical traces of
the commercial , political , and ecological networks
described – may be in keeping with Braudel ’ s example . However if the authors are sincere in their
desire to demonstrate the persuasiveness of the
Mediterranean model to new disciplines , they
must at the very least be ready to welcome into
their midst scholars concerned with parallel relationships as revealed by art objects and buildings . 
Similarly , the often repeated interest in correcting
the bias towards the northern , Christian shores of
the Mediterranean should be accompanied by the
inclusion of scholars writing from different traditions . 
Despite the many ways in which the history of art
and architecture has always been intertwined with
the field of history , the idea of the Mediterranean
has never taken hold , and historians of art and architecture remain closely tied to national boundaries . It is worth considering how appropriate or
useful the Mediterranean might be as a unit of
study for these disciplines . Can an approach aiming to shift attention from princes to peasants be
extended to include costly artifacts ? Is the antielitism of Braudel ’ s approach incompatible with a
consideration of objects and buildings made by
and for the elite ? 
In lieu of a synthetic vision of the Mediterranean , 
art and architectural historians have begun to
consider particular instances of cross cultural exchange . Two books are distinguished by their geographical and chronological breadth : Deborah
Howard ’ s Venice and the East ( New Haven-London 2000 ) and Rosamond Mack ’ s Bazaar to Piazza , Islamic Trade and Italian Art , 1300-1600 
( Berkeley-London 2003 ) 4 
. In addition , Gülru
Neçipog˘lu ’ s The Age of Sinan ( London 2005 ) includes substantial considerations of parallels and
relations between the Ottoman Empire and Italy5 
. 
Much more typical than these efforts , however , 
are the essays in the volume edited by Anna Contadini and Charles Burnett , Islam and the Italian
Renaissance ( London 1999 )  . While extremely
learned and valuable , the essays in this volume
present a mosaic of the Mediterranean rather than
a coherent picture . Museums have been quicker
than scholars to respond to current political circumstances by presenting exhibits that challenge
the presentation of the Middle East and Islam by
the popular media . Ambitious recent shows include “ The Art of the First Cities ”  ( The Metropolitan Museum in New York , 2001 )  ,  “ Turks : A
thousand Years of Ottoman History ”  ( The Royal
Academy in London , 2005 )  ,  “ Persia : The Forgotten Empire ,  ”  ( The British Museum in London , 
2005-2006 ) and , inspired by Deborah Howard ’ s
book ,  “ Bellini and the East ”  ( The National
Gallery in London and the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston , 2005-2006 )  . 
Although a number of questions are left unresolved in the volumes edited by Abulafia and Harris , not to mention Horden and Purcell , their ambition is extraordinary and their implications
broad . In this regard , the challenge they pose to
historians of art and architecture – not only by example , but also by exclusion – is one worth answering . The books have their greatest value to
scholars in these fields , perhaps , as both a provocation and an invitation . 
1 . There is an excellent account of Braudel ’ s career and
the developments in his thinking in the preface by Oswyn Murray to the English edition of Braudel ’ s Mémoires de la Meditérranée ( The Mediterranean in the Ancient World , London 2001 )  . 
2 . The reviews of The Corrupting Sea include David Abulafia , in “ Times Literary Supplement ”  , 14 April 2000 , 
pp . 9-10 ; Elizabeth Fentress and James Fentress , The
Hole in the Doughnut , in “ Past and Present ”  , 173 , 2001 , 
pp . 203-219 ; Thomas Glick , in “ Speculum ”  , 77 , 2002 , 
pp . 555-557 ; Anthony Molho , in “ Journal of World History ”  , 13 , 2002 , pp . 486-492 ; and B . D . Shaw , Challenging Braudel : A New Vision of the Mediterranean , in “ Journal of Roman Archaeology ”  , 14 , 2001 , pp . 419-453 ; and
Paolo Squatriti , Mohammed , the Early Medieval Mediterranean , and Charlemagne , in “ Early Medieval Europe ”  , 
11 , 2002 , pp . 263-279 . A full list is provided by Horden
and Purcell in W . V . Harris , Rethinking the Mediterranean , Oxford 2005 , pp . 348-349 , n . 1 . 
3 . These journals include the “ Journal of Mediterranean
Anthropology and Archaeology ”  ;  “ Mediterranean Studies : The Journal of the Mediterranean Studies Association ”  ;  “ Mediterranean Archaoelogy and Archaeometry ”  ; 
the “ Journal of Mediterranean Studies : History , Culture
and Society in the Mediterranean World ”  ;  “ Mediterraneo Antico . Economie , Società , Culture ”  ; and 
 “ Mediterranean Historical Review ”  , to name a few examples . 
4 . Howard ’ s book was widely reviewed , for example by
Silvia Foschi in this journal ( 13 , 2001 , pp . 204-206 )  ; by
Patricia Fortini Brown in the “ Journal of the Society of
Architectural Historians ”  , 60 , 2001 , pp . 357-359 ; and by
Oleg Grabar together with Mack ’ s book and others by
Jeremy Brotton , Lisa Jardine , and Maria Georgopoulou
in “ The Art Bulletin ”  , 85 , 2003 , pp . 189-192 . 
5 . In the early 1990s , Neçipo˘glu taught jointly with
Howard Burns a lecture and a seminar on “ The Architecture of the Mediterranean World ”  , which sparked my
own interest in the subject