Egypt and the Origin of Assyrian Wall Reliefs by Mattias Karlsson
Introductory remarks
The sudden rise of monumental palace art in the shape of wall relief programs in 
Assyria in the ninth century BCE under Ashurnasirpal II (883-859) in his North-West 
Palace of Kalhu (modern Nimrud) has long interested scholars.1
 It has been common 
practice to speak of the Syrian and Anatolian cultural spheres as the source of 
inspiration for these relief programs (e.g. Winter 1982, Gilibert 2004). The issue has 
rather revolved around to what extent the Assyrians copied or transformed these 
Syrian-Anatolian influences (e.g. Gerlach 2000, Orlamünde 2011). The perspective 
that these influences may be indirect, then having Egypt as their ultimate source, has 
less often been brought up (but see Groenewegen-Frankfort 1951: 172). Monumental 
relief programs in Egyptian palaces and temples were well developed in the New 
Kingdom (1550-1069), and because of this fact and Egypt’s proximity, it is natural to 
take a closer look on this art when discussing the origins of Assyrian relief programs. 
This paper contributes, in all modesty, to the debate by making a comparison out 
of an iconographic motif that is attested both from ancient Egypt and Assyria, namely 
“the siege scene” (Figs. 1-2). The comparative case is a most-likely-to-be-similar one. 
Thus, if it can be proved that there are substantial divergences between the two 
scenes, then the idea of Egypt as the ultimate source of inspiration for Assyrian art 
will be somewhat undermined. In case of the alternative outcome, the idea in question 
will reappear as a credible explanatory force. The Egyptian scene given below (Fig. 1) 
is taken from the art of the famous ruler Ramesses II (1279-1213) who is known for 
his ample monumental art and whose art in its grandeur can be seen as a good 
representative of Egyptian palace art, conveying a high point. The Assyrian scene 
(Fig. 2) is, for evident reasons, taken from the palace art of Ashurnasirpal II. It is my 
hope that this paper will bring more light on the issue of the latter art’s origins.
A scene from Egyptian royal iconography 
The scene below (Westrin 1907: pl. Till art. VI Egypten2
) represents the Egyptian 
king Ramesses II and his army besiege the city of Dapur, situated in Syria but 
controlled by the rivalling Hittite empire (Kitchen 1998: 56). It is part of a tableux 
showing the gradual defeat of the polity in question, and it was laid out in relief on 
several of Ramesses II’s monuments, such as his mortuary temple Ramesseum, and is 
accompanied by captions and text narratives. As for the aftermath of the siege, 
Ramesses II narrates that he raised a statue of himself and established a garrison in the 
conquered city of Dapur (Meyer 1965: 454-71). The siege of Dapur was part of a 
larger military campaign of the said king around 1270 BCE which took him and his 
army past Palestine and well into Syria, to the cities of Dapur and Tunip, capturing 
the city of Kadesh where Ramesses II nearly had suffered a decisive defeat against the 
Hittite state and its Anatolian and Syrian allies a few years earlier (Grimal 1994: 256-
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 1 Regarding the question of the genesis of Assyrian wall reliefs, see e.g. Winter 1982, Tunca 1996, 
Russell 1998-2001, Gerlach 2000, Novák 2002, Hrouda 2003, and Gilibert 2004. 2 Originally illustrated in Erman 1894 after a drawing made by Lepsius.
2
57). However, the king’s military gains were shortlived, and the Hittites managed to 
regain their lost Syrian territory, followed by a stalemate that was eventually resolved 
by a peace treaty between the two parties in 1259 BCE (Meyer 1965: 454-71).
Describing the scene above, Ramesses II is depicted in his chariot while shooting an 
arrow at the besieged city of Dapur. Meanwhile, enemy soldiers are driven over by 
his chariot while others flee at his approach. Two of the king’s sons, depicted with the 
sidelock of youth, are portrayed slaying enemies. Enemy soldiers are illustrated as 
killed, lying all over the place. Regular Egyptian soldiers, depicted with darker skin 
and white loincloths, attack the city with various weapons. Two of these soldiers are 
about to storm the enemy city through a ladder. Defenders of the city are seen falling 
headlong from the walls, as fleeing, or as sending arrows, spears, and stones. Others, 
among them women, give away gestures of seeking for mercy. At the foot of the city, 
a short row of tribute and tributaries are illustrated, pointing to the eventual outcome 
of the siege. The city is situated on a mountain and is topped by its city emblem. 
Captions (on the left half) and text narratives (on the right half) accompany the scene.
A scene from Assyrian royal iconography 
The scene below (Layard 1853: pl. 13) represents the Assyrian king Ashurnasirpal II 
and his army besiege a city somewhere in north-west Mesopotamia. It is part of a 
visual program, focusing on royal warfare and hunting, which decorated the throne 
room of the North-West Palace in Kalhu (Meuszyński 1981). This program is made 
up of reliefs on stone slabs laid out in two registers and separated by a (regularly 
repeated) text narrative. The (north-)western milieu can be inferred from the looks of 
the enemy (Wäfler 1975). There are not any captions, and the text narrative, i.e. the 
so-called Standard Inscription, conveys a general description of the king’s person and 
deeds and is not a comment on the iconography, making a definite localization of the 
city under siege unattainable (Grayson 1991: 268-76).3
 The reign of Ashurnasirpal II 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 3 It is believed that the warfare scenes depict events from regnal years 6-9 (Russell 1998-2001: 245), 
and the annals of Ashurnasirpal II can therefore be consulted. The annals on the one hand talk of a 
campaign towards the city Suru of the land Suhu, situated along the Euphrates and to the south-east of 
the mouth of the river Habur (Grayson 1991: 212-13, iii 16-26). They also speak of a confronting of a 
rebellion from the land Laqu, the city Hindanu, and the land Suhu, the two firstly mentioned polities 
situated at or near the mouth of the Habur (Grayson 1991: 213-15, iii 26-48). The relevant passages 
3
was part of a period in which Assyria gradually regained its old borders from the 
Middle Assyrian period (c. 1500-1000 BCE), consisting roughly speaking of the area 
between the Euphrates and the Tigris in northern Mesopotamia (Liverani 1982, 1992). 
The military gains in the west which Ashurnasirpal II claims through his words and 
images turned out to be temporary, and it was his successor and son, Shalmaneser III, 
who managed to establish a firm control on north-western Mesopotamia, paving way 
for the greater Assyrian empire of the seventh century BCE (Liverani 2004: 213).
Describing the scene above, Ashurnasirpal II in his chariot shoots an arrow at a 
besieged enemy city. The gesture is mirrored by the emblem above the king’s head, 
hovering in mid-air and representing a god, probably the state god Ashur (Reade 
1998: 37). The king shares his chariot with a shield-bearer and the charioteer. No less 
than four horses pull the royal chariot. An enemy soldier is driven over by the chariot. 
Regular Assyrian soldiers, characterized by their pointed monochromed helmets, kill 
a few enemies in close combat. A number of enemy soldiers defend their city by 
shooting arrows from the city’s crenellations. One enemy seems to fall headlong from 
the crenellations, while another makes some gesture with his raised right arm.
Similarities and differences
In the following comparison between the two siege scenes in question, I will 
distinguish between primary parallels (where there are direct similarities), secondary
parallels (where similarities exist outside these specific case studies), and no parallels 
(where there are clear differences). Iconographic elements that have correspondences, 
but that are given in other ways, are continuously brought up in the evaluating. At the 
end, I will pay special attention to the differences and their possible backgrounds.
Turning firstly to primary parallels and the royal image, a chariot-bound king 
assaults a besieged enemy city in both examples. He also drives over enemy soldiers 
under his chariot and uses his bow weapon in both cases. These iconographic 
elements are of course of crucial importance. Also common to both scenes are the 
depictions of princely or regular soldiers stabbing down people of the enemy side. 
These attack the enemy city relatively lightly armed, and they even use their bare 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! also refer to enemies who flee by swimming, to boat building, to river crossing, and to royal hunting
(Grayson 1991: 212-16, iii 18-19, 29, 33-34, 48-50 resp.), i.e. themes which are actual motifs in the 
visual program in question (Meuszyński 1981: B17 upper, B11 lower, B9-11 lower, B19-20 resp.).
4
hands in combat, when seizing the hair of their opponents before stabbing them to 
death. A most important similarity is that the Egyptians and Assyrians are not 
represented dead, wounded, or at a disadvantage in combat. Lastly, the fact that both 
kings are accompanied (and obviously guided and supported) by a divine emblem 
underscores similarities. While a sun disk with two uraeii hovers above the Egyptian 
ruler, a winged disk with a horned god inside hovers above the Assyrian one. 
Moving on to primary parallels and images of the enemy side, representatives of 
enemies to the Egyptian and Assyrian kings are illustrated shooting arrows, throwing 
spears (and seemingly also stones) at the attackers from the crenellations of their 
besieged city walls. In both scenes, other men make gestures of submission and mercy 
seeking from these crenellations. Other similarities focus on the circumstance that 
people from the enemy side are seen falling headlong from the crenellations and on 
the fact that enemies are depicted “all over the place” in a highly unorganized manner. 
There is a chaos prevalent where the enemy is and an order where the “rightful” side 
is. It even looks like city defenders are shooting at each other occasionally, indicative 
of their chaotic state. The enemies’ horses are illustrated galopping along in panic, 
with their accompanying cavallerists portrayed as desperately clinging on to them. 
Regarding the structure of the scenes and primary parallels, it is worth pointing out 
that the persons involved in the scenes are depicted in profile,4
 that details of the 
action are “hanging in the air” and “piled up” rather than portrayed realistically with 
broad and depth in perspective, and that individual components are not depicted 
realistically in terms of proportions either. As for the latest feature, the enemy cities 
are for example illustrated as relatively tiny. It is obvious that the artisans were driven 
by functional goals rather than by the aim of giving a reflection of reality.5
Turning to secondary parallels and the Egyptian and Assyrian sides in their 
respective conflicts, the circumstance that princes form part of the siege force in the 
Egyptian scene differentiates it from the Assyrian one with the latter’s seemingly 
regular soldiers, but there are indeed depictions of (what probably is) crown princes 
attested from Assyrian art associated with warfare. The “aftermath scene” with the 
Assyrian king standing face-to-face with the crown prince (alternatively the field 
marshal) naturally comes to mind (cf. e.g. Meuszyński 1981: B7 lower). In any case, 
the focusing on the king’s sons is in certain respects unique to the monumental art of 
Ramesses II in the Egyptian sphere (Murnane 1995: 203). The Egyptian scene also 
includes the portrayal of siege instruments, in this case a ladder upon whom two 
Egyptian soldiers climb in order to storm the enemy city. However, siege instruments 
are frequently illustrated elsewhere in Assyrian state art (cf. e.g. Meuszyński 1981: 
B4 lower), and it is simply a coincidence that this particular scene lacks this feature.
Moving on to the enemy side and secondary parallels, the Egyptian scene contains 
a depiction of an enemy aiming with his spear at an Egyptian from the crenellations. 
Another iconographic component to mention is the portrayals of enemy heads that 
protrude from the crenellations. Both these features are however also attested in 
Assyrian art focusing on warfare (cf. e.g. Schachner 2007: 1 lower). The body 
gestures of the Egyptian enemies, such as the mercy seeking gesture by fleeing 
soldiers and the arrow-inflicted and crouching (in their being wounded or killed) 
enemy soldiers, are also often attested in Assyrian art depicting warfare (cf. e.g. 
Meuszyński 1981: B8 upper). Also the less standard, Dapur-located images of the 
enemy fleeing by means of a rope down from the crenellations and killed enemies 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 4 Note however the exceptions from this general rule, as attested from the Dapur crenellations. 5 The idea that the ancient artisans were not skilled enough to produce accurate and realistic 
representations is certainly misguided. Instead, the function of the art was highlighted.
5
hanging double-folded from the crenellations also have their correspondences in other 
Assyrian war scenes (cf. e.g. Meuszyński 1981: B4 lower). The Egyptian military 
force is quite heterogenuous (by its mixture of princely and regular soldiers) in 
comparison, but later Assyrian art was to diversify the representation of the Assyrian 
army, for example by depicting foreign auxiliary troops with their characteristic 
feather-decorated helmets (cf. e.g. Barnett et al. 1998: room XXXVI). Finally, Dapur 
is by contrast located on a hill of some sort, but topographically elevated enemy cities 
are frequent in other Assyrian art (cf. e.g. Schachner 2007: 1 lower).
A special feature is the portraying of women, attested only in the Egyptian scene. 
Men and women are differentiated by what they are wearing, and some women are 
illustrated making gestures of submission from the crenellations. However, women 
are depicted also in Assyrian art on warfare, and both of the said phenomena are 
characteristic of the Mesopotamian art in question (cf. e.g. Meuszyński 1981: B8 
lower). One of the Dapur women seems to hold a ritual vessel (a sistrum?) in her 
hands, and this iconographic component may be in line with the act of mercy seeking 
accompanied by ritual action. Having said that, Assyrian ivories that depict women 
who make musical performances from city crenellations are known (cf. e.g. Mallowan 
and Davies 1970: V:6). Also the depiction of men (?) among the women at the 
crenellations, jointly making the mercy seeking gesture, has correspondence in other 
Assyrian art on warfare (cf. e.g. Schachner 2007: 13 upper).6
 Lastly, Egyptian soldiers 
seem to discipline three tribute bearing Dapur women. Other Assyrian art conveys 
such motifs (cf. e.g. Meuszyński 1981: B5 lower), and the circumstance that women 
are not represented as direct targets of the warfare is common to Egyptian and 
Assyrian relief art. The attacking of the enemies’ women was taboo in both cultures.7
Regarding structure and secondary parallels, the three-fold partition of the Dapur 
scene into motifs focusing on fighting outside the besieged city, on actions directly 
associated with the storming of the city, and on the delivering of tribute (naturally
related to the aftermath of the siege) has correspondences also in Assyrian relief art 
(cf. e.g. Meuszyński 1981: B3-5 lower). This spatial or temporal partition of the siege 
scene is thus not evidence of a fundamental difference in art. Lastly, the Egyptian 
scene is accompanied by textual captions, presenting the actors and explaining the 
action, in contrast to the Assyrian one which only has its Standard Inscription. 
However, other Assyrian art also employs textual captions (cf. e.g. Gerardi 1988).
Turning to real differences and the “good” side, the use of “social perspective” (the 
relative size of the actors) is striking in the Egyptian scene but absent in the Assyrian 
one. Relatedly, Ramesses II conducts warfare single-handedly from his chariot, while
Ashurnasirpal II shares his chariot with the charioteer and a shield-bearer. Another 
interesting difference is that the Egyptian ruler wears a crown (the so-called “blue 
crown”) that is often tied to military occasions, although it can not be considered as a 
genuine “war crown” (Shaw and Nicholson 1995: 74-75). The Assyrian ruler often 
wears his crown in question in cultic contexts (cf. e.g. Meuszyński 1981: B13). 
Moving on, the chariot horses of Ramesses II are behaving somewhat wildly and 
unorderly, in contrast to the calm and forceful appearance of the Assyrian horses. 
Perhaps the intent behind the Egyptian horse motif was to convey the message that 
Ramesses II accomplished his military feat in spite of this external obstacle. 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 6 This emasculation of the male enemy is common in Assyrian propaganda (Karlsson 2013: 270-71, 
2016: 228-42). It naturally served to belittle the opponents of the Assyrian king. 7 Whether this taboo was kept in real life, outside the propaganda sphere, is of course another question. 
It is easy to suspect that also ancient warfare was accompanied by the atrocity of rape.
6
As for actual differences and the enemy side, the Egyptian scene differentiates the 
combattants not the least by means of varying skin colour, not only when it comes to 
ethnicity but also with regards to sex (Robins 1997: 180). This differentiation is 
evidently not found in Assyrian art (cf. Wäfler 1975). In the Dapur scene the 
Egyptians have a darker skin than the Syrians, and in Egyptian iconography generally 
men have darker skin (red-brown) than women (yellow). Another interesting 
difference is that the meticuluous delineating of muscles is very marked in the 
Assyrian scene but largely absent in the Egyptian one. The attacking of the enemies’ 
horses with arrows is also something which differentiates the Egyptian scene from the 
Assyrian one. Finally, the great city emblem which adorns the besieged city in the 
Egyptian scene is, to my knowledge, unattested as a motif in Assyrian art.
How should we understand these (what I suspect to be meaningful) differences? It 
has often been concluded that the position of the king in Egypt was markedly stronger 
than that in Assyria (cf. e.g. Frankfort 1948). The above noted social perspective and 
the motif of the sole king in chariot can be explained by these varying ideological 
positions. It should be said though that there are some pictures of a few Assyrian 
kings (notably Esarhaddon) in moderately given social perspective (Reade 1979: 331-
32), and that the themes or motifs of the Assyrian king achieving “heroic priority”8
and overcoming the “difficult path” pervade Assyrian state ideology, especially its 
royal inscriptions (Karlsson 2013: 114-20, 192, 2016: 126-33, 218). Furthermore, the 
juxtapositioning by Frankfort of kingship in Egypt and Mesopotamia in terms of 
status has long been seen as exaggerated (Hill et al. 2013). Nevertheless, I believe that 
the identified difference can be considered as a meningful one.
It has also been noted that Egyptian culture, in particular with respect to its views 
on its kingship, had a strong sense of dualism and belief in dichotomies, notably 
between Order and Chaos (cf. e.g. Assmann 1990). The more marked differentiation 
between war and peace inherent in this worldview can then explain things such as the 
special helmet for royal warfare (the so-called blue crown) in Ramesside Egypt. 
However, also Assyrian kings are depicted wearing clothing that is especially 
connected to royal acts of violence, notably the military robe of warfare and the 
headband or diadem associated with hunting (Magen 1986: 92-96, Reade 2009: 249-
52). Additionally, the contrasting of Order and Chaos was an inherent part also of the 
Assyrian belief system (Karlsson 2013: 189, 2016: 214). It is then difficult to 
establish that the identified difference is indeed a meningful one.
Turning to a third possibly meaningful difference, it is difficult to explain the role 
skin colour differentiation had in Egyptian art and identity formation. One should 
definitively be cautious in applying modern notions of nationalism and racism upon 
the ancient material. Fact remains that Egyptian art, for whatever reason, stands out in 
their use of skin colour, in their differentiating of sexes and ethnicity groups (Robins 
1997: 180). It should be noted here that colour in Egyptian art could have a symbolic 
function. The black face of the famous, seated statue of Montuhotep II needs not 
express a marker of ethnicity but a religious statement, connecting the king to fertility 
(associated with the black soil of Egypt) and Osiris, god of the dead (depicted with a 
black face). Also, the absence of skin colour as a marker of difference in Assyrian art 
may be explained by Mesopotamias’s distance from subsaharan Africa and the Far 
East. Still, the use of skin colour in Egyptian art is a meaningful difference.
Another often repeated conclusion focuses on the idea that Assyria was a 
profoundly militaristic and imperialistic state (cf. e.g. Fuchs 2005). The above noted 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 8 The theme of heroic priority focuses on the king’s extraordinary and unprecedent feat in some area.
7
emphasis on muscles can perhaps be explained this way. However, the dichotomy in 
question is quite exaggerated. Military might was an important component of 
Egyptian state ideology from the earliest times, and warfare was a self-evident motif 
in the monumental art of New Kingdom Egypt (Redford 1995: 164-69). Also, 
Assyrian kings does not come across solely as brute warlords. They are also often 
portrayed making offerings to deities (Magen 1986: 65-69), and the state archive from 
the capital Nineveh presents an image of a court culture not solely concentrated on 
military ambitions (e.g. Hunger 1992). Having said that, there may still be a 
difference in terms of relative focus on warfare in the two cultures, so it is fully 
possible that emphasis on muscles in Assyrian art tells of a meaningful difference.
Moving on to the horse issue, the above noted attack on horses may be explained 
by the idea that Egyptians had less attachment to horses as species, their being 
introduced to horses in the warfare sphere relatively late, namely in the Hyksos period 
directly preceding the New Kingdom period (Grimal 1994: 186-87). This may explain 
the fact that the hurting of the enemies’ horses is not a taboo act in Egyptian 
iconography. The special cherishing of horses attested in Nubian sources from the 
Kushite dynasty is certainly not expressed in Egypt (Shaw and Nicholson 1995: 132-
33). In Assyrian texts, horses are greatly valued and respected (Postgate 1974: 16-18), 
and an obvious maltreatment of horses in the visual sources is hardly attested.
9
 In 
other words, I believe that the relevant difference is a meaningful one.
The final observation of possibly meaningful differences focuses on the 
phenomenon of a great city emblem in the Dapur scene. It is hard to make something 
out of this, but perhaps depictions of foreign city emblems served to mark the enemy 
side’s genuine Otherness in the illustrating of the Self-side’s predetermined victory. 
To conclude, although I have now focused on differences, the general impression 
from the above analysis must be that the similarities (primary and secondary parallels) 
far outweighs the differences (no parallels) in terms of iconographic elements and the 
two compared scenes. Only a few differences were found to be meaningful and then 
not in a black or white-fashion but in terms of degrees. All in all, the similarities are 
so striking that a connection between Egyptian and Assyrian art must be recognized.
Concluding remarks
This case study clearly shows that Egyptian art must be reckoned with in the 
identifying of the origin of Assyrian wall reliefs. As already noted, Syrian-Anatolian 
art is often highlighted in this context, but the results of this greatly delimited study 
point to that also Egyptian art should be identified as a strong influence. This mostlikely-to-be-similar case then does not dismiss the Egyptian connection, but it rather 
points to Egyptian influence as a clearly credible explanatory force. Thus, the role of 
Syrian-Anatolian relief art as the source of inspiration may be exaggerated. 
When did this Egyptian influence come about? It is much conceivable that this 
occurred in the Amarna period when there was a great contact and interaction 
between the great states of the day, including Egypt and Assyria. The Amarna letters 
shows that the growing state Assyria was in direct contact with the established state 
Egypt (Liverani 1990: 41-42). The expanding state of Assyria naturally sought for 
ways of proclaiming their great power, and monumental wall reliefs would fulfill this 
propagandistic need. There are not any monumental wall reliefs preserved from 
Assyria of the Middle Assyrian period, but it has been suggested that the reliefs of
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 9 Wild donkeys are chased by Ashurbanipal in his North Palace of Nineveh (Barnett 1976: room S).
8
obelisks mirror the decoration of palace walls not preserved (Pittman 1997).10 The 
Assyrian obelisk itself has been suggested as borrowed (in form, not in function) from 
Egypt (Frahm 2011: 73-75).11 It is consequently quite plausible that this adoption of 
Egyptian motifs came about already in the Middle Assyrian period. Anyway, Egypt’s 
great role in the origin of Assyrian wall relief art should be plain to see. 
One should of course not forget the influence that southern Mesopotamia 
undoubtedly had in the shaping of Assyrian propaganda. The obelisk of Manishtushu 
of the Old Akkadian period and the Standard of Ur from an early dynasty of Ur 
naturally come to mind, even though the said obelisk is not decorated with art (but 
with cuneiform) and the said standard does not represent warfare in quite the same 
way. Still, this caution is perhaps somewhat superfluous, since the cultural 
dependence of Assyria upon southern Mesopotamia has long been emphasized. 
What this article shows is that Egypt and its art has not been enough linked to the 
question on the origin of Assyrian wall reliefs of the ninth century BCE. At the same 
time, it is vital to point out that Assyrian court artisans did not embrace Egyptian art 
wholesale, but that they adapted it to fit their specific culture and needs, as evidenced 
for example in the above discussion on social perspective, use of colour, and so on. At 
the end of the day, we can easily distinguish a typically Assyrian form of relief art.