King Tut ' s ' dagger from outer space ' may have been a gift from abroad
By Owen Jarus published 8 days ago

Debate ensues over where the pharaoh ' s dagger was forged on Earth . 
King Tut ' s ' dagger from outer space ' may have been a gift from abroad
By Owen Jarus published 8 days ago

Debate ensues over where the pharaoh ' s dagger was forged on Earth . 
In one of the new studies , published Feb . 11 in the journal Meteoritics & Planetary Science , researchers describe how an adhesive used on the dagger ' s gold hilt was likely made of lime plaster , a material that was used in Anatolia at the time Tutankhamun reigned . This lime plaster , however , was not widely used in Egypt at that time , the researchers wrote . 

Additionally , historical records found at the site of Amarna , in Egypt , show that Tushratta , the king of Mitanni in Anatolia , gifted at least one iron dagger to Amenhotep III ( who reigned from about 1390 B . C . to 1352 B . C .  )  , the grandfather of Tutankhamun , the researchers noted . 

The team also found that the " iron blade was made by low-temperature heat forging at less than 950 °C [ 1 , 742 degrees Fahrenheit ]  ,  " since a mineral called troilite and formations of iron-nickel crystals known as " widmanstätten patterns " could be seen on the dagger , the researchers wrote in the journal article . 
This image shows results from the chemical analysis of both sides of the dagger ' s blade .  ( Image credit : Image courtesy Tomoko Arai ) 
A different viewpoint
However , in another study , published in the book " Iron from Tutankhamun ' s Tomb "  ( American University in Cairo Press , 2022 )  , researchers found that " it is currently impossible to arrive at a reliable conclusion as to the origin of Tutankhamun ' s iron objects or the craftsmen and materials involved ,  " the research team wrote . 

Those study authors noted that the " rock crystal " of the blade ' s pommel is similar to artifacts widely used in the Aegean area , while the pommel ' s " typically Egyptian shape suggests either manufacture in Egypt or foreign production for an Egyptian market ,  " the research team wrote .  " As a result , no clear overall picture on the origin of the dagger ' s handle and blade " can be made . 

Live Science contacted several scholars not affiliated with either study to get their reactions . Albert Jambon , a researcher at Sorbonne University in France who has conducted extensive research on artifacts made of meteor iron , was unconvinced by the findings that placed the manufacture of the dagger in Anatolia . 

Jambon disputed the claim that the lime plaster was used as an adhesive . He noted that in the 1920s , limestone powder was used for the cleaning of some Tutankhamun artifacts and that the chemical tests used in the study detected this cleaning solution , not an adhesive . Additionally ,  " the hilt and the blade are two separate parts " and could have been manufactured in different places , Jambon said in an email . 

Marian Feldman , W . H . Collins Vickers chair in archaeology at Johns Hopkins University , said that if the team ' s findings that the dagger was manufactured in Anatolia are correct , it " would be important confirmation that some of the luxurious objects found in Tutankhamen ' s tomb were diplomatic gifts from abroad ,  " Feldman wrote in an email . More research is needed to confirm those findings , Feldman added . 

Originally published on Live Science . 