Part I
The Arthur of History

K1
1
The End of Roman Britain and the 
Coming of the Saxons: An 
Archaeological Context for Arthur?
Alan Lane
The last time an archaeologist seriously engaged with the matter of Arthur was in 
1971 with the publication of Leslie Alcock’s book Arthur’s Britain. Subtitled History 
and Archaeology AD 367–634, this was a rigorous academic attempt to put the historical evidence for Arthur alongside the archaeology for the period in which he 
might have existed. It was written in the context of the late Professor Alcock’s 
excavations between 1966 and 1973 at Cadbury Castle, Somerset, where he had 
investigated the major Iron Age hill fort identifi ed by Leland as the alleged site of 
Camelot (Alcock 1972). Alcock’s work was a detailed account of the archaeology, 
framed by a critical discussion of the early historical evidence for the period and the 
few sparse “early” references to Arthur. Aimed at both students and an interested 
public, it ranged over both Anglo-Saxon and Celtic evidence throughout the British 
Isles.
Arthur’s Britain offered an analysis of the supposed Arthurian evidence but was 
perhaps unfortunate in coinciding with an upsurge in Arthurian iconoclasm whereby 
most historians decided Arthur was either a myth or at best unknowable. Alcock 
concluded that one reference – that to Arthur in the Annales Cambriae (“Welsh 
Annals”) for 537, “The battle of Camlann, in which Arthur and Medraut fell” – was 
“the irreducible minimum of historical fact” and that this assured us “that Arthur 
was an authentic person” (Alcock 1971: 88). However, in 1977 David Dumville 
published a trenchant review paper in the journal History, which rejected the claim 
that any of the references to Arthur, including those in the Welsh annals, were 
contemporary and concluded: “This is not the stuff of which history can be made. 
The fact of the matter is that there is no historical evidence about Arthur; we must 
reject him from our histories and, above all, from the titles of our books” (1977: 
188).
This view that there is no reliable historical evidence for Arthur is one held by all 
serious historians of the period. Thus in 1991 Thomas Charles-Edwards’ discussion 
of the ninth-century Historia Brittonum concluded that: “At this stage of the enquiry, 
c01.indd 15 01.indd 15 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
16 Alan Lane
one can only say there may well have been an historical Arthur,” but “the historian 
can as yet say nothing of value about him” (1991: 29). The skepticism of historians 
about Arthur was matched by a general rejection of the fi fth- and sixth-century historical sources for Britain as a whole. Previous credibility given to Bede and the 
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle has now been replaced by a conclusion that little historical 
material pre-600 can be relied upon, and Dumville’s view that a “historical horizon” 
of credibility begins sometime in the mid- to late sixth century for some Irish, 
English, and British sources seems to be widely accepted (1977: 189–92; Yorke 1993; 
see also chapter 2, this volume).
But if historians cannot agree on evidence for a historical Arthur, what can archaeology say? Since Dumville’s 1977 paper, no serious archaeologist has tried to combine 
archaeology and Arthur. There is of course an archaeology of Arthurian folklore and 
fakes – the numerous Arthur’s Stones (often megalithic tombs, such as Arthur’s Stone 
on the Gower peninsula in south Wales); other Arthurian place names in the landscape 
(Higham 2002: fi gs 16 and 18); and fakes ranging from the twelfth-century “discovery” of Arthur’s body at Glastonbury (Barber 1972: 59–65) to the more recent claims 
often expressed on the internet and in popular books (Higham 2002: 34–5) as well 
as in otherwise reputable daily newspapers (see for example the Sunday Telegraph
newspaper of October 16, 1994). Indeed, Oliver Padel has argued that the earliest 
references to Arthur in the ninth century indicate that he was already a mythical fi gure 
attached to dramatic features of the landscape and that, by analogy with the Fionn 
cycle in Ireland, no historical Arthur ever existed (1994).
However, if we wanted to portray an archaeological context for a notional Arthur, 
where and when would that be? Barber has pointed to four genuine historical fi gures 
called Arthur who appear in reliable sources. These are all associated with Irish/
Scottish colonies and show that the name was current in Dál Riata and Dyfed in the 
later sixth and seventh centuries. Barber suggests that Arthur, son of Áedán mac 
Gabráin, the late-sixth-century king of Dál Riata who was killed fi ghting the Picts 
in the 590s, may be the original historical fi gure to whom subsequent legends were 
attached (1972: 29–38). However, the attachment of Arthur’s name to the battle of 
Badon and the battle list in the Historia Brittonum, together with his prominence in 
later British/Welsh sources, has led to him being regarded as a British hero associated 
with the native resistance to the Germanic conquest of southern and eastern Britain 
which gave rise to the creation of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of England.
As to date, Arthur’s absence from British genealogies and reliable historical sources 
before the ninth or tenth centuries means that most attempts to place him historically 
have to push him back to the later fi fth or earlier sixth century. After about 550 the 
historical silence about Arthur becomes more damning. In 500 British political units 
would probably still have ruled much of Britain from the Forth–Clyde line in Scotland 
south to the English Channel, though the extent of Anglo-Saxon territorial control is 
not historically documented at this period. Consequently the archaeological context 
for a notional British Arthur might be thought to be the post-Roman British kingdoms of the fi fth and sixth centuries between Edinburgh in the north and Cornwall 
c01.indd 16 01.indd 16 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
 The End of Roman Britain and the Coming of the Saxons 17
in the southwest. This chapter, then, will look at some current debates on the fi fthand sixth-century history and archaeology of the British kingdoms.
Gildas and the History of Britain in the 
Fifth and Sixth Centuries
Opinions about the nature of fi fth-century and early sixth-century Britain have varied 
since Alcock wrote in 1971. In 400 Britain was still part of the Roman Empire, which, 
though politically divided between a western emperor in Ravenna and an eastern 
emperor in Constantinople, still stretched from Hadrian’s Wall in the north to an 
eastern frontier in modern Turkey and Syria. By 476, with the deposition of the last 
western emperor, successor Germanic barbarian kingdoms were increasingly coming 
to dominate the whole of the Western Empire (Cameron et al. 2000). The fate of the 
British provinces is not well documented after 400. If the late-sixth-century Byzantine 
historian Zosimus is to be believed, the British rebelled against Roman rule and laws, 
but the exigencies of the sources are such that no secure narrative of fi fth-century 
Britain is possible.
Historians are much more wary now of using either Bede’s Historia Ecclesiastica
(eighth century) or the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle to date the Adventus Saxonum (SimsWilliams 1983). However, in contrast to Alcock’s view, it is now recognized that 
Gildas’s De excidio Britanniae (“Concerning the ruin of Britain,” hereafter abbreviated 
to DEB) is the only real source for much of fi fth-century and early sixth-century 
British history. Whereas Alcock was rather scathing about Gildas, revisionist views 
now place him fi rmly as the key source from which the entire traditional account of 
the English conquest derives (Dumville 1977; Lapidge & Dumville 1984). The diffi -
culty with Gildas is of course the absence of names and dates which would allow us 
to calibrate his narrative against continental sources. As is well known, after the death 
of Magnus Maximus in 388 Gildas probably names only one independently dated 
person – Agitius (Aetius), who was consul for the third time in 446–52. However, 
attempts to date the fi fth-century sequence of events in DEB are less convincing and 
the contradiction between Gildas’s sequence and that in Bede has led to several distinct versions of fi fth-century history being posited by modern scholars (SimsWilliams 1983; Higham 1994).
Gildas is conventionally dated to the early sixth century, with DEB written in the 
mid-sixth century. Higham has tried to push him back into the fi fth century (1994: 
118–45) and although this has not been met with general assent, scholars such as 
Wood seem to allow an early date (1984: 23). Gildas describes a long series of disasters 
for the Britons after 388: attacks and threats of attack from Pictish and Irish raiders, 
the rise of kings and civil wars, the invitation of Saxon mercenaries to fi ght the Picts 
and Irish, the rebellion of the Saxon federates and the wholesale destruction that 
ensues. Following all this, an apparently long process of warfare ensues until a British 
resistance led by Ambrosius Aurelianus has some success (Sims-Williams 1983). The 
c01.indd 17 01.indd 17 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
18 Alan Lane
battle of Badon is cited by Gildas as a major British victory, although one which 
leaves much of the former Roman provinces of Britain in Germanic hands. One diffi -
culty in interpreting Gildas is that the areas where he describes, and denounces, surviving British kingdoms and the “tyrants” who rule them seem limited to the extreme 
south and west of Britain. This has led Higham to posit Germanic control either 
directly or as overlords over most of lowland England by the mid- or late fi fth century 
(1994: 190–93).
The Archaeology of Britain in the Fifth and Sixth Centuries
The degree of survival of Roman material culture and the nature of fi fth-century 
British material culture are still contested issues. On the basis of archaeological evidence, it is undeniable that the most obvious features of Roman archaeology – mass 
coinage, mass-produced pottery and other goods, villas, walled towns, masonry buildings, mosaics, hypocausts, sculpture – had ceased to be signifi cant features of Britain 
in the sixth century. Our problem of course is the poverty of evidence for the continuation of Romano-British material culture after the late fourth century. Unlike some 
parts of the Western Empire, the evidence for the continuation of Roman technology 
in Britain is poor (Esmonde Cleary 1989). Opinion on the speed of change in Britain 
– how quickly Roman technology and lifestyle was lost, and why – has therefore been 
a long-term matter of debate, with two central positions emerging. On the one hand, 
some scholars have seen the disappearance of Roman culture from Britain as swift, 
catastrophic, and violent (Faulkner 2000). Gildas is one of the sources of this interpretation. On the other hand, an argument has been made for substantial continuities 
in material culture well into the fi fth, sixth, and seventh centuries, ironically, perhaps, 
also using Gildas as evidence (Dark 1994, 2000).
This difference of opinion is of course linked to theories about the date, scale, and 
speed of Germanic takeover and the thorny issue of British survival in lowland 
England. In recent years this debate has focused on what is sometimes called the “late 
antiquity” paradigm. This is an infl uential historical view which emphasizes the cultural continuities in Europe from the third to the eighth centuries – the period of 
“late antiquity” – and downplays both the signifi cance of the “fall” of the Western 
Empire and the warfare and displacement that may have accompanied it (WardPerkins 2005). Until recently, this paradigm had relatively little infl uence in Britain 
since it was diffi cult to see pagan Anglo-Saxon England having much late-antique 
fl avor, while the Celtic west was visualized as comprising heroic, rather “barbarian,” 
societies (Alcock 1971). However, in recent years the concept of a late-antique culture 
of continuity has been applied to the Celtic west of Britain, in particular in the work 
of Ken Dark (2000: 15).
The interest in the concept of late antiquity, with its implication of continuity and 
relative stability, has cross-fertilized with other theoretical ideas current in British 
academia, in particular the rejection of invasion and migration as signifi cant forces 
c01.indd 18 01.indd 18 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
 The End of Roman Britain and the Coming of the Saxons 19
for change in the historical and archaeological record. The rejection of the “invasion 
hypothesis,” which dominated older British archaeological interpretations, can be seen 
particularly in prehistoric studies from the 1960s onwards. Initially, invasions or settlements by Anglo-Saxons, Vikings, and perhaps Irish immigrants were accepted as 
signifi cant, alongside a dominant pattern of endogenous change, since these could be 
supported by historical sources, and, at least in the Anglo-Saxon case, by substantial 
archaeological evidence of burials and settlements (Clark 1966). However, historical 
skepticism about the reliability of early sources, coupled with a desire by archaeologists to write “history-free” interpretations, led to the downgrading of even these few 
remaining invasions (Harke 1998). Continuity and population survival became de 
rigueur and the impression was given that violence or population displacement were 
not convincing explanations of cultural change and could be rejected except perhaps 
for small-scale elite replacement.
The hitching of the Celtic west to the “late antique” bandwagon may, however, 
be a step too far, especially at a time when its general applicability to the Western 
Empire, at least in its more extreme pacifi st manifestations, is being questioned. 
Ward-Perkins’ recent book on The Fall of Rome (2005) makes a strong case for understanding how dramatic and painful the collapse of the Western Empire was for many 
who experienced it. Likewise Peter Heather’s Fall of the Roman Empire cites evidence 
for the destructiveness of barbarian armies and the massive decline in productivity 
caused by warfare (2005). The completeness of the disappearance of Roman material 
culture in Britain should not be underestimated. It is arguable that by 500, and probably a lot earlier, there were no towns, villas, coinage, wheel-made pottery, or other 
mass-produced goods. Virtually all the physical manifestations of Roman material 
culture had gone (Esmonde Cleary 1989; Wickham 2005: 306–12). No one built a 
mortared masonry structure, tiled a roof, threw a pot on a fast wheel, or fi red a pottery 
kiln from sometime in the fi fth century until the seventh century.
Views about the speed of material collapse in Britain and its explanation vary. Some 
Romanists see decline having set in substantially in the fourth century and the break 
from the Western Empire in 406–10 merely fi nishes off a weakened elite superstructure. Esmonde Cleary suggested that decline on Roman sites could be traced through 
the later fourth century and that collapse followed within a few decades in the fi fth 
(1989). A similar pattern is traced by Faulkner, who argues that the Roman state was 
parasitic, and that speedy collapse was inherent in its internal social contradictions. 
He argues vehemently against the “late antique” paradigm and suggests that “overall 
the Romanised settlement pattern and associated material culture had collapsed to 
almost nothing by the late fourth and early fi fth century” (2004: 10). In his view, “all 
the archaeological indicators of Romanitas reached zero or close to zero in the fi fth 
century. This is true of settlements, structures and artefacts” (2002: 74); and he went 
on to reiterate his position that there was a “clear material culture gap separating 
the fi nal collapse of Romanised settlements and assemblages in c. AD 375/425, 
and the emergence of distinctive Early Dark Age ones from c. AD 450/75 onwards” 
(2004: 10).
c01.indd 19 01.indd 19 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
20 Alan Lane
The alternative view regarding late antiquity was put by Dark: “Rather than being 
the area of the former Roman West in which Late Roman culture was most entirely 
swept away in the fi fth century, . . . quite the opposite would seem to be true. 
It . . . was the only part of the West in which the descendants of Roman citizens lived 
under their own rule, with their own Romano-Christian culture and in recognisably 
late-Roman political units, into the sixth century” (Dark 2000: 230). At its most 
extreme, claims Dark, the argument could be made that Roman Britain’s last province 
did not fall until the thirteenth century when Edward I fi nally conquered north Wales 
(Dark 1994: 256).
One does not need to take Faulkner’s “Life of Brian” view of what the Romans ever 
did for us to accept that there is little convincing evidence of Roman culture surviving in Britain to be taken over by the Anglo-Saxons in the middle and later decades 
of the fi fth century. Though attempts have been made to demonstrate town and villa 
life in the fi fth century, the new Anglo-Saxon society dominating lowland England 
seems to be markedly different and technologically quite apart. In spite of various 
claims no one has yet shown Roman technology and forms continuing beyond the 
fi fth century.
The problem of Faulkner’s view of speedy total collapse, and Dark’s alternative of 
a substantial late-antique survival, is how to date and interpret late fourth- and early 
fi fth-century deposits. Faulkner’s dating of decline is dependent on coin and pottery 
dates. If late fourth-century coins and pottery continue in use unchanged then his 
theory of speedy collapse must be extended into the fi fth century. Various attempts 
have been made in the past to show continuation of Roman material culture well into 
the fi fth century (Frere 1987). Hines has argued that though a few Anglo-Saxon items 
turn up on the latest deposits of Roman sites, by and large the English set up new 
sites and new types of site even if some agrarian continuity is likely (1990). The 
apparent absence of widespread landscape change has been a key argument for the 
continuity theorists. While there can be no doubt that many Late Roman sites were 
abandoned, and some areas show evidence of much less intense agriculture and some 
forest regeneration, much of the landscape continued to be exploited in one way or 
another. Most scholars, however, would agree that there is a substantial population 
decline between the fourth century and the seventh or eighth century, though this 
apparent reduction in settlement density must be partly attributed to the loss of 
visibility of the material culture.
We thus have two alternative views: speedy collapse of Roman material culture in 
Britain, and perhaps population collapse; alternatively, many Roman sites may have 
continued in use with archaic Roman fi nds. There remains the possibility of Roman 
culture surviving in British territories outside the areas of early Anglo-Saxon settlement, which will be discussed below, but the problem of recognizing and identifying 
the British and their culture in the fi fth century is a real one. For some areas we have 
virtually no evidence of settlement sites and buildings and for much of the fi fth 
century the picture of the “Dark Ages” is truly dark.
c01.indd 20 01.indd 20 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
 The End of Roman Britain and the Coming of the Saxons 21
Germanic Settlement
The date of Germanic settlement, its scale, and its social and political impact are likewise contested. Some linguists have argued that the apparent massive dominance of 
English place names and the absence of signifi cant linguistic borrowing from Brittonic 
require large-scale migration by Germanic populations (Gelling 1993). Although 
some Celtic names and words are recognizable in England and English names denoting 
British speakers exist, their numbers are still small. English appears to have totally 
dominated the landscape as far west as the Welsh and Cornish borders before the late 
pre-Norman period. Historians and archaeologists such as Higham (1992: 189–208) 
and Hodges (1989: 65–7) have argued that this linguistic supremacy can be explained 
by an “elite dominance” model and thus is compatible with minimal English settlement 
in Britain. However, other Anglo-Saxon specialists argue for a substantial Germanic 
migration without subscribing to oversimplistic arguments about language and 
numbers (Harke 2003), while some linguists have restated the case for large numbers 
and/or widespread violence with some vigor (e.g. Padel 2007).
Some aspects of this debate on the scale of Germanic immigration are due to new 
evidence and reconsideration of old evidence, but academic fashions and modern social 
trends play their role too. When Alcock wrote in 1971, a number of scholars were 
arguing for a signifi cant Germanic settlement in Britain pre-400 when it was still 
under Roman control. The evidence for this was primarily provided by J. N. L. Myres’ 
suggested dating of pagan Anglo-Saxon funerary urns to the fourth century or even 
earlier (1986). Coupled with the evidence of belt buckles and the idea that the fourthcentury term “Saxon Shore” (describing late third-century fortifi cations on both sides 
of the English Channel) might indicate an area of Saxon settlement, a theory of peaceful Germanic settlement in Britain was advanced which would then allow for gradual 
acculturation of the native population. The evidence for this theory was strongly challenged by Anglo-Saxon specialists in the 1980s though it took some time to penetrate 
through to more popular books (Hills 1979). Current opinion suggests that securely 
dated Anglo-Saxon graves begin in the period around 420–40, with most evidence 
coming after 450 (Hines 1990). A few brooches may be of earlier date, bracketed 
380–420 on continental dating, but there are no secure deposition contexts before 
420. The absence of stratifi ed Germanic material occurring together with Late Roman 
fi nds tends to imply that Roman material culture had largely collapsed before signifi -
cant Anglo-Saxon settlement had taken place. That is not to say that there may not 
have been people of Germanic origin in Britain before 400, but the current archaeological evidence suggests that, with rare exceptions, they were not signaling a separate 
identity any more than the numerous other groups who had been included within the 
empire.
So if we were to take c. 450 to 550 as the rough period in which we would wish 
to position Arthur, what can we say about the nature of that society? Anglo-Saxon 
c01.indd 21 01.indd 21 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
22 Alan Lane
graves are found through much of midland and eastern Britain (Hines 2003: map 5). 
Although some of these cemeteries are near Roman towns there is little to suggest 
that the towns are still functioning. The nature of the population of Anglo-Saxon 
England is obviously a consideration. The likelihood that the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms 
were populated in large part by descendants of the Romano-British is still vigorously 
debated, though it is extremely diffi cult to demonstrate from evidence as opposed to 
a priori assumptions (Harke 2003; Hills 2003: 57–71). If we exclude from our remit 
those areas of Anglo-Saxon settlement defi ned by graves, we still have a substantial 
part of Britain that can be regarded as British in the fi fth and sixth centuries. For our 
purposes, the distribution of “Anglo-Saxon” burial sites is probably the best guide to 
the nature of the population, though the gaps within the distribution may conceal 
surviving British populations (Dark 2000). However, the speed of Germanic takeover 
of the British provinces is diffi cult to evaluate from the sparse historical sources, and 
Anglo-Saxon political control may be much wider and earlier than core zones of 
Germanic burial (Higham 2002: 68–9, fi g. 7).
Towns
The fate of Roman towns has been central to discussions of continuity and the 
nature of post-Roman society. Debates about the possible continuation of 
Roman towns have oscillated over the past fi fty years, with opinion mainly shifting 
between speedy abandonment, gradual decay, and continuing low-level urban activity 
until Anglo-Saxon takeover in the seventh century. Biddle put an infl uential case 
for continuing “central place” functions at a number of sites, with Winchester 
claimed as demonstrating British/English continuity (1976: 103–12). Wacher’s 
concept of limited non-urban occupation of former Roman towns, that is, “life in 
towns” rather than an economically salient “town life,” has had some support (1995: 
408–21). However, subsequent analysis of the evidence has led to the general 
view that towns did not survive the Roman withdrawal, and the beginnings of 
proto-urban use in England is now generally dated to the seventh century (Palliser 
2000).
A key site for the discussion of urban life in the British west is the Roman town 
of Wroxeter (in the modern county of Shropshire), the civitas capital of the British 
tribe of the Cornovii in the West Midlands. Since the 1960s, Wroxeter has been 
cited as a classic excavation demonstrating major building activity post-400 in a 
Roman town and indeed the continuing existence of urban life well into the sixth 
or even seventh century (White & Barker 1998: 118–36). Perhaps inevitably, one 
popular book on Arthur claims he was king of Wroxeter (Phillips & Keatman 1992: 
160–161). In many ways this site is central to the late antiquity model and to arguments for the continuation of Romanitas in western Britain (Dark 2000). White and 
Barker’s claim was that signifi cant building activity continued in the town as late as 
the seventh century with several phases of building after 400, including a massive 
c01.indd 22 01.indd 22 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
 The End of Roman Britain and the Coming of the Saxons 23
two-story structure in a Romanized style (Dark 2000: fi g 26). This was not, he argued, 
an isolated building but part of continued use of the town generally.
The diffi culty with White and Barker’s proposal is that there is virtually no material culture at Wroxeter to associate with this fi fth-, sixth-, and early seventh-century 
urbanism unless of course fourth-century artifacts were still in use in successive centuries. Most students have accepted the Wroxeter model and indeed considerable 
effort has been expended trying to replicate it elsewhere, with only occasional public 
skepticism being voiced (e.g. Gelling 1992: 23; Ward-Perkins 1996: 9–10). However, 
the recent publication by Fulford of an important review of the Baths Basilica excavations in Wroxeter casts doubt on the evidence of major building activity as an indication of continuous town use. Instead, he puts a serious case that the rubble spreads 
attributed to large post-Roman timber-framed buildings are evidence of Late Saxon 
stone-robbing for church building (2002: 643–5). Fulford does suggest that the evidence of less elaborate buildings may be genuine and comparable to the late structures 
he postulates at Silchester (in the modern county of Hampshire, near Reading). Some 
post-Roman activity at Wroxeter is demonstrated by the Cunorix stone, whose Latin 
inscription seems to indicate a high-ranking Irish fi gure on the site in the fi fth or 
sixth century (Sims-Williams 2002: 25–6), and the fi nding of a stray bronze coin of 
Valentinian III (c. 430–35) has recently been confi rmed (Abdy & Williams 2006: 31). 
However, the absence of the kind of British fi nds which occur at sites such as Cadbury 
Congresbury, in Somerset, or New Pieces, Powys, a small site only sixteen miles west 
of Wroxeter; and the absence of Anglo-Saxon imports, which occur on other British 
sites of late fi fth- and sixth-century date, would seem to rule out signifi cant activity 
at Wroxeter (Campbell 2000: table 1).
The Celtic West
There are, however, some parts of the “Celtic west” where we can with confi dence 
claim later fi fth- and sixth-century activity because examples of imported Mediterranean ceramics have been identifi ed at a number of sites. This material has been studied 
in increasing detail since the 1930s when it was fi rst recognized in England and 
Ireland but it is only in the past few decades that its chronology has been fi rmly 
established (Campbell 1996; 2007).
Late fi fth-century color-coated fi ne wares from the Aegean and North Africa, 
Phocaean Red Slip ware and African Red Slip ware (PRS and ARS respectively, both 
formerly referred to as A ware), can be quite closely dated in the Mediterranean. These 
can be used to date the arrival in Britain of amphorae (B ware), which are in themselves less closely datable. If correctly dated, these three types of pottery seem to have 
reached Britain in a fairly narrow time zone from c. 475 to 525 (Campbell 2007: 26). 
Following this or perhaps overlapping with it, small quantities of gray color-coated 
pottery, sigille paleochretienne grise (D ware), arrived from western France, probably 
dating to the mid-sixth century. Subsequently we fi nd E ware, again from western 
c01.indd 23 01.indd 23 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
24 Alan Lane
France, not closely dated in its presumed continental source area but seemingly of 
late sixth- to late seventh-century date, in Britain and Ireland (Campbell 2007: 46). 
Substantial quantities of imported glass, again largely of western French origin, seem 
to occur in the same period, perhaps mid-sixth to late-seventh century (Campbell 
2000; 2007). Campbell has suggested that two distinct phases of importation are 
recognizable, allowing us two clear chronological horizons of 475–550 and 550–650, 
with only a few imports of pottery or glass recognizable after the end of the seventh 
century (2007: 125–39).
The Mediterranean imports identify sites that were in use around AD 500. These 
lie most densely in a zone centered on Cornwall, west Devon, Somerset, and south 
Wales, with occasional outliers in north Wales, Ireland, and southern Scotland. Such 
imports seem to be absent from the English west and north. With some exceptions 
they allow us to identify enclosed and defended sites that are likely to be those belonging to the kind of British military aristocracy glimpsed in Gildas’s denunciations. 
The key sites are still those reported by Alcock in 1971 and here I only have space 
to mention briefl y the most important in the southern core zone.
Tintagel
Tintagel, a dramatic cliff-girt coastal promontory sited on the north Cornish coast, 
has fi gured in Arthurian discussion since Geoffrey of Monmouth located Arthur’s 
conception there. It has also been central to debates about the post-Roman imported 
pottery since the 1930s. Initially interpreted as a monastery and virtually viewed as 
the beachhead for desert monasticism in the Celtic west, it was convincingly reinterpreted as a defended secular site in the 1970s (Burrow 1973). It is now generally 
regarded as the primary royal site of the kings of Dumnonia (whose name survives in 
the modern Devon). Its importance and remembered symbolism may be indicated by 
the presence of a medieval castle of the mid-thirteenth century built on top of it as 
well as a possible footprint inauguration carving. Defended by a deep rock-cut ditch 
and bank as well as its natural defenses, it is a naturally impressive site. By far the 
largest quantities of Mediterranean imports in Britain have been found here in spite 
of quite limited excavation. There is no doubt, then, that this was an important site 
in the fi fth and sixth centuries, but the precise nature of its function and use is the 
subject of continuing debate: suggestions include an entrepot for Mediterranean merchants, a Byzantine diplomatic outpost, a defended royal citadel, an occasional summer 
residence, or even a town (Dark 2000: 153–6).
Tintagel has no E ware and seems to have lost its importance by the time these 
western French imports reach the area, though radiocarbon dates may show some 
continued use. Stone foundations for more than one hundred buildings were traced 
on the summit area and slope terraces after a grass fi re removed surface cover, but we 
do not know how many were in occupation at any one time (Harry & Morris 1997: 
fi g. 2). Some of the more obvious rectangular structures are thought to be medieval 
and belong to the thirteenth-century castle phase. Nevertheless, recent excavations on 
c01.indd 24 01.indd 24 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
 The End of Roman Britain and the Coming of the Saxons 25
one of the terraces have confi rmed the presence of irregular square and sub-rectangular 
stone footings, possibly for turf-walled structures (Harry & Morris 1997: 121–5). Very 
little of the site has seen modern excavation but the suggestion that it had substantial 
numbers of rather temporary-looking structures seems to have widespread agreement. 
Dark, however, envisages more substantial structures and an internal organization 
that he compares to a Roman “small town” (2000: 156). There is no doubt that 
Tintagel is an important site though the limited modern excavation inhibits secure 
interpretation. That it is the major royal site of the Dumnonian kings seems probable 
though we cannot currently identify any other high-status structures or artifacts to 
associate with the richness of its ceramic material.
Cadbury Castle
Cadbury Castle (variously South Cadbury or Cadbury Camelot), dug by Leslie Alcock 
in the 1960s, is a major multi-walled Iron Age hill fort, occupied in the late fi fth 
century and early sixth century. The apparent re-defense of the entire eight-hectare 
enclosure makes it the biggest of the defi nite post-Roman hill forts. The use of timberlaced stonework is comparable to sites found in north Britain though Alcock was 
inclined to see some Roman military experience in the apparent gateway tower.
Unfortunately the fi nds and structural evidence for the site are limited as the interior 
had been heavily plowed, removing the stratigraphy and presenting a 3,000-year 
palimpsest of pits, postholes, gullies, and other structural features for interpretation. 
From these postholes Alcock suggested a large rectangular summit hall dated by the 
presence of PRS, ARS, and amphorae. There is no doubt about the presence of a structure and the associated pottery concentration, but doubt must persist about the precise 
form of the building. Round houses also occur on the site but could be of Iron Age 
date. There is no way of knowing how much of the site was in use or the likely population involved. The site has no evidence of E ware and it is thought to have been abandoned in the sixth century, perhaps due to Anglo-Saxon encroachment (Alcock 1995). 
Although the Arthurian association of the site cannot be shown to be earlier than the 
fi fteenth century, this was clearly an important site c. 500, though given the small scale 
of excavation and poor preservation little more can currently be said.
Dinas Powys
The location of the bulk of Mediterranean fi nds on both sides of the “Severn Sea” 
suggests links across the Bristol Channel and Severn estuary between Wales, Somerset, 
and Dumnonia. The short distance and intervisibility of the Welsh and Somerset 
coasts allow the possibility of signifi cant political linkages – the sea facilitates as well 
as separates pre-modern contact – and it is generally thought that Tintagel may have 
had primacy in the distribution of the wine and oil that the imported amphorae are 
thought to have contained.
c01.indd 25 01.indd 25 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
26 Alan Lane
As in Dumnonia, the putative high-status sites in Wales are hill forts. Dinas Powys, 
a small inland promontory site near Cardiff in south Wales, remains the richest and 
best-explored site in Wales nearly fi fty years after it was excavated (Alcock 1963). 
Alcock’s proposed chronological sequence, which envisaged the triple multi-vallation 
(outer defensive walling) as belonging to the Norman period, has been disputed by 
Campbell and Dark, and it seems clear that the whole defensive sequence should be 
placed in the fi fth to seventh centuries (Edwards & Lane 1988: 58–61; Campbell 
2007: 96–7, fi gs 67 and 68). This means that the initial rather weak single rampart 
enclosure was replaced in the sixth or seventh century by massive triple ramparts. The 
enclosure is quite small – roughly 0.2 hectares – but the input of labor and the seriousness of the defenses cannot be doubted. The large assemblage of pottery, glass, 
metalwork, metalworking debris, bonework, and stone implements gives us some idea 
of what might be expected on a reasonably rich site with good preservation. The evidence of fi ne metalworking in copper alloy, silver, and gold is particularly important. 
The animal-bone assemblages suggest that food was supplied from neighboring settlements. The house structural evidence is poor and Campbell rejects Alcock’s hypothetical stone buildings, arguing instead for timber structures within the outlines of the 
drip gullies. The presence of E ware takes us into the seventh century, by which time 
Tintagel may have lost its trading dominance and all the Somerset sites, save Carhampton on the north coast, have been cut off from the later sixth- to seventh-century 
trading network.
Western and Northern England
Few advances have been made in identifying British sites beyond the core import zone 
described above, though various sites have been postulated without secure artifactual 
sequences. The ceramic imports are strangely missing in the western English zone 
north from Somerset as far as the modern Scottish border, as if there were a political 
boundary on the Severn blocking the Mediterranean trade. Early to mid-fi fth-century 
activity in York – described as “grandee feasting” in a declining post-imperial twilight (Roskams 1996) – or possible evidence of activity on Hadrian’s Wall could both 
provide a context for our Arthurian search but it is only in southern Scotland that we 
again meet the Mediterranean dating and accompanying fi nds which allow secure 
dating of c. 500, as at the Strathclyde royal citadel of Dumbarton (Alcock & Alcock 
1990).
Conclusion
The archaeological interpretation of fi fth-century Britain remains highly contentious. 
Only limited areas of the British west have well-dated sites and fi nds, as we have 
demonstrated at Cadbury, Tintagel, and Dinas Powys, and some areas of England have 
c01.indd 26 01.indd 26 8/26/2008 6:54:24 PM /26/2008 6:54:24 PM
K1
 The End of Roman Britain and the Coming of the Saxons 27
virtually no evidence until securely dated Anglo-Saxon material appears much later. 
Most of the western British sites have been known since the early 1970s. New discoveries do occur, particularly of the later E ware phase of importation in Ireland and 
Scotland, but it is striking how few new discoveries of the earlier imports have been 
made. This may be partly because they are largely confi ned to enclosed and defended 
sites, which are less likely to be excavated by rescue archaeology (mandatory excavations preceding planned building development).
The distribution of the Mediterranean imports remains fi rmly rooted in Dumnonia 
and Wales and shows no sign of occurring in the Roman towns of central and western 
England. Whether this means these sites were genuinely abandoned, as Gildas says, 
or some other economic/social/ethnic explanation should be preferred remains to be 
seen. But the imports do allow us to identify some fi fth- and sixth-century sites and 
assemblages.
What social context does this give us for a hypothetical British “Arthur”? Faulkner 
posits a period of fi fth-century anarchy or revolution followed c. 500 by the rise of 
exploitative chieftains or self-styled kings (Gildas’s “tyrants”) in their hill forts (2004). 
Alternatively, Dark envisages a gradually declining Romanitas in a successful lateantique Romano-Christian West (2000: 227–30). Unfortunately, much of the evidence remains vague and open to very different interpretations.
We can say, then, that the archaeological picture presented by Leslie Alcock in 
1971 has been modifi ed but the account of Dumnonia/Wales/Somerset remains stubbornly close to how it is presented in Arthur’s Britain. No modern scholar would seek 
to place Camelot at Cadbury rather than in the pages of Chrétien de Troyes. Nor 
would anyone claim we can show that a historical fi gure called Arthur had any association with the fi fth- and sixth-century hill fort sites of the British west. Only with 
the unlikely discovery of new historical sources proving that King Arthur was located 
in a specifi c place and time could archaeology tell us anything about him. Until that 
happens archaeologists will follow Dumville and keep him from their reconstructions 
– if not their chapter titles.