n Westward on the High-Hilled Plains belongs to the publishers Oxbow Books 
and it is their copyright . 
As author you are licenced to make up to 50 offprints from it , but beyond that you may not publish it on 
the World Wide Web until three years from publication ( January 2020 )  , unless the site is a limited access 
intranet ( password protected )  . If you have queries about this please contact the editorial department at 
Oxbow Books ( editorial @ oxbowbooks . com )  . 
WESTWARD ON THE HIGH-HILLED PLAINS
THE MAKING OF THE WEST MIDLANDS
Series Editors : 
Paul Garwood ( Lecturer in Prehistory , IAA , University of Birmingham ) 
Sarah Watt ( Historic Buildings Consultant , CgMs Consulting ) 
Roger White ( Assistant Director , IAA , University of Birmingham ) 
Vol . 1 The Undiscovered Country : The Earlier Prehistory of the West Midlands 
edited by Paul Garwood
Vol . 2 Westward on the High-hilled Plains : The Later Prehistory of the West Midlands 
edited by Derek Hurst
Forthcoming : 
Vol . 3 A Clash of Cultures ? The Romano-British Period in the West Midlands 
edited by Roger White
Vol . 4 Fields Flourishing and Bountiful : The West Midlands in the early Medieval period 
edited by Della Hooke
Vol . 5 Town , Country and Landscape : The Archaeology of the Medieval West Midlands 
edited by John Hunt
Vol . 6 Country of Discovery : The Post-medieval Period in the West Midlands 
edited by David Barker and Paul Belford 
WESTWARD ON THE HIGH-HILLED 
PLAINS 
THE LATER PREHISTORY OF THE WEST MIDLANDS
Edited by 
DEREK HURST 
Hardcover Edition : ISBN 978-1-78570-411-6
Digital Edition : ISBN 978-1-78570-412-3 ( epub ) 
© Oxbow Books 2017
Oxford & Philadelphia
www . oxbowbooks . com
AN OFFPRINT FROM
Published in the United Kingdom in 2017 by
OXBOW BOOKS
The Old Music Hall , 106–108 Cowley Road , Oxford OX4 1JE
and in the United States by 
OXBOW BOOKS
1950 Lawrence Road , Havertown , PA 19083
© Oxbow Books and the individual authors 2017
Hardcover Edition : ISBN 978-1-78570-411-6
Digital Edition : ISBN 978-1-78570-412-3 ( epub ) 
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library and the Library of Congress
All rights reserved . No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means , 
electronic or mechanical including photocopying , recording or by any information storage and retrieval 
system , without permission from the publisher in writing . 
Typeset in India by Lapiz Digital Services , Chennai
For a complete list of Oxbow titles , please contact : 
UNITED KINGDOM
Oxbow Books
Telephone ( 01865 ) 241249 , Fax ( 01865 ) 794449
Email : oxbow @ oxbowbooks . com
www . oxbowbooks . com
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Oxbow Books
Telephone ( 800 ) 791-9354 , Fax ( 610 ) 853-9146
Email : queries @ casemateacademic . com
www . casemateacademic . com / oxbow
Oxbow Books is part of the Casemate Group
Front cover : Main entrance to Kemerton Camp , Bredon Hill , Worcestershire , with the Malvern Hills just visible beyond the 
mid-18th century tower ( Parsons Folly )  . Photograph courtesy of and copyright Adam Stanford ( Aerial-Cam Ltd ) 
Back cover : Copper alloy bucket mount in the form of a bovine head ; broken loop at top ( Henley-in-Arden , Warwickshire ; 
WAW-F4DF95 )  . Copyright C . Stevens
Westward on the high-hilled plains
Where for me the world began , 
Still , I think , in newer veins
Frets the changeless blood of man . 
First stanza of poem LV from A Shropshire Lad by A . E . Housman

Contents
Preface viii
Résumé xi
Zusammenfassung xii
1 . Introduction : Westward on the high-hilled plains 1
Niall Sharples
2 . Cows , beans and the view : landscape and farming of the West Midlands in later prehistory 9
Elizabeth Pearson
3 .  ‘ The Bronze Age has lagged behind … ’  . Late Bronze Age settlement and landscape in the West Midlands 17
Hal Dalwood
4 . Burnt mounds and beyond : the later prehistory of Birmingham and the Black Country 29
Mike Hodder
5 . Any more old iron age ? An archaeological resource assessment for the Middle Bronze Age to Iron Age in 
Warwickshire and Solihull 37
Stuart C . Palmer
6 . Herefordshire : from the Middle Bronze Age to the later Iron Age 70
Peter Dorling , Keith Ray and Paul White
7 . 	 Fugitive pieces : towards a new understanding of the later second and first millennia BC in Shropshire 85
Andy Wigley
8 . The Late Bronze Age and Iron Age in Staffordshire : the torc of the Midlands ? 97
Chris Wardle
9 . Middle Bronze Age to Late Iron Age Worcestershire 110
Derek Hurst
10 . An overview of the ceramic basis within the broader West Midlands region 119
Annette Hancocks
11 . 	 The potential of the Portable Antiquities Scheme and treasure finds for understanding the Iron Age
in the West Midlands 124
Angie Bolton
12 . Later prehistoric production and trade in the West Midlands 135
Derek Hurst
13 . Touching the void : Iron Age landscapes and settlement in the West Midlands 144
Andy Wigley
Index 153
Preface
The move towards the production of this volume was first
mooted at a meeting on West Midlands later prehistory 
held in the council chamber of Worcestershire County 
Council in September 2002 ( doi : 10 . 5284 / 1038433 )  , as part 
of the national initiative by English Heritage ( now Historic 
England ) to promote research frameworks as central to the 
practice of archaeology . This event was followed up by 
a seminar which was focussed on establishing a research 
framework agenda for the later prehistoric period , and 
that was held at Birmingham University in July 2003 . The 
later prehistoric research agenda and strategy was finally
published ( Hurst 2011 )  , alongside that for the other periods , 
in The archaeology of the West Midlands : a framework for 
research ( Watt 2011 )  . That left the West Midlands regional 
research assessments , the period-based background surveys 
to the agenda and strategy , as still to be published to 
complete the West Midlands Research Framework . This is 
the second volume in this intended series of six volumes . 
The majority of the research assessment papers in this 
volume were , therefore , first drafted in 2002 . Thereafter , 
during 2004 , a process of revision was instigated in 
consultation with authors with the intention to publish . At 
that time , however , several papers were still missing , and , in 
particular , one on a major topic , and it was not clear whether 
these would be forthcoming . Also illustrations , especially 
based on a map template , were lacking . With limited 
support from the Worcestershire Historic Environment and 
Archaeology Service ( now Archive & Archaeology Service ) 
the updating of existing papers was finally achieved in
2009 , and this process then continued , selectively , into 
2011 . While this had significantly advanced the volume , 
the unavailability of funding to deal with the major topic 
omission and for drawing up the template maps , still 
remained major obstacles to publication . Fortunately , these 
difficulties were eventually overcome in 2014 , when English
Heritage undertook to support progressing the volume to 
final publication . 
The West Midlands presently struggles archaeologically 
to project a distinct regional identity . The region is 
geographically defined by reference to other areas , such
as Wessex and the South-West , and the North , which 
have developed a stronger identity , both with regard to 
landscape and their associated historical culture . Whether 
this has always been the case going back into the more 
distant past , apart from a temporary eminence during the 
middle Saxon period ( viz . kingdom of Mercia )  , is presently 
unclear , and this surely forms one of the lines of enquiry 
that might be pursued archaeologically . In more recent 
times part of the region attained international fame as 
the birthplace of the industrial revolution , though this 
occurred , incongruously , at Coalbrookdale in rural south 
Shropshire . This ignited the blaze of industrial expansion 
that later spread eastwards , as the Black Country , but , 
sadly , industrial heritage is not celebrated in the same way 
as other national achievements , and this has not adhered 
to the regional sense of identity . The resulting lack of a 
well formed self-identity is possibly exacerbated by the 
land-locked centrality of the West Midlands , and by its 
proximity to other much better ( i . e . culturally ) defined
regions ( e . g . Wales )  . This weak sense of identity has also 
probably led to a failure to recognise and then build a sense 
of character and place , even when circumstances allowed . 
This has even encouraged the view , perhaps most readily 
seen politically , that the West Midlands is peripheral , and 
so outside the range of normality . Hopefully this volume 
will serve to provide grounds for building a stronger sense 
of West Midlands identity based on the past , which could 
then be a source of greater inspiration towards developing 
a stronger sense of identity for the inhabitants of the 
region today . 
Introducing this volume
This volume presents the papers that formed the basis of 
the research agenda and strategy for later prehistory ( Hurst 
2011 ) published in The archaeology of the West Midlands : 
a framework for research ( Watt 2011 )  . In common with the 
earlier prehistoric Regional Research Assessment volume in 
Preface ix
The West Midlands region in geographical context . 
x Preface
this series ( Garwood 2007 )  , the papers of the later prehistoric 
volume adopt a variety of approaches , variously being 
either regional , county-wide or thematic ( e . g . by site type , 
or artefactual typology )  . Inevitably , because of the nature 
of the assessment papers , they often conclude by looking 
forward and so also include agenda and strategy points , 
though in this case usually very specific . These seem quite
validly expressed here as part of the assessment rather than 
the formal Agenda and Strategy volume , as it is clear that the 
broad agenda formulated in Watt ( 2011 ) is more concerned 
with the related general points and issues . The latter 
include the need to recognise key sites and deal with them 
appropriately , the need also for greater scientific focus , the
case for select work on major monument types sympathetic 
both to their protected status and their significance for the
period , and how to use the broad appeal of archaeology to 
pursue this agenda . Accordingly , both Watt ( 2011 ) and this 
volume are intended to both be of relevance , when looking 
to develop projects where later prehistoric archaeology 
is involved . 
The later prehistoric papers have been arranged so that 
a survey of environmental evidence for changing landscape 
in the region ( by Pearson ) is followed by papers in 
chronological order , with most of these being reviews of the 
evidence within a county ( e . g . by Palmer )  , followed in turn 
by some thematic papers largely focussed around artefacts 
of the period ( e . g . by Hancocks )  , and , finally , there is an
overview of the later prehistoric activity viewed against its 
West Midlands landscape and as compared with other parts 
of the country ( by Wigley )  . 
Whereas the West Midlands is largely an area of 
rural counties ( Figure 1 . 1 )  , the former West Midlands 
County Council area is administratively complicated , being 
composed of several , mainly densely populated , boroughs 
and the coverage in this volume reflects this . It has resulted
in a variable coverage : that is , Birmingham and the Black 
Country with its own paper ( Hodder )  , and Solihull being 
covered in the Warwickshire paper ( Palmer )  , but no specific
coverage for the other metropolitan parts of the region . 
Acknowledgements
Many people have , over the long period of this project , given 
up their time and / or committed resources under their control 
to keeping this volume in view , with the knowledge that the 
research assessments represent key statements on the state 
of later prehistoric studies in this region . These statements 
are important , not least because they are too rare examples 
of synthesis , but also because they provide an opportunity 
to disseminate more widely some striking highlights from 
the recent era of developer-funded archaeology . As such , 
this second volume in the West Midlands Regional Research 
Assessment series is a further stepping stone to greater 
understanding in an archaeological world currently largely 
drowning in data . 
I am particularly indebted to Simon Woodiwiss and 
Victoria Bryant for their support in 2009 when the project 
was in danger of sinking , and , again , to the former for his 
more recently helping by reading and commenting on a draft 
text . Latterly I am indebted to Dan Miles and Ian George of 
English Heritage ( now Historic England ) for their crucial 
support in 2014 . In the meantime , I have been generally 
encouraged and warmed by the unselfish response of fellow
archaeologists who responded positively to the spirit of this 
project by providing the results of their work , and then , on 
occasion , were also ready to accept my calls for even more 
information . 
Suzy Blake ( Staffordshire HER ) kindly pitched in with 
the production of template mapping for that county , while 
Alex Bayliss ( Historic England ) fielded my enquiries about
radiocarbon dating , but I reserve my special thanks for 
Louise Buglass , who so patiently brought into being all the 
template maps ( except for Staffordshire )  , regardless of how 
often I presented her with rather abysmal roughs and then 
went on to suggest more changes on top . 
References
Garwood , P .  ( ed .  )  ( 2007 ) The undiscovered country : the earlier 
prehistory of the West Midlands . Oxford : Oxbow Books . 
Hurst , D .  ( 2011 ) Middle Bronze Age to Iron Age : a research 
assessment overview and agenda , in S . Watt ( ed .  )  , The 
archaeology of the West Midlands : a framework for research , 
101–126 . Oxford : Oxbow Books . 
Watt , S .  ( ed .  )  ( 2011 ) The archaeology of the West Midlands : a 
framework for research . Oxford : Oxbow Books . 
Résumé
Les West Midlands ont peiné sur le plan archéologique 
pour projeter une identité régionale distincte , ayant été 
largement définis par comparaison avec d ’ autres zones
bénéficiant d ’ une identité culturelle et d ’ une histoire plus
solides , telles que le Wessex , le sud-ouest et le nord . Ce 
n ’ est qu ’ occasionnellement que les West Midlands ont 
été sur le devant de la scène , par exemple au milieu de la 
période saxonne ( c-à-d le royaume de Mercie ) ou , beaucoup 
plus tard , quand le sud rural du Shropshire est devenu le 
berceau de la révolution industrielle . Pourtant c ’ est une 
région riche en ressources minérales naturelles , située 
parmi des terres agricoles facilement productives et avec 
d ’ importantes rivières , comme la Severn , pour faciliter le 
transport . L ’ échelle de ses monuments de la deuxième moitié 
de la préhistoire , en particulier les forteresses de sommet 
de colline , proclame la centralisation de certaines fonctions , 
que ce soit pour la sécurité , les échanges ou l ’ émulation 
tandis que la population maintenait une production et 
une distribution étendue d ’ objets artisanaux spécialisés . 
Finalement , vers la clôture de la préhistoire , on peut voir 
émerger des royaumes locaux . Au cours de la revue des 
témoignages de la deuxième partie de la préhistoire de 
l ’ âge du bronze moyen à l ’ âge du fer final , les articles
présentés ici adoptent des approches multiples , elles sont 
soit régionales , soit au niveau du comté , ou thématiques 
( par ex . par type de site ou typologie des artefacts ) et elles 
comprennent aussi le paysage plus étendu tel qu ’ il a été 
reconstruit à partir des témoignages environnementaux . 
Ceci est le second volume dans une série – La création 
des West Midlands , – qui explore l ’ archéologie de la 
région anglaise des West Midlands à partir du paléolithique 
inférieur . Ces volumes , reposant sur une série de séminaires 
du Cadre de Recherches des West Midlands , ont pour but de 
transformer la perception de la nature et de la signification
des témoignages archéologiques à travers une grande partie 
du centre de la Grande-Bretagne . 
Annie Pritchard
Zusammenfassung
Archäologisch gesehen haben sich die West Midlands schwer 
getan , eine eigene regionale Identität hervorzubringen ; 
sie wurden weitgehend in Bezug zu anderen Regionen 
mit stärkerer kultureller Identität und Geschichte , wie 
z . B . Wessex , dem Südwesten und dem Norden definiert . 
Nur gelegentlich haben sich die West Midlands hervorgetan , 
so z . B . in der mittelangelsächsischen Periode ( d . h . zur 
Zeit des Königreichs Mercia )  , oder , wesentlich später , als 
der ländlich geprägte Süden der Grafschaft Shropshire die 
Wiege der industriellen Revolution war . Dennoch ist es 
eine an natürlichen Bodenschätzen reiche , in fruchtbarem 
Ackerland gelegene Region deren große Flüsse , wie 
der Severn , gute Transportanbindungen bieten . Die 
Größenordnung der in der Region vorhandenen bronze- / 
eisenzeitlichen Bodendenkmäler , vor allem der Ringwälle , 
zeugt von der Zentralisierung bestimmter Funktionen , 
sei es Sicherheit , Austausch oder Wetteifer , während die 
Gesellschaft die Produktion und weitreichende Verbreitung 
spezialisierter Handwerkserzeugnisse unterstützte . Am 
Ende der vorrömischen Eisenzeit ist letztlich die Bildung 
regionaler Königreiche zu beobachten . Hinsichtlich der 
Bearbeitung des Quellenmaterials zur jüngeren Urgeschichte , 
von der mittleren Bronze- bis zur späten vorrömischen 
Eisenzeit , wurden für die hier vorgelegten Beiträge 
unterschiedliche Ansätze gewählt , so z . B . regionale , die 
gesamte Grafschaft umfassende oder thematische ( z . B . nach 
Fundstellentyp oder Kleinfundtypologie )  , und sie schließen 
auch die anhand des paläoökologischen Quellenmaterials 
rekonstruierte weitere Landschaft ein . Dies ist der zweite 
Band einer Serie – The Making of the West Midlands ( Die 
Herausbildung der West Midlands ) – in der die Archäologie 
der englischen Region West Midlands seit der älteren 
Altsteinzeit untersucht wird . Mit diesen Bänden , die auf 
eine Reihe von Seminaren zu den Forschungsrichtlinien 
für die West Midlands zurückgehen , soll zum Wandel in 
der Wahrnehmung des Charakters und der Bedeutung des 
archäologischen Quellenmaterials eines großen Teils von 
Mittel-England beigetragen werden . 
Jörn Schuster
1
Introduction : Westward on the high-hilled plains
Niall Sharples * 
The West Midlands is an unusual region in many respects . 
Its existence is related purely to modern political and 
economic developments and owes little to either the 
underlying geology and topography or to the historical 
settlement patterns ( Figure 1 . 1 )  . This might be regarded as 
a disadvantage and there is certainly diversity to the region 
that defies easy synthesis . However , it could be regarded
as an advantage , as it is clear the region encompasses a 
series of social , economic and natural boundaries that are 
of considerable interest to any archaeologist attempting 
to understand the development of regional cultures and 
identities in later prehistory . A considerable number of 
archaeologists find the definition and maintenance of 
regional identities a key area for contemporary research 
( Bevan 1999 ; Giles 2012 ; Sharples 2010 )  . 
In my job as a university lecturer I teach the ‘ British Later 
Bronze Age ’ and ‘ Iron Age ’  . These courses are very broad 
and synthetic , and do not allow the detailed analysis of many 
of the ‘ Different Iron Ages ’  ( Bevan 1999 ) that characterise 
the last millennium BC . The courses are split into thematic 
issues and case studies . My regional case studies have 
tended to focus on the usual suspects : Wessex , Yorkshire , 
the Atlantic Seaboard and , for local reasons , Wales . I have 
no specific incentive to examine the West Midlands as
opposed to any other region . It is , therefore , interesting to 
note aspects of the West Midlands archaeology that are of 
such interest that they feature in the thematic lectures in 
my course ; these demonstrate , to my mind , the national 
importance of the archaeological record of this region . 
•	 On a broad scale the hillforts of the Welsh Marches 
are of considerable significance ( Forde-Johnston 1976 )  . 
These , though frequently linked geographically with the 
Wessex hillfort region , provide an interesting contrast to 
the evidence from that dominant region . They include 
some of the largest and most densely occupied hillforts 
known from Britain ( Stanford 1974 ; 1981 )  , and potentially 
they are very early , though the best dated examples The 
Breidden ( Musson 1991 ) and Beeston Castle ( Ellis 1993 ) 
lie just outside the West Midlands . They , therefore , provide 
important evidence for the development and significance
of this very distinctive settlement form . The extensive 
excavation of large hillforts , such as Credenhill Hill Camp , 
Croft Ambrey and Midsummer Hill ( Stanford 1970 ; 1974 ; 
1981 )  , has revealed regimented ranks of ‘ 4-posters ’ that 
contrast with Wessex , and which require explanation , even 
if they cannot be interpreted as houses . 
•	 The quality of the excavated record for these hillforts 
is very good . Stanford was a good field archaeologist
and his recording of the hillforts at Croft Ambrey , and 
Midsummer Hill ( Stanford 1974 ; 1981 ) is as good as , if 
not better than , other more celebrated practitioners of the 
era . Earlier excavations by Kathleen Kenyon at The Wrekin 
and Sutton Walls , and Thalassa Hencken on Bredon Hill 
( Kenyon 1942 ; 1953 ; Hencken 1938 ) were also good . 
Many of these sites produced substantial collections of 
artefacts , which include important assemblages of iron 
and bone tools that are still not common in many areas of 
Britain . The published excavations are sufficiently detailed
to justify thorough reanalysis . All this could contribute a 
considerable amount to contemporary debate , and it is 
rather surprising that work on these artefact assemblages 
has so far been largely restricted to analysis of the ceramic 
record ( Morris 1982 )  .  
* Professor in Archaeology , School of History , Archaeology and Religion , Cardiff University . 
2 Niall Sharples
Fig . 1 . 1 West Midlands topography with main places and rivers indicated as mentioned in the text of this volume . 
•	 The regional evidence for the understanding of exchange 
networks is unparalleled for the British Isles . The 
geology of much of the region is sufficiently distinctive
to allow for sourcing pottery and important stone 
quarries ( Moore 2006 )  . The pottery evidence is perhaps 
the most well-known aspect , and this region was 
instrumental in demonstrating that specialised pottery 
production existed in Iron Age Britain ( Peacock 1968 )  , 
and in providing a quantified approach to analysing
the distribution networks that connected producers to 
individuals at a considerable distance from the source 
( Morris 1982 ; 1994 )  . The evidence for the exploitation 
1 . Introduction : Westward on the high-hilled plains 3
of salt at Droitwich and in Cheshire is even more 
important , as these are very unusual sources in Britain 
and the associated briquetage provides good evidence 
for the distribution of salt across a very wide area of 
western Britain ( Morris 1985 )  . The detailed analysis of 
these production and exchange networks is impossible 
to undertake in most of Britain where the geology is 
less conducive to investigation , or where the material 
culture simply does not exist . 
•	 A particularly interesting discovery in the West Midlands 
is the burial evidence from Bredon Hill and Sutton Walls 
( Hencken 1938 ; Kenyon 1953 )  . Both deposits have 
been interpreted as the result of warfare and certainly 
the remains at Bredon Hill had been systematically 
dismembered ( Western and Hurst 2013 )  . The only 
comparable deposit is the massacre level at South 
Cadbury which has recently been subjected to a detailed 
reinterpretation that has indicated the complexity of the 
depositional process ( Barrett et al . 2000 )  . The absence of 
a normal burial record for most of Iron Age Britain makes 
these deposits exceptionally important and provides some 
of the best evidence for the practice of warfare in Britain . 
These deposits have only recently been the subject of 
renewed study ( Western and Hurst 2013 )  , which has 
drawn attention to the international importance of the 
archaeological record of the region . 
These are only some of the region ’ s greatest hits and I am 
sure others would have a different list . Nevertheless , they 
give an impression of the important contribution West 
Midlands archaeology has made to the understanding of 
Later Prehistoric studies in Britain . I would now like to look 
at the potential the region has for addressing issues , which 
seem to me to be of considerable importance in current 
archaeological practice . 
Landscape and territory
Within the region the ability to compare and contrast 
different landscapes is very important , and understanding 
the very different nature of these landscapes should be one 
of the principal research objectives of the region . 
It is immediately obvious that there is an important eastwest division between the hillfort-rich landscapes of the 
Welsh Border counties , and the small enclosures that are 
so common in the low lying river valleys of Warwickshire 
and Staffordshire . This pattern was a feature of Cyril Fox ’ s 
Highland Lowland division of Britain ( Fox 1952 )  , and , 
though we can now dismiss the cultural assumptions that 
dominate Fox ’ s interpretation , we must still address the 
significant differences between the settlement patterns in
each area ( see Wigley , this volume )  . 
There is also a major north / south division that ignores 
the landscape and which is best represented by material 
culture . This is reflected in a marked decline in the quantity
and quality of the ceramics found in the northern counties 
of Shropshire and Staffordshire , compared to the southern 
counties of Herefordshire , Worcestershire and Warwickshire , 
and this may also be the case for other aspects of material 
culture , such as metal and stone tools , though these patterns 
are more difficult to determine . These divisions can be linked
to the development of distinctive exchange networks in the 
Middle Iron Age , which in turn are normally explained as 
reflecting ethnic identities , such as between the Dubonni and
the Cornovii . However , we need to explore the significance
of these differences at the level of daily practice before we 
start to discuss ethnic and tribal affinities . 
For example , it is worth asking why certain stone types 
are being used to temper specific types of pottery . Can we
just assume that this is because of the thermal properties 
provided to the pot which make it a more efficient cooking
utensil ? I doubt it . If the decoration and form of pots is about 
building identities and defining communities , then it may
be that a desire to be associated with particular localities is 
the most significant feature of the distribution networks . A
Neolithic analogy is appropriate : it is now fairly acceptable 
to claim that stone axes were being quarried from specific
sources because of the symbolic significance of the sources , 
which were located on very dramatic topographic locations 
( Edmonds and Bradley 1993 )  . Is it possible that some of 
the sources of rock temper used in the Iron Age also had 
a symbolic significance to the producers and users of this
pottery ? The distribution of pottery has to be seen as a social 
process ; it creates relationships between people , which are 
lubricated by stories that explain these relationships and place 
them in a broader cosmology . Ultimately these stories create 
an explanation for people ’ s existence as human beings , and 
place them in a world of rocks , soils , plants and animals . 
The possibility of a symbolic significance for these
ceramic sources may also be linked to some of the most 
important hillforts . The Malvern ridge is a dramatic 
landscape feature , which is highly visible , as anyone who 
has ever driven up the M5 will know . It acts as a boundary 
separating the very different landscapes of Herefordshire 
and Worcestershire . In most traditional societies this natural 
feature would be written into the mythological ancestry of 
the surrounding peoples . It would have a central role in 
the narrative of existence and provide an explanation for 
their being . It may be this mythological role that led to the 
construction of the two massive hillforts of Midsummer Hill 
and Herefordshire Beacon on the ridge . Do they control the 
mythology of place ? 
Directly opposite the Malverns is another prominent 
landscape feature , Bredon Hill . This isolated hill is the end 
of the Cotswold Ridge and looks down on the meeting of the 
rivers Avon and Severn . The hill is again controlled by the 
construction of a hillfort , but it is a very strange construction 
and difficult to interpret because of a massive landslip on
4 Niall Sharples
the northern slopes . Nevertheless , it seems to have been 
densely occupied despite a very exposed location , and the 
importance may be reflected in the extreme violence that
was used to kill and dismember the occupants . 
Separating these two eminences is the River Severn , 
and , again , this natural feature must have had a prominent 
role in the cosmological , social and economic life of these 
communities . It is surprising , therefore , to find that this
river does not appear to be marked by the activities of any 
prehistoric community . If this river was in Eastern England 
we would expect to recover Bronze Age , and probably Iron 
Age , metalwork from dredging , but this does not appear 
to be the case for the Severn , though the Ironbridge Gorge 
might be the exception ( see Wigley , this volume )  . Is this a 
result of particular dredging practices which do not allow 
for the recovery of archaeological remains , or is it an 
accurate reflection of an archaeological reality ? Did the
people of the West Midlands have a religious practice that 
avoided rivers ? As Dorling et al . observe ( this volume ) we 
know next to nothing about Iron Age religious practice in 
this region . 
Site level
It is also necessary to consider the significance of the
patterns recognised at the site level as part of this research 
process , and it is perhaps unfortunate that the analysis of 
sites was not a subject for detailed consideration in this 
volume . Certain aspects of settlements were a repeated 
feature of discussion during the original conference , and 
the nature of boundaries was one of these . This is a topic 
of considerable interest in later prehistoric research , and 
provides a thematic problem that cuts across different scales 
of the archaeological landscape : 
•	 Large landscape boundaries are a conspicuous feature of 
some landscapes . Several of these have been identified
in Warwickshire , and the redating of the cross-dykes 
of Shropshire to the prehistoric period is important . Pit 
alignments have a very interesting distribution , appearing 
in very limited areas on the river valleys of Warwickshire , 
Shropshire and Staffordshire . 
•	 Field systems are also clearly a feature of some landscapes 
( notably at Kemerton , Worcestershire )  , though they are 
perhaps not as common as we would expect ; recent work 
in Shropshire and Staffordshire suggests they are there , 
waiting to be explored ( Wigley and Wardle , this volume )  . 
•	 Enclosure boundaries are an important feature . The 
hillforts of the region are spectacularly well defined
and can be used to distinguish the communities of the 
western uplands from the farmsteads occupying the less 
substantial enclosures of the eastern river valleys . 
•	 Houses defined by shallow ditches are characteristic
of the region . These should not be dismissed as drip 
gullies , as they are a deliberate feature that would be a 
conspicuous part of the domestic arena . 
All of these boundaries need to be interpreted , and cannot 
simply be assumed to have an obvious function . The 
enclosure of the landscape is not necessarily an efficient
way of organising agricultural landscapes , particularly 
those where large-scale seasonal movements of animals are 
routine practice . The purpose of cross-ridge dykes and the 
precise physical characteristics of pit alignments are still 
a matter of some conjecture , but nether seem particularly 
efficient ways of creating an exclusive boundary . Field
systems may be a feature of the Later Bronze Age , but as 
work on Dartmoor ( Fleming 1988 ) and on Salisbury Plain 
( McOmish et al . 2002 ) clearly demonstrates , these divisions 
can be a relatively short-term phenomenon , which seems to 
be of little significance in the Iron Age . They do not simply
reflect agricultural intensification to meet the demands of
an increasing population in later prehistory . 
The defensive nature of hillfort boundaries has been 
largely rejected in other areas within the hillfort zones of 
southern Britain ( Bowden and McOmish 1987 )  , and this reinterpretation has much to commend it , so long as people do 
not confuse the argument with a view that the Iron Age was 
a peaceful place , or that hillforts were never subject to attack 
( Sharples 1991 )  . The effort involved in the construction 
of hillfort defences , and to a lesser extent settlement 
enclosures can be related to other issues of importance in 
these societies , and one of these must have been the social 
construction of identity . All of these boundaries have to be 
understood in terms of relationships between people who 
have chosen to define and delimit a specific place in the
landscape . They are choosing to separate this place from 
other spaces , control access to the place and movement 
in the surrounding space . Hillforts separate communities 
from the landscape and other communities , and drip gullies 
separate a household from functionally distinct settlement 
space and from other households . 
In recent years a considerable amount of emphasis has 
been placed on the understanding of depositional processes , 
in particular in houses . It is clear that the location and 
manner in which material is deposited within houses 
and in the settlement areas surrounding them , can tell 
us a considerable amount about society . This process of 
deposition is not simply occurring in a self-explanatory 
fashion , but uses a cultural logic , which can illuminate the 
different roles of individuals within these societies . The 
recovery of intact floor levels and in situ surfaces must 
be a very high priority in any research . These are always 
going to be rare in an intensively cultivated agricultural 
landscape , but recent work in Warwickshire suggests they 
do occur ( Palmer 2012 )  . Valley floors , uplands and localised
accumulation zones , such as behind hillfort ramparts , 
become very important in this respect . 
1 . Introduction : Westward on the high-hilled plains 5
Finally , it is important to think of stratigraphic sequence as 
not just a useful means of demonstrating chronology but as a 
significant human decision . Why do people choose either to
build on the same spot for several generations or , in contrast , 
choose to avoid past settlement locations for the construction 
of their own new settlements ( Brück 1999 ; Gerritson 1999 ; 
Sharples 2010 )  . In many areas of eastern England , the presence 
of settlement scatters which spread across the landscape in an 
unfocused manner , links these areas with the continent , and 
contrasts them with the location of specific settlements of
areas such as Wessex . The creation of a settlement boundary 
clearly restricts a settlement ’ s ability to expand or drift , and 
suggests a commitment to long-term occupation of a locale , 
which is otherwise unusual in prehistory . Does this indicate 
a change in inheritance and ownership ? 
Potential
The understanding of settlements is a crucial research goal 
for Later Prehistory , as in many ways the millennium and a 
half from the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age is defined
by the ubiquitous presence of settlements in many areas of 
Britain . In the West Midlands , however , identifying Late 
Bronze Age settlement has proved to be very difficult and
settlements belonging to this period are largely absent from 
many areas ( Dalwood , this volume )  . 
The potential of limited and restricted research 
excavations to transform radically the current understanding 
of the archaeological record is ably demonstrated by the 
discovery of a Late Bronze / Early Iron Age settlement at 
Whitchurch ( Waddington and Sharples 2011 ; Figure 1 . 2 )  . 
This settlement lies in the valley of the River Stour , a 
tributary of the Avon . Research excavations by Cardiff 
University revealed a complex site which consisted of a Late 
Bronze Age / Early Iron Age midden ; a thick accumulation of 
organic rich soil . This later became the focus for Iron Age 
settlement which included rectangular , trapezoidal and oval 
enclosures . Pits , postholes and gullies were recognised both 
cutting through the midden and stratified below the midden 
( Figure 1 . 3 )  , indicating the presence of a complex sequence 
of settlement structures . 
Despite the small-scale nature of the research , the 
excavations produced an enormous assemblage of finds : 
251 copper alloy artefacts , 7 , 512 sherds of pottery , 519 
fragments of fired clay ( including briquetage and spear
mould fragments )  , 47 pieces of worked bone , 16 stone 
tools and a blue glass bead . The pottery assemblage from 
the midden and contemporary settlement features belongs 
to the post-Deverel-Rimbury decorated tradition that dates 
to the period around 850 / 800–550 / 500 cal BC ( Brudenell 
in Waddington and Sharples 2011 )  , and is almost unique 
for the whole region . 17 , 890 animal bones were recovered 
dominated by sheep , but with relatively high numbers of 
pig , a feature of many other midden sites ( cf . Madgwick in 
Waddington and Sharples 2011 )  . The presence of isolated 
bones of beaver and wild boar are important . 
Fig . 1 . 2 Whitchurch , Warwickshire . General view of site locality with Trench 4 in foreground . 
6 Niall Sharples
The copper alloy assemblage largely comprises 
metalworking residues including casting waste and an 
ingot , which together with the mould fragments suggest 
metalworking was an important part of the settlement 
activity . There was also an important assemblage of 
objects which included a socketed axe and a late palstave ; 
tools including a chisel , punch , awl and razor ; fragments 
from weapons , and a wide range of ornaments including 
pins , rings and discs . The most interesting discovery was 
20 miniature axes ( Waddington 2007 ; Figure 1 . 4 )  . This 
assemblage was a very unexpected discovery as , until recent 
reporting through the Portable Antiquities Scheme , only 
a small quantity of miniature axes had been discovered , 
mostly from Wiltshire ( Robinson 1995 )  . These were thought 
to date to the Iron Age or Roman period , and a Late Bronze 
Age date was unexpected . 
This is a truly exceptional site and is currently without 
parallel in the region . Sites producing Post Deverel-Rimbury 
Decorated Wares are very unusual , bone assemblages 
seldom survive , glass beads are unknown , and copper 
alloy objects are rare and seldom found on settlement sites . 
Most West Midlands finds assemblages fit a single box ( see
Dalwood , this volume )  . The site is best interpreted as an 
important meeting place , where people gathered together 
to exchange material culture , animals and perhaps people , 
and to undertake significant ritual acts , the most noticeable
of which was the conspicuous and wasteful deposition of 
large quantities of material culture . The location is relatively 
inconspicuous and , though the Stour valley might be an 
important route connecting the West Midlands to the Thames 
Valley , there seems little intrinsic reason why this location 
was chosen . 
The exploration of the settlement at Whitchurch 
demonstrates that new discoveries will transform our 
understanding of the region . The recent discovery of an 
Iron Age road at Sharpstone Hill ( Shropshire ; Malim 
and Hayes 2010 )  , as well as the discovery of a sword 
scabbard in the nearby Late Iron Age enclosure at Meole 
Brace ( Bain and Evans 2011 )  , and of large coin hoards 
at Pershore ( Worcestershire ; Hurst and Leins 2013 )  , 
Fig . 1 . 3 Whitchurch , Warwickshire . Trench 6 excavated . 
1 . Introduction : Westward on the high-hilled plains 7
would not have been predicted on the basis of previous 
work in the region and indicate the complexity of the 
archaeological record . The Portable Antiquities Scheme 
has also produced a surprising number of finds that
challenge the accepted view that the West Midlands is 
impoverished ( Bolton , this volume )  . It should also be 
remembered that Staffordshire is one of the few areas 
of Britain outside East Anglia which has produced gold 
torcs , such as at Glascote ( Painter 1971 )  . 
Conclusion
The West Midlands is one of the least understood regions 
of Later Prehistoric Britain . It does not generally have 
the long tradition of intensive antiquarian research that 
illuminates areas such as Wessex and Yorkshire , but nor 
does it have the intensive developer-funded excavations that 
have transformed our understanding of the East Midlands 
and South-East England in recent years . Nevertheless , it is 
clear that there is rich and interesting archaeology waiting 
to be discovered and that the region has the potential to 
make a major contribution to our understanding of many 
of the key problems in Later Prehistory . A considerable 
amount of work is required and whilst some of it may be 
undertaken as developer-funded archaeology , this is unlikely 
to provide all the answers . Targeted research excavations are 
an urgent necessity , and it is unclear where the resources 
for these projects will be located . They are likely to require 
partnerships between universities , local communities and 
professional organisations to be successful . 