Colombia moves to salvage immense treasure from sunken Spanish galleon
By Tom Metcalfe published 17 days ago

The treasure is estimated to be worth about $17 billion today . 

The Colombian government has fired a legal broadside against rival claimants for an immense treasure on a sunken Spanish galleon , with a presidential decree calling for salvage companies to register to recover it . 

Earlier this month , the Colombian government announced that salvagers would have to submit a detailed inventory of everything they found on the San José shipwreck , which was discovered near the Colombian coast in 2015 , Agence France-Presse reported . 

British warships sank the San José more than 300 years ago , when it was laden with roughly 200 tons ( 180 metric tons ) of gold , silver and jewels — a treasure estimated to be worth about $17 billion today — destined for France , which was then allied with the Spanish royal court . The sea battle resulted in the galleon — and its treasure — sinking somewhere near the Barú Peninsula , south of Cartagena , Colombia . 

Spain says the San José was a Spanish ship of state when it was sunk , and so according to international conventions , Spain still owns everything on board . A Bolivian Indigenous group , the Qhara Qhara nation , is also claiming the treasure , saying the Spanish forced their ancestors to mine most of it in the 16th century . 

In 2018 , the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) advised Colombia not to " commercially exploit " — in other words , salvage — the shipwreck , but the latest move signals the intent of Colombia ' s government to salvage it anyway , according to the Associated Press . 

Treasure ship
According to the Spanish naval history website Todo a Babor (  " All to Port "  )  , the San José was a 62-gun galleon of the Spanish navy during the War of the Spanish Succession , a decade-long conflict that embroiled most of the major powers of Europe after the death of the childless Charles II of Spain in 1700 . 

At the end of May 1708 , the San José led a treasure fleet of three warships and 14 merchant vessels from Portobelo in Panama to Cartagena , where the ships planned to shelter during the approaching hurricane season . Both regions were then under Spanish colonial rule . 

An image from 2018 showing cannons from the San José on the seafloor . 

An image from 2018 showing cannons from the San José on the seafloor .  ( Image credit : Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution ) 
But the Spanish fleet was intercepted in early June 1708 near the Barú Peninsula by a British Royal Navy squadron of five warships . The ensuing battle was a complete victory for the British ; the San José exploded when its stores of gunpowder detonated , and it sank with almost 600 crewmembers and its treasure on board . In the early 1980s , a U . S . company called Sea Search Armada claimed to have located the San José shipwreck and proposed a deal to the Colombian government to share the treasure , National Geographic reported . But the government declined to give permission for the shipwreck ' s salvage ; a lawsuit by the company was eventually overturned in a U . S . court . 

In 2015 , the Colombian government announced that its navy had located the San José shipwreck at a different location . According to the BBC , Colombia passed a law in 2013 proclaiming that all shipwrecks in its waters are part of the country ' s national heritage , and the government estimates that there are up to 1 , 200 such wrecks . 

Related : Stunning photos capture eerie underwater shipwrecks

Shipwreck search
The Colombian navy discovered the San José shipwreck in part thanks to a seafloor search by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution ( WHOI )  , a private research and educational nonprofit based in Massachusetts . 

Rob Munier , WHOI ' s vice president for marine facilities and operations , told Live Science that the institution was contracted for the search by a British maritime archaeology company , which itself had contracted to the Colombian government . WHOI scientists and engineers made more than two trips to the region over several months , searching with the institution ' s REMUS 6000 autonomous underwater vehicle ( AUV )  , Munier said .  ( In 2011 , WHOI ' s REMUS 6000 had been used to find the wreckage of the downed airliner Air France 447 off the coast of Brazil .  ) 

The AUV first searched with side scan sonar equipment , which creates a three-dimensional image of swaths of the seafloor , and it found the San José wreck at a depth of about 2 , 000 feet ( 600 meters )  . For the later investigations , the AUV ' s sonar equipment was replaced with cameras to capture images . Very little sea life had grown on the shipwreck during its 300 years underwater , partly because of its depth , and so its distinctive cannons and other artifacts were still clearly visible , Munier said . 

For now , the wreck of the San José and its multibillion-dollar treasure lie on the seafloor off the Colombian coast , and no physical steps have been taken to salvage it . The government estimates it will cost about $70 million to salvage what it calls a " national treasure ,  " and it wants it put on display in a museum to be built in Cartagena , according to AFP . 

Originally published on Live Science . 