Tarrant Launceston: Survey and excavation of a long barrow with 
secondary burial on Race Down
HARRY P MANLEY, DAMIAN EVANS, IAIN HEWITT, PATRICIA PHURPHY, MILES 
RUSSELL AND KATE WELHAM
Bournemouth University
Abstract
In March 2003, it was noted that rabbit burrowing had uncovered possible human remains 
close to the centre of Race Down long barrow. In order to determine whether the bones were
human and/or of forensic interest, the School of Conservation Sciences (now the Department 
of Archaeology, Anthropology & Forensic Science), Bournemouth University, carried out a 
limited investigation on behalf of Dorset Police and the landowner, Defence Estates. The spoil 
heap of the rabbit burrow was excavated and this process revealed other displaced human 
bones, including long bones. A human osteologist examined the recovered bones and 
determined that the disturbed remains were human and ancient. Consequently, Dorset Police 
concluded that, although the bones were human, they would not be carrying out a criminal 
investigation due to the antiquity of the remains. 
In March 2004, a small excavation team from Bournemouth University returned to the site to 
fully recover any in situ human remains, together with recording the burial context and 
stratigraphy. A wider topographic survey of the long barrow was also carried out. This paper 
reports on the results of this field survey and excavation.
 
Site Location & Description
Race Down neolithic long barrow (a designated Scheduled Ancient Monument; No. 86/33578)
is situated on the eastern side of Race Down (NGR ST 92940884), part of a chalk ridge 
which runs parallel with the River Tarrant (Figure 1; Plate 1). It is the only long barrow listed 
by L.V. Grinsell occurring within the parish of Tarrant Launceston (1959, 81), although 
another long barrow occurs 800m to the northwest in the neighbouring parish of Tarrant 
Hinton (Telegraph Clump Long Barrow; NGR: ST 92280933). The Royal Commission on 
Historical Monuments surveyed the barrow in the 1970s and recorded it as being 35m long 
and 15m wide (1977, 106). It was possibly opened in 1840 by JH Austen, who found an 
extended inhumation 0.75m from the top that was interpreted as an intrusive deposit (i.e.
post-dating the construction of the long barrow) (Grinsell 1959, 81).
Figure 1: Location of Race Down long barrow also showing location of Neolithic and Bronze 
Age barrows on either side of the Tarrant valley.
Plate 1: Race Down long barrow looking west. Note the stumps from recent tree felling.
Plate 2: Rabbit burrow spoil heap on top of long barrow.
Cartographic evidence indicates that the place name “Race Down” is derived from the use of 
the ridge plateau, where the monument is located, as a racetrack for horses. However, by 
1880 the race track appears to have become disused and a rifle range had been established 
on the southern flank of the ridge (Ordnance Survey, 1888). Dudley Stamp's 1930s Land 
Utilisation Survey (1935) shows the monument within a coniferous woodland plantation, but 
by the mid-twentieth century barracks of Blandford (Army) Camp surrounded it (Ordnance 
Survey, 1961). The barracks were later demolished (Ordnance Survey, 1976) although 
remnants of the conifer trees were only removed from the summit of the long barrow at the 
beginning of the twenty-first century (authors’ field observations). 
Excavation
The aim of the archaeological investigation was to determine the date, circumstances of 
deposition, and the context of the inhumation that was first observed as having been 
disturbed by rabbit burrowing at Race Down long barrow in March 2003 (Plates 1 and 2).
A 2m x 3m trench was located over the partially exposed bones on the south-western flank of 
the long barrow (Figure 2). Approximately 0.08m of topsoil (context 001) overlay the outer 
shell of the barrow that comprised a degraded chalk layer (context 002). The chalk layer had
a maximum thickness of 0.45m and was cut by feature 001, interpreted as a roughly 
rectangular grave. Orientated east-west, the grave (F001) was 2.0m long, 0.65m wide, with a 
maximum depth of 0.45m (Figure 3). The grave (F001) contained one inhumation burial, 
extended west-east (with the head to the west). The entire left side of the skeleton was 
missing, having been disturbed by rabbit burrowing (Figure 4). No other artefacts were 
recovered although an iron stain considered to be the remains of a knife was noted adjacent 
to the right femur. The grave cut extended down into a layer consisting of silty clay loam
(context 004) interpreted as barrow matrix which had been highly disturbed by rabbit 
burrowing (Figure 5). The skeletal material was recovered and taken to Bournemouth 
University for further analysis and conservation.
Figure 2: Location of excavation trench.
Figure 3: Cross-section of grave cut. Drawn at 1:10 scale.
Figure 4: Plan of grave showing skeletal remains and rabbit disturbance. Drawn at 1:10 
scale.
Figure 5: Schematic interpretation of grave fill. Drawn at 1:10 scale.
Topographic Survey
The long barrow and its immediate vicinity were surveyed using a Leica SR530 differential 
Global Positioning System (GPS). Nearly 2000 unique topographic points (each with a threedimensional accuracy of ±3cm) were collected in WGS84 format and were later converted to 
British National Grid coordinates (OSGB36) using Ordnance Survey RINEX data. The 
resulting data were gridded and interpolated in Golden Software Surfer V.8 to produce a 3D 
surface plot (Figure 6).
The results of the topographic survey indicate that the barrow was constructed on a northwest / south-east orientation. It is approximately 2m high, 37 m long and has a maximum 
width of 17m, which tapers to a width of 13m at the north-west end (Figures 7, 8 and 9). The 
shape and size conform to the group of long barrows commonly referred to as trapezoidal (or 
“wedge” shaped), where the wider end faces roughly east, an alignment that is assumed to 
have cosmological implications (Field 2006, 69). The profile along the barrow length indicates 
that the south-eastern end is the higher, a general pattern recognised in other trapezoidal 
barrows (Ashbee 1984, 19), and possibly emphasising the importance of the eastern end of 
the barrow. Along the south-western side of the barrow a shallow ditch could be seen. The 
ditch did not show on the opposite length, although the ground surface is generally lower 
here. This is probably the remains of the quarry ditch that was dug at the time of the long 
barrow’s construction and since then has been gradually backfilled by natural and / or 
anthropogenic activity. Without further excavation little more can be determined. 
Figure 6: Interpreted topographic surface elevation plot.
Figure 7: Longitudinal profile of long barrow (NE to SW).
Figure 8: Cross-section profile across long barrow (NW end, W to E).
Figure 9: Cross section profile across long barrow (SE end, W to E).
Race Down is one of thirty-six long barrows collectively known as the Cranborne Chase group 
which stretches for approximately 20 miles across the chalk upland of Dorset and Wiltshire 
(Ashbee 1984, 9). This group of long barrows is peculiar as within it the dominant barrow 
orientation is north-west / south-east, whereas of the other long barrows found in Britain, 
more than four-fifths are orientated east-west (or within 45° of this). Race Down long barrow, 
situated at the south-western end of the Cranborne Chase group, fits this anomalous pattern, 
possibly the result of the barrow being located on the interfluvial ridge between the Tarrant 
and Stour river valleys.
In its wider landscape context, Race Down long barrow is situated towards the south-eastern 
end of a chalk ridge that runs for approximately 8 km inland between the River Stour and 
River Tarrant. The ground surface drops away immediately to the east of the long barrow (on 
about the 108m contour line) with the barrow orientated parallel with this break of slope. It is 
unclear from the survey if this is a localised change in height, but evidence from Ordnance 
Survey contour data indicates that the barrow is located where there is a general topographic 
change from the ridge top to the valley side. Gale (2003, 34-35) has noted the vast majority of 
long barrows are found on, or slightly to one side of, ridges allowing them to dominate the 
landscape and be seen from long distances away. Woodward (2000, 138-139) has studied 
the landscape positions of long barrows on the South Dorset Ridgway, and has suggested 
that varying angles of inter-visibility between different long barrows and other contemporary 
monuments could have played an important role in the siting and ceremonial use of the 
monuments. Further analysis of the barrow’s relationship with the natural topographic and 
other contemporary monuments is outside the scope of this paper, but may provide useful 
insights as part of a future research project.
Skeletal analysis and dating
The skeletal remains were analysed by Dr Patricia Phurphy. Approximately 50% of the 
skeleton was present within the burial context with much of the left side of the remains 
missing (with the exception of the left hand and the distal radius). The majority of the remains 
suffered post-mortem damage in the form of breaks and loss of bone around the right knee 
and foot which appears to be as a result of animal activity.
Skeletal analysis indicated that one individual was represented within the burial, aged 
between 10-11 years at time of death. Estimating the sex of the individual was not possible as 
the dimorphism between males and females occurs around the time of puberty and this 
individual has not yet reached that stage of development.
There was no indication from the bones recovered of the cause or manner of death, and there 
is no indication of pathology or disease. Trauma was, however, noted on the first metacarpal 
of the right hand in the form of an ante-mortem fracture. A 2cm region of new bone growth 
and callus formation was seen on the midshaft of the metacarpal, consistent with healing 
(Roberts and Manchester 2001) causing the bone to look slightly swollen on the lateral 
section when compared with the left metacarpal. The fracture may have occurred as a result 
of direct force to the specific location of the hand, a fall, or an underlying pathology which 
weakened the bone making it more susceptible to fractures (Ortner 2003). 
A sample of clavicle was submitted for C14 dating by Rafter GNS Science, New Zealand, 
using an Accelerator Mass Spectrometer. The result, 1511 ±20 BP, (NZA-32571) calibrates 
to cal AD 440-610 at the 95% confidence limit (2∂), and cal AD 530-610 at the 90% 
confidence limit. The result was calibrated using the curve of Reimer et al. (2004) used in 
OxCal v4.05 (Bronk Ramsey 1995; 2001). The calibrated date range cited in the text is that 
for 95% confidence and is rounded outwards to the nearest 10 years following the form 
recommended by Mook (1986). The ranges given are derived from the probability method 
(Stuiver & Reimer, 1993). The radiocarbon probability distribution clearly shows the result is 
more likely to be the second half of the sixth century AD.
Discussion
The radiocarbon date of the skeleton and the possible association with an iron knife indicate
that the inhumation was an Anglo-Saxon (early medieval) secondary insertion into the earlier, 
neolithic, long barrow. There was no evidence that the grave had been opened before and it 
is therefore unlikely that the inhumation is the one discovered by Austen in 1840 (Grinsell 
1959, 81). As such, it appears that the long barrow has at least two intrusive inhumations.
The west / east orientation of the grave and the supine position of the skeleton are typical of 
Anglo-Saxon burial practice, and knives are near-ubiquitous items in ‘Anglo–Saxon’ furnished 
graves of all periods (Lucy, 2000, 58). The poor preservation of the knife is unfortunate as no 
comments can be made on its typology.
The re-use of neolithic monuments is rare, with only thirteen examples known in the country 
(Lucy 2000, 126), three of which occur in Dorset (Grinsell 1959 & 1982). A close parallel 
exists with the neolithic bank barrow at Maiden Castle, from which Tess and Mortimer 
Wheeler exhumed a skeleton tentatively dated to the late 6th century (Wheeler 1948, 78-79). 
In both the Race Down and Maiden Castle cases, the skeletons were buried in shallow 
graves, with the head to the west. The burial at Maiden Castle was accompanied by a seax
(or long knife), also located adjacent to the thigh. A second skeleton recovered from the 
Maiden Castle bank barrow, initially thought to date from the neolithic, but radiocarbon dated 
to 1345 +- 80 BP (c. AD 635), was also excavated by the Wheelers (Wheeler 1948, 78-79). 
This skeleton, which was male, 1.63m tall and aged between 25 and 35 at death had 
evidence of extreme trauma on the head, face, right arm and lower body. Brothwell (1971, 
240) suggested that these wounds either caused the individual’s death, or were inflicted 
immediately post-mortem, and were perhaps the result of superstitions about the dead and 
fear of the supernatural. No evidence of trauma was identified on the skeleton recovered from 
Race Down so further inferences cannot be made about the death or burial rite of this 
particular individual.
More common is the re-use of Bronze Age barrows for Anglo-Saxon burials and Lucy (2000, 
126) calculates a total of 140 examples nationwide. Three kilometres to the east of Race 
Down, on the other side of the River Tarrant, excavation of a number of round barrows on 
Launceston Down revealed the presence of seven ‘Anglo-Saxon’ burials, these being
identified as belonging to a distinct group of burial sites within north-east Dorset dating to the 
sixth and seventh centuries (Piggott and Piggott, 1944, 47-80; Green et. al., 1983, 57; Eagles, 
2004). Green et. al. (1982) viewed the burials on Launceston Down as family groupings, and 
if the skeleton recorded by JH Austen (Grinsell 1959, 81) at Race Down is assumed to be a 
secondary intrusive burial, taken together the two may be interpreted as being part of a family 
group.
Evison (1968) has argued that these burial sites, together with others found at Bokerley Dyke 
and Woodyates, represent the western limit of the group of pagan Saxons centred in the Avon 
Valley and Salisbury area. Eagles (2004) has suggested that the evidence now points to an 
Anglo-Saxon (early medieval) ‘bite’ into former Durotrigian lands west and south west of 
Bokerley Dyke that occurred during the sixth century, penetrating along both Ackling Dyke 
and the River Stour. The late sixth century date and location of the Race Down burial on the 
interfluvial ridge between the Stour and Tarrant rivers probably makes it part of this 
hypothesised intrusion and associated burial culture.
The re-use of prehistoric earthworks for early medieval inhumations is characterised by two 
different themes. Smith and Brickley (2009) suggest that structures such as long and round 
barrows were regarded as fearful or otherworldly places and where the socially excluded 
might be placed. As such, they may have been used for the burial of execution victims, such 
as the skeleton recovered from Maiden Castle (Brothwell, 1971, 240). Reynolds has noted 
that two thirds of known execution sites of the early medieval period are associated with 
prehistoric or post-Roman barrows, the remainder being located upon linear earthworks 
(1999, 108). All excavated sites appear to have been positioned on boundaries, presumably 
reflecting the desire to banish outcasts to the geographical limit of a specific territory, in 
places, such as prehistoric barrows, that afforded a commanding view within sight of 
important road or river (Reynolds 1999, 109). Williams (1997; 1998) has argued that the 
practice of placing burials in existing earthworks is a way legitimising an immigrant
community’s ancestral links to the distant past, and Bonney (1976) has suggested that pagan 
Anglo-Saxon burials occur on, or near to, boundaries of estates or parishes possibly in the 
hope of causing such boundaries to receive protection by the spirits of the dead.
The skeletal remains recovered from Race Down long barrow appear to be an early medieval
interment probably dating from the second half of the sixth century. These types of 
interments are rare in neolithic monuments, with few other scientifically dated examples 
known. Further work may involve the commissioning of a project to scientifically date other 
secondary interments recovered from prehistoric monuments to determine when they were 
buried and to try and to further our understanding of this burial practice. 