Acknowledgements
The work presented here has benefited from the assistance of many people.
Land owners and managers, Mark Havler (Surrey Wildlife Trust Ranger for Whitmoor 
Common, Worplesdon), Peter Creasey, then National Trust Warden for Mickleham 
Downs), Richard Osgood (Ministry of Defence archaeologist for the Salisbury Plain 
Training Area), Des Lambert (Plumpton Agricultural College), Jeremy West (Balmer 
Farm), Simon Ward (West Dean Estates), Dave Mercer and Katherine Birch (Wardens for 
Kingley Vale National Nature Reserve), Ray Ellis (Lullington Farm), Malcolm Emery 
(Manager for East Sussex National Nature Reserves), Tim Beech (Warden for Lullington 
Heath National Nature Reserve), Tracey Younghusband (South East Water Company), 
Peter Nye (Erringham Farm), Pauline Harris and David Allen (Freshcombe and 
Summersdeane Farms) have facilitated access to the land under their care.
Information from Historic Environment Records and Portable Antiquities Scheme
databases has been provided by Alex Godden (Hampshire County Council), Emily Brandt 
(Surrey County Council), Greg Chuter (East Sussex County Council) and Ian Scrivener 
Lindley (Chichester District Council). Transcriptions of aerial photographic evidence were 
given by Dave Field and Edward Carpenter (English Heritage) and Greg Chuter (East 
Sussex County Council).
Mike Allen gave advice on re-interpretation of old molluscan reports, Richard Macphail on 
soil microstructure and Mike Seager Thomas on prehistoric pottery, whilst members of the 
Prehistoric Group of the Surrey Archaeological Society confirmed identification of worked 
flints. Mike Allen and Richard Madgwick allowed use of unpublished data and Cyril 
Marcigny discussed dating of field systems in Normandy.
Advice, guidance and a level of control over what was in danger of becoming an open 
ended project, were given and exercised by my academic supervisors Peter Drewett and 
2
David Rudling. Encouragement and shared enthusiasm for the subject, together with 
valued advice and discussion were available whenever needed from Dave Field and Dave 
McOmish; Julie Wileman could be relied on to make me justify any argument other that the 
purely pragmatic, and also exercised editorial control; Martin Welch and Dennis Turner 
added non-prehistorians’ view points and the latter exercised exactly the right degree of 
pressure to ensure timely completion.
A number of individuals helped with the fieldwork, Geoff Stonehouse, Pauline Hulse, Alan 
Hall, Jen Newell and Rose Hooker undertook survey and excavation on Whitmoor 
Common and the last two named also helped in Kingley Vale and on Plumpton Plain. 
Excavation on Plumpton Plain also involved David Millum and Peter ‘Dozer’ Miller.
But above all, the unstinted gifts of skill and time, plus informed discussion and unending 
good humour, received from David Lea and Dick Tapper made this project both possible 
and enjoyable.
To all these, and to any whom I have inadvertently omitted, my most grateful thanks.
3
Chapter 1
Introduction
4
1.1 The origins of agriculture in Britain
There is a fundamental transformation in a cosmology governing the relationship between 
man and the land which he inhabits when an economy based on understanding and 
exploiting non-domesticated species changes to one of tending stock and crops. It is now 
thought that the indigenous population adopted new ideas, a new subsistence economy and 
a new world view, motivated either by social competition or by a need to alleviate pressure 
on resources (Whittle 1999, 63). In the south-east at least, the possession of prestige 
artefacts appears before firm evidence of farming (Holgate 2004), and early dating of flint 
mines on the South Downs suggests exploitation and participation in exchange networks 
during the 5th millennium BC (Barber et al 1999). There appears to be some evidence of 
minor manipulations of the environment by man before this time in the form of clearance 
(Simmons 1969; Evans 1999, 36-37), although the likelihood that this represents deliberate 
burning of trees has been challenged on the basis that British deciduous woodland is 
relatively non-flammable (Rackham 1986, 71). However, simply burning the under-storey 
at the right season would encourage growth of tender shoots and ground cover attractive to 
browsing animals thus bringing them to a known locale and facilitating the hunt; such 
burning may occur naturally (Zvelebil 1994; Moore 1997) and it has been suggested that 
the production of clearings by burning, whether intentional or not, would change man’s 
perception of the woodland from ‘wildwood’ to a partially tamed environment (Tacon 
1999, 51). At Iping Common, West Sussex, for example, pollen analysis suggests the 
brown earth covering of the greensand had begun to deteriorate, probably due to human 
activity, and possibly by the end of the 5th millennium BC (Keef et al 1965). Similarly at 
West Heath, West Sussex, burning of pine and hazel precipitated development of a 
heathland vegetation (Scaife 1985, 21).
The gradual change from such use of shifting clearings with their amplified opportunities 
for both hunting prey and gathering less mobile food resources, to shifting agriculture, still 
combined with hunting, may have done less to change man’s perceived relationship with 
his environment than the introduction of strange species of both plants and animals. 
5
Domesticated crop and stock species, with the knowledge of farming techniques, spread 
across north-west Europe taking some six millennia to reach Britain from the Middle East 
(Cunliffe 2008, 88-112). While the exact method by which such knowledge spread is much 
debated the presence of the sea crossing between Britain and Continental Europe would 
have necessitated the transmission of more than ideas and, indeed, recent investigations into 
the genetic make-up of the modern British population indicate the presence of small 
numbers of individuals carrying alleles derived from Middle Eastern ancestors of 
approximately 6,000 years ago (Chilkhi et al 2002). Analysis of ancient deoxyribonucleic 
acid (DNA) has shown little continuity between Mesolithic and Neolithic peoples – people 
came with their seeds and livestock – but also that, in Central Europe at least, early farmers 
are not the direct ancestors of modern Europeans (Bramanti et al 2009). Whilst the study 
of ancient DNA as an indicator of population movement, rather than examining the 
ancestry of individuals, is in its infancy, some people clearly moved. The context of that 
movement and the sea routes used is much debated (for example Cummings & Harris 2011; 
Sheridan 2011) but evidence from radiocarbon dates from agricultural sites suggests early 
foci around the Solent area of central southern Britain and the Central Lowlands of 
Scotland (Collard et al 2009).
The time period over which agriculture came to be adopted is a subject of much debate and 
seems to vary in different areas of north-west Europe. 
In Ireland a ‘package’ of substantial houses, cereal production and stock rearing appears 
together with a remarkably early, and reliably dated field system, at Céide Fields in the 
west of the country (Molloy & O’Connell 1995; Cooney 2000). Here, a series of fields 
extending over more than 1km2 with a main axis aligned north east / south west has been 
dated by approximately 50 radiocarbon samples from the peat overlying the stone walls, 
and confirmed by dendrochronological dating of wood from within that peat, to about 
3700BC. However, these are large enclosures and may relate to stock management rather 
than to agriculture (Cooney 2000). Neolithic fields have also been identified at Scord of 
Brouster on Shetland (Whittle 1986).
6
This relatively rapid change to an agricultural economy is also found in northern Britain. 
Obtaining land for crop growing may have required greater clearance of existing woodland 
or scrub than had occurred previously and, despite the doubts expressed above it is 
probable that this was achieved by ‘slash and burn’ techniques which left, as evidence, 
charcoal on Neolithic land surfaces, for example that buried beneath a long barrow at 
Daladies, Angus (Romans & Robertson 1975) although clearance of the land specifically 
for barrow construction cannot be ruled out. Analysis of the soil structure of palaeosoils 
sealed beneath a henge monument and of cultivation ridges sealed under a mound at 
Strathallan, Perthshire (Barclay 1983) has been interpreted as indicating Neolithic use of an 
ard in the former context and hoe in the latter (Romans & Robertson 1983). 
The agency through which this fundamental change took place in northern Britain is 
thought to be settlement from overseas, a similar situation to that in parts of Europe, and to 
have been part of a continuum of spread and adoption by indigenous cultures (Whittle 
1996, chapters 6 & 7).
In southern Britain, by contrast, change seems to have taken place over an extended period 
of time and large monuments to the dead appear in the early centuries of the 4th millennium 
BC (Whittle et al 2007). There is more evidence of continuing use of wild resources and 
stock management may have been practised before arable farming. Evidence for both cross 
ploughing using an ard and a phase of spade digging have also been found on the chalk 
surface sealed beneath the South Street long barrow (Ashbee et al 1979), and both here and 
at Beckhampton Road long barrow recurrent, piecemeal cultivation, a ‘routine’ activity, 
was followed by a shift to ‘special’ use of the loci and eventual construction of burial 
mounds (Pollard 2005). Also located beneath the long barrow at South Street was a row of 
stake holes, possibly indicative of a fence and, if so, one of the few examples of a boundary 
constructed during the first centuries of farming activity (Ashbee et al 1979). It is possible 
that the linear arrangement of sarsens found beneath the same long barrow should be 
interpreted as resulting from clearance and thus, effectively, also as a field boundary 
(McOmish 2005).
7
Here it is considered that indigenous peoples adopted farming through acculturation across 
an agricultural frontier moving north from across the Channel (Fischer 2002). It is however 
worth stressing that within this model domesticated plants and animals, and the orally 
transmitted knowledge surrounding their successful use, must also have travelled. 
Early evidence for agriculture in north-west Europe comes from a series of examples of ard 
mark survival, particularly in Denmark where some 175m2
of marks were located beneath a 
dolmen mound at Snave near Dreslette and dated to between 3700 and 3500BC (Bakker 
1979, 141-145). 
The apparent rarity of constructed earthwork boundaries to fields at this time may relate to 
their impermanent nature, failure to maintain fertility by use of manuring necessitating the 
breaking in of new ground when yields on the old fell. Either the labour involved was not 
considered worthwhile or, more likely, the sense of ownership of a particular area was 
reflected in the permanence of monuments rather than areas of food production. Early 
monument types, long barrows and causewayed enclosures represent a considerable labour 
investment and their construction over previously cultivated ground, as at South Street and 
Beckhampton Road, adds cogency to the suggestion that clearings, used temporarily for 
agriculture, were made permanent by being monumentalised (Brown 2000).
However limited, the use of any individual cleared area during the 4th and 3rd millennia BC 
saw the start of a fundamental, and in some cases irrevocable, alteration to the structure of 
certain fragile soils and the ecosystem. Tillage beneath the long cairn at Hazleton 
(Gloucestershire), for example, on a soil with poor structural stability caused slaking 
(Macphail 1990). At Rackham in West Sussex, the process of podzolisation had been 
initiated by 2000 ± 140bc after a period of clearance and activity not, on the evidence 
found, including cereal production (Dimbleby & Bradley, 1975). At South Street, near 
Avebury, arable land became infested with weeds and, more seriously, bracken began to 
infiltrate, and it may have been that this led to abandonment of the area for agricultural 
purposes and its use for long barrow construction about 2800bc (Smith 1984). It has been 
suggested that early farmers enjoyed a period of high crop yields which gradually declined 
8
as weeds, pests and diseases evolved to occupy the ecological niche provided by agriculture 
(Dark & Gent, 2001). Baysian dating of long barrows places their construction, use and 
abandonment within a relatively short period in the Early Neolithic (Bayliss & Whittle 
2007), a flourishing of activity possibly enabled by these high yields. Whilst shifting 
agriculture undoubtedly altered soil structure in some areas, recent work has challenged the 
view that Britain was covered in climax woodland during the earlier Holocene and that, 
therefore, the country was covered with thick, well-structured argillic brown earths. On 
parts of Cranborne Chase in Dorset, only thin brown earths developed and these were 
reduced to thin rendzinas by the Late Neolithic (French et al 2003) and a similar mosaic of 
varying thicknesses of fertile soils also existed in the Dorchester area (Allen 1997) and on 
the Marlborough Downs around Avebury (Allen 2005). The changes initiated in this 
period would have remained visible in terms of soil texture and vegetation – an indication 
of past activity recognised and understood by those who came later.
1.2 The genesis of field systems and their geographical occurrence
The reasons underlying the development of systems of fields defined by visible boundaries 
during the 2nd millennium BC is a matter of much debate. What is certain is that many 
thousands of hectares of land, in most of the country, were so marked and the appearance of 
the farming landscape changed for ever. Early surveyors recognised the standing remains 
of field systems and also their considerable age. William Stukeley (1724) writing of the 
interior of Ogbury hillfort, Wilts noted:
‘within it are many little banks, carry’d strait and meeting one another at 
right angles, square, oblong parallels and some oblique, as the meres and 
divisions between plow’d lands; yet it seems never to have been plow’d’
and on Cranborne Chase:
‘I frequently observed on the sides of hills long divisions very strait 
crossing one another with all kinds of angle; ….. made of flint oregrown 
9
with turf; they are too small for plow’d lands, unless of the most ancient 
Britons, who dealt little that way’
On Dartmoor field workers debated the identity of the reaves but their potential role as land 
divisions and considerable age came early here also (Baring-Gould 1900):
‘It is very probable that the long tracklines that extend over hill and vale 
on Dartmoor indicate tribal boundaries, limits beyond which the cattle of 
one clan might not feed. Some of these lines, certainly of the age of the 
Neolithic men of the hut circles, may be traced for miles’.
Similar extensive field systems came to be known as ‘Celtic’ (Crawford 1923; Curwen & 
Curwen 1923) in the mistaken belief that they originated in the Iron Age. They are now 
divided by many authors into two types on the basis of their morphology; coaxial (Fleming 
1987) or terrain oblivious systems comprise a grid based on a consistent axis and regardless 
of the underlying topography, whilst aggregated or agglomerated systems comprise 
irregular clusters of variably shaped fields. Both types may occur in the same area and, 
where an association allowing relative dating is found, in the great majority of cases the 
aggregated system is seen to post-date the co-axial (Fleming 1988, 101; McOmish et al 
2002, 56). This division may come to be seen as an oversimplification but for convenience, 
the terms will be used in this brief overview. Whilst in no way comprehensive, examples 
have been selected which indicate both the breadth of research which has been undertaken 
and also the complexities revealed and the questions unanswered.
Since their first modern identification on Dartmoor (Fleming 1978; 1983) coaxial field 
systems have been recognised in many parts of the country. However, only where large 
areas of fields can be observed can their morphological type be classified with any 
certainty. The methods involved, analytical survey or aerial photographic transcription, 
require a level of survival found only in areas where the land has been considered 
agriculturally marginal at least throughout the post-medieval period, and where remains 
have not been obliterated either by colluviation, alleviation or modern development. 
10
Recognition of such large entities within the necessarily limited exposure of excavated 
trenches is problematic and, whilst small areas with parallel boundaries are often 
interpreted as part of a coaxial system, only when large areas are exposed as at Heathrow 
Terminal 5 (Framework Archaeology 2006; 2010) or Peacehaven (Hart forthcoming) can 
this identification be accepted. These problems have resulted in an apparent bias of 
distribution away from lowlands and valleys where later land-use and PPG16 developer 
funded excavations are the norm, towards upland areas.
The first upland areas to be considered are the granite moors of the south-west where 
acidity and altitude have combined to produce an infertile ‘rab’, often covered with peat. 
Since the prehistoric period they have been primarily used for rough grazing, a typical 
‘zone of preservation’ (Taylor 1972). The reaves on Dartmoor cover several thousand 
hectares but, whilst early interpretations of the extent and apparent single phase 
construction of these coaxial systems (Fleming 1978) attempted to understand their genesis 
in terms of the development of social hierarchies, and a growing importance of land 
ownership, more recent work has emphasised a continuum of evolution (Johnston 2005). 
Excavation of the Saddlesborough terminal reave on Shaugh Moor has shown that what 
appears as a single boundary can have a complex and extended biography (Smith et al
1981), and adaptation of existing field systems as economic and socio-political priorities 
changed is common. Similar results, only available as preliminary data, have been obtained 
from excavation of part of the reave system on Shovel Down (Brück 2003). Pollen analysis 
and radiocarbon dating show something of the complex history of human activity on 
Shaugh Moor (Balaam et al 1982) and calibration of dates from Shaugh Moor which relate 
to phases of activity during the use of the boundary bracket the period 2140-1260BC 
(Johnston 2005). The area of the Saddlesborough reave had been used for grazing, but then 
abandoned, prior to woodland clearance and construction of the reave. The land had then 
been used as rough grazing with very little evidence of arable production. Although dating 
evidence was not obtained, the authors speculate, on the basis of the rate of deposition of 
peat, that this grazing period lasted for about 200 years after which the area degenerated 
into heathland (Balaam et al 1982).
11
A similar pattern on Wotter Common, close-by, produced a radiocarbon date of c1450 ± 
70bc for the woodland clearance phase, whilst a similar phase at Lee Moor gave dates 
between 1560 ± 80 and 1230 ± 80bc. It is notable that none of the pollen columns analysed 
indicated more than occasional, episodic cereal production. Settlement sites on Shovel 
Down and Kestor give indirect dating for adjacent field systems early in the 2nd millennium 
BC (Wainwright & Smith 1980) and association with Trevisker ware pottery suggests dates 
after c. 1700BC (Needham 1996; Parker Pearson 1990).
On Exmoor coaxial systems survive primarily in the central portion of the moor. On 
Codsend and Hoar Moors situated on Middle and Upper Devonian sandstones, fragments of 
a coaxial system exist on the flanks of Dunkery Beacon (Pattison & Sainsbury 1989), and a 
similar system, with a main axis running north-east / south-west has been observed above 
Chetsford Water (McDonnell 1980).
On all the south-western moorland, at least partial abandonment occurred around the end of 
the 2nd millennium BC, possibly as a result of climatic deterioration leading to increased 
acidity of soils based mainly on granite bedrock, and the development of blanket bog. 
Given the general problem of dating the use of field systems, it is not usually possible to 
distinguish between continuity of activity and utilisation punctuated by hiati. However, on 
Shapley Common, Dartmoor, a timber house set on a platform cut into the hill-side was 
replaced by a smaller, simpler building in the Mid to Late Iron Age after a gap of at least a 
century (Gibson 1992). Other settlement sites on Dartmoor demonstrate later, but more 
ephemeral, occupation (for example Silvester 1979; Quinnell 1994) but this does not 
necessarily imply use of the field systems. Transhumance grazing is one option, and at 
Black Patch on the South Downs a similar situation pertains, with simple shelters, little 
more than windbreaks, being built around the grassed over and trampled depressions left by 
earlier, possibly ancestral, dwellings (Tapper forthcoming).
On St David’s Head, Pembrokeshire, a coaxial system predated the sinuous boundaries of 
an agglomerated system (Murphy 2001). Survey and excavation at Tulloch Wood, Forres 
12
in Moray has located a coaxial field system oriented north-west / south-east (Carter 1993). 
Radiocarbon dates provided a terminus post quem for their construction of between c1450 
and c1150bc.
At Behy / Glenulra in Ireland fields which appear on morphological grounds to be part of a 
coaxial system (Caulfield 1978, fig 19.1) have produced early dates. The parallel 
boundaries are aligned north-east / south-west but the area of the individual fields is some 
7ha, much larger than those found in Bronze Age contexts, and it has been suggested, on 
theoretical grounds, that such divisions might represent one stage in the evolution of 
coaxial systems (Fowler 1971, fig 26). Radiocarbon dating of the basal peat overlying the 
mineral soils on which the walls were built and of trees growing within the mineral soils 
range from 2270 to 1885bc. 
Coaxial systems have been widely recognised on chalk downland in southern Britain. 
Within the Salisbury Plain Training Area little of the higher land was ploughed during the 
medieval period and military ownership has protected the earthworks from the post-World 
War 2 agricultural onslaught. Here the earthworks are well preserved over wide areas 
(McOmish et al 2002, fig 3.1) with some of the lynchets up to 6m in height. The detailed 
surface survey undertaken allows some relative dating, and in all cases where the field 
systems come into spatial association with linear ditches, the latter post-date the former and 
the authors place the field systems contemporary with Deverel-Rimbury tradition pottery, 
between approximately 1500 and 1000BC. It has been noted that there appears to be a 
consistency of alignment between different blocks of fields with the main axis tending to lie 
between 26 and 30 degrees east of north – whilst there may be a pragmatic explanation for 
this observation its constancy over different portions of the topography of the chalk plateau 
may militate against this explanation (McOmish et al 2002, fig 3.4).
There also appears to be some consistency in the size of fields within each block with 
square fields of 25m2
to 50m2
in the centre of each block whilst those on the periphery are 
often elongated, possibly as a result of removing one or more cross banks. Work on 
Fyfield and Overton Downs west of Marlborough has suggested that the alignment of field 
systems changes with time (Fowler 2004). Here it is suggested that two phases with main 
13
axes lying between 15o
and 45o west of north date to the Early Bronze Age / Middle Bronze 
Age whilst those aligned north / south are Romano-British in origin. 
1.3 Field systems in detail
1.3.1 Coaxial field systems
The nature of the boundaries to these field systems varies both between and within 
geographical areas, but truncation, usually by modern ploughing, often precludes 
assessment of its original form. The reave system on Dartmoor was primarily constructed 
of stone blocks (Fleming 1978) and on Exmoor a similar situation pertains (Riley & 
Wilson-North 2001, 43). On Fyfield Down, near Marlborough, some boundaries 
comprised sarsens from field clearance which became the basis for lynchet formation 
(Bowen & Fowler 1962, 104-105). Lynchets, the most common visible form of field 
boundary, could also have formed against fences or hedges (Bowen 1961) or may have 
simply resulted from unploughed baulks, perhaps used as permanent pasture (Bowen 1978).
Lynchetted fields cover large areas of the chalk plateau of central Wessex (for example 
McOmish et al 2002, fig 3.1) and the South Downs at, for example, New Barn Down 
(Curwen 1934), Park Brow (Wolseley et al 1927, fig A) and Plumpton Plain (Holleyman & 
Curwen 1935).
On the Marlborough Downs opportunistic collection of artefacts, largely by Owen Meyrick, 
permits some dating of the settlements intimately associated with field systems (Meyrick 
1973). An extensive and intensive survey of the surviving earthworks of both coaxial and 
agglomerated field systems, and their accompanying settlement enclosures, has taken place 
and this allows for some relative dating (Gingell 1992). On Preshute Down the enclosure 
ditch for a small settlement produced Deverel-Rimbury pottery and could be seen to,
unusually, pre-date the adjacent, coaxial field system. By contrast, an enclosure on 
Ogbourne Mazey Down, which produced similarly dated pottery (Piggott 1942) post-dated 
a field system, its enclosure ditch truncating the lynchetted field boundaries. At South 
Lodge Camp, on Cranbourne Chase, the shape of an enclosure round a settlement 
producing Deverel-Rimbury pottery had been influenced by the field boundaries it overlay 
and therefore post-dated (Barrett et al 1991, 144-183).
14
In Sussex a number of field systems were surveyed as standing monuments before World 
War 2 and several of their accompanying settlements have been excavated. A pre-war 
survey of the downs around Brighton (Holleyman 1935) indicates a density at least equal to 
that on Marlborough Downs and Salisbury Plain Training Area in Wiltshire. The available 
aerial photographs are being transcribed as part of the National Mapping Programme 
(Simon Crutchley & Ed Carpenter pers comm.); any comments for this area must be seen as 
premature since small pilot studies show a considerable abundance and complexity of 
evidence.
One example of the potential of large scale excavation has taken place at Peacehaven, East 
Sussex where some 32ha have been examined in advance of development (Hart in prep). 
Two Neolithic pits were the only evidence relating to that period but a Middle Bronze Age / 
Late Bronze Age landscape indicating extensive use was revealed. The earliest feature 
found was a small pit which had been rapidly back-filled after deposition of a broken antler 
pick. A double ditched drove-way, running west / east along a low spur, was laid out with 
one ditch directly overlying the pit. A series of irregular rectilinear, fields were laid out on 
either side of the drove-way and among the fields were probably five settlement sites, 
characterised by storage pits, one of which contained peas (Pisum sativum), post-holes and 
roundhouses. The field system had several characteristics typical of stock management -
substantial ditched boundaries, several drove-ways forming cross-roads with settlement 
sites accessible from the droves, Y-gates and a race for separating groups of stock, and a 
gated entrance into a drove-way which ran between fields from a possible open grazing 
area. The main area was then apparently abandoned but a small section to the south-west 
was laid out with paddocks, enclosures and drove-ways in the Middle Iron Age. The results 
from extensive post-excavation analysis and a suite of radiocarbon dates are awaited.
Away from the chalk, heathlands, then supporting deciduous woodland with an understorey 
of grass and herbs growing in an argillaceous brown earth, would have appeared attractive 
to early farmers. On Yately Common, Hampshire fragmentary remains of a field system 
surveyed on military land may possibly be a coaxial system of prehistoric date (White 
15
2002). In Dorset, fieldwork in advance of development of the Wytch Farm Oilfield located 
a group of six parallel ditches, aligned north-north-west to south-south-east, of which five 
were fairly regularly spaced at 23 – 33m apart (Cox & Hearne 1991, 27-45). They were 
situated on Bagshot Beds (here known as Poole Formation) and finds of carbonised plant 
remains included barley (Hordeum vulgare) and wheat (Triticum dicoccum) suggestive of 
arable use. A date of Early Bronze Age / Middle Bronze Age was attributed to the field 
system on the basis of a radiocarbon date for the subsequent phase of activity of 1450-
1224BC (at 2σ). Small areas of field system, not securely dated but probably late 
prehistoric in origin, have been located in the New Forest. One such, on Ridley Plain 
south-east of Fordingbridge, situated on Barton Sands and Plateau Gravels, is considered 
by the author to represent the fragmentary remains of a coaxial system (Smith 1999).
It has recently become clear that coaxial field systems also existed in areas not now 
marginal in arable farming terms, although here later use tends to have been more 
destructive and discovery of small portions of a large field system, often under the 
limitations of PPG16 excavations, may preclude their recognition. In some areas, the soils 
would have been suitable for prehistoric agriculture, brickearths of the coastal plain or 
gravel terraces in river valleys for example, but other, heavier, soils were also utilised.
The clay soils of East Anglia, once thought too heavy to have been ploughed with the ards 
available at the time, are now seen to have been extensively cultivated. Here, intensive 
agriculture since means that these systems do not survive as relict earthworks, but are 
revealed by aerial photographic transcription as part of the National Mapping programme 
and by regressive map analysis as fossilised in the present agri-landscape. Between the 
villages of Scole and Dickleburgh an extensive area of some 7 x 6km had, in the 1840s, a 
network of fields whose alignment had been slighted by, and, therefore predated, the 
Roman Pye Road (Williamson 1987). This assigning of the field systems to a prehistoric 
date has been challenged and a later, possibly post-medieval, date suggested (Hinton 1997). 
A further rejoinder (Williamson 1998) maintained his belief that the landscape was 
prehistoric in origin A narrow strip examined in advance of laying a pipeline has shown 
16
evidence of Bronze Age activity on the Boulder Clay of the Essex Plateau (Guttman 2000). 
Other work on the lowlands of East Anglia will be discussed below.
In the Low Weald Bronze Age field systems are now known to have existed close to 
Gatwick Airport (Wells 2004); recent and ongoing work in advance of housing 
development at Meath Green, Horley, some 3km to the north, has also located prehistoric 
activity including Bronze Age field boundaries suggesting the possibility of extensive use 
of the Weald Clay in this area (Roger Ellaby pers comm.). Also in Surrey, Bronze Age 
field boundaries have been found on London Clay north of Guildford (Lambert 2008; 
chapter 3).
Work in advance of gravel extraction on the first terrace of the Thames in Oxfordshire 
revealed ditched boundaries and a number of water-holes which were considered to indicate 
land divisions suited to a mixed farming economy with each unit provided with a source of 
water. Here macroscopic plant remains from one of the water-holes suggested any 
associated banks may have been surmounted by hedges (Mudd 1995). A radiocarbon date 
of 1680-1420BC from wood from one of the two waterholes was considered too early, and 
may indicate re-use of timber, but one of 1020-800BC from the second waterhole appeared 
more likely to be correct in view of the date of the pottery recovered.
At Perry Oaks, a 21ha site on the West London Gravels was excavated in advance of 
development of Terminal 5 at Heathrow (Framework Archaeology 2006; 2010). In the 
eastern portion a coaxial field system, with its main axis lying north-north-west / southsouth-east main, contrasts with a less formally organised series of agglomerated fields to its 
west. The ditches were accompanied by banks with indications from pollen analysis of 
multi-species hedges. Presence of both cereal pollen and dung beetles indicates a mixed 
farming regime. The chronological development of this landscape depends largely for its 
dating on radiocarbon estimations on wood from waterholes but the authors considered that 
these features may have been inserted into an already partially organised pattern of fields, 
and therefore cannot date the genesis of enclosure. The suggestion here is that initiation of 
the coaxial and agglomerated systems was more or less contemporary, and took place in the 
17
period 1700 – 1600BC (Framework Archaeology 2010, 137). However, in general, there is 
a broad indication that radiocarbon dates from the area of agglomerated fields may predate 
those from the coaxial system.
Piecemeal development of the coaxial system from south to north attests a system adapting 
to changing local circumstances. ‘Stops’ across some of the 10 identified north / south 
routes were noted, presumably ended their role as through routes. The size of the ditches 
and, presumably, their accompanying banks differed within the same route, between 
substantial continuous construction close to settlements, and segmented construction away 
from the houses. The latter form was thought to be the earlier of the two which also hints at 
priorities which changed over time (ibid 143-147).
Within the agglomerated field system the main alignment changed on either side of a north 
/ south trackway but most of the main axes were perpendicular to the Colne valley. Several 
settlements could be seen to result from either division of the earliest, or to have been 
constructed close by. Each of these settlements had several phases of occupation pointing to 
long term development and use of the area and its resources from c. 1700cal BC to the start 
of the 1st millenium BC (ibid 148-175). 
By contrast settlements within the coaxial field system did not appear to have had such a 
clear chronological development; all were bounded by trackways and there appeared to be 
little evidence of development in the morphology of the fields (ibid 175-187).
Considerable changes took place over the turn of the 1st millennium BC but these do not 
form a coherent trend. Settlements within the agglomerated system tended to coalesce into 
fewer but larger farms, while those within the coaxial fields tended to fragment into smaller 
units. This pattern seems to have continued until about 400BC when a single nucleated 
settlement took the place of the scattered farms (ibid 187-206).
Also on the Taplow Terrace of the West London Gravels, part of a coaxial field system has 
been excavated at Imperial College Sports Ground in Hillingdon (Crockett 2001). The 
system, with a main axis aligned approximately north / south and ditches 60-62m apart, and 
18
with a subsidiary east / west axis, had been constructed during the Middle Bronze Age, here 
on land previously farmed and invested with monuments during the Early Neolithic, the 
coaxial field system respected the earlier monuments. At Mayfield Farm, Bedfont, also on 
the Taplow Terrace but extending onto the Kempton Park Terrace, a further field system 
was excavated in advance of development (Jefferson 2004). The main alignment was 
north-east / south-west and the ditches contained both Deverel-Rimbury and post-DeverelRimbury plainware tradition pottery. A few cereal grains were found although the lack of 
weed species suggests domestic debris rather than large scale production and processing.
Further sites on the gravels east of London include a Late Bronze Age settlement and field 
system at South Hornchurch in the Borough of Havering (Guttman & Last 2000). By the 
Bronze Age the soil appears to have been an argillic gley with a leached upper subsoil, an 
unstable soil with low humic content, vulnerable to erosion, and of limited fertility. 
However, here a fragment of several phases of a probable coaxial system was located, with 
ditches laid out with a main axis, or alignment, to the ditches between 45 and 50m apart 
and a drove-way belonging to the first phase leading from the terrace towards the river. 
The first and second phases were similarly aligned north-west / south-east but in the second 
phase the drove-way had been remodelled and ran parallel to the river appearing to separate 
the field system from a ringwork. In the third phase the alignment of the field system 
changed to north-north-east / south-south-west and the ditches of the earlier phases were 
disregarded. Pottery found on site dated the occupation to between the 10th and 8th
centuries BC. Although grain had clearly been processed on site the lack of weed seeds 
encouraged the authors to believe that it had been transported from farther afield, and that 
the fields close to the settlement were used for pastoral farming. 
A large number of archaeological interventions in the Thames and other valleys have 
provided evidence of Bronze Age activity and this information, gained mainly through 
PPG16 excavations, has improved our understanding of the distribution of field systems, 
which had previously exhibited a bias towards those preserved on marginal land (Yates 
2007).
19
The Reading Business Park, an 80ha development in the Kennett valley close to its 
confluence with the Thames illustrates this point (Moore & Jennings 1992). A combination 
of non-invasive fieldwork, field walking and aerial survey, and excavation in advance of 
development has identified a density of Bronze Age settlement previously unsuspected in 
this area of contemporary abraded marshes and low lying gravel islands. Settlement sites, 
considered to be contemporary, lay within 500m of each other for a considerable distance 
along the valley and many have probably been lost without record during gravel extraction. 
However, as always, the difference between contemporary and shifting, short-lived 
settlements is difficult to detect. Ditches representing field boundaries were located in 
several trenches and are known from aerial survey outside the excavation area. In most 
cases the ditch lines had been re-dug on several occasions and, at the same time, the 
positions of most of the entrances had been changed. Small fields, possibly for flax 
cultivation, and larger ones thought to be suitable for stock control were located. These, 
together with systems found by aerial survey on several of the nearby gravel islands 
(Carstairs 1986), and by excavation at Dorney Island (Oxford Archaeological Unit 1990) 
and at Dorchester (Bradley & Chambers 1988), point to extensive and intensive use of the 
valley. 
Ditches, again maintained through re-cutting were also found at Wear Farm Stud, Bray 
(Barnes et al 1995, 32) and on a number of other floodplain sites along the Thames and its 
tributaries. On most of these sites truncation had destroyed evidence of banks but they are 
likely to have accompanied the ditches. Pollen analysis has occasionally indicated the 
presence of hedges and rows of stake holes suggest fences (ibid).
Synthesis of ‘grey literature’ and other sources indicates that the density of exploitation of
low lying land on the floodplain of the Kennett at Reading is by no means unusual. Study 
of a 120km stretch of the Thames valley between its source near Shorncote and the gravels 
around Heathrow has allowed a detailed picture to be drawn of management of a productive 
landscape and changes in the administration of that landscape over time (Yates 1999). 
Middle Bronze Age activity in the form of ditched field boundaries appears concentrated in 
the lower reaches of the river with large coaxial field systems on gravel terraces at 
20
Heathrow and sites upriver around Eton, Bray, Dorney, and a further cluster around 
Reading and Abingdon. Farther west settlement sites of the same period are known, at 
Yarnton for example (Hey & Muir 1997), but these do not appear, on the basis of present 
evidence, to have been associated with contemporary field systems, and environmental 
evidence suggests a continuity of the older, less intensive farming economy with shifting 
grazing (Allen et al 1993, 95).
Reasons for this apparent dichotomy have been suggested as lying within the prevailing 
social structure (Yates 2007, 107 et seq). Away from the ‘core’ areas, like those around 
Reading an older kin based system, with its concern for the ancestors and possibly inherited 
land pertained. A ‘ritual authority structure’ (Thorpe & Richard 1984, 67), with close 
integration between the living and spirit worlds, led to a rigidly controlled society and 
resistance against change. Within the ‘core’ areas, however, change had taken place and 
more entrepreneurial society with a ‘growth-orientated’ economy resulted. Here, access to 
and control over resources, and the production of wealth, imbued power and a more fluid 
society resulted (ibid, 67-68). This in turn may have led to a greater bed for the acquisition 
of prestige, possibly exotic, goods, and development of the international hierarchy of the 
‘Channel Bronze Age’ (Needham et al 2006). 
By the Late Bronze Age this portion of the Thames valley contained four concentrations of 
field systems (Yates 1999, fig 3). The position of these groups also reflects findings of 
riverine votive deposits and each is dominated by an ‘aggrandised’ settlement, sometimes 
but not always a ringowork; there are also differences in ceramic styles between the 
settlement areas. The farming regimes were dominated by pastoralism; at sites around 
Reading, for example, stock farming and textile production (Bowden 1985; Moore & 
Jennings 1992) are evidenced on site whilst the small amounts of grain recovered had been 
processed and, probably, grown elsewhere (Bradley et al, 1980; Campbell 1992).
The morphology of the field systems, incorporating drove-ways, waterholes and possible 
stockyards, points to the importance of stock raising from the Middle Bronze Age, but by 
the Late Bronze Age a strongly specialised regime appears to have been adopted 
21
throughout the middle and lower Thames valley. Both coaxial and aggregated systems are 
known; the former were common around the Colne, where drove-ways and waterholes can 
be seen to have been inserted into an already existing field system (Maloney 1999, 14).
Use of extensive low lying and traditionally marshy areas during late prehistory is also 
attested, later peat deposits have since been drained providing light and fertile, if 
vulnerable, soils – the ‘grain basket’ of East Anglia for example. In the Fenlands careful 
analysis of complex areas of enclosures and tracks has provided evidence for seasonal 
movement of stock and intensive stock management. In the Nene Valley concern about 
destruction of archaeological remains due to the expansion of Peterborough lead to a survey 
by the Royal Commission for Historic Monuments in England (Taylor 1969) and this led to 
the eventual founding of the Fengate Project by Francis Pryor. This resulted in the 
excavation of a prehistoric landscape, one of the first in lowland Britain and here with the 
additional advantage of wet preservation beneath the fenland peat (Pryor 2001). It is now 
clear that large areas were enclosed in field systems and details of Y-gates, stockyards and 
pens and tracks between grazing on slightly higher ground and water at the fen edge 
suggest an emphasis on stock management (Evans & Pryor 2001; Evans & Pollard 2001). 
Many of the field systems in this area are thought to date to the mid-2
nd millennium BC, 
and in area of south Fengate an apparently short-lived coaxial system was overlain by a 
settlement complex at the Late Bronze Age to Early Iron Age transition (Evans & Pryor 
2001).
At Fengate drove-ways are seen to link the summer pastures at Flag Fen with stock being 
kept over winter in enclosures on higher, flood-free land in a system dating to the 2nd
millennium BC (Pryor 1980; 1996). Large populations of sheep may have been kept in 
these systems with stocking densities of 10-20 animals per hectare, and the suggestion is 
made that status within this society may have been expressed by the number of animals an 
individual was able to maintain. 
Recent and ongoing work at Must Farm and Bradley Fen, also near Peterborough, is 
providing more detailed evidence from water-logged contexts (Knight & Murrell 2012). 
The area was inhabited from at least the Neolithic period and a house whose surviving 
22
timber posts gave a radiocarbon date of 2200-1950BC appears to have existed within an 
unenclosed landscape. Before 1500BC coaxial field systems were constructed on the 
higher land but periods of use were separated by long fallow phases. The excavators speak 
of mobility, occupation on the scale of the river system rather than long-term occupation of 
single sites. The fen encroached and c. 1500BC the landscape was reorganised into strips 
divided by linear ditches. As movement became more difficult timber alignment were built 
and this development coincided with the advent of many hundreds of bronze weapons. 
Boats, fish-weirs and eel-traps attest an increasing reliance on aquatic resources as ‘the fens 
were rapidly transforming a place once connected by a major river into a series of islands’. 
On the Avon Levels evidence of seasonal grazing of the low lying pastures, mainly by 
sheep, has been found at Avonmouth, Cabot Park and Rockingham Farm, and dated to the 
period 1760-1500 to 910-420 BC (Locock 1999; 2000). A model has been produced to 
explain the relationship between uplands and wetlands throughout the prehistoric and 
Romano-British periods and to counter the assumption that areas of marsh would have been 
considered marginal during the Bronze Age (Gardiner et al 2002, fig 9). For the Late 
Bronze Age it is suggested that uplands were used for burial and flint production whilst 
arable land was concentrated on the lower slopes and the fen edge. Fen islands were used 
for summer grazing and temporary settlements whilst salt was produced from the intertidal 
zone. Notably, this system seems to have been abandoned, possibly as a result of climatic 
deterioration and increasing inundation, with little evidence of activity during the Early 
Iron Age. 
Extensive evidence of field boundaries has been found on the coastal plain of West Sussex 
(Yates 2004, 46-52, 156-157) but here most work has been on the small-scale of developer 
funded interventions. Although parallel boundaries have been found on a number of sites, 
Ford Aerodrome for example (Clouston 2000), it is an assumption that they were part of a 
coaxial system. (See also chapter 6).
Abandonment of coaxial field systems can rarely be dated and for many, abandonment, if it 
happened, was only temporary. On Fyfield and Overton Downs, Wilts, for example, eleven 
23
blocks of ‘Celtic’ fields, mainly of the coaxial type, have been located, and many 
associated with Late Iron Age and / or Romano-British pottery. Within these blocks are 
instances where the field systems are overlain by Bronze Age settlements and where Early 
Iron Age linear boundaries slice through the field systems pointing to a probable Bronze 
Age origin for the fields, with later reuse (McOmish 2005). 
1.3.2 Agglomerated field systems
Agglomerated field systems, surviving to such an extent that they can be recognised, are 
widespread in occurrence but largely limited to present agriculturally marginal land. On 
Dartmoor a number of small settlements with stone built hut circles set within stone walled 
enclosures, probably fields, have been assigned to the Bronze Age (Curwen 1927; Ralegh 
Radford 1952). In some cases small agglomerations of fields can be associated with their 
settlements; on Rippon Tor a single hut circle was linked with three fields totalling 1.06a 
(0.43ha), whilst on Blissmoor three hut circles lay on the edge of six fields totalling 2.17a 
(0.88ha) (Fox 1954). More recent work on Crownhill has resulted in the location and 
survey of five or six small field systems all on different alignments and apparently formed 
by piecemeal enclosure (Collis et al 1984). 
At Eaglestone Flat in Derbyshire an extensive survey of field boundaries allowed a detailed 
interpretation (Barnatt 1987). After some initial clearance in the 3rd millennium BC the 
area was used intensively with perhaps between 30 - 50% of the available land enclosed. 
Some of the boundaries originated in clearance of stone to field edges, whilst others were 
lynchets resulting from erosion. Each set of fields contained a single farmstead and each 
unit was separated from its neighbour by uncleared land, possibly used for grazing. Mixed 
farming was practised, with cereals grown in fields close to the settlement, the units 
remaining in use throughout the 2nd millennium BC. Excavation provided evidence of 
cereal production and a series of radiocarbon dates lying between 1900 and 1400BC 
(Barnatt 1994).
At Houseledge, Black Law in the Cheviots a field system comprising a number of narrow 
terraces with a single associated house scoop has been dated to the Early Bronze Age 
24
whilst, probably in the Middle Bronze Age this field system was superseded by one of 
larger fields bounded by banks running down slope (Burgess 1980). On Islay, a site at An 
Sithean produced evidence of a system of banks, probably surmounted by a hawthorn 
hedge, and fields used for cereal production on soils where the podzolisation process had 
already been initialised by earlier arable use (Barber & Brown 1984). The construction of 
the boundaries was dated by radiocarbon to not long after c. 1220BC. 
Agglomerated field systems appear rarer in the lowland zone than in the uplands, though 
this may be a result of differential preservation and recognition rather than a genuine 
contemporary difference. In the New Forest, a system noted on Bracklesham Beds at 
Nightingale Woods, Rownhams near Nursling in the Test valley (Crawford 1953, 94) may 
be a continuation of that excavated at Dairy Lane, Nursling and shown to date to the 
Middle Bronze Age (Gardiner 1994). A further example lying on Becton Sand was located 
at Shepton Water east of Brockenhurst (Smith 1999). Here the above ground evidence 
comprised portions of four, sub-rectangular enclosures of varying sizes; the banks 
disappeared into a boggy area where further remains may survive.
At Dean Bottom on the Marlborough Downs a settlement platform with a main occupation 
phase dating to 1150-850bc, and set close to the edge of a large agglomerated field system, 
also showed evidence of Beaker period activity, including ploughsoil, suggesting 
considerable longevity for the field system (Gingell 1992, fig 14). The lack of any strict 
regional dimension to the distribution of the two types of field systems is illustrated by the 
presence of coaxial fields at Dean Bottom and an agglomerated system immediately to the 
west on Preshute Down, sites no more than 10km apart. Unfortunately the relative 
chronology of these systems is unknown but the variation in morphology could result from 
either economic and social changes over time, or from differing contemporary usage.
One area where the agglomerated field systems have appeared to dominate is the South 
Downs where, to date, no certain, extensive coaxial system has been reported. However, 
several field systems were surveyed as standing monuments before World War 2 and 
careful examination of that recorded at Plumpton Plain (Holleyman & Curwen 1935, fig 1; 
25
chapter 5, fig 5.4) shows that an agglomerated system may in fact overlie a coaxial 
example. Aerial photographs suggest that many more may exist and it is suspected that 
results from National Mapping Programme transcriptions for the South Downs National 
Park will profoundly change our view of this area. 
At Itford Hill a settlement site has been excavated and dated to the Middle Bronze Age but 
most of the adjacent field system was, at the time of excavation, considered to be RomanoBritish (Burstow & Holleyman 1957). Grain located on site was identified as unthreshed 
barley (Hordeum vulgare), much of which was undersized and twisted, a phenomenon 
denoting either a wild form or grain suffering nutrient deficiency. The settlement site has 
since been dated by radiocarbon to 1292-1018 cal BC (GrN-6167; 2950±35 BP; Holden 
1972) and the field system reassessed. A group of small, rectangular fields, about 50m in 
width but too damaged to estimate their length, is aligned on a lynchet which is an integral 
part of the settlement site and it has now been suggested that the two entities are coeval 
(Drewett 1978). The settlement has been described as a series of sequential operational 
units pointing to occupation over a considerable time span in the Middle Bronze Age 
(Ellison 1978, fig 16). The area had already been in use prior to this settlement was built. 
A small amount of Beaker pottery has been found and the presence of a Late Neolithic / 
Early Bronze Age ceremonial site on Itford Hill suggested (Russell 1996), that suggestion 
has since been refuted (Garwood 2003). A barrow containing the remains of young and old 
adults and children, again suggesting a family unit (Holden 1972) is of a form likely to date 
to between 1800BC and 1200BC (Garwood 2003).
At Black Patch a Late Bronze Age settlement, associated with a probably contemporary 
field system was partially excavated (Drewett 1982) and an attempt made to assess the 
resource area utilised by this and other settlements. Radiocarbon dates between 1130 and 
830bc were obtained from samples of grain found in pits cut into the hut platforms. Many 
requirements - arable land, upland and lowland grazing, water, flint and clay - would have 
been available within an hour’s walk. Coastal and marine resources could have been 
reached within about a 1.5 hour walk, depending on the amount of cliff erosion which has 
taken place. Timber would have been available from the Weald had all the downland been 
26
cleared, although the effort required to drag large posts up the scarp slope would have been 
considerable. Items from farther afield included a fragment of quernstone of Mayern lava 
from the Eiffel region of Germany and bronze or its constituents.
Recently the concept of an Early Bronze Age ‘maritory’, an area of cultural links made by 
cross-channel communicants based on the eastern reaches of the Channel and the southern 
portion of the North Sea, has been discussed (Needham et al 2006). The amber cup from 
Hove is one artefact which hints at the status of some Sussex coastal settlements and the 
concentration of barrows on the South Downs (Field 1998) may also reflect this wealth. 
This wealth will be further discussed, particularly in light of the recently discovered ‘near 
Lewes’ hoard.
The settlements associated with the downland Middle Bronze Age field systems appear to 
be small units, possibly family farms, with main buildings regularly replaced on new 
locations within the settlement area as at Varley Halls (Greig 1997), possibly as often as 
every generation (Brück 1999). Contemporary settlements on the coastal plain have 
seemed notable by their absence but developer funded excavations are correcting that bias, 
and more evidence of settlement in the Weald to the north of the downs is also emerging 
(Yates 2007). During the Late Bronze Age there appears to be a continuation of activity on 
the Downs but also an interest in significant locations on the coastline for deposition of 
high status goods (Hamilton 2003), presumably indicating either wealth accumulation in 
that area, or movement of goods from other areas for deposition. As with other areas, only 
on the chalk downs have field systems survived sufficiently above ground to be surveyed, 
but it is the brickearths of the coastal plain, producing light fertile soils, which are likely to 
have provided a core area for agriculture during the late prehistoric period - the 
combination of coastal erosion and urban development has destroyed much of the evidence, 
but a number of sites have been recorded on the West Sussex coastal plain (see chapter 6). 
Coastal marshland sites such as the Willingdon Levels provide rare opportunities to study 
timber preserved in situ and the Late Bronze Age Shinewater platform and associated 
trackways may shed light on cross-Channel links as a source of trade and wealth for this 
period (Greatorex 2003). 
27
This division of field systems into coaxial and agglomerated is simplistic in the extreme, 
ignoring as it does both changes in morphology over time and the possibility of other types 
of layout. One such, which is increasingly being recognised, is a ladder like arrangement; a 
number of this type have been recognised in the south-west quarter of the Marlborough 
Downs, where they stretch from the chalk escarpment on a north-east / south-west 
alignment (McOmish 2005).
1.3.3 Later developments
An increasing emphasis on stock raising has already been noted; addition of water-holes to 
the fields at Heathrow and extensive use of low-lying areas, the Avon Levels and the Fens 
for example, for grazing. A further change involved division of land into larger areas with 
linear boundaries, the ‘ranch’ boundaries (Bowen 1961) used by ‘Wessex cowboys’ 
(Cunliffe 2004). These boundaries are wide spread, both geographically and in terms of 
soil type, and have been studied on the Wolds (Stoertz 1997) and Tabular Hills (Spratt 
1989) of Yorkshire, the Fens of East Anglia (Pryor 1996; Knight & Murrell 2012) the chalk 
downland of southern Britain (Bradley et al 1994; McOmish et al 2002) and elsewhere. 
These boundaries, and the changes they imply, will be further discussed in chapters 4 and 
10. 
1.4 The late prehistoric environment and the effect of agricultural intensification
In some areas there appears to be a strong suggestion of wide spread socio-political 
disruption at the end of the Bronze Age with only a minority of Late Bronze Age sites 
remaining in use and relatively sparse recovery of evidence of Early Iron Age settlement 
and farming activity. It is thought that the climate cooled at the start of the 1st millennium 
BC with an estimated fall of around 2oC between 1000 and 750BC (Lamb 1981). In the 
Thames valley and estuary the dearth of sites seems to indicate something of a catastrophe, 
and it has been suggested that the international trading links which had underpinned earlier 
prosperity now collapsed, precipitating a crisis (Yates 2001). Farther west, on the chalk of 
the Marlborough Downs, linear ditches divided the land into relatively large blocks and 
some field systems were slighted but, as in the Thames valley, intensive farming activity 
28
ceased by the Early Iron Age (Gingell 1992, 155). On the Salisbury Plain Training Area a 
change in the farming economy from crop growing in extensive field systems to pastoral 
farming was noted but here several unenclosed settlements and the vast East Chisenbury 
midden site attest continuing activity into the Early Iron Age, with a number of hillforts 
being constructed later in the period (McOmish et al 2002, 67 et seq). 
Any investigation of the distribution of prehistoric field systems and the economic structure 
which they supported must recognise that considerable alteration, and, in the main, 
deterioration of the soil structure, topsoil depth and fertility, has taken place since the fields 
were in use. Indeed, in many cases prehistoric agriculture was one of, if not the main, 
precipitating factor in these changes. Fertility of the soil, and the vulnerability of the soil 
structure were in the past clearly of supreme importance to contemporary farmers and their 
experience of certain soils would have been fundamentally different from the modern view. 
In general terms a major phase of land clearance for agriculture is found to have taken place 
during the Bronze Age. Two sites on the Jurassic limestones of Oxfordshire have been 
subjected to palynological investigation (Day 1991). Cothill Farm is located in a shallow 
basin, a location where pollen from the sides is considered likely to have blown in from 
several hundred metres away and to represent vegetation over a longer distance from the 
site (Jacobson & Bradshaw 1981). By contrast Sidlings Copse lies in the bottom of a steepsided valley, and the pollen is considered likely to have originated mainly from the slopes 
immediately above it. Both sites were surrounded by woodland, alder (Alnus glutinosa) on 
water-logged soils and small-leaved lime (Tilia cordata) where drainage was better, from c. 
4850BC (Oxa-2709; given as 6790 ±100 BP). The pollen profile at Sidlings Copse 
provided evidence for the first major disruption of woodland cover at about 1850BC (Oxa2049 given as 3820 ± 100BP; Oxa-2050 given as 3820 ±70BP), in the Early Bronze Age, 
with the appearance of cereal pollen. This would suggest a wooded environment, first 
cleared and ploughed during the Early Bronze Age.
However, in some areas a different pattern is emerging. As described earlier, detailed work 
in the Upper Allen valley in Dorset suggests that some areas of the chalk downs may never 
29
have become wooded (French et al 2003). These poor soils, apparently lacking any 
deposition of loess, a light aeolian deposit, may have presented a very different agricultural 
potential to prehistoric farmers, when compared with areas of the North and South Downs, 
emphasizing a need for local environmental assessment when considering farming 
economies in the past. In some cases the original soil can be recovered in sub-soil horizons 
(Evans 1972) or, with its structure altered, in valley sediments (Bell 1981). In others, 
heathlands in particular, the pre-podzolisation soil is subject to leaching even when in a 
sealed context, and its contemporary fertility cannot now be judged with any precision. 
However, it is clear that, in some cases at least, the podzolisation process had led to a 
noticeable deterioration in soil fertility prior to the construction of coaxial field systems 
(Cox & Hearne 1991), and also that in some areas, Tofts Ness in Orkney for example, 
manuring was used as a mitigation strategy, possibly as early as the Neolithic period 
(Simpson et al 1998).
In an attempt to address a number of problems and apparent paradoxes in prehistoric land 
use Martin Bell (1983) studied valley sediments on the South Downs. Using the 
stratification sequence, 3D recording of artefacts, radiocarbon dating and molluscan 
analysis of valley bottom trenches, combined with soil pits on the valley sides, the work 
enabled a correlation to be drawn between adjacent, excavated settlements and their 
exploited environment. This colluviation does not occur in all areas, for example in the 
Lambourn valley in Berkshire (Bradley & Ellison, 1975). 
Further work on the South Downs adds evidence to the anthropogenic effect on the 
environment. At Grey Pit (Allen 1995) a colluvial foot-slope deposit revealed by quarrying 
produced a molluscan sequence indicating limited clearance of woodland during the 
Neolithic period, followed by a period of open grassland. The main periods of colluviation 
due to upslope ploughing occurred during the Iron Age and later, an unusual lack of 
evidence of Bronze Age activity being suggested as resulting from truncation of the 
deposits. At Malling Hill sections of lynchets showed a similar sequence with some 
evidence of woodland clearance between c. 3200-2900BC, but no deposition during the 
Bronze Age despite the presence of field systems on the slopes of Cliffe Hill above 
30
(Gregory 1985), and it is assumed that truncation of the deposits had occurred. In 
reviewing environmental data from a number of sites Allen (1995) concludes that, on the 
South Downs, woodland clearance started during the Neolithic period, accelerated during 
the Middle Bronze Age and, particularly, the Late Bronze Age with some areas laid out in 
field systems but others, like the area around Grey Pit, reserved for grazing.
Whilst colluvial deposits may preserve information about environmental and soil structure 
changes, they also preserve, but mask, sites covered at depths not reached by most survey 
methods. Whilst ploughing will seldom penetrate to a depth greater than 40cm, 
fieldwalking, aerial photography will not detect sites below that depth and above ground 
remains will, by definition, not be visible. Valley bottom deposits vary and generalisations 
are unwise – at Black Patch, East Sussex, the valley to the west of the settlements contains 
loess some 1.4m deep probably eroded from the slope above during the Neolithic period, 
whilst to the east large flint nodules and fractured chalk of modern origin lie immediately 
over, and in, post-glacial solution hollows (Tapper forthcoming). This may introduce a bias 
in our understanding of prehistoric land-use since it is clear that in some areas, where 
colluvium has accumulated over millennia, sites do exist in the valleys. In the Kennett 
valley lines of sarsens located in situ under deposits of erosion debris have been interpreted 
as early field boundaries (JG Evans pers comm. as quoted by Gingell 1992, 155). In 
Sussex Beaker activity has been located at depths of between 0.5m and 1m at Ashcombe 
Bottom, Cuckoo Bottom and Grey Pit, and at greater depths that 2m at Cow Gap and Kiln 
Bottom (Allen 2005c, table 1).
1.5 Across the seas
A question which appears to have been little considered is any relationship between the 
evolution of field systems in Britain during the later part of the 2nd millennium BC and 
development on the Continent although their presence in Europe is well attested (Bradley 
1978). A survey of field systems in north-west Europe visible on aerial photographs has 
shown them to be a widespread phenomenon (Brongers 1976, fig 1). Examples are found 
in Sweden, Denmark, and Holland, often on heathland, and in Belgium. To this can be 
added systems in the Rhineland, the French Jura and the Côte d’Or, the Lower Somme and 
31
the Upper Marne valleys, in Alsace and Westerwald and in the Rhön, Vogelsberg and Eifel 
Mountains (Bradley 1978).
A considerable amount of work, including aerial photography and excavation, has been 
undertaken in The Netherlands, Denmark and Holland. In Vendsyssel in Denmark some 
300 field systems covering in total 22,500ha have been located on aerial photographs and 
divided into three types (Harder Sørensen 1982). Type A, described as irregular, comprised 
sub-rectangular fields of between 0.04 and 0.3ha concentrated on undulating land; type B is 
an apparently planned layout of long, narrow fields of between 0.06 and 0.45ha, with no 
sub-division evidence and concentrated on level land; type C fields again show evidence of 
planning but are of two phases, the first comprising large rectangular fields and the second 
the subdivision of those fields into long narrow fields of between 0.04 and 0.7ha. No direct 
dating evidence for these systems is reported but a prehistoric origin for types A and B at 
least is considered likely. In Jutland an irregular field system comprising banks and 
lynchets originating with clearance of stones into cairns and along field edges has been 
dated, through proximity to a cemetery, to the Iron Age (Lerche 1968). At Store 
Vildermose, also in Jutland, the earliest boundaries were simply strips of land left 
unploughed, and only later were boundary earthworks constructed (Nielsen 1971). A 
detailed survey has been undertaken in eastern Denmark of 162 field systems surviving, 
partially at least, as standing earthworks within woodland (Nielsen 1984). The majority are 
described as regular and some illustrated would, in Britain, be considered coaxial, with 
main axes running north-east to south-west (ibid figs 5 & 11). In the limited number of 
examples where dating evidence is available there appears a Late Bronze Age / Early Iron 
Age genesis with development starting about 1200BC and abandonment of most systems 
by 200BC. On the South Thy Sandhills in Denmark an ‘infield / outfield’ system is 
suggested with approximately 10% of the available land used for arable production, and 
supported by manure from grazing the remaining 90% (Liversage 1996-7). Use of these 
systems continued from the Late Bronze Age to the early pre-Roman Iron Age with 
radiocarbon dates from associated settlements falling between c. 1400BC and c. 600BC.
32
In a detailed case study from Pleistocene sands in the Noordseveld of Zeijen in the Drenthe 
in Holland (Spek et al 2003), five developmental periods were identified for a single field 
within a system in use from the Late Bronze Age to the Roman Period. The field system 
was constructed during the Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age and some manuring of the 
plot seems to have taken place. During the Middle Iron Age / Late Iron Age extensive 
cultivation had taken place on the ridges of the field boundaries as well as in the plots, and 
the need for long fallowing periods was noted. Later the ridges alone were intensively 
cultivated and their fertility maintained by introduction of material from elsewhere 
(plaggen soils) and by addition of glacial till subsoil from the now abandoned field plots. 
Eventually, possibly during the 2nd century AD, the field was abandoned and the process of 
podzolisation produced the heathland of the present day. 
In The Netherlands, systems of coaxial type have been dated to a considerably later period 
than in Britain; at Vaassen radiocarbon dates bracketing the last cultivation layer within a 
‘Celtic’ field system were c. 470BC and c. 150AD (Brongers 1976). More recent work is,
however, producing examples from earlier periods. At Noordwijk in Zuid-Holland a 
settlement with Accelerator Mass Spectrometry / radiocarbon-dates from the house of 
between 1980 and 1680BC was associated with a field system that had been abandoned due 
to peat development, and dates from the overlying peat range from the Middle (3270BP; 
1690-1430BC) to the Late (2650BP; 900-780BC) Bronze Age. Use of the fields, which is 
likely to have been contemporary with the house therefore took place during the 1st half of 
the 2nd millennium BC (van der Velde 2008).
From Väderstad in Östergötland, Sweden clearance cairns denoting early agriculture have 
been dated to the Neolithic period whilst hearths, commonly found at field edges in Scania 
and Denmark, have given radiocarbon dates between 720 and 210BC, (Petersson 1999). 
Constructed field boundaries were not found until later, but unfortunately this phase was 
not accurately dated.
In north-east France aerial photographic evidence exists of large areas of field systems, 
particularly on the limon soils of Picardy (Agache & Bréart 1975) but unfortunately little 
33
investigation appears to have taken place and these systems do not have dates assigned 
although, from the morphology, a prehistoric origin seems likely. However, work in 
Normandy has produced evidence of agricultural landscapes of houses with associated 
fields dated to the first half of the 2nd millennium BC (Marcigny 2008; Marcigny & 
Ghesquière 2008), and these will be further considered in the discussion.
1.6 The questions – ‘we do not know’
Despite the widespread and frequent nature of these field systems, and the period of time 
over which they have been recognised, basic questions remain unanswered. That two 
major pieces of recent work (Yates 2007; Wickstead 2008) can produce fundamentally 
different interpretation only serves to emphasise this point. The former work, primarily a 
synthesis of information available in the ‘grey’ literature, examined the distribution of 
coaxial field systems. Their genesis was placed largely in the Late Bronze Age, seeing 
them as resulting from a need to intensify farming production, particularly of stock, to 
allow participation in an economy defined by the possession of prestige items. In contrast, 
the latter work places identity, not solely that of the individual, at the centre of a process 
negotiating land tenure.
We do not know where or when field systems originated. The coaxial field systems of the 
Middle Bronze Age do not appear to have evolved or, if they did, then the early forms are 
either lost or have not been recognised. Although southern and south-eastern Britain 
appear to be the core areas for this development, landscape archaeology, sensu stricto, and 
with it the technique of analytical survey, has not been a priority on the Continent and field 
systems, away from the Low Countries, may well be under-reported. Gaining absolute 
dates for the earliest section of any field system is fraught with difficulty (and will be 
further discussed in Chapter 2), but most methods and contexts yield only termini post and 
ante quem, and, at best, only a single boundary within a complex, which may have been 
added to and altered, may be dated. Relative dating, recovered either from above ground 
survey or from excavation, is more commonly found but less useful in relating these major 
landscape features to their socio-political and economic contexts. 
34
We do not know whether any coaxial field systems were created as a single entity, or if all 
originated from core areas to which additions could be made as required. Occasionally, as 
at Heathrow (Framework Archaeology 2006; 2010), for example, stratigraphic analysis can 
identify developmental stages, but single cases should not lead to generalisations. If large 
areas were enclosed in a single act, we do not know whether the whole was farmed at the 
same time or whether sub-divisions could have been used sequentially. It is not thought 
that the population was such as to require the produce of even a fraction of the area 
enclosed, and some form of phased redundancy seems likely. The relationship between 
specific settlement sites and field systems is also unclear; indeed, settlements, temporary or 
permanent, which were contemporary with the earliest field systems are relatively rare.
We do not know the change in social framework within which these systems were created. 
The view that in southern Britain the development of a landscape of enclosed settlements 
and field systems represented a change of concern from ritual to everyday matters, 
particularly the need for intensification, has been challenged (Brück 2000). The belief that 
early farmers exploited their land for maximum output, despite visible evidence of 
destruction of soil structure, may be seen as a reflection of the present concerns of our 
capitalist society over the global effect of profligate use of natural resources. Instead, 
social fragmentation is suggested as the driving factor behind the Early Bronze Age / 
Middle Bronze Age transition, reflected in fixed divisions within settlements and a 
centripetal organisation of daily activities within an extended family rather than the 
communal concerns of a more mobile lifestyle. The construction of field systems 
comprising familial blocks within a communally coherent whole (Gingell 1992, fig 96 and 
below), requiring as seems likely cooperation and perhaps shared labour can then be seen 
as a level at which such social fragmentation was not expressed (Brück 2000).
We do not know why such a rigid and formal morphology was chosen. Whilst fields were 
undoubtedly an important part of the farming landscape their construction may have 
represented more than a pragmatic act of land division. That such major impositions on the 
land, albeit now known to have been, in some cases, built piecemeal, should have come 
into use over a wide area of the country suggests some socio-political impetus. The field 
35
systems must also have acted as a visible marker of control or tenure of the land, a situation 
arguably of greater permanence than the exact location of settlement sites. These divisions 
may well have negated earlier, less extensive, systems of tenure, invisible to us but 
important to those whose rights and memories were displaced. Placing the dead in barrows, 
false crested and often overlooking springs, related the ancestors to the land and, through 
the visibility of the burial sites, with the living, and with the source of their water. The 
continuing presence of ancestral spirits may have been weighed against the disruption 
inherent in reorganising land tenure. Later, the labour involved in the initial creation of a 
field system would have been remembered as having been undertaken in an ancestral past; 
the constant maintenance of the boundaries, adaptation of the morphology and utilisation of 
the fields would have provided an ongoing link between the living, the land, and the 
remembered ancestral past.
We do not know why the organisation of the landscape changed, although an increasing 
interest in stock, perhaps as a form of wealth, is strongly implicated (Bowen 1978; Bradley 
et al 1994; McOmish et al 2002; Cunliffe 2004). Climatic change may be implicated in 
this development, or is this, again, a reflection of our modern concerns? Stock as an 
expression of wealth is both valuable and mobile – an ideal situation for raiding to develop. 
Raiding cultures can be highly successful, for example the Chiricahua branch of the Apache 
nation could exist by hunting and raiding to the point where violence was unnecessary - the 
threat of a raid was sufficient to elicit ‘presents’ of food (Opler 1941). That aggression 
increased in later British prehistory seems evidenced by the prevalence of weaponry and 
defensible sites, eventually to become hillforts – but it had never been absent. What is clear 
is that although many were to be re-used, coaxial field systems were no longer created after 
the start of the 1st millennium BC, a change which must have reflected a realignment of 
parameters within society.
This thesis cannot attempt to address the totality of these questions. 
It will examine, primarily, the above ground evidence for a number of limited areas. It will 
also seek to link the field systems with their wider hinterland, and to assess the influence of 
36
differing geological and topographical zones, and from them the differing resource base 
and communication potential, on the fields and their attendant settlements. An integral aim 
will be to study the development of late prehistoric field systems over time and, where the 
evolutionary sequence is available, relate the changes in morphology to possible changes in 
the socio-political and economic landscapes of southern Britain within a European context.
1.7 Chronological framework
The names that we give to divisions within the Chalcolithic, Bronze and Early Iron Ages 
have undergone much discussion over several decades. Creating a framework out of diverse 
information derived from typologies of metalwork and pottery traditions, and absolute and 
relative chronologies, and then attempting to allow that framework to cover areas 
throughout north-west Europe and beyond has proved complex. As discussed in Chapter 2, 
assigning dates to field systems is particularly problematic but, in general terms, the 
chronological framework used here is shown in table 1.1.
37
38
Chapter 2
Methods: means and limitations
39
2.1 Introduction
The aim of this thesis is to use primarily above ground evidence of field systems dating to 
the 2nd and early 1st millennia BC to investigate the succession in morphology of land 
division, any regionality in that succession in central southern and south-eastern Britain, 
and the implications of these findings for our understanding of contemporary socio-political 
and economic organisation. 
Detailed analytical earthwork survey, the main technique which will be used, allows study 
of chronological developments over relatively large areas suitable for attempting to link 
developments in land use by communities. These changes, while immediately relating to 
these developments, may also reflect changes in the wider economy and, possibly, sociopolitical aspects of the life of the community. If these changes vary from site to site 
reflection of decisions made by small groups is implied, but emergence of a more general 
pattern should infer regional and, possibly, wider change. The factors which may underlie 
these changes, whether they represent responses to natural factors, climate change for 
example, or human agency, through population change, foreign contacts or insular 
pressures, will be explored.
The study will utilise information from different sources and gained by use of disparate 
methodologies, each of which may present their own strengths and weaknesses. The aim of 
this chapter is to:
specify the primary and secondary sources which will be used in the dissertation
describe the manner of their use and the type of information which may be obtained
recognise the weaknesses inherent in each source
illustrate ways by which these weaknesses may be mitigated
2.2 Existing archives
2.2.1 Published information
2.2.1.1 County Historic Environment records (previously Sites 
and Monument Records)
40
Each county produces, and in theory at least updates, a database of all known 
archaeological sites, a public document which can be searched on various bases but usually 
by area, key word and period. This should include information from published texts, ‘grey’ 
literature and the Portable Antiquities Ssheme record (see below). However, there are no 
national standards for the collection and inputting of data and, as a consequence, the 
database varies in both reliability and ease of access from county to county.
Some counties, East Sussex for example, can produce site distributions mapped against 
both modern and older maps and against aerial photographs whilst others only contain what 
is effectively a transcription of data held on old records onto a digital base. 
In some counties neither cleansing of inaccurate information nor updating the Historic 
Environment Records is regarded as a priority and in these cases searching the literature is 
a necessary adjunct. However, at their best these archives form the core of any 
archaeological investigation and, even at their worst, they still provide a point from which 
to start.
2.2.1.2 National Monuments Record archive (AMIE) and 
database
A national database held by English Heritage containing information from Ordnance 
Survey records, county Historic Environment Records, excavation indices, work of the 
Archaeological Investigation teams at the Royal Commission for Historic Monuments 
(England) and English Heritage, and other sources. Being largely dependent on others for 
its information the National Monuments Record suffers, inevitably, from their flaws.
2.2.1.3 Archaeological Data Service website
This is a site hosted by the University of York on which any organisation can archive 
primary information. The deposition has been somewhat eclectic and, since the withdrawal 
of core funding in March 2008, payment is now required. This limits its usefulness and it 
cannot be regarded as providing an over-view of any given area although it can prove 
41
useful for individual sites but, hopefully, it is a source of information which will grow in 
importance.
2.2.1.4 Academic journals
Papers published in academic journals are now usually peer-reviewed and therefore provide 
information considered reliable and in keeping with views current at the time of 
publication. Older journals will provide information of a level considered acceptable by the 
then editors.
2.2.1.5 Portable Antiquities Scheme database
Artefacts reported to Finds Liaison Officers for each county are identified and entered into 
a publicly available database. Whilst this can be accessed and is a valuable source of 
information about finds made by metal detector users and others, the database only gives 
area National Grid References and precise find spots may be difficult to obtain. In 
addition, the context of the find is seldom recorded – many represent deposited hoards and 
their relationship with settlements and land-use is unclear.
2.2.2 Unpublished information
The amount of information available in the ‘grey’ literature, largely unsynthesised into the 
body of archaeological knowledge, is one of the challenges facing the modern practitioner. 
The manner in which accessing this information can revolutionise our understanding of the 
distribution of activity has been well illustrated by work on British and Irish prehistory in 
general (Bradley 2007) and Bronze Age field systems in particular (Yates 2007) and use 
will be made of unpublished client reports in this thesis. Copies of reports from most work 
undertaken under PPG16 regulations are generally lodged with the appropriate county 
authorities and sometimes with county archaeological societies and can be accessed there. 
Online access is available to the index of archaeological investigations (http://OASIS.ac.uk) 
and to databases produced by the Archaeological Investigations Project based at 
Bournemouth University (http://csweb.bournemouth.ac.uk/aip/aipintro.htm). Some, 
although regrettably few, professional units make non-confidential reports available online 
but occasionally word of mouth and personal contacts may have to be used.
42
2.3 Analytical earthwork survey
A description of survey work at Julliberries Grave, Kent, written by one of William 
Stukeley’s colleagues, Lord Winchelsea, mentions a number of the concerns of modern 
surveyors of archaeological monuments (Piggott 1985, 56-7): they set out 
‘in my chaise, where that will go; and where not, upon our horses’.
They made notes and took bearings of the Roman road when they came upon it,
‘and I have been at Julaber’s Grave, which I formerly measured only by my 
paces but I have now taken it with my measuring chain, and have all its 
dimensions very right; and I took its bearings with my compass, and from the 
top of it I have drawn out a prospect of the country’
However, most early surveys were of discrete monuments, and it was not until the advent 
of detailed Ordnance Survey maps in the middle decades of the 19th century that a few 
prehistoric field systems were depicted. An exponent working in the early 20th century was 
a one-time pupil of Pitt Rivers, himself a poor observer of earthworks (Bowden 1991, 121-
1), Herbert Toms, whose work on field systems in Sussex, together with that of Robert 
Gurd, provides valuable information for that county.
During the last hundred years surveyors with, successively, the Ordnance Survey, the Royal 
Commission for Historic Monuments (England), and, since their takeover of the latter 
organisation, the Archaeological and Investigation team of English Heritage, have 
maintained the traditions of analytical earthwork survey and the interpretation of above 
ground earthworks.
The aims of analytical survey, in the words of one of its great practitioners (Bowden 1999, 
23), are to:
look at what is there
43
consider, and try to understand, the component parts, and how they relate to one another
assess how the whole relates to its contemporary context (whether on a local, regional, 
or national level) and to comparable examples recorded elsewhere
The methods used in this dissertation vary according to the information available and any
limitations in access to the area under study. Where possible, surveys took place in winter 
and spring when vegetation cover was least likely to mask detail.
Where there were no constraints in terms of access, and the earthworks were clearly visible, 
survey was undertaken using the tape and offset method (Bowden 1999, 62-63). Tapes 
were laid out relative to fixed points present on the relevant Ordnance Survey large scale 
maps and the positions of additional control points were located by Global Positioning 
System. Where large open fields, with no available fixed points within the area, were 
involved earthworks were located entirely by Global Positioning System. However, in 
these cases, a number of readings were taken along each field boundary (which could be 
located on Ordnance Survey maps) where earthworks abutted the boundary these points 
were compared with measured distances from corners or other fixed points to minimise the 
error inherent in hand-held navigational Global Positioning System units. In examples 
where a ‘full’ survey was possible, information from different sources, previous surveys or 
aerial photographs, was not incorporated until after the ground survey was complete.
Where access was limited, as on the Defence Estates land on Bulford Ranges, the results of 
the National Mapping Programme, made available though the kind offices of Dr David 
Field, were used to enable phasing of the earthworks to be completed within the military 
closure period. The aerial photograph transcriptions were printed onto a suitable scale of 
Ordnance Survey map so that the junction points between boundaries could be located on 
the ground and the relative chronology of the different components determined. 
On the rare occasions where access could not be arranged information from earlier surveys 
and from aerial photographs could be used, but in these cases it will be made clear in the 
text that the results could not be verified and determination of phase relationships will not 
44
be attempted unless the survey was made by a person or organisation whose work can be 
fully accepted.
Where accurate surveys made by accomplished practitioners were already available these 
were used but the earthworks were checked on the ground by a walk over survey and in all 
cases the source of the original material is given in the appropriate chapter.
All these techniques have inherent errors and analytical survey as a whole has to be 
regarded as subjective – both an advantage and a disadvantage. This subjectivity stems 
both from accuracy of observation, some individuals being better able to recognise slight 
earthworks than others, and from the fact that recording the relationship between 
component parts of the system of earthworks necessitates a level of interpretation - the data
recorded therefore lacks ‘detachment’. However, in the hands of a skilled practitioner this 
element of subjectivity lends depth to the results and allows experience to be brought into 
the equation. 
Mensural errors can be reduced by selecting the most suitable survey strategy available. 
All of the work reported here has been undertaken to at least Level 3 (non-analytical 
essential information, detailed, descriptive and fully analytical earthwork survey, methods 
statement and assessment of accuracy, and photographs as appropriate), and, in some cases 
to Level 4 (Level 3 with a multidisciplinary approach involving other specialists) (Bowden 
1999, 189-193). In the absence of differential Global Positioning System, accuracy was 
maintained by ensuring that control points fixed using navigational Global Positioning 
System formed a closed ring and were related to fixed points available from large scale 
Ordnance Survey maps. When using the tape and offset method, all offset tapes related to a 
fixed base tape, not to each other, so avoiding any compounding of error.
As used here, the fieldwork relies to a large extent on the accuracy of Ordnance Survey 
maps, sometimes in rural areas which have not been re-surveyed since the early 1970s. 
Whilst the construction of rings of control points, and triangulation between fixed points 
45
should make any errors apparent and therefore capable of correction, the possibility of 
survey errors cannot be discounted.
This method alone can only provide relative phasing, and dating of those phases must rely 
on more invasive techniques.
2.4 Aerial photographs
Among the earliest aerial photographs produced for archaeological purposes was that taken 
of Stonehenge from a balloon (Wilson 1982, 11) and after World War 1 landscapes in the 
Middle East (Wiegand 1920) and elsewhere were recorded (Deuel 1969). In England the 
work of OGS Crawford, who not only took his own photographs but collected the work of 
others (Crawford & Keiller 1928), formed the basis of the archive held by the National 
Monuments Record. After World War 2 work of Cambridge University Committee for 
Aerial Photography added to the cover available (St Joseph 1966).
Many photographs in these archives date to a period before modern development and 
changes in agricultural practice which have destroyed some sites completely and damaged 
the above ground evidence over widespread areas. Ploughing of chalk downland in 
southern Britain has had a particularly severe effect on the survival of prehistoric field 
systems, some of this destruction being portrayed in the photographs. Whilst aerial 
photographs may indicate the presence of field systems or their ploughed-out remains they 
seldom give information about the relationship between the different boundaries and are 
thus incapable alone of producing the relative dating evidence required for this research. 
They can be useful however, as described above, for aiding the speed of survey when 
access is limited, and for producing a fuller picture of large systems where portions have 
been lost to agriculture, vegetation cover or other activities.
For all the study areas in this dissertation the archives of the National Monuments Record
and of the Cambridge University Committee for Aerial Photography have been accessed. 
At present the information from these collections of photographs is being transcribed under 
the National Mapping Programme; where such transcriptions are available they will be 
46
utilised. In other areas transcription have been undertaken manually and must be 
considered to give only an approximate picture.
2.5 Dating methods
2.5.1 Introduction
Dating a field system which may cover many hectares and may have been both altered and 
adapted during its original period of use, and re-used and adapted since, presents a major 
challenge. A number of methods may produce absolute dates, or more usually termini ante 
quem and termini post quem, but only for a short stretch of the particular boundary under 
study, not the entire system. Dating a field system as contemporary with settlement sites in 
the immediate vicinity, although frequently done, involves obvious, and possibly 
unjustified, assumptions.
The contexts from which direct dating evidence may be obtained encompass the palaeosoil 
below either a constructed bank or wall which formed the original boundary, or the build up 
of soil within a lynchet; the body of the boundary itself, most usually the matrix of the 
lynchet; any ditch which accompanies the boundary; or material overlying the boundary.
Contexts which may indirectly provide putative absolute dates include settlement and other 
sites close to, but not an integral part of, the boundary structure and complex.
Relative chronologies of the different boundaries within a field system or field systems, or 
between a boundary and other earthworks, can be developed from examination of the above 
ground earthworks. Where earthworks come into direct contact with each other it should 
be possible to detect a stratigraphic relationship – for example, banks may overlie and 
underlie, or abut each other, and the shape of the termini at an entrance may indicate 
whether it was original to the construction or a later cut. These phase relationships may 
sometimes also be visible on aerial photographs or indicated by excavation. It is however 
by analytical survey of standing earthworks that the phase relationships of entire systems 
are most likely to be available.
47
2.5.2. Chronological evidence from contexts pre-dating construction of field 
boundaries
Only if the boundary comprised a constructed bank or wall can the palaeosoil beneath the 
structure truly be said to pre-date the construction of the boundary. In such a case radiocarbon dating of the upper layer of that palaeosoil will, at best, provide a terminus post 
quem for the construction of that particular portion of the boundary. If the vegetation on 
the old land surface can be recovered, most likely in an acid podzolic environment, and is 
of short lived species, then that terminus post quem is likely to be close to the construction 
date. Dateable artefacts recovered from the old ground surface again provide only a 
terminus post quem if ploughing or other disturbance had taken place before construction of 
the boundary; only if the palaeosoil can be considered undisturbed, a rare occurrence, may 
artefacts provide an absolute date.
2.5.3 Chronological evidence from contexts within the matrix of the original 
field boundary
These contexts comprise artefacts or ecofacts from within the matrix of a constructed bank 
or wall, or from fills of any ditch associated with the boundary.
Artefacts or other dateable material located within a constructed bank or wall, are likely to 
have come from the immediate vicinity, the former often from a ditch associated with the 
bank, and provide a terminus post quem for its construction. It must be borne in mind, 
however, that re-use of building material may add further uncertainty to this already 
unsound date.
If the boundary complex includes a ditch, the fills and artefacts from within those fills may 
provide dating evidence. The material of the fill may have eroded in from any adjacent 
bank, in which case artefacts will pre-date construction, or from the surrounding ground 
surface. In the latter case they may date to before the digging of the ditch or from any 
period up to final abandonment. Artefacts from within the primary silt, or Optically 
Stimulated Luminescence dating of that silt, may therefore provide a terminus post quem
not for the construction of the ditch but for the last time it was cleaned out.
48
2.5.4 Chronological evidence from contexts post-dating construction of field 
boundaries
Dating obtained from archaeological features or from natural build-up of material which 
overlie field boundaries will, at least, provide a terminus ante quem for its construction and 
may provide the same for its abandonment.
Intrusive features, burials or deposited hoards, created within the matrix of a developed 
lynchet clearly post-date the construction of that boundary. Settlements overlying a field 
boundary also post-date its construction although here a caveat must be entered. In most 
cases it is a bank enclosing the settlement that can be seen to overlie the field boundary and 
in some cases previously open settlements were enclosed at a late stage in their evolution. 
In such a case artefacts from the settlement are not necessarily of the same date as 
construction of the enclosure and thus do not themselves provide a terminus ante quem for 
the field boundary.
On acid producing bedrock like granite, land may become covered with peat – essentially 
undecayed vegetable matter. In these rare cases radiocarbon dating of the peat may provide 
a terminus ante quem for the abandonment of any fields and their boundaries excavated 
from beneath it.
In summary providing an approximate date of construction, use and abandonment for a 
field system relies heavily, yet unsatisfactorily, on its morphology and the date ascribed to 
settlements in the immediate area which may provide dateable artefacts or contexts. Whilst 
this may be accepted when an approximate date for an entire system is sufficient, it 
produces major uncertainties when attempting to study developmental sequences and 
alterations which may involve short term, perhaps generational, change.
However, observation of repeating patterns of change, particularly if excavation of different 
sites also provides a relatively constant chronology, may give at least a narrow enough date 
range to form the basis for the development of working hypotheses.
49
2.6 Excavation
Excavation was undertaken according to the principles described in Standard and Guidance 
for Archaeological Excavation, Reading: Institute for Archaeologists, published 1995, 
revised 2008.
2.7 Pottery analysis
Any necessary pottery analysis, at more than a superficial level, was undertaken by Mike 
Seager Thomas, an independent expert in the analysis of prehistoric pottery based in 
Sussex.
2.8 Analysis of worked flint
Items of worked flint were assessed by the author with, where necessary, the assistance of 
members of the Prehistoric Group of the Surrey Archaeological Society or Bertie Haken of 
Sussex Archaeological Society.
2.9 Soil structure analysis
Soil analysis was undertaken by Dr Richard Macphail at the Institute of Archaeology, 
University College London using routine published methods.
2.10 Graphical depiction of analytical survey results
Field drawings will be made at scales of either 1:2500 or 1:1250 depending primarily on 
the amount of detail visible. Vignettes designed to illustrate details of complex areas, or of 
areas where relative phasing is of importance, were surveyed at larger scales, and these will 
be given within the text. In the case of small scale depiction, hachures will be used to show 
the direction of slope and to crudely differentiate between major and minor scarps, but, 
given the need to reduce the scale for final presentation, they will not replicate the width of 
the field boundaries accurately. In the case of larger scale surveys of small areas the 
hachures will be drawn to scale. Otherwise the survey drawings will observe accepted 
conventions (Bowden 1999, 85; English Heritage 2007).
50
Figures intended to illustrate different phases of development of the field systems will be 
given as line drawings and will utilise colour to identify the phases.
2.11 Site selection
A number of criteria were used in selecting sites for survey where the resultant data were 
considered likely to provide information relevant to the questions posed in the design of 
this thesis. The location of the case study areas is shown in figure 2.1 and in greater detail 
in the appropriate chapter.
2.11.1 State of preservation
The most important of these criteria was that the above ground survival of earthworks 
should be such that survey would provide evidence of different phases of construction, use 
and abandonment over a wide area. A somewhat arbitrary measure was that at least 75% of 
the field corners and abutments should be available, and their phase differences visible, 
over an area of about a sq km or more. In most cases the larger earthworks on which this 
51
assessment was based proved to be only part of the story and inevitably slighter earthworks 
provided a poorer degree of certainty.
2.11.2 Access and timing
Permission from landowners, tenant farmers, wardens and rangers, English Heritage where 
scheduled monuments lay within the proposed survey area and, similarly, Natural England
for Nature Reserves, Sites of Special Scientific Interest or other relevant designations, was 
essential. Where possible survey took place when vegetation cover was low but if other 
priorities, the presence of ground nesting birds for example, made this impossible then 
those limitations were accepted. This had particular relevance when working on the 
Salisbury Plain Training Area where, although above ground survival was excellent, the 
requirement to work within the summer closure period necessitated survey when the 
vegetation cover was maximal. In areas some distance from a road the availability of 
vehicular access, and permission to take a vehicle on site, were desirable.
2.11.3 Previous archaeological interventions
Since this project largely involved above ground evidence, previous fieldwork in the area 
was used to provide some dateable evidence of activity in the area. Whilst they are not 
necessarily contemporary, the presence of Bronze Age settlements within the field systems 
was taken as a strong suggestion that the latter were also prehistoric, and a lack of RomanoBritish or later settlement in the immediate area was considered highly desirable though not 
essential. Given the widespread evidence of re-use of prehistoric fields in the RomanoBritish period this resulted in the exclusion of a large number of sites, and may well have 
introduced a further bias towards the most marginal areas in agricultural terms.
2.11.4 Geological distribution
It was recognised that suitable sites would cluster within zones of preservation but the 
initial intention was to try to locate areas situated on a range soil types. However, it 
became clear that, within the accessible regions of southern Britain, the great majority lay 
on chalk. Only on Whitmoor Common in Surrey, located on superficial sands of the 
52
Bagshot Series, was the survival on a non-chalk geology sufficient for the purpose of 
survey.
2.11.5 Terminology
The term plough, used throughout, is taken to indicate use of an ard in all pre-Roman 
contexts.
53
Chapter 3
Land use in Central Surrey during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
54
3.1 Summary
Erosion of the Wealden Dome, the uplifted area at the junction between the northern and 
central European tectonic provinces, has resulted in a wide variation of the solid geology 
within a limited area and, therefore, of the resources available for exploitation. 
Concommitantly, however, each soil type is of limited extent, and those based on either 
greensand or superficial sandy deposits were vulnerable to anthropogenic deterioration. 
While some clustering of sites on lighter soils can be seen, the combination of only 
relatively small areas of either fertile soils for arable agriculture or easily accessible high 
quality grazing appears to have led to extensive rather than intensive land use during the 
BA. Within this general picture, the Mole Gap provides an example where fieldwork has 
identified an integrated economic, socio-political and ritual landscape. In the western 
portion of the area, study of present heathlands has located a prehistoric field system with 
at least two phases of construction, where organic survival has allowed dating and 
palynological information to be recovered.
3.2 Definition of the study area
The study area lies in central Surrey and stretches from the clay of the Thames Basin, 
across the North Downs and the greensand ridge to the south, and into the Weald. It 
comprises an area of 360 sq km and is bounded by grid line SU90 to the west, TQ20 to the 
east, SU/TQ56 to the north and SU/TQ44 to the south (fig 3.1).
3.3 Rationale for selection of the study area
The area comprises outcrops of a wide range of solid geology exposed by erosion of the 
Wealden Dome, and therefore a varied resource base available within a small locality.
Its central location provides an opportunity to study rural settlement and land use in an 
area of the south-east of Britain relatively free of external influence from contact zones 
either in the Lower Thames Valley or the Sussex coastal plain.
Recent fieldwork, primarily led by the author, has located and investigated two field 
systems (Whitmoor Common and Mickleham Downs), both of which probably 
originated in the BA.
55
56
The archive from the excavation during the 1960s of a major settlement site (Weston 
Wood) is being prepared for publication by the Artefacts and Archives Research Group 
of the Surrey Archaeological Society under the Aggregates Levy Sustainability Fund.
This is new research in an area often overlooked
3.4 Geology and topography of the study area
Simplified geology and topography of the study area are shown in figure 3.1. Relevant 
points of note are:
The degree to which the Upper Chalk of the North Downs is overlain by clay-withflints and other superficial deposits
The presence of extensive areas of leached, acidic podzols which have developed, 
probably through anthropogenic action, on sand-based solid geology
o In the north-west of the study area these comprise Bagshot Series soils 
derived from superficial Holocene deposits
o The central greensand ridge, mainly Hythe, Folkestone and Sandgate Beds, 
here higher than the chalk downs to the north, ranges from light, relatively 
fertile soils on the dip-slope to infertile heathland with high points protected 
from erosion by strata of chert
Large areas of alluvium and river gravel related to the Wey and its tributaries
o The limited areas of similar geology related to the Mole
The relatively ‘small scale’ nature of the different geological areas
That the gentle dip-slopes of both the North Downs and the greensand ridge are north 
facing and thus less conducive to arable agriculture than the similar geological strata in 
Sussex
3.5 Evidence of Bronze Age activity in the study area
A general overview of evidence pertaining to the relevant period will be given here and 
further details are available in Appendix 1. Distributions of known sites and finds, taken 
from the Surrey Historic Environment Records and Portable Antiquities Scheme data, are 
shown for the Early Bronze Age, Middle Bronze Age and Late Bronze Age in figure 3.2. 
Sites specifically named in the text and in appendix 1 are located in figure 3.3.
57
58
The distribution in general shows a strong bias towards land agriculturally marginal in 
modern terms, heathland and chalk downs, a bias which may relate to areas of light soils 
suitable for early cultivation but since degraded, but which could also be caused by 
differential survival and by a greater propensity towards finding sites on what are, in many 
cases, commons and public open spaces. A local history of antiquarian and modern flint 
hunters, although under-recorded, has also produced a bias, particularly for the Early 
Bronze Age, towards the greensand ridge. Ongoing cataloguing by the Prehistoric Group 
of the Surrey Archaeological Society of unpublished collections of worked flint held at 
Guildford Museum is showing a concentration of areas searched on Lower and Upper 
Greensands.
The great majority of Early Bronze Age data comprises either barrows or casual finds of 
worked flint. The identification of a number of barrow sites is uncertain. Those on 
heathland can easily be confused with naturally occurring dunes (Graham et al 2004), and 
ring ditches located by aerial photography may have different origins; in addition the 
distinction between prehistoric and Anglo-Saxon barrows is not always clear. Most of those 
within the study area are dispersed on heathland and here the acid environment has resulted 
in poor survival of artefacts (for example ibid). The notable lack on the North Downs 
contrasts with the situation in Sussex and even those excavated on chalk have yielded 
remarkably few and poor contents. Within the study area three groups of barrows warrant 
consideration here.
59
The Hog’s Back (area SU 912485) is the dominant landscape feature of western Surrey, 
where the North Downs narrow to give a ridge, measured as land above the 100m contour 
line, 11.2km long and no more than 200m wide. Exactly at the mid-point of this ridge is a 
nivation hollow, producing a slight dip in the skyline and a coombe on the north facing 
slope. Two certain and a further possible barrow, the latter visible only as a ring ditch, 
formed an arc at the head of this coombe. However, molluscan analysis of deposits in the 
ditch of one of these barrows, excavated by AJ (Tony) Clark in 1966 (Allen in English in
press) indicate that the barrow was constructed in previously undisturbed, mature 
deciduous woodland. Unless much of the ridge was cleared at the same time long views 
may not have been available, but pathways into remaining woodland could have led to 
barrows standing in secluded glades.
All the known barrows in the Mole Gap (area TQ 1754) are assumed to be prehistoric in 
date and are situated in two clusters on the east of the river, at the northern and southern 
ends of the gap. At the north, in the Cherkley valley, a group of eight or nine mounds, of 
which at least four have been destroyed, lay on the southern slope of the now dry valley. In 
1868 ‘sepulchral urns’ one of which had ‘impressed zig-zag ornament’ were found 
(Grinsell 1934), presumably representing flat graves. It has been suggested (Currie 2000, 
16) that the description indicates Beaker pottery pre-dating the barrow burials. A group of 
ten or eleven ring ditches noted on an aerial photograph close to Hambleton Wood on the 
northern slope of the same valley may indicate the presence of a further barrow cemetery. 
At the southern end of the gap two barrows on Boxhill overlook the river from the top of 
the scarp slope. No barrows have survived to the west of the river but at the southern end 
of the gap, on a prominent spur, ring ditches, again visible on aerial photographs may be 
relevant.
The barrows on Whitmoor Common are further discussed below. No Early Bronze Age 
settlement sites have been located within the study area although the presence of the 
barrows is strongly suggestive of settlement somewhere in the area.
60
A number of hoards of metalwork have been located within the study area. On the southern 
slope of the Hog’s Back (SU 97254835) a hoard including parts of four axes was found 
with a number of pieces of waste. One of the axes was of end-winged type placing the 
hoard within the Carp’s Tongue Complex (English 2002). A socio-political territorial 
division has been suggested on the basis that Late Bronze Age metalwork from the 
greensand ridge in the east of the county has Carp’s Tongue affiliations and may relate to a 
Thames-side and eastern North Downs zone whilst farther west the hoards resemble those 
from eastern Wessex (Needham 1987). On this basis the Hog’s Back hoard represents the 
westernmost of the former tradition.
At Coast Hill, Wotton (TQ 130482), on the greensand ridge between the Wey and Mole 
Gaps, a hoard discovered in 1787 by workmen quarrying sandstone was located ‘in a cavity 
in the rock’ (Barber 2003, 63). It comprised two socketed axes, a possible sickle and lumps 
of copper cake. The site is within the valley but on high ground marking the watershed 
between the Tillingbourne and the Pipbrook, a location which was perhaps marginal in 
settlement terms.
The third hoard, from Norbury Park, Mickleham (TQ 16155345, comprised three objects, 
two palstaves and a sword chape, and was found within a flint cairn placed over a 
developed lynchet close to the foot of the chalk downs and dated to between 1150-1000 BC 
(Williams 2008). It will be further discussed below in relation to the field system located 
on both sides of the river in the Mole Gap.
In 1853 a hoard comprising a socketed axe, portions of three other socketed axes, two 
palstaves, a spearhead, an arrowhead, a chisel and an ingot was found close to the top of the 
dip-slope of the greensand ridge on Farley Heath (area TQ 053447) (list provided by British 
Museum who purchased the hoard, with other objects, from Henry Drummond, Lord of the 
Manor of Albury). Other finds from Farley Heath include an early palstave (Field & 
Needham 1984) and on Blackheath, nearby, a possibly contemporary advanced form of 
flanged axe (Phillips 1968). Farther east, on Winterfold, a looped palstave from the later 
portion of the Middle Bronze Age has close stylistic links with Brittany although probably 
61
a local product (Needham 1980). This block of heathland again represents an elevated and 
perhaps marginal position.
A number of finds by a metal detector user on ploughed land within Clandon Park (TQ 
038520) include a hollow tip of a spearhead, a further tip to a side-looped spearhead, part of 
a palstave, an awl and part of a tanged chisel together with a number of sherds of Late 
Bronze Age pottery (Portable Antiquities Scheme data).
A further group of metal detector finds, parts of two palstaves, part of a socketed axe, part 
of the blade of a sword, the tip of a spearhead and an unidentifiable piece of copper alloy 
have been reported over a period of time as coming from the northern side of St Martha’s 
Hill (area TQ 029487), a prominent high point of chert capped greensand visible from 
much of the Tillingbourne and Bramley Wey valleys (Portable Antiquities Scheme data).
A recent find from Frank’s Sandpit (area TQ 1950), one of several from different periods 
with ritual connotations from the same area, is a Late Bronze Age two-handled pot filled 
with ingot fragments. Similar vessels have been dated to the 8th century BC but their use as 
a container for a hoard appears to be a unique find (David Williams, Surrey Finds Liaison 
Officer, pers comm.). It may be relevant that a number of finds of metal-working debris 
have been located in the same area; one large plano-convex ingot, of which about two 
thirds weighing 1783g was present is thought, in view of its size, to be a deliberate burial 
(PAS-SUR-599873) and two other smaller pieces (PAS-SUR-21D003 and PAS-SUR08F611) add evidence of industrial activity to this area.
These finds of metalwork dating to the Middle Bronze Age and Late Bronze Age include a 
notable cluster of early examples. Shield-pattern palstaves from Guildford, Albury and 
Farley Heath (2) are part of Burgess’ Acton Park complex (1962, 17-18) and are thought to 
date from either side of 1400BC. It has been suggested (Needham 1987, 111) that this 
group represents a novel tradition current in southern Surrey whilst farther north the 
Arreton tradition still persisted. Later in the Middle Bronze Age, Winterfold has produced 
a narrow-bladed palstave based in style on those imported from northern France and rare 
62
lugged chisel and palstave-chisel forms from Farley Heath represent a diversification in 
tool form (ibid 113-114).
All these find spots, with the possible exception of an inexact location ‘Guildford’, are 
found on the heaths of the Upper Greensand. The two field systems probably initiated 
during this period are, however located on chalk (Mickleham Downs) and sands of the 
Bagshot Series (Whitmoor Common) (these sites will be further discussed below). Only 
one settlement site is known from this period, a possible enclosure producing DeverelRimbury tradition pottery near Cherkley Wood, situated on Upper Chalk (Harp 1999).
By contrast with the earlier periods, the Late Bronze Age data set includes two certain and 
one possible settlement sites, together with a number of pottery scatters which may indicate 
occupation. Of these Weston Wood and Reelhall are situated on Upper Greensand whilst 
Manor Farm, Guildford is on London Clay.
Some of the pottery from Weston Wood, Albury (TQ 055484), excavated in advance of 
sand extraction in the 1960s (Harding 1964), has been published (Russell 1989) but the site 
archive and the remainder of the pottery is presently undergoing assessment with the aim of 
full publication. The settlement is situated on an isolated hill where the Lower Greensand 
has been protected from erosion by a capping of chert and carstone, but within easy reach 
of both the chalk of the North Downs and the alluvial deposits of the Tillingbourne and 
Bramley Wey valleys. It would have had extensive views in all directions except to the 
north where the scarp slope of the North Downs dominates the skyline. The presence of a 
prehistoric route along the North Downs has been comprehensively discounted (Turner 
1980), but the amount of Bronze Age metalwork found on the greensand ridge (see above) 
and increasing evidence of settlement, mainly from the Late Bronze Age, in the Wey valley 
to the west (English & Davis 2000; Lambert 2008) and to the east in the Tillingbourne 
valley (fieldwork in progress at Barnfield East, Abinger TQ110482) suggests the possibility 
of at least a local route along the greensand. It is unlikely that the entire site was excavated, 
but no enclosure ditch was located. The settlement comprised at least three round houses 
and a number of pits, one containing a coarseware jar with the carbonised grains of six-
63
rowed hulled barley (Hordeum sp) and emmer wheat (Triticum dicoccum), and twenty 
probable hearths and burnt areas. A radiocarbon date of 510 ± 110bc is regarded with some 
suspicion, and, on the basis of the pottery, dates of between 11th to 9th centuries BC for area 
2 and between 8th and 7th centuries BC for area 1 seem more likely (Russell 1989). 
Findings of grain attest agricultural production with barley, the predominant grain in the 
single sample recorded, being well suited to the relatively dry land available in the 
immediate locality. The amount of pottery recovered, some 9000 sherds including almost 
complete pots, together with the finding of concentrations associated with kilns / furnaces 
has led to the suggestion that the economy of the site may have included some form of 
industrial presence (ibid), possibly a specialised pottery production centre.
At Manor Farm, Guildford (SU 968496) evaluation (English & Davies 2000) located a 
scatter of Late Bronze Age pottery in an area where development was intended and further 
excavation (Oxford Archaeological Unit 2002) located three possible buildings and other 
features including a cremation burial all associated with Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age 
pottery. Later fieldwork (Wessex Archaeology 2003) produced further evidence in the 
form of a number of ditches, set at right angles to each other and possibly enclosing fields, 
together with three possible post holes, two concentrations of burnt flint and approximately 
1kg pottery. This latter contained few diagnostic sherds and was generally dated to the 
post-Deverel-Rimbury (Late Bronze Age/Early Iron Age) ceramic tradition. This site 
which, from the area over which the pottery was found, appears to have been of some size 
was located on London Clay within sight of the chalk of the Hog’s Back. Expansion of 
activity onto this heavy soil has been confirmed by work north of Guildford (Lambert 
2008) which will be further discussed below.
The site located at Reelhall, Shamley Green (TQ 039442) during a watching brief, 
comprised a concentration of Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age pottery overlying a buried 
soil which in turn sealed a number of apparent post-holes. The pottery was thought to have 
been located within erosion products from the adjacent hill-slope and no further work on 
this site has been undertaken (Jackson et al 1999).
64
At Cherkely Wood, Mickleham (TQ 191544), an area lying at the eastern end of a chalk 
ridge jutting out from the eastern side of the Mole Gap, but partially hidden from the field 
system on both sides of the river by a raised area of superficial deposits, has produced 
evidence of Late Bronze Age activity. In 1907 a large ditch producing pot sherds, animal 
bones and worked flint overlain by the point of a bronze weapon, was located but the 
archive of both this intervention and a later one by the Ordnance Survey appear to have 
been lost. The site was damaged by a flying bomb in World War 2, by the Great Storm in 
1987 which felled a number of large beech trees and pulled out their root plates, and by 
subsequent inappropriate replanting. Examination of the root plates produced postDeverel-Rimbury tradition pottery including a globular urn. The position of this site, set on 
high ground above an extensive field system, and the presence of Late Bronze Age pottery 
suggests that this may have been a high status ‘aggrandised’ settlement. 
3.6 The Field Systems
3.6.1 Whitmoor Common, Worplesdon
3.6.1.1 Background
Whitmoor Common is part of the extensive sandy heath which characterises land on the 
borders of Surrey, Hampshire and Berkshire. It lies between 30 and 40m OD on Eocene 
sands of the Bagshot Beds and is now a stagnogley podzol. A small stream crosses the 
common from west to east. The detailed location, geology and topography of the area are 
shown in figure 3.4.
Two barrows are known to have existed on the common and both were excavated by LaneFox (later Pitt Rivers); the finds are now deposited in the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford and a 
partial archive in Salisbury and South Wiltshire Museum but the excavation remained 
unpublished (Saunders 1980; English 2010). The western barrow (NGR TQ98635333) has 
been portrayed as a saucer barrow (Grinsell 1987) but in that publication the National Grid 
References and the descriptions have been transposed. Two somewhat impressionistic 
watercolour section drawings exist among the records of Lane-Fox’s excavation of this 
barrow (accession number R7[e]) and, with the accompanying notes, indicate that this was 
a bowl barrow, probably covering a cremation burial with at least three bucket urns 
65
66
containing cremated bones inserted as secondary burials. The eastern barrow was probably 
constructed over the remains of a pyre or redistributed pyre debris and a digital terrain 
survey (Graham & Graham 2005) has shown it to be a hybrid between disc and bell types.
In the 1970s a rapid survey, undertaken by a local man and reported to Dr Stuart Needham,
noted a number of banks which appeared to be portions of a field system. More recently, 
the presence of pollen from deciduous woodland including Tilia in samples collected from
a land surface beneath one of the banks suggested that the earthworks dated to a period 
prior to the full development of the present heathland vegetation (Ellis 1996).
Confirmation of an early date for the field system was gained from multi-element analysis 
(Entwistle & Abrahams 1997; Entwistle et al 1998) of samples taken from the palaeosoils 
beneath the western barrow and two of the banks, and from the primary silt in the bottom of 
the linear ditch. This technique, not before used on an acid podzol, indicated that all three 
palaeosoils and the primary silt were approximately coeval, indicating a similar terminus 
post quem for construction of both the barrow and the portion of the field system sampled, 
and for the initial silting of the linear ditch. In addition, high phosphate levels for this latter 
feature, the ‘Grymes diche’ (see below) suggested its use as a droveway (Dolan et al 2004), 
but the date of such usage is unclear.
3.6.1.2 Fieldwork
3.6.1.2.1 Analytical survey
An analytical survey (level 3) located a series of banks, most of which were between 15 
and 20cm high, with occasional traces of an accompanying ditch. These are depicted in 
line form only since the depth of vegetation and the mobile nature of their sandy matrices 
precluded identification of any phase relationships other than by variations in their 
alignments (fig 3.5).
The banks appear to represent two phases of a rectilinear field system on different 
alignments. The earliest phase had banks aligned 70o west of north, whilst those of the 
main phase lay 20o west of north. This main phase comprised both sub-rectangular and 
67
strip fields. Insufficient survives to calculate the area of individual fields but a number of 
parallel banks forming boundaries of the sub-rectangular fields are approximately 100m 
apart. The NNW / SSE axis curves slightly towards the west at the northern end of the 
common and appears to have been constructed perpendicularly to the small (un-named) 
stream. In some areas the fields comprise narrow strips and where these survive complete 
they measure approximately 220 x 40m.
The mid-19th century Tithe Map for Worplesdon parish (SHC WOR/10/1/1-3) shows fields 
similar in alignment to those on the common immediately north of the present common 
boundary, suggesting re-use of the prehistoric boundaries at a later date. Both extant 
boundaries and visible earthworks in fields up to 1km north of these suggest the field 
system may have extended for a considerable distance.
A ditch, known in 1562 as ‘the Gryme’s diche’ (SHC G97/6/12), appears to be an integral 
part of this field system. It is on the same NNW / SSE alignment and the field boundaries 
abut it. In form, this feature is flat-bottomed, approximately 4-5m wide and between 0.3m 
deep at its southern end and 1.8m at its northern, with slight banks on either side (fig 3.6a). 
There are two points at which field boundaries on either side abut the linear ditch opposite 
each other – this may be coincidental or it may indicate that the ditch was imposed along an 
already existing NNW / SSE boundary. Aubrey (1718, 326) called this the ‘great old 
trench’ and gave a length of 800 yards, considerably longer than the portion which still 
survives, again suggesting that only a fragment of a once larger system is now visible.
3.6.1.2.2 Excavation
The locations of four trenches (T1 – T4) excavated under the direction of this author are 
shown in figure 3.5. Nine sections in total, including those by other investigators (Ellis 
1996, Dolan et al 2004), have been dug across the banks and in all except one case they had 
been of simple ‘dig and dump’ construction with each bank having a ditch on one side. 
One bank however, (fig 3.6b, T3) showed a more complex construction (fig 3.7). The core 
of the bank, 1.2m wide, comprised yellow / orange sand with an upper context (308)
68
containing a higher density of pebbles than the lower (310), there was no sharp boundary 
between these two contexts. On the surface of context 308 the pebbles almost constituted a 
continuous layer. The sides of this core were vertical and on either side were contexts (312 
and 314), triangular in section, of fine grey sand with no inclusions. Beneath these and the 
core of the bank was a dark layer (313; 2A horizon) which appeared to be a buried soil 
overlying a pale elluvial (2Ea) horizon. There were ditches on both sides of the bank, with 
variable amounts of iron panning at the bottom of the fills (306 and 307) overlying 
apparently undisturbed leached yellow / orange sand. The complex of central bank with 
both ditches was approximately 3.4m in overall width.
69
70
Further sampling of palaeosoils beneath the banks of the field system, and the fill of a stake 
hole cutting that of the ‘early’ phase, provided material for radiocarbon dating and the 
results of this are shown below, calibrated and given as a range at 2σ::
NZA 26365 ‘Early’ phase Trench 4 1522 – 1415BC
NZA 26250 ‘Main’ phase Trench 1 1297 – 1199BC
NZA 26368 Strip field Trench 2 1317 – 1123BC
NZA 26367 Stake hole Trench 4 1373 – 1339BC
The period of time elapsed between these dates and the construction of the field system 
cannot be judged but an origin in the Middle Bronze Age seems likely as does a 
remodelling some time later, on a different alignment. It is not possible to say whether 
there was a period of abandonment between the two phases and the strip fields appear to 
have been an integral part of the second phase, rather than a later adaptation.
Pollen samples have been collected on one occasion as fieldwork for a thesis, part of a MSc 
degree being undertaken at Royal Holloway College, University of London, under the 
supervision of Dr Nick Branch (Ellis 1996) and secondly, by this author for whom the 
preparation and assessment was undertaken by Professor Jon Dodson, then of Brunel 
University and now of the University of Western Australia. Details of this latter analysis 
appear as table 3.1 and figure 3.8.
71
Species Palaeosoil below bank Palaeosoil below bank Palaeosoil below bank
in Trench 4 in Trench 1 in Trench 2
Pinus 1 _ _
Tilia present _ 8
Ulnus _ present _
Betula 3 2 1
Fagus _ present _
Quercus 8 4 7
Alnus 4 5 5
Fraxinus _ _ 1
Corylus type 14 18 16
Salix 2 present _
Ilex present present _
Calluna 15 26 16
Erica type 19 27 15
Ranunculus type present _ present
Brassicaceae indet _ _ _
Sinapis type 2 _ _
Caryophyllaceae indet present present _
Chenopodium type present present _
Fabaceae present _ _
Filipendula present _ _
Apiaceae present _ _
Potentilla type present _
Rumex indet present present present
Plantago lanceolata _ present _
Succisa present _ _
Circium _ _ _
Asteroideae present present _
Serratula type _ _ _
Lactuceae indet 4 present present
Cyperaceae 2 4 1
Poaceae 17 10 9
Cereale indet _ present _
Hordeum group _ present _
Utricularia _ _ _
Mentha type _ _ _
Polypodium _ present 3
Pteridium _ present 5
Dryopteris type 4 present 17
Dryopteris filix-mass present present _
Sphagnum present _
Total 95 96 104
Trees 15 11 21
Shrubs 53 67 45
Herbs 27 16 10
Spores 5 6 24
Total 100 100 100
Table 3.1 Pollen analyses from palaeosoils beneath the ‘early’ (T4) and ‘main’ (T1 and T2 
phases of the field system on Whitmoor Common, Worplesdon
72
There is little variation in the pollen content of the palaeosoils taken from below the banks 
of the two phases of the field system. All show that, although the land supported a tree, 
shrub and grass rich vegetation prior to construction of the field system the process of 
podzolisation had already started. However, the replacement of a portion of the Poaceae 
pollen by spores from Dryopteris and Pteridium suggest further deterioration in fertility 
between the construction dates of the two phases. Samples taken from below banks of the 
main phase of the field system (T1 and T2) showed that they had been built in an 
environment of mixed deciduous woodland with a hazel under-storey, but with large open 
73
areas where the vegetation was dominated by a mixture of grassland species and heathers. 
Pollen from Hordeum (barley) indicated arable farming and broken ground which would 
have supported the ruderal weeds Rumex (dock) and Lactuceae (dandelion-like plants). 
Areas of shorter, possibly grazed, turf are indicated by the presence of Plantago lanceolata
(ribwort plantain), Potentilla type (possibly tormentil or cinquefoil) and Asteroideae 
(daisy). The presence of Cyperaceae (sedges) suggests damp ground in the vicinity as do 
the occurrence of Filipendula (meadowsweet), Ranunculus type (possibly buttercup), 
Succisa (scabious) and spores from Sphagnum although the dry loving species 
Caryophyllaceae (pink family) was also present. Tree species present included Tilia (lime) 
which requires a base-rich soil (Keith-Lucas 1994), indicating partial survival of a fertile 
brown earth but podzolisation is indicated by high percentages (over 20% in most samples) 
of Calluna (heathers) and Erica (heaths) together with Pteridium (bracken).
3.6.1.3 Discussion
Despite the belief that the degradation of brown earths to the present podzols has an 
anthropogenic origin, and the not infrequent finding of signs of agriculture on land surfaces 
beneath Bronze Age barrows, few prehistoric field systems have been located on sandy 
heathland in this country. The standing earthworks on Whitmoor Common are the most 
complete example as yet recognised. Of those known there is an apparent bias towards 
sands derived from superficial Eocene and Pleistocene deposits rather than those from 
greensand of the Cretaceous period – given the occurrence of prehistoric barrows in both 
areas and the evidence from pollen analysis of deposits in Ockley Bog on Thursley 
Common, Surrey of cereal cultivation (Graham et al 2004), this bias may be artefactual. 
Both areas, though marginal in modern agricultural terms, have been subject to activities 
likely to have destroyed above ground archaeological evidence. The greensand ridge, 
particularly between Guildford and Dorking, was clear felled to provide fuel for industries 
in the Tillingbourne valley during the 16th century if not before (Brandon 1984). This 
activity took place at the date before note was likely to have been made of any 
archaeological remains and commercial forestry since will have led to further damage. By 
contrast, the superficial sands and the extensive heaths in the west of Surrey were primarily 
used for grazing and the more destructive military use largely occurred at a later period, 
74
mainly in the 19th and 20th centuries (English 2004; 2005); ‘ancient’ earthworks are likely 
to have been recorded by that date.
Here, the podzolisation process was under way by the middle of the 2nd millennium BC. It 
is not known whether ploughing is necessary to initiate this process, or if trampling by 
stock is sufficient. Earlier activity is evidenced by the presence of a few worked flints of 
probable Mesolithic and Neolithic dates and podzol development may have started during 
these earlier periods. Woodland hunters would recognise changes in the vegetation 
resulting from abandoned clearances as evidence of earlier communities (Field 2004a) 
whilst Neolithic farming, whether agricultural or pastoral, is likely to have resulted in 
clearings in use or in successive stages of regeneration, as much here as on the more 
intensively studied chalk downland (for example Allen 2000). The dating, longevity and 
degree of permanence of this earlier activity remains unknown but the land would have 
been known and understood as a patchwork of significant locales and links between them, a 
changing patchwork probably already many centuries old when the barrows and the first 
field system came to be constructed. The presence of Tilia pollen, however, suggests the 
presence of at least semi-permanent woodland – the decline of this species being strongly 
associated with clearance (Drummond-Murray et al 1994; Sidell et al 2000; 2002). It is 
inconceivable that the vegetational change, involving the invasive species Pteridium with 
Erica and Calluna, was not observed at the time, and unlikely that the implications for crop 
yield were not appreciated, yet the expenditure of effort involved in creating the field 
system was deemed necessary.
Although analysis of the palaeosoil gives a terminus post quem, not a construction date, a 
Middle Bronze Age date for the first phase of boundaries seems likely. Adaptation of these 
systems is now recognised and the new layout could observe and respect or, occasionally, 
ignore that of earlier land use (Bradley 2002, 76-78). The second phase field system was 
constructed on a different alignment although some at least of the banks of the earlier fields 
were visible. On Dartmoor a number of systems were constructed with their main axes 
perpendicular to rivers (for example Johnston 2005), and here the second phase bears the 
same relationship to the stream crossing Whitmoor Common. It may be that the labour 
75
needed to reconstruct a field system reflected practical concerns, particularly access to 
water, but it might also represent a response to a new, or different, cosmology and these 
aspects will be further discussed.
One of the boundaries was of some complexity, comprising a bank ditched on either side. 
The vertical sides of that bank would have been unlikely to survive without support and the 
presence of triangular contexts of pebble-free sand on either side may indicate that it was 
retained by a permeable material, possibly hazel wattle, through which soil might trickle. 
Such a construction has been suggested as revetment for sand used to cover a turf stack 
barrow (barrow III) on West Heath in Sussex (Drewett 1976) where similar contexts of 
filtered sand were observed. The concentration of pebbles in the upper part of the bank 
and, particularly, on the top, may indicate an attempt to prevent wind erosion of the
exposed surface but it is more likely to represent the effect of some of the light soil matrix 
having slipped down the side of the bank. The additional work required to construct and 
maintain this boundary hints at some greater importance within the tenurial system, perhaps 
a division between different familial groups – division of land using boundaries set at right 
angles to the stream would allow each holding access to this essential resource.
The slight nature of all these banks would preclude their utility as effective boundaries 
unless they were surmounted by a fence or a hedge; the stake hole located in a bank from 
the earlier phase may represent such a structure but could equally easily have been used as 
a sighting device when the system was laid out. No other evidence was recovered and 
although truncation through erosion is likely on this geology, the soft nature of the soil 
would have necessitated deep stake holes for any fence – hedging appears the more likely 
solution given pollen evidence that hazel, in particular, could survive on the soil at the time. 
However, a non-exclusive boundary to mark divisions of use or responsibility is possible.
The linear ditch may have served as a route through which stock could be taken to water 
without their straying into arable fields on either side, or as access for any whose holdings 
did not front the stream. It could either have been part of the original design of the field 
system or imposed on that system, but if the latter no individual fields appear to have been 
76
slighted and the system presumably remained in use. However, the limited evidence hints 
that the line originated as a field boundary. North of the stream the line of the bank on the 
east side of the ‘Gryme’s diche’ continues as a field boundary but there is no hollow-way or 
western bank. South of the stream three west / east boundaries appear, albeit now 
damaged, aligned on both sides of the ditch and may have been cut when a track was 
imposed.
At Perry Oaks, west of London, major north / south boundaries of an Early Bronze Age / 
Middle Bronze Age field system later acquired a second parallel ditch, thus creating a 
trackway and , in the opinion of the authors, dividing the land into identifiable holdings 
(Framework Archaeology 2006, 105-112). If the same situation pertains here, the 
‘Gryme’s diche’ may have been constructed when more fields were enclosed to the south. 
In this scenario the west / east trackway located at the southern edge of the surviving field 
system may have divided two blocks of fields and the ‘Gryme’s diche’ allowed access to 
the stream for these southern fields.
The second phase of this field system lends itself to a highly speculative reconstruction of 
land holdings (fig 3.9). One holding (red), bounded by the a trackway to west, the stream 
to the north and the complex boundary to the east, would place the size as approximately 
17ha. To its west two further holdings (blue and green) might be suggested by the 
continuous north / south boundaries, and a further track to the south of one (blue) and 
would enclose areas 18.8 and 15ha respectively. These are of a similar size to those of 
medieval virgates which in Surrey range from a generality of 5.3 to 6.5ha (13 to 16a) but 
could be as large as 24.3ha (60a) on poor land like heavy Wealden Clay (Blair 1991, 72). 
If the virgate was designed to support a familial unit could the putative holdings on 
Whitmoor Common have been allocated with the same intent?
Whether they would have been used contemporaneously or sequentially remains open to 
question. It is, however, worth noting that despite the labour expending in creating the 
main phase of this field system, it cannot have been used intensively since the sand banks 
of the earlier phase still survive. The pollen analysis showed some slight evidence of the 
77
presence of barley but a single episode of cross-ploughing of the later fields is likely to 
have destroyed the boundaries of the earlier, and spade digging of small plots avoiding both 
sets of earthworks is a possibility. 
This site hints at a complexity of land use over several centuries but once the soil structure 
deteriorated to the present podzol the area was abandoned other than for rough grazing, 
becoming the ‘zone of preservation’ (Taylor 1972) within which these remarkable 
earthworks could survive.
78
3.6.2 The Mole Gap
3.6.2.1 Background
Four archaeological interventions have taken place in recent years in the Mole Gap. Land 
on the west of the river was subjected to landscape survey as the Norbury Park Project, a
joint undertaking by Surrey Archaeological Society and Surrey County Council between 
1989 and 1993 (Dyer 1996). On the east, Mickleham Downs was the subject of a 
successful proposal gaining it Area of Special Historic Landscape Value status (Currie 
2000). Finds made by a metal detector user and reported to the Finds Liaison Officer for 
Surrey resulted in excavation of a hoard buried within a flint cairn close to the downstream 
swallow holes in Norbury Park (Williams 2008; see appendix 1 and chapter frontispiece). 
The author was involved in all this fieldwork and also undertook a more detailed survey of 
the portions of the field system to the east of the Mole on Mickleham Downs.
The river Mole cuts a steep-sided valley through the North Downs with river cliffs at 
various points on either side. There are three dry side valleys, the Polesden valley to the 
west and the Cherkley and Headley valleys to the east, as well as several smaller combes. 
Detailed location, geology and topography are shown in figure 3.10. There are many 
swallow holes, some still active, both in the bed of the river, and in the pasture on either 
side and in Nower Wood. Before the swallows were capped the river would disappear in 
times of drought, reappearing downstream as permanent springs.
The earliest recognition of a prehistoric field system on Fetcham Downs, to the west of the 
Mole, appears to have been by AHA Hogg in 1936 but unfortunately neither record nor 
source for the quotation ‘it was a prominent system with numerous lynchets’ (Hanworth 
1978) can now be found. On Leatherhead Downs a sketch-plan of a field system 
incorporating field observations and information from aerial photographs was apparently 
prepared but this too appears to have been lost. Described are ‘a small group of typical 
Celtic fields, laid out regularly on both sides of a fieldway which runs south-west from the 
north-east corner of the Downs’ (Hope Taylor 1949). Aerial photographs reveal numerous 
disconnected field-banks scattered over the whole area of Leatherhead Downs, but those on 
Mickleham Downs are not visible. There is little doubt, however, that the lynchets on
79
80
Mickleham Downs, recorded by Messrs Frere and Hogg (1944/5), were part of this larger 
system. On the Long Ride a small portion of what could then be observed was published 
and ascribed, from pottery evidence, an Iron Age or Romano-British date. The area had 
been ploughed as part of the ‘Dig for Victory’ campaign during World War 2 and the 
position of the lynchets could then be seen as lines of large flint nodules.
Excavation of a lynchet on the Shepehale (Currie 2000) showed that there was no structure 
underlying the earthwork but a series of plough marks, thought to be prehistoric ard marks, 
were found cutting up to 10cm into the chalk bedrock. The ard marks gave evidence of 
cross ploughing but the visible lynchet appeared to have been created by ploughing uphill 
until the point of the ard dug into the slope, loosening the chalk downslope and leaving a 
step in the surface. It is difficult to understand how this could have been achieved if there 
had been any permanent barrier in place since this would have not allowed the space for a 
means of forward traction.
No signs of any barrier were seen on the top of the lynchet, and, although these could have 
been lost to subsequent erosion, the ard marks show that the point had been driven into the 
chalk with considerable force, possibly indicating the use of a rip ard to try to obtain some 
depth of topsoil on this high point of the downs. All the pottery recovered came from a 
single context and is of mixed date; the prehistoric portion is further described below.
3.6.2.2 Fieldwork
The dip-slope of the downs on both sides of the river is still under the plough and here 
portions of the field system are visible on aerial photographs which have been transcribed 
(by Rog Palmer). The earthworks, visible in areas above the present and, probably, historic 
arable margin have been subjected to analytical survey. Minor excavation was undertaken 
on the Long Ride and pottery recovered during fieldwalking undertaken as part of the 
Norbury Park Project (Dyer 1996) and from excavations in the Shepehale (Currie 2000) 
and on the Long Ride has been re-assessed.
81
3.6.2.2.1 Analytical survey
Only the Long Ride and small areas on the top of Fetcham Downs are now clear of scrub 
and woodland, a situation exacerbated by adventitious vegetation covering trees felled by 
the Great Storm of 1987 which devastated this narrow valley, and it is recognised that some 
zones were impenetrable and in others minor earthworks may have been missed.
Results from the analytical survey, together with the aerial transcripts, are shown in figure 
3.11. To the west of the Mole on the dip-slope of Fetcham Downs the boundaries of a 
series of small sub-rectangular fields are visible as soil marks, with their main axis running 
approximately 300 west of north. This alignment is also observed by lynchets crossing the 
summit of Fetcham Downs. Farther south a number of lynchets follow the line of the 
contours on the steep slope above Norbury Farm.
To the east of the Mole a series of short lengths of parallel lynchets cross the Long Ride on 
an alignment, again, of approximately 300 west of north. The majority of these earthworks 
are very slight but the larger ones correspond with the positions of those noted during their 
reduction by ploughing in WW2 (Frere & Hogg 1944/5) and it is possible that two phases 
of field system existed in this area. To the north of this, on the dip-slope of Leatherhead 
Downs, the same alignment is continued by a number of linear soil marks indicating the 
presence of further small sub-rectangular fields. None of the areas surveyed produced 
sufficient information for the sizes of individual fields to be assessed although, where 
visible, parallel boundaries tend to lie 70-80m apart. 
3.6.2.2.2 Excavation
A series of test pits were excavated on the Long Ride in an area where horses’ hooves were 
eroding the side of a track revealing Romano-British pottery. Some 20, 1m x 1m, test pits 
placed in a grid, excavated only to the top of compacted soil, and a 2m x 2m trench located 
over the area of maximal damage, produced a large amount of Romano-British pottery 
dating from the 1st to the 4th centuries and a small amount of prehistoric pottery. Only the 
latter is described here.
82
3.6.2.2.3 The Pottery (by Mike Seager Thomas)
The full details of this report can be found in Appendix 1. In summary, the pottery 
assemblage from the Shepehale (Currie 2000) contained few diagnostic pieces but a general 
Middle Bronze Age / Late Bronze Age could be assigned. That recovered during 
excavation of test pits on the Long Ride was all from the first millennium BC, including 
some definite Late Bronze Age and Middle Iron Age, but mostly probably Late Bronze 
Age/Early Iron Age: Pottery recovered during fieldwalking west of the Mole included 8 
sherds, possibly from the same vessel, of a medium to coarse flint tempered fabric dating to 
the Late Bronze Age.
83
3.6.2.3 Relative and absolute chronology
None of the field boundaries within the Mole Gap can be dated with certainty and the 
view that the system is prehistoric in origin relies on relative chronology, morphology 
and the presence of Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age pottery in relevant, but not 
secure, contexts. The caveats expressed above pertain and a summary of available 
evidence is given below.
To the west of the Mole the modern fields attached to Bocketts Farm are probably those 
associated with a late 13th century holding (Blair 1977) and may well have remained in 
arable use for much time since, and the sub-rectangular fields visible as soil marks, on 
a different alignment, clearly pre-date these.
One of the contour lynchets west of the Mole was overlain by, and must therefore 
predate, a flint cairn containing objects dated to between c1150-1000BC (Williams 
2008).
On the east side of the Mole the field boundaries on the dip-slope of Leatherhead 
Downs, visible on aerial photographs, appear to underlie, and therefore predate, the 
strips in one of the medieval open fields belonging to Thorncroft Manor, Leatherhead.
The earthworks of field boundaries at the western end of the Long Ride can be seen to 
underlie the Roman Road, Stane Street (a situation confirmed by excavation at Thirty 
Acres Barn, some 2km north of Leatherhead Downs [Fasham & Hanworth 1978; Hall 
2008]).
The presence of ard marks and Late Bronze Age/Early Iron Age pottery attest activity 
in the area, although that does not, of course, necessarily provide dating evidence for 
the field system.
Survival of boundaries as earthworks on the top of the downs on both sides of the river
probably results from lack of later ploughing and protection by medieval and later sheep 
grazing, evidenced from the 14th century in documents produced during a legal dispute in 
84
1305 about rights to Fetcham Downs (Blair 1978, no 9), and by the place-name Shepehale, 
current in 1303, on Mickleham Downs (Blair 1984, no 261).
It may be relevant that the orientation of strips in the open fields of Headley parish to the 
south, and of Leatherhead to the north of Mickleham, is not dissimilar to that of the 
probable prehistoric field boundaries on the Long Ride and the Shepehale (Currie 2000, 
12).
Any temporal relationship between these fragments remains to be verified but if it were to 
be proven then the field system, on either side of the river, might cover an area of some 3sq 
km. However, a major caveat must be entered regarding ascribing a single date to these 
disparate areas. Settlements in, or close to, the Mole Gap include the Early Iron Age 
farmstead at Hawk’s Hill (Hastings 1965), an Iron Age and Romano-British settlement on 
the Long Ride, Mickleham (Frere & Hogg 1944-5) and a further Romano-British settlement 
at Park Corner (Dyer 1996); any or all of these and possibly others not yet recognised may 
have created or utilised any part of the system/s thus masking information dating to the 
Bronze Age. 
3.6.2.4 Discussion
In contrast to the situation in Sussex, where at least 23% of an area on the South Downs 
north of Brighton bore standing earthworks prior to World War 2 (Holleyman 1935), few 
prehistoric field systems are known on the chalk of the North Downs in Surrey. A system 
on Farthing Down where the lynchets are overlain by Anglo-Saxon barrows may well be 
prehistoric in origin (Hope-Taylor 1949); here the fields lie on either side of a trackway 
which appears to be integral to the design. It seems at this stage unlikely that this finding is 
completely incorrect – whilst much of the dip-slope of the North Downs within the study 
area has been under the plough since the medieval period, and remains so, that degree of 
ploughing did not render field systems invisible to aerial photography in the Mole Gap. 
Additionally, detailed field survey of the Sheep Leas, West Horsley, and Westhanger, 
Coombe Bottom and Netley Plantation, Shere and Gomshall, all on the North Downs 
between Guildford and Dorking, failed to find any earthworks suggestive of prehistoric 
85
activity in areas of grazing where preservation might be expected. Whilst the degree of 
clay-with-flints cover and the northern aspect of the gentle dip slope might militate against 
early agriculture, this finding still remains surprising. Although it has been said that 
prehistoric farmers avoided this type of soil (Moffatt 1988) work in Hampshire and Sussex 
has shown field systems extending onto superficial clay-with-flints cover over chalk (see 
chapters 8 and 9).
However, the Mole Gap shows evidence of at least intermittent activity over a long period. 
The barrows on Leatherhead Downs and Boxhill are assumed to date to the Early Bronze 
Age whilst one of the vessels from an inurned cremation found in 1868 but now lost 
(HER169) is probably from the Middle Bronze Age. Pottery recovered during the work 
described here dates from the Late Bronze Age, Early Iron Age and Romano-British period 
whilst earlier work on Mickleham Downs found some thought to be Late Iron Age (Frere & 
Hogg 1944/5). The gap cut through the North Downs provides easy access to both the clay 
of the London Basin to the north and to the greensands and clay of the Weald to the south; 
such an ecotonal zone might well have attracted settlement. 
The presence of swallow holes may have been an additional factor. The story is told locally 
of the air raid warden for Mickleham during World War 2 who was shaving one morning. 
Looking in the mirror he saw behind him a tree descending out of view. When he turned 
round he realised that an unknown swallow hole had opened in his lawn and engulfed a 
mature oak. The reaction to such a happening in the Bronze Age can only be imagined –
although these events would be relatively uncommon, folk memory within an oral tradition 
would ensure that the story was told and retold. Shafts have long attracted attention; on 
Cranborne Chase a natural shaft which had been open since the early Mesolithic period 
acquired a symbolic capping during the currency of Beakers (Green & Allen 1997) and at 
Charterhouse-on-Mendip deliberate placement within a swallet (swallow hole) of items 
from the Late Neolithic or Early Bronze Age including a Beaker, a flint dagger, bone pin 
and antler spatula and five slate ‘sponge finger stones’ (Levitan et al 1988) are just two 
examples. Use of shafts for burial and deposition occurred throughout prehistory and 
encourages the belief that such places were seen as portals to the underworld. An 
86
association between barrows and swallow holes can be seen, among other places, on 
Bronkham Hill, Dorset and here Tilley (1994) says that ‘It is not hard to imagine that 
during the Bronze Age these circular sink holes were conceptualised as sites of ancestral 
activity: the places where ancestors entered and exited from the land into a sea of the 
underworld existing below’. Together with the habit of the river of disappearing 
underground, this surely made the Mole Gap a ‘special’ area perhaps necessitating 
particular care to appease the river spirits, though not sufficiently dangerous to prevent use 
of the land for food production.
3.7 Discussion of land use in Central Surrey during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
The relative lack of known evidence for field systems on the chalk of this area has already 
been mentioned and, similarly, there are few barrows in Surrey as a whole when compared 
with Sussex (Field 1998). Nevertheless, copious amounts of worked flint of the period and 
the increasingly regular finding of mainly Late Bronze Age pottery and, less frequently, 
features indicative of Bronze Age settlement, during developer funded interventions on 
both London and Weald Clay in Surrey as a whole, attest the presence of communities.
The locations of the known barrows within the study area evidence a concern for visibility 
but also for water sources. Of those on the Hogs Back two known and a possible third 
visible only as a crop mark cluster at the top of a nivation hollow (English in press), a 
position repeated elsewhere (Tomalin 1993; McOmish et al 2002, fig 2.24[b]) at the exact 
middle of the ridge, whilst one suggested as forming the focus for an Early Anglo-Saxon 
cemetery on Guildown (Reynolds 1999) would have overlooked the Wey from the eastern 
end of the ridge. Those in the Mole Gap are again clustered, in groups on the sides of dry 
valleys overlooking the Mole and its swallow holes. 
However, the number of barrows on areas of heathland suggests an early interest in the 
fertile brown earths which would then have been available. The burial mounds appear on 
heaths derived from both superficial deposits and greensand although field systems only 
appear on the former. The Abinger Transect fieldwalking programme recovered large 
87
amounts of Mesolithic and Neolithic material from the dip-slope of the greensand (Field et 
al 1987) but notably less evidence of activity in later prehistory (Dave Field pers comm.), 
suggesting that deterioration of the soils had already reduced fertility and therefore utility. 
Neolithic clearance and settlement of the High Weald has been postulated as underlying 
major colluvial deposition in the Eastern Rother valley in Sussex (Scaife & Burrin 1987), 
and a similar picture of the preferential use of soils derived from sandstones and superficial 
sandy deposits seems to exist in Surrey.
The coaxial field system on Whitmoor Common was constructed after the podzolisation 
process was underway as, indeed, were the barrows (Ellis 1996, 66-67). North of the area 
under study a bell barrow at Ascot with a radiocarbon date of 1480 ± 70 cal BC (Bradley & 
Keith-Lucas 1975) was also constructed over a podzol. Work on acidic lithologies in the 
south-east of Britain indicate a range of dates for the first appearance of Calluna sps 
between 3873 ± 29BP (range 4400 – 4150 cal BP at 2σ, 2450-2200 cal BC) on Bagshot 
Heath in Surrey, 2812 ± 36BP (range 3000 – 2800 cal BP; 1050 – 850 cal BC) on Conford 
Heath in Hampshire, both these examples lying on Eocene sands, and 1565 ±30BP (range 
1550 – 1400 cal BP; 400 – 550 cal AD) at Hurston Warren in West Sussex on Lower 
Greensand (Groves 2008). At all three sites woodland with small areas of heathland 
vegetation were dated to the Early Bronze Age / Middle Bronze Age but after the 
widespread appearance of developed heathland the areas were kept open by grazing on 
Bagshot Heath and Hurston Warren and by repeated episodes of burning at Conford. 
Recent work has located a possible field system underlying the rampart surrounding the 
greensand hillfort on Hascombe Hill (Hooker & English 2009) and post-Deveral-Rimbury 
tradition pottery has been found among excavated collections both there and from 
Holmbury Hill (Seager Thomas 2010).
Deterioration of these sand based soils may have resulted in use of the chalk for agriculture 
but in Surrey much of the North Downs are covered by superficial strata of difficult and 
infertile soils, particularly clay-with-flints, Netley Heath and Headley Heath Deposits. At 
Juniper Hall in the Mole Gap through the North Downs in Surrey, molluscan analysis from 
valley bottom deposits showed a high proportion of shade loving species preceding a 
88
downwash of chalk debris as erosion products moved down the steep valley sides (Barrett 
& Chatfield 1978). Given the coaxial system surveyed on the Long Ride, directly above 
Juniper Hall, this may indicate a lack of clearance prior to construction of the fields. 
Middle Bronze Age and Late Bronze Age activity on London Clay has been located at 
Manor Farm with evaluations yielding environmental samples which gave a radiocarbon 
date of 1416-1292 cal BC (Howe et al 2010) and Late Bronze Age pottery (English & 
Davies 2000). At Christ’s College School, Guildford a pit containing Middle Bronze Age 
pottery, and post-holes and ditches dated to the Late Bronze Age were located (Lambert 
2008). It may well be that the small-scale geology of the study area, with only small, 
discrete areas suitable for agricultural development, meant that the impetus necessary for 
creation, regulation and use of numbers of large co-axial field systems was limited to 
farther north in the Thames Basin or south on the Channel coast (Framework Archaeology 
2006; 2010; Yates 2007, 29-36).
89
Chapter 4
Land use near Nine Mile River, Wiltshire during the 2nd
and early 1st millennia BC
90
4.1 Summary
Two areas of enclosed fields on Brigmerston and Milston Downs, have been subjected to 
limited analytical survey utilising transcriptions of aerial photographs undertaken as part 
of the NMP. Those on Brigmerston Down resolved as a small area of aggregated fields set 
around two conjoined enclosures all overlying a rectilinear field system. The sequence on 
Milston Down was less clear due to the imposition of modern military ranges but may have 
been similar. The vicinity displays complex and long-lasting use within the Stonehenge 
landscape.
4.2 Definition of the study area
The study area lies on the chalk massif of Wessex, on the Bulford Ranges, part of the 
Salisbury Plain Training Area. Some 28 sq km, bounded by grid line SU43 to the south, 
SU19 to the west, SU23 to the east and SU50 to the north, forms the core to this area. 
Since access is extremely limited only a small proportion, comprising two areas where the 
earthworks of parts of field systems appear practicable for analysis, was selected for 
detailed fieldwork. However, these surveyed systems will be set within a wider context 
through use of published fieldwork and reference to the Wiltshire Historic Environment
Record.
4.3 Rationale for selection of the study area
Military use of Salisbury Plain has preserved a wide range of prehistoric earthworks as 
standing monuments and this may enable some understanding of the relative dating of 
different phases of the field system and its adjacent settlement sites and linear ditches
The Nine Mile River valley and its surrounding area has already undergone extensive 
(McOmish et al 2002) and intensive (Bradley et al 1994) survey and this work can be 
utilised in the present study
Aerial photographs of the Salisbury Plain Training Area have been transcribed as part 
of the National Mapping Programme and made available through the kind offices of Dr 
David Field
Permission was granted for access during the summer closure period for fieldwork 
within the danger area of Bulford Ranges
91
92
The lack of Romano-British pottery as a significant component in any of the collections 
recovered either from the surface or at excavation encourages the belief that extensive 
adaptation during that period is unlikely
4.4 Geology and topography of the study area
The location, geology and topography of the study area are shown in figure 4.1. Relevant 
points of note are:
The generally southern aspect of the Nine Mile River valley
The relative lack of variation in the geology of the area and, from that, a lack of 
diversity in the resource base
The ‘closure’ of the southern end of the valley by the high ridge of Beacon Hill
4.5 Evidence of Bronze Age activity in the study area
Several of the sites in the Nine Mile River valley were investigated at an early date. A 
number of barrows at Bulford and Brigmerston were excavated in the early 20th century 
(Hawley 1910) and secondary burials characterised by Deverel-Rimbury tradition pottery 
were noted. An early and influential study of linear ditches led to their being used to define 
valley-based Iron Age territories (Hawkes 1939).
More recently excavation in advance of roadworks (Bellamy 1992), molluscan analysis 
(Allen 1992) and extensive work undertaken as part of the Stonehenge Environs project 
(Richards 1990) have added information about the general area. Molluscan data from 
Copehill Down (approximately 10km NW of Stonehenge) suggests the presence of broadleaved deciduous woodland during the Late Neolithic period (Evans & Vaughan 1985) and 
several other sites around Stonehenge produced similar data (Evans 1984). However, the 
density of round barrows strongly suggests that by the Early Bronze Age much of the area 
had been cleared of woodland cover and indications of woodland and scrub regeneration at 
a number of sites indicates a complex pattern of shifting clearance and abandonment (Allen 
1992). A rather different view has suggested that some areas of the chalk downland of 
southern Britain may never have been wooded (Allen 2000; Allen 2002) but clearly field 
systems are only likely to have been constructed in areas which did not bear woodland.
93
The Wessex Linear Ditches Project was devised to investigate division of the land during 
the Late Bronze Age into relatively large areas bounded by large scale earthwork bank and 
ditch complexes (Bradley et al 1994). However, a large amount of information about 
earlier periods and, in particular, the changing pattern of land use over time, was also 
recorded, and this project above all provides a context for the study presented here. Their 
Upper Study Area (fig 4.2) comprised an area some 18 x 11km, including Sidbury hillfort 
94
and a large number of linear ditches, settlement sites, round barrows and areas of field 
system, including both those under consideration here. What follows is a resumé of the 
findings which relate to the land under study, Brigmerston Down and Milston Down, using 
the site coding from that report. Percentages only relate to the relative proportions of 
Deverel-Rimbury tradition and Late Bronze Age pottery and do not include finds from 
other periods unless stated.
On Brigmerston Down (fig 4.3) two areas (LPD080 and LPD102), both of which overlay 
portions of coaxial field systems, were selected for surface collection of artefacts. Area 
LPD080, adjacent to enclosure LPD108, produced 79 sherds of which 4% were DeverelRimbury tradition and 90% Late Bronze Age, including All Cannings Cross tradition 
pottery, but no Romano-British pottery. Included in the Deverel-Rimbury pottery was the 
95
fineware FS: DR/5, a fabric whose ubiquity on sites up to 8km apart led to the suggestion 
of specialisation. Either the pottery derived from a single production site or was the work 
of an itinerant potter (Ellison 1980), or that the sharing of pottery fabrics between groups 
referenced complex and shared relationships (Barrett 1980). The enclosure (LPD108), 
adjacent to area LPD080, appears to have gone out of use earlier than the field system since 
the pottery assemblage from surface collection lacked any Early Cannings Cross ware 
sherds but, since that tradition represented only a small proportion of the pottery recovered, 
the lack may not be significant
Moving approximately 100m south-east further surface collection in an area of surviving 
fields overlain by two enclosures (LPD102) produced a pottery assemblage of 20% (by 
weight) Deverel-Rimbury tradition and 80% Late Bronze Age and also a very small amount 
of Beaker ceramic, but All Cannings Cross ware was completely lacking. The highest 
concentration of pottery did not coincide with the position of the enclosures (fig 4.3) 
suggesting a second locus, possibly either a settlement or a midden accumulation.
On the west side of the linear ditch (1971) a horse-shoe shaped enclosure (LPD109; fig 4.3) 
produced a rather different picture with 53% (by weight) Deverel-Rimbury tradition and 
47% Late Bronze Age, mainly Plain Ware. A small amount of Beaker ceramic suggests 
activity during that period but the main period of occupation at this site appears to have 
originated during the Middle Bronze Age and may be associated with secondary burials in 
nearby Early Bronze Age barrows.
On the basis of the pottery two sites, LPD102 and LPD109, showed evidence of activity 
during the Beaker period but there then appears to have been a hiatus in occupation,
although Early Bronze Age occupation foci may have lain outside the areas of surface 
collection and excavation. Only LPD109 produced a high proportion of Deverel-Rimbury 
tradition pottery but low amounts were also found at LPD080 and LPD102. All sites 
produced Late Bronze Age pottery and occupation into the Early Iron Age was indicated by 
findings of All Cannings Cross ware at LPD080, which was considered to have been 
occupied from the end of the Middle Bronze Age to the beginning of the 8th century BC.
96
The chronology of the settlement sites within the Northern Core Area derived from study of 
the lithic assemblage placed LPD102 as the earliest followed by LPD080, LPD081 and, 
latest, LPD081A. There was also an impression of a greater time depth for sites LPD102 
and LPD080, both of which were to be included within the area bounded by linear ditch 
1971, when compared with those excluded. Location of the flint procurement site LPD104 
(fig 4.2) indicated that surface material from the Pleistocene river gravels was utilised.
Analysis of the pottery also allowed some discussion of social and cultural changes through 
the Bronze Age. In the Early Bronze Age and Middle Bronze Age there appears to have 
been close contact between the different communities with identical fabrics from both 
Beaker and Deverel-Rimbury fine ware assemblages being found on sites throughout the 
area. However, a different picture pertains to the Deverel-Rimbury coarse wares. Here 
individual wares have a more restricted distribution and appear to respect the position of the 
later linear ditch boundary. A contrast exists between contemporary sites LPD 080 and 
LPD102, inside, and Dunch Hill and Milston Down, outside, the bounded area. Although 
all the sites could have had access to the same range of pottery, cultural determinants 
resulted in different choices being made (Bradley et al 1994, 86-87).
The high proportion of Deverel-Rimbury ware associated with the horse-shoe shaped 
enclosure or, possibly, with an open settlement in the immediate area may result from its 
early abandonment when left outside, to the west of, the area bounded by linear ditch 1971. 
Further tenuous evidence that this settlement was abandoned at, or prior to, construction of 
linear ditch 1971 lay in the presence of two post holes, located at excavation (LPD092), 
beneath the banks of the complex. Despite admitted problems with the phasing, it was 
thought likely that they represented a structure related to settlement at LPD109.
A further type of site located during this study was the burnt mound. The investigators 
differentiated between small accumulations of burnt flint, sometimes found in pits, 
associated with settlement sites and interpreted as cooking holes and burnt mounds, which 
were located on marginal land, peripheral to settlements, and associated with rivers (ibid 
130-131). Two of the former were found within the Northern Study Area (LDP 087 and 
97
LDP 110), neither associated with the field systems under study. However, there are dense 
concentrations of burnt flint close to the Nine Mile River, including one associated with a 
D-shaped enclosure constructed of burnt flint close to the sources of the river 
(SU19904761).
The Wessex Linear Ditches Project took only a peripheral note of the field systems within 
their study area but examination of soils buried beneath the banks of linear ditch complex 
1971 produced useful information about land use prior to its construction (intervention 
LDP092). The soil beneath the western bank (LPD092B) was a rendzina and this, together 
with molluscan analysis indicated that vegetation on the west side had been short-turfed 
grassland, possibly maintained by grazing. By contrast the soil buried beneath the eastern 
bank of the linear (LPD092C) was an unsorted plough soil and the snail species found were 
typical of a cultivated horizon. The secondary silts of the linear ditch contained Trichia 
hispida at levels up to 45% of the total fauna, suggesting a relatively moist and wellvegetated environment, which led to the suggestion that if arable farming did continue in 
the field to the east of the linear ditch then it was at a somewhat insignificant level.
The area between Brigmerston Down and a site at the foot of Beacon Hill, Milston Down, 
produced virtually no pottery. In contrast, and mainly on the floodplain and lower terraces, 
there was a marked concentration of burnt flint together with the only evidence of metal 
working found within the study area, a deliberately deposited hoard of axes and the flint 
procurement site (LPD104). This led the authors to suggest a different perception of the 
settlement areas and the regions beyond, which again predated formalised boundaries.
The settlement on Milston Down (LPD112) is located on the south facing slope of a slight 
spur to the west of linear ditch 1971 and thus later lay outside the bounded area. The area 
of occupation, as defined by surface collection of ceramic material, lay within a small 
barrow cemetery. The field system on the north facing slope of Beacon Hill, the second 
example from the Nine Mile River valley studied here, may have related to this settlement. 
The pottery included a few Beaker sherds with decoration which enabled them to be 
identified as Middle to Late Styles (Case 1977). Of 471 pottery sherds recovered 5.5% 
98
were Deverel-Rimbury tradition but the overwhelming majority, 91.7%, dated to the Late 
Bronze Age. These proportions suggested to the authors that the settlement on Milston 
Down was founded towards the end of the Middle Bronze Age but the relatively coarse 
dating allowed by the Plain Ware tradition did not enable a judgment to be made about 
whether it survived to a period after the construction of the linear ditch system, although a 
single sherd of Early Cannings Cross pottery was recovered.
A number of field systems exist within the study area. Morphologically they take the form 
either of large areas of small rectilinear enclosures or smaller areas of aggregated fields. 
Together with the observation that in some places they are cut by linear ditches, believed to 
have been constructed in the Late Bronze Age/Early Iron Age, and the lack of later pottery, 
this suggests that the fields probably had their genesis during the Bronze Age. Their 
relationships with both linear ditches and settlement enclosures were sometimes noted. To 
the east of Beacon Hill linear ditches 1959 and 2061 clearly cut across pre-existing field 
systems (Bradley et al 1994, fig 72). On Brigmerston Down linear ditch 1971 observed the 
same alignment as the field system it cut, isolating it from its adjacent settlement (LPD109) 
and, from the evidence presented above, may have been associated with a reduction in 
arable usage.
In summary, the Wessex Linear Ditches Project provides a background of settlements of 
known, primarily Bronze Age in date, a virtually complete lack of evidence of later 
activity, and a limited amount of phasing evidence from the various interventions. 
However, in line with its design, the numerous field systems in the area received little 
attention.
The relationship between linear ditches and field systems had already been noted over a 
wider area in the pioneering work by Collin Bowen. In some areas linear ditches cut 
coaxial field systems, whilst in other groups of fields were enclosed by the linear 
boundaries (Bowen 1975; 1978). He also noted examples where linear ditches were 
overlain by the ramparts of IA hillforts, as at Whitsbury (Bowen & Eagles 1990, 75) or 
99
where a hillfort might be constructed at the end of a linear ditch, for example Damerham 
Knoll (ibid, fig 32).
Limited analytical survey of the Nine Mile River valley was undertaken as part of an 
assessment of the field archaeology of the Salisbury Plain Training Area (McOmish et al 
2002). This project provided evidence of the extent of ‘Celtic’ fields on Salisbury Plain 
and of their above ground survival, but also recognised their relative lack in the river 
valleys. Whilst many examples have probably been destroyed by later development 
including the widespread construction of water meadow systems, some low lying areas may 
have been managed as meadow or woodland. Specific to the Nine Mile River valley were 
detailed surveys of a number of the small enclosures and their relationships with field 
boundaries. The majority of these enclosures appeared to overlie lynchets and the 
suggestion is made that the enclosures may relate to a stock based farming economy within 
land divisions marked by the linear ditch complexes, rather than representing the 
farmsteads of those growing crops in the field systems. Earthworks of one of the 
enclosures on Brigmerston Down (LPD 109 [Bradley et al 1994]; fig 4.3) and its immediate 
environment indicated a more complex history; two adjoining enclosures, rather than one, 
open out onto each other and both overlie the lynchets of part of a coaxial field system, but 
ploughing after the construction of the enclosure boundaries resulted in a further build up of 
soil against the outer side of the banks (McOmish et al 2002, 71-72).
Approximately 1km north of the field system on Brigmerston Down mitigation work in 
advance of track construction located evidence of intermittent activity from the Late 
Neolithic period to the Late Bronze Age on the south-west facing slope of Dunch Hill 
(Andrews 2006). The earliest evidence comprised a small pit containing Late Neolithic 
Grooved Ware and Beaker pottery. Environmental evidence suggested areas of grazed 
grassland among hazel, ash and oak woodland. Despite the presence of two barrows no 
Early Bronze Age settlement activity was located within the areas of excavation or of 
watching briefs. A cremation burial, radiocarbon dated to 1450-1210 cal BC (2σ) was 
found within 10m of one of the barrows and may have been a secondary burial. A ditch 
(402) containing a single sherd of Deverel-Rimbury pottery and sealed by a Late Bronze
100
101
Age midden deposit radiocarbon dated to 770-390 cal BC (2σ), was also assigned to the 
Middle Bronze Age. This ditch appears to have been part of a large field system part of 
which has been subjected to a detailed survey, which clearly showed that it predated one of 
the linear ditches (McOmish et al 2002, figure 3.3). A larger barrow (HER 604) appears to 
overlie one, or possibly two, boundaries within the field system which would confirm a 
Middle Bronze Age or earlier date (Andrews 2006, figure 17). The ditch appears to have 
been allowed to silt up but its alignment was respected by a series of fences enclosing what 
may have been paddocks for stock, and which were associated with round houses and other 
features producing post-Deverel-Rimbury Plain Ware, three sherds of All Cannings Cross 
Ware, and a radiocarbon date of 1320 – 1000 cal BC (2σ). Triticum dicoccum (emmer) was 
found in the Late Neolithic / Beaker period pit, Hordeum sp from the Middle Bronze Age 
cremation burial, and both these cereals, together with Avena sativa (oats) from the Late 
Bronze Age round houses. 
Archaeological sites ascribed to the Bronze Age listed on the Wiltshire Historic 
Environment Record are shown in figure 4.4 and listed in appendix 2 (this includes all 
barrows where the dating is uncertain although some of these may have originated in the 
Romano-British or Saxon periods).
Aerial photographs of sites on the Salisbury Plain Training Area, a total of 675 sq km, have 
been transcribed under the National Mapping Programme and, despite intense 
archaeological interest in the area over a long period of time, 43% of the sites mapped had 
not previously been recognised (Crutchley 2000). An extract from these transcriptions
covering the upper reaches of the Nine Mile River valley is shown as figure 4.5 and it is 
these data which were used as the basis for fieldwork reported here
4.6 Fieldwork
4.6.1 Method of analytical survey
Access to that portion of the Nine Mile River valley which lies within the Bulford Ranges 
was granted through the good offices of Dr Richard Osgood, archaeologist for this area of 
the Defence Estates, during the two week closure in July 2008. A digital version of the 
102
relevant portion of the National Mapping Programme transcription of aerial photographic 
evidence had been provided by Dr David Field (fig 4.5).
The field system on Brigmerston Down was found to be under long grass and, since the 
boundaries stood on average only 20cm high, they had to be located from the National 
Mapping Programme transcript by hand held Global Positioning System. Although the 
known portions could be investigated any above ground evidence in the ‘blank’ areas was 
unlikely to have been recognised. An exception to this proved to be an area under tree 
cover where the section of fields known from transcription of aerial photographs could be 
extended. A portion of the field system was situated within an arable field under crop and 
this area was not investigated.
103
On Milston Down the field system lay within an area of small arms ranges and some dense 
tree and shrub cover. However, the majority of the ranges had been constructed without 
destroying the above ground archaeology and only on one modern range had the field 
system been totally obliterated. Within this area detailed examination of the junctions 
between the field boundaries could be undertaken and in many cases phase relationships 
could be established. During this work two probable and one possible previously 
unrecognised settlement areas were located and these were subjected to measured survey. 
The opportunity was also taken of visiting the area between these two field systems, 
notably the barrow cemetery on Milston Down (also known as Sling Down), and a 
selection of the linear ditches and enclosures were also viewed.
4.6.2 Survey of field system on Brigmerston Down
The results of the survey, giving both additional field boundaries located under vegetation 
cover and the phase relationships of the observed earthworks, are shown in figure 4.6.
The great majority of the features noted on the National Mapping Programme transcript 
could be located on the ground and the observed lines deviated only slightly and 
occasionally from that transcript. Some additional earthworks were observed and plotted 
along the north-western edge of the system which lay under tree and shrub cover, and at the 
southern limit where the effects of colluviation masked the crop and parch marks on which 
the transcript was based. 
4.6.2.1 Analysis
Examination of the relationships between the various earthworks suggested that the earliest 
field system had comprised a grid of small rectangular fields with a main axis aligned 
between 40o
and 50o
east of north. This orientation lies within the range observed for the 
area (McOmish et al 2002, fig 3.4). The smallest fields, in some cases measuring no more 
than approximately 30m x 30m, lay on the north-western and south-eastern edges of the 
system but examination of the aerial photographic data from ‘outside’ these fields show 
that this form extended in each direction, albeit with only fragmentary survival. It may be 
that this was the original form of the entire system but that areas close to the settlement 
104
sites had been altered and adapted over time. The north-western boundary appeared as an 
uninterrupted line with no sign of any boundaries approaching it from ‘outside’ the system.
The only area which has been available for fieldwalking was the arable field east of the 
enclosures and this has produced pottery including Beaker, Deverel-Rimbury and postDeverel-Rimbury (figure 4.3; Bradley et al 1994, figure 21). In an area south of the 
enclosures a number of possible stances were noted during survey and one of these 
105
produced a single sherd of post-Deverel-Rimbury pottery from the up-throw of an animal 
burrow. These may represent unenclosed settlements contemporary with the earlier field 
system.
Without excavation it is not possible to determine whether or not all the field boundaries 
were of similar construction but survival of a small number, which appear to be evenly 
spaced, as more or less continuous lines from north-west to south-east across the block of 
106
fields, have been used to try to divide the system into subunits. The lines utilised in this 
way, and the size of the resulting subunits, are shown in figure 4.7. These areas are similar 
to the medieval virgate, a parcel of land designed to support a single family; also like many 
Late Saxon and Medieval estates, they lie across the valley, giving each unit a share of the 
different soils and aspects. However, it should be noted that these parcels lie perpendicular 
to the main axis of the system and, although similar evenly spaced boundaries could not be 
as clearly seen lying from north-east to south-west, the decision to utilise the north-west to 
south-east lines has been taken as a personal judgment rather that with any clear evidence 
from the fieldwork.
Overlying this grid pattern of fields are a number of boundaries which together form a
group of four enclosures with rounded outer corners and each linked to the others (green in 
fig 4.6). The two central enclosures are each further divided into sub-rectangular fields. 
The total area of these aggregated fields is approximately 6.2ha, less than half the size of 
the earlier subdivisions. In some places the boundaries of this later system utilise the 
earlier lynchets but for the majority of their circuits, lines were created de novo. 
Boundaries from the earlier system are still visible within the western and eastern of the 
four enclosures of the later system suggesting that they cannot have been ploughed 
intensively. However, in the central two the pre-existing boundaries have been obliterated, 
and to the west of the small enclosure outlined in red (fig 4.6) ploughsoil has built up 
against the outer side of the enclosure bank.
Set within this system of aggregated fields is a small enclosure (orange in fig 4.6) within 
which can be traced a lynchet from the earliest surviving fields, but at no point does this 
enclosure appear to overlie those from the aggregated fields. There is no reason to believe 
other than that this enclosure was contemporary with, and formed an integral part of, the 
remodelling of the field system. Adjoining it to the north-east, and overlying the boundary 
of one of the aggregated fields, is a further banked enclosure. Although ploughing has now 
eroded these banks to the point where the position of any entrance is uncertain, earlier 
fieldwork determined that the two enclosures opened into each other and into the fields at 
their southern edges (McOmish et al 2002, 77-72).
107
Linear ditches (blue in fig 4.6) occur to east and west of the field systems and enclosures 
but at no point do they intersect. The eastern linear, known as the Devil’s Ditch, runs along 
the top of a ridge which forms the end of the re-entrant valley in which the survey area lies. 
The western linear is located on low lying ground, and runs parallel to and on the eastern 
side of the Nine Mile River, thus effectively dividing the fields and enclosures from their 
presumed source of water.
4.6.3 Survey of field system on Milston Down
The results of that survey, giving both additional field boundaries located under vegetation 
cover and the phase relationships of the observed earthworks, are shown in figure 4.8. As 
with Brigmerston Down, the great majority of the features noted on the National Mapping 
Programme transcript could be located on the ground and the observed lines deviated only 
slightly and occasionally from that transcript. A small number of additional earthworks 
were observed and plotted but a number of those visible as crop or parch marks located on 
the small arms ranges have not survived to a height where their phase relationships could 
be determined.
4.6.3.1 Analysis
Given the impact of later land-use over much of the area it is not possible to produce as 
coherent a picture of the successive phases of the field system on Milston Down as that on 
Brigmerston Down. This interpretation is therefore based on an incomplete data set and is 
necessarily somewhat speculative.
However, the surviving pattern might suggest a similar developmental sequence. The 
earliest boundaries are those of a series of small rectangular fields lying within a grid with a 
main alignment of approximately 300
east of north. These fields can also be divided into 
blocks (fig 4.9), the areas of which are very similar to those on Brigmerston Down ranging 
from 18.3ha to 21.2ha. These blocks again lie perpendicular to the main axis of the field 
system, and here there are no continuous boundaries lying with the main axis. The 
topography here is relatively flat and this disposition does not appear to confer the 
advantage seen on Brigmerston Down of sharing land types equally.
108
Overlying the grid fields are a number of more pronounced lynchets enclosing a smaller 
area (green in fig 4.8), but insufficient of these survive to state with certainty that they 
represent a cluster of aggregated fields. Although not recognised as such during the survey, 
post-survey analysis has also indicated the presence of two small enclosures (yellow in fig 
4.8) overlying the grid field pattern but any chronological relationship between these and 
the possible aggregated fields remains uncertain. 
A linear ditch skirts the eastern side of the area surveyed and can be clearly seen to slight 
both the ‘early’ coaxial field system and the later, potential, aggregated fields. 
109
Results from the survey of the possible settlement sites are shown as figures 4.10 and 4.11. 
All are situated in the immediate vicinity of the modern ranges, an area of intensive military 
use over a prolonged period and it is entirely possible that some or, indeed, all of these 
earthworks derive from that use. However, that shown as B in figure 4.11 produced a 
single sherd of post-Deverel-Rimbury type pottery and the enclosure shown as A yielded a 
horned scraper, a type usually assigned to the Late Bronze Age. In no case did the 
earthworks survive to a height of greater than 0.3m. Enclosure A (fig 4.11) comprises a 
simple bank, with disturbance of the south-west portion, but enclosures B and C both 
110
appear to have a south-eastern entrances and slight signs of external ditches, whilst the 
latter overlies a field boundary.
4.6.4 Relative and absolute chronology
On both Brigmerston and Milston Downs rectilinear systems of small, sub-rectangular 
fields are overlain by aggregated groups of fields
On Brigmerston Down, and possibly also on Milston, these aggregations of fields may 
be associated with small enclosures
On Brigmerston Down a scatter of pottery with a small Beaker component, some 
Deverel-Rimbury tradition but 80% Late Bronze Age may have come from a settlement 
associated with the earliest phase of the field systems
On Milston Down both phases of the field system were slighted by a linear ditch 
complex
111
112
4.7 Discussion of land use in the Nine Mile river valley during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
Little environmental evidence is available from the Nine Mile river valley but it seems 
likely that the area would have been extensively, if not intensively, farmed before the 2nd
millennium BC. Molluscan analysis in both the Stonehenge (Allen et al 1990) and 
Avebury (Allen 2005) landscapes has suggested that small, short-lived clearances during 
the Early Neolithic gradually changed to a more generally open landscape by the end of 
that period. During phases of monument construction the requirement of surplus food for 
those engaged in building would probably have been fulfilled from the immediately local 
area and the scale of farming may have fluctuated throughout the 4th
– 2
nd millennia BC. 
Nevertheless, the extent of field systems on Salisbury Plain (McOmish et al 2002) suggests 
a considerable population. The midden site at East Chisenbury (McOmish et al 2010) and 
other, possible, similar sites in the Vale of Pewsey (Tubbs 2010) also suggest large scale 
farming, albeit stock raising, into the 1st millennium BC. 
There was a substantial change in terms of the number of monuments during the first half 
of the 2nd millennium BC when round barrows, both scattered examples and cemeteries, 
proliferated (fig 4.4). The density of known sites between Stonehenge and Eversleigh 
reaches about 10 per sq km (Royal Commission for Historic Monuments [England] 1979, 
427). From the west, the valley of the Nine Mile River is overlooked by the cemetery on 
Silk Hill, whilst major clusters exist to the east of the river at Milston Down, Bulford Down 
and Sling Camp. The cemetery known as Milston Down 1 lies on a flat-topped, westfacing spur between the field systems at Brigmerston Down and Milston Down – the area 
would seem ideal for cultivation but no fields have yet been located, and the existing 
funeral landscape appears to have been avoided. The source of the Nine Mile River, now 
marked by two ponds, attracted a cluster of barrows at the edge of the surrounding higher 
land. 
However, despite this plethora of barrows there is sparse evidence of the accompanying 
settlements. Small amounts of Beaker pottery have been found throughout the study area 
(Bradley et al 1994, 71) but the earliest pottery found in any substantial amount is that of 
113
the Deverel-Rimbury tradition. Whilst a certain relationship cannot be established by this 
work, a temporal link between this pottery and the construction of coaxial field systems is 
strongly suggested by its presence on the supposed open settlement within the field system 
on Brigmerston Down (LDP 102, ibid figs 21 and 51) and from the closest collection point, 
some 1km north, to the field system on Milston Down (LDP 112, ibid figs 19 and 51). 
Some coaxial field systems cover several sq km, and it is not impossible that the areas 
described here represent fragments of a larger system, but the aerial photographic evidence 
combined with the continuous boundaries marking the northern limits of Brigmerston and 
Milston Downs encourages the belief that they represent two, probably of many, small units 
located within the valley. Despite their relatively small size both obey the alignment 
commonly, almost consistently, found in this area (McOmish et al 2002, fig 3.4).
Both systems can be divided into smaller portions of approximately 20ha, using boundaries 
perpendicular to this main axis. In practical terms, particularly on Brigmerston Down, this 
provides each holding with a share of land from ridge to ridge across the valley. Perhaps 
less pragmatically, it ensures that the boundaries defining the main axis cannot be seen as 
divisive, but as features which bind the separately farmed and, perhaps, separately held, 
fractions into a coherent whole.
It is not possible from this work to say that the development of aggregated field systems, 
the advent of enclosed settlements, and the reorganisation of land division marked by the 
construction of linear ditches are contemporary changes, but all post-date the coaxial field 
systems, and appear to be associated with post-Deverel-Rimbury tradition pottery.
The change from coaxial field systems to larger areas divided by linear ditches is usually 
considered to represent a change in emphasis from arable farming to stock raising. Unless 
the stock were either tethered or held in paddocks when management required their being 
close to the settlements, the aggregated fields may have been well fenced to protect 
remaining crop production from predation. On Brigmerston Down it is clear that some of 
these fields were ploughed – the earlier field boundaries had been ablated and ploughsoil 
had built up against the enclosure bank. No evidence of occupation has been recovered 
114
from either of the enclosures on Brigmerston Down, but the position of the earlier, western 
one in the centre of the aggregated fields suggests that it does represent a settlement, whilst 
the addition of the conjoined eastern enclosure may well relate to stock management. The 
failure to find any pottery at this location most likely results from the area having been 
taken out of modern cultivation.
The overall impression of the upper reaches of the Nine Mile river valley is one of a land 
organised on a very local and intimate level, and exploited in specific zones, but then 
abandoned. Details of use during the Neolithic period are uncertain but the number of long 
barrows indicates a utilised landscape. However, it is the concentration of round barrows 
that is most notable - placed around the source of the river and on raised ground on either 
side, they dominate the valley. Notably, although there are a number of barrows on the 
flanks of Beacon Hill, there are none on the pronounced summit ridge; it seems possible 
that the integrity of the flat profile, when viewed from a distance, was deliberately 
preserved. Given this concentration of activity it is likely that by the time the first of the 
field systems whose above ground remains are still visible came to be constructed, the land 
had been farmed for many generations. Erosion may already have reduced the amount of 
topsoil on the slopes to the point where fertility had been noticeably affected, but manuring 
and, possibly, fallowing or even folding stock on depleted arable could have kept the soil in 
good heart.
The field systems and, presumably, their accompanying settlements, avoided both the burial 
areas and the bottom of the valley itself. This latter zone, to our eyes the most desirable 
and the location of most of the modern arable fields, is unlikely on this geology to have 
been water logged and may have been reserved for grazing. Areas set aside for woodland 
must also have existed within the surrounding landscape. 
The slighting of a coaxial field system as seen on Milston Down shows not an end to the 
requirement for crop production, but a social change in the way in which land was held and 
exploited. This reorganisation of land division with small groups of aggregated fields 
surrounded by unenclosed land would suit a change in emphasis from arable to stock 
115
farming. However, a role for the linear ditch complexes in formalising pre-existing 
divisions between socio-political entities, as hinted at here by the differing coarseware 
pottery styles, is also likely. 
116
Chapter 5
Land use on Plumpton Plain during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
117
5.1 Summary
This study area comprises a 3km wide transect running from the Weald to the coast which 
includes the Bronze Age settlement sites and field systems on Plumpton Plain. Detailed 
survey of this area shows large systems of sub-rectangular fields stretching between high, 
narrow ridges and, in one case, bounded such that a space for movement of stock or 
humans remained between the two systems. Overlying these was a series of smaller 
systems of fields looped one upon each other. A number of previously unrecognised 
possible settlement sites were also located. Within the wider context the settlements at 
Plumpton Plain and Buckland Bank show an unusual longevity of at least intermittent 
occupation from the Early Bronze Age to the end of the Romano-British period.
5.2 Definition of the study area
The study area crosses most of the various geological strata of south-east England from the 
Greensand and Gault Clay in the north, across the chalk of the South Downs and the 
superficial brickearth deposits of the coastal plain. The area comprises some 42km2 
bounded by grid line TQ01 to the south, TQ35 to the west, TQ38 to the east and TQ15 to 
the north. Within this area the field system and settlements on Plumpton Plain and 
Moustone will be studied in detail and will be set within their wider context using 
published sources, unpublished fieldwork undertaken by Joyce Biggar and sites recorded on 
the East Sussex Historic Environment Record.
5.3 Rationale for selection of the study area
The area crosses a range of geologies similar to those of the Central Surrey area but 
may enable any influence of coastal access to be assessed
A considerable body of information about Bronze Age settlement in the area already 
exists but has not been synthesised
o The details of fieldwork undertaken by Joyce Biggar in the 1970s remain 
largely unpublished but written and finds archives are available for study
Analytical survey undertaken on the Plumpton Plain settlement (McOmish & Tuck 
2004) was limited to the scheduled area but note was made that field system earthworks 
extended further
118
119
120
5.4 Geology and topography of the study area
The location of the study area is shown in figure 5.1 and the drift geology and topography 
in figure 5.2. Relevant points of note are:
In Sussex, the greensand provides an area of light soil immediately north of the scarp 
slope of the downs
The steep scarp of the South Downs is north-facing and the gentle dip-slope faces south 
towards the sea
o In the period under study the downs would still have had a covering of loess, 
which has since been eroded, and would have had lighter, less calcareous 
and more fertile soils than at present (Catt 1978)
o Much of the dip-slope comprises a number of long, finger-like spurs running 
approximately southwards from the main ridge of the downs
Superficial deposits of clay-with-flints are relatively sparse but the spur on which the 
Plumpton Plain settlements are located bears such a capping
The coastal plain which provides fertile, light soils farther west, is absent east of 
Brighton
5.5 Evidence of Bronze Age activity in the study area
The overwhelming amount of evidence on the East Sussex Historic Environment Record 
for Bronze Age activity comprises poorly dated barrows, settlements and field systems on 
the chalk of the South Downs. Many of these sites have been destroyed or severely 
damaged by ploughing since World War 2; of 129 barrow sites recorded 82 are now 
ploughed out or mutilated, many since a pre-war survey (Grinsell 1931).
Field systems, usually undated, are recorded from several areas; indeed, a survey of the 
area of the downs behind Brighton (Holleyman 1935) shows that of 168 sq km (65 square 
miles) some 23% bore visible earthworks. Many of these have now been ploughed and, 
although their remains are often still visible on aerial photographs, this two dimensional 
depiction seldom allows adaptations and different phases of construction to be identified. 
Bronze Age sites in the immediate area of Plumpton Plain, recorded on the East Sussex 
Historic Environment Record, are shown in figure 5.3 and are listed in appendix 3.
121
122
Earthworks of the complex of settlements and field systems on Plumpton Plain were noted 
on the Ordnance Survey 2nd edition 6-inch map of 1909 (sheet liii, NE), but were first 
subjected to detailed survey in the 1920s (Toms 1927). Toms also collected a number of 
artefacts including pottery, mainly of probable Middle Bronze Age date, but also including 
portions of a late phase Beaker vessel.
A more detailed survey of the settlements and their wider context (fig 5.4; Holleyman & 
Curwen 1935, figure 1) was undertaken in the 1930s prior to excavation of the settlement 
123
area at a period before the destruction of large areas of standing earthworks by post-war 
ploughing. Analysis of pottery recovered at excavation (Hawkes 1935) led to a date for the 
enclosed settlements (Plumpton Plain A) of approximately 1000BC whilst the open 
settlement located farther down the slope was thought to be considerably later. More recent 
assessments of dating phases for the Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age transition, based on 
local ceramic assemblages (Hamilton & Gregory 2000; Seager Thomas 2008), recognise 
Plumpton Plain A as producing Deverel-Rimbury pottery with a calendar date of c. 1700-
c1150 cal BC. Plumpton Plain B produced post-Deverel-Rimbury ceramics in the plainware tradition with an overall date range of c. 1150-c. 500 cal BC, but with plain-ware 
limited to the period c. 1150-c. 950 cal BC. Placing the open settlement B at a later date 
than the enclosed settlement A is noted as a possible ‘key development’ of period 2 in 
Sussex predating a further phase of enclosed settlement in period 3 (Hamilton & Gregory 
2000, table 1).
In the 1970s Joyce Biggar undertook fieldwalking in the areas of Balmer Huff, Balmer 
Down and Buckland Bank prior to their being put down to permanent pasture. This work 
was augmented by a small excavation under the guidance of Mr L Allen but remains 
largely unpublished (Biggar 1978; 1980). A typescript final report (Biggar 1977) and hand 
written and typed interim reports and summaries, and the finds archive, were deposited 
with the Sussex Archaeological Society. The majority of the pottery found was reported as 
dating to the Iron Age and Romano-British periods but some appears to have been Late 
Bronze Age.
In addition, Joyce Biggar seems to have located pottery recovered during excavation of the 
‘Circus’ or ‘Cursus’ on Buckland Bank, thought to have been a Romano-British meeting 
place related to the nearby settlement, but with a ‘Celtic’ road running through it (Allcroft 
1926). More modern interpretation would suggest that the ‘circus’ was a pond and some of 
the pottery may have derived from manuring scatters. Some of the pottery was RomanoBritish but the majority, described at the time as ‘native ware’, was thought to be Early Iron 
Age (Curwen 1926). Prehistoric pottery and worked flint from these two sources will be 
examined as part of this report (see below and appendix 3).
124
In 2004 three out of the four settlement sites comprising Plumpton Plain A were subjected 
to a detailed analytical survey (McOmish & Tuck 2004) (fig 5.5) and at this time it was 
noted that the scheduled area was surrounded by permanent arable except on the western 
side where the land had recently reverted to pasture. During this survey a probable fifth 
enclosure was recognised lying north-east of those previously known and severely damaged 
by later activity. In addition three possible building stances comprising a further 
unenclosed settlement were located some 190m south-east of enclosure 3 in an area of 
dense vegetation. Further possible stances were located between enclosures 3 and 5 where 
they may be related to a lynchet boundary underlying the bank of enclosure 3.
Remains of field boundaries were noted extending away from the surveyed area in all 
directions. In general terms in each instance where a relationship existed between the 
earliest visible phase of the field system and the banks enclosing the settlements, the former 
underlay the latter; however, later fields could also be observed whose boundaries had built 
up against the enclosure banks. An area of fields was observed to the south of the 
125
enclosure complex which consisted of small, some just 25m2
, rectangular fields laid out on 
a north-west / south-east alignment which respected the underlying topography. One of the 
boundaries of this system could be seen both underlying the banks of enclosure 2 and 
within the enclosure. This field system clearly continued west of the scheduled area. 
Associated with these fields, and a rare survival on the South Downs, are a number of 
clearance cairns which consisted of large flint nodules presumably removed from the fields 
to facilitate ploughing.
Two track-ways were noted; one which lead eastwards from enclosure 1 pre-dated the latest 
activity in the area, being blocked by the bank of enclosure 2, and may have been 
contemporary with the earliest phase of the field system. This track may originally have 
joined a major track-way which came to lie between enclosures 3 and 4 but which clearly 
pre-dated the first of these.
A cross ridge dyke had been constructed across the spur and passed between the settlements 
designated by Holleyman & Curwen (1935) as Plumpton Plain A and B but unfortunately 
no direct relationship could be observed between the dyke and either the settlements or 
their field systems.
In summary, although some clearance and agricultural use probably took place in the 4th
and much of the 3rd millennia BC, in common with much of the South Downs, little sign 
remains other than scatters of worked flint with an area of Neolithic surface mining, 
possibly not coincidentally, underlying the Bronze Age settlement complex (McOmish & 
Tuck 2004, 30). What is abundantly clear is the intensification of use, including increasing 
findings of cereal pollen, in the late 3rd and early 2nd millennia. The settlements, field 
systems, track-ways and clearance cairns are of a type associated with the Middle Bronze 
Age to Late Bronze Age, a dating confirmed by excavation (Holleyman & Curwen 1935) 
although the finding of Beaker tradition pottery should not be forgotten. There are a 
number of round barrows surrounding Plumpton Plain which probably predate the known 
settlements. Many of these provide views to the north over the Weald and south to the 
coastal plain although views of the barrows are more restricted; from the settlement 
126
complex barrows would have punctuated the horizon to west and north (McOmish & Tuck 
2004, 31).
A coaxial field system appears to have been farmed perhaps by those living in unenclosed 
settlements set among the fields. That the Bronze Age settlement enclosures slight earlier 
field boundaries is clear both from survey evidence (McOmish & Tuck 2004) and from 
excavation of ard marks, not recognised at the time, under the bank of enclosure 3 
(Holleyman & Curwen 1935, fig 7). Although this arable use is probably Middle Bronze 
Age in date, the presence of earlier lithics found at excavation and during survey work 
(McOmish & Tuck 2004; English et al in press), and of Beaker tradition pottery mean that 
an earlier genesis is probable. 
Moving to the wider area, an extensive overview of published evidence and information 
from the grey literature (Yates 2007) has synthesised the Bronze Age settlement pattern 
across the various pays of Sussex. Perhaps surprisingly no evidence of Bronze Age activity 
has been found close to the coast within the narrow band under study here, although farther 
west in Sussex, where a fertile coastal plain exists, it is clear that the resources of this 
region were intensively exploited. One site, to the east of the area under study, throws light 
on the external links available to the coastal area. At Shinewater, on the Willingdon Levels 
near Eastbourne, a series of timber causeways and platforms were excavated and exotic 
finds included Baltic amber, Kimmeridge shale, a bowl in the Thames valley tradition and a 
socketed axe paralleled in northern Germany and Holland (Greatorex 2003). This site is 
further considered in chapters 7 and 10.
Use of land north of the scarp of the downs has been found on greensand close to the study 
area sites at Hassocks (Butler 2000) and on the Hastings Beds of the High Weald at 
Ardingley (Stevens 1998); each site has produced Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age 
pottery. At Warningore Farm close to the scarp slope of the downs, a narrow bladed, 
looped palstave, which may have been deliberately broken prior to deposition, was found 
and is dated to the later end of the Middle Bronze Age (Butler 1990). A bronze awl found 
near Novington Farm, also below the scarp, in style very similar to one found at Black 
127
Patch (Drewett 1982) and dated to the Late Bronze Age, may be related to the Plumpton 
Plain settlements (Butler 1988). Fieldwalking at Novington Manor, also on low-lying 
greensand beneath the scarp slope, has produced a concentration of worked flint of Late 
Neolithic / Early Bronze Age date and burnt flint which may indicate a settlement site, 
together with a small amount of Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age pottery (Butler 1989; 
1992).
5.6 Field and other practical work
5.6.1 The Biggar archive
128
Part of the area under study was field-walked by Joyce Biggar and assessment of her 
archive provides details of the human activity outside the field systems surveyed here, and 
from zones where above ground earthworks have been truncated by recent ploughing. The 
topographical location of sites described here is shown in figure 5.6. A spur running SW 
from the scarp of the South Downs, and dropping in height, narrows to produce a saddle, 
Buckland Bank, with a steep western side into Moustone and a gentler eastern slope into 
Buckland Hole. South of this saddle the spur rises again to a high point, Balmer Huff. The 
tip of an eastern spur from the root of the main spur, on the top of the scarp of the Downs, 
is cut off by a cross ridge dyke, effectively isolating a barrow cemetery, and a further group 
of round barrows, including Four Lord’s Burgh are located at the point of the spur north of 
the Buckland Bank saddle.
Previous archaeological interventions had located an Romano-British cemetery at the head 
of Buckland Hole and an accompanying settlement appeared likely to have been situated 
SE of the ‘circus’, itself located at TQ 369101. In Buckland Hole a lynchetted field system 
may have been used during this period or during the Early Iron Age activity evidenced in 
the same area (Allcroft 1926, figure 5.9), though an earlier origin is probable.
129
Joyce Biggar’s work involved walking fields on Buckland Bank, Balmer Huff and Balmer 
Down (fig 5.7); she collected worked and burnt flint, and pottery, of which a high 
proportion was Romano-British in date but only prehistoric finds will be assessed here. 
The Final Report on Balmer Huff A & B and Buckland Bank II (Biggar 1977) contains 
comments on soil conditions, number of sweeps, and other factors which may have affected 
the integrity of the collection, and her personal views ‘as nothing would induce me to 
record any more flintwork’ which is presumably why no figures appear for field BBII (fig 
5.7) – for much of the time this indomitable lady had only a bicycle to transport herself and 
her finds from her home in Lewes. Two notes on this work also appeared (Biggar 1978; 
1980). 
On Buckland Bank two fields, BBII centred at TQ 37101105, and BBIII centred at TQ 
37131088, were systematically walked in a series of grids; these were not of identical size, 
being related to a series of fence posts which may not have been equally spaced and have 
since been replaced, but few dimensions are given and the distribution plots, which assume 
that the grids were equal in size, are not necessarily accurate in terms of exact position. On 
the southern spur of Balmer Huff is the site of the deserted medieval settlement of Balmer 
but the fields reported here lie to the north of this. Two adjacent fields were subjected to 
gridded field walking, designated Field A and Field B, with the latter divided into a 
southern portion, Field B I and a northern, Field B II. The location of these fields is shown 
in figure 5.7. Cursory inspection was also made of Fields C, D and E but the position of 
these fields is not clear from the available archive.
Further work was undertaken on Balmer Down when Joyce Biggar saw a hand written note 
on Gurd’s 25” plan of the area marking the possible position of a Romano-British 
settlement. The field, centred on TQ 367104, lies on a south-east facing spur to the south 
of Buckland Hole. This field was only informally walked but a large amount of pottery 
(mainly Romano-British), worked flint and quern fragments were recovered.
The finds from this work were deposited, in an eclectic assortment of containers, at 
Barbican House, Lewes. As part of this project the archive has now been brought up to 
130
modern standards, a catalogue produced, and the worked flints and prehistoric pottery 
subjected to expert report. It is intended that the Romano-British finds will be the subject 
of further work and publication elsewhere.
5.6.1.1 Finds reports from fieldwalking and excavation by Joyce 
Biggar
5.6.1.1.1 Prehistoric pot by Mike Seager Thomas
Only a summary of the report is presented here but the details are included in appendix 3.
All of the areas surveyed yielded numerically significant quantities of prehistoric pottery. 
The assemblages comprise mostly featureless body sherds, highly weathered in the case of 
the field walked material, unweathered in that of the excavated material. The traditions to 
which they belong are identifiable primarily through analogy with fabrics and fabric suites 
known from sites elsewhere in the county. Owing to the lack of clear stratification, a 
number of sherds in similar fabrics that occurred in different traditions were impossible to 
distinguish. Four broad groups, however, are definitely present: ‘early’ post-DeverelRimbury, dated to the Late Bronze Age, ‘late’ post-Deverel-Rimbury, dated to the end of 
the Late Bronze Age or the beginning of the Early Iron Age, saucepan pottery, dated to the 
Middle Iron Age, and East Sussex grog-tempered ware (East Sussex Ware), early variants 
of which occur both immediately before and immediately after the Roman conquest. In 
addition a handful of sherds suggest the possibility of proximate Deverel-Rimbury (Middle 
Bronze Age) and slightly later Early Iron Age activity. (for discussions of all these 
traditions in Sussex see Green 1980, Hamilton 1993, Seager Thomas 2005, 85 & table 2, 
and Seager Thomas 2008).
INTERPRETATIVE IMPLICATIONS
Coming from an area, which, with exception of the excavations on Plumpton Plain, is 
under-studied ceramically the prehistoric assemblage from the survey area fills a yawning 
gap in the known distributions of Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age, Middle Iron Age and 
Late Iron Age / Early Romano-British activity locally.
131
Its distribution and relationship to the (mostly) earlier occupation on Plumpton Plain 
highlights the spatial separation locally of different phases of activity during the later 
second and first millennia BC: Middle Bronze Age and Late Bronze Age on Plumpton 
Plain and Balmer Huff, Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age and Middle Iron Age and Late 
Iron Age on the spur of Buckland Bank. The ceramic repertoire during all four periods 
shows activity to have been intimately related to that on other contemporary Sussex sites, 
probably through trade and exchange of the widespread and non-local fabrics.
Finally, and most importantly in ceramic terms, the assemblage holds a clue to the Early 
Iron Age locally. Ceramics from this period are relatively rare and, in contrast to the 
situation evidenced here, occupation of Late Bronze Age sites and their immediate 
surroundings seldom appears to continue into this later period.
Although definitive Park Brow – Caesar’s Camp, the ceramic tradition conventionally 
associated with this period in Sussex, is absent, the use of shelly and pisolithic fabrics 
within the survey area shows there to have been continuity locally in pottery procurement / 
manufacture through the Early and Middle parts of the Iron Age. This view is supported by 
the recovery from the survey area of a sherd in this fabric with Early Iron Age affinities.
5.6.1.1.2 Worked flint by Bertie Haken
The nature and period of all worked flint from the Biggar archive were identified by Bertie 
Haken and the full results are shown in appendix 3. Small amounts of Mesolithic and 
Neolithic flint are present in the assemblage but the great majority of the diagnostic pieces 
date to the Late Bronze Age, the most common tool form recovered being scrapers.
5.6.1.1.3 Fire cracked flint
A large amount of fire cracked flint was recovered from certain grids within fields on 
Buckland Bank - grid A3 (445 pieces) and E1 (645 pieces). The amounts suggest the 
possibility that the concentrations result from plough scattering of burnt mounds. A feature 
of this type was found at Church Field, Felpham in West Sussex (Holgate 1987) and 
concentrations thought likely to have originated from burnt mounds are known from near 
132
Chichester Harbour (Cartwright 1984) and, rather closer to Plumpton Plain, from Berwick, 
East Sussex (Butler 2005). An alternative suggestion is provided by the excavation of a pit 
used for the disposal of burnt flint, possibly from an activity which results in the production 
of burnt mounds, at Yapton (Rudling 1987). Burnt mounds are generally considered to 
date to the prehistoric periods, often the Middle and Late Bronze Ages, and have been 
found in many areas of the British Isles (Barfield & Hodder 1989). Various interpretations 
of their genesis have been advanced but domestic cooking (Barfield 1991) or industrial 
(Drewett et al 1988, 111; Jeffrey 1991) sites and thus an association with settlement seem 
the most likely. Pieces of fire cracked flint were recovered from most of the grids walked 
on Balmer Huff but no concentrations were located. On Balmer Down fire cracked flint 
was not collected but its presence noted ‘in no great quantity’ (Biggar 1977, appendix III).
5.6.2 Survey of field system on Plumpton Plain
Visible earthworks of field systems between the south-western boundary of the settlement 
area on Plumpton Plain and the ridge to the east of Buckland Hole, and south from the 
scarp of the downs to Balmer Huff have been surveyed and the results interpolated with 
earlier surveys of Buckland Bank and the settlement area (McOmish & Tuck 2004), and 
with evidence from transcription of aerial photographs. This area comprises two main 
valleys, Moustone and Buckland Hole, re-entrant valleys adjoining the former, and ridges 
bounding and separating the valleys; the detailed topography is shown in figure 5.6.
The earthworks within pasture in the floor of the upper reach of Moustone were of 
considerable size and were surveyed by tape and offset, this divorced survey being located 
both with respect to hard features depicted on the relevant Ordnance Survey map and by 
use of a Global Positioning System. Within both present arable and pasture fields 
elsewhere ploughing had reduced the earthworks to between 0.1 and 0.5m in height and 
here survey could only be undertaken in conditions of bright, low-angled light and using 
points located by using a Global Positioning System. It is likely that fine detail had been 
destroyed above ground in these latter areas. Evidence of probable field boundaries visible 
on aerial photographs, obtained from the National Monuments Record, was transcribed and 
the overall results are shown in figure 5.8.
133
134
At least two phases of field boundaries predating the modern survive as earthworks over 
much of the area surveyed. The earliest comprise two locales where rectangular fields 
arranged on a grid pattern can be seen, partly as earthworks and partly as soil marks on 
aerial photographs. Whilst only a portion of each system could be located, the remainder 
having been destroyed by more aggressive ploughing in the adjoining fields, each appears 
to have been coaxial in nature.
One system stretches from the ridge west of the settlement area, across Moustone valley, to 
the ridge west of Buckland Hole (red in fig 5.9). The field boundaries can be seen both as 
slight earthworks no more than 0.2m high, as soil marks in the modern arable field to the 
south of the settlement area (fig 5.11), and as lynchets up to 0.4m high on the steep pasture 
slopes of Moustone valley. Aerial photographs of the modern pasture to the south show 
that the area was ploughed in the 1960s and both here, and in the modern arable to the north 
of the settlement area, soil marks can be seen, but in the latter area these are fragmentary 
and unclear.
The main alignment of this system lies 100 east of north, contrasting with the second 
system, lying across Buckland Hole up to the ridge to its east with an alignment 400 east of 
north (red in fig 5.10). Here also, the boundaries of the earliest visible field system are 
mainly present only as soil marks, but again, they cross the floor of the valley whilst the 
later system was constructed on its sides. In neither case do these alignments appear to 
have been influenced by the local topography. 
Unfortunately the above ground survival was not such as to allow any attempt to divide 
these systems into sub-units. Very few examples of individual fields survive sufficiently 
well for their size to be calculated; where parallel boundaries are visible they tend to be in 
the order of 100m apart, giving a field size of approximately 1ha. It is notable that these 
field boundaries appear on aerial photographs (figure 5.11), whilst those of the overlying 
‘looped’ fields do not, although where not destroyed by ploughing these latter fields are 
bounded by lynchets of considerable height. The nature of the soil marks from the earlier 
system indicate the presence of both positive and negative lynchets.
135
136
Overlying each system were a number of smaller systems of aggregated fields ‘looped’ 
onto each other, and situated on the valley slopes leaving both the highest ground and the
floors of the valleys unenclosed. Just as the alignment of the coaxial systems changed on 
the ridge between them, a change which may have created a visual reflection of some 
underlying difference, so did the aggregated systems related to one valley or the other –
none crossed the intervening ridge. These systems are shown in black in figures 5.9 and 
5.10, and on aerial photographs in figure 5.12.
In the vicinity of the settlement there are at least three, and perhaps four, of these 
aggregated systems (fig 5.9). The least certain is that which may have lain to the north of 
137
the scheduled area, on the south-facing slope of what is now an arable field. Survey within 
the scheduled area (McOmish & Tuck 2004) recorded several curving lynchets which may 
represent the edge of ‘looped’ fields but neither earthworks nor soil marks survive on the 
modern arable. Partially within the scheduled area, but mainly to its south, and on the 
south-facing slope of a re-entrant valley at the head of Moustone, three fields lie adjoined 
and north of the cross ridge dyke, occupying an area of approximately 31.5ha. 
 Figure 5.11 Aerial photograph showing the rectilinear field system on Plumpton
 Plain. Photograph from Google Earth taken in 2005
Draped over the north-west facing slope of the same re-entrant valley, the south-east facing 
slope of Moustone valley, and the low ridge between them is another group of aggregated 
fields. Here, the group appears to have been constructed of at least four phases, firstly, four 
fields were ‘looped’ on to each other enclosing an area of 41.4ha, then, at an unknown 
period of time later, a further field of 6.2ha was added. Later again, another field was 
138
constructed continuing the line southwards into an area of modern pasture, but where 
earlier ploughing has destroyed much of the above ground evidence. A small field, no 
more than 0.12ha, was then built in the corner between the last two phases. Whilst the field 
system can be analysed in terms of order of construction of the fields it is, of course, not 
possible to judge the timescale of these developments – it may be that this group of 
aggregated fields was built in a single season but a period of centuries is also possible. 
However, the similar height of the lynchets surviving within the long-term pasture perhaps 
suggests a relatively short creation phase. The eastern portion of this group lies within an 
area of modern pasture and, with lynchets up to 1.5m high, represents the best preservation 
of these boundaries on Plumpton Plain.
On the opposite, west-facing side of Moustone valley a further group of aggregated fields is 
visible on the northern edge of the long-term pasture. The southern ends of three fields can 
be seen west of, and below, a terraced track-way with a further single field above. All the 
fields extend north into a modern ploughed field where above ground evidence has been 
destroyed and no soil marks appear on the relevant aerial photographs.
The separation between these groups of fields appears to have been deliberately enhanced 
either by their positioning relative to the local topography or by constructed features. The 
two south of the settlement area lie on either side of a re-entrant valley and this distinction 
may have been confirmed by the construction of a cross-ridge dyke, something of a 
misnomer in this case since it crosses a valley and also divides the settlement area itself, 
although its contemporaneity with any of these features is uncertain. These groups are 
separated from the one to the north by the settlement area, itself lying in the head of 
Moustone valley, and that valley also separates the two on its eastern flank, which are 
themselves separated by a terraced track-way.
The lynchets bounding these later systems are up to 1.5m high, and the underlying 
boundaries are seldom visible even as soil marks within these areas – either they have been 
destroyed by intensive ploughing or are too deeply buried beneath the later plough soil.
139
140
In Buckland Hole (fig 5.10) two of these systems of fields looped onto each other can be 
seen, one each side of the valley, the floor of the valley again being left free. Although the 
morphology of both systems is similar to that on Plumpton Plain, the proximity of Iron Age 
and Romano-British settlement suggests later use and possible adaptation of earlier field 
systems and further discussion of this area in a Bronze Age context would be ill advised.
On the high ground south of the scheduled area are one, or possibly two, isolated 
enclosures, long and narrow in shape, and overlying elements of the coaxial field system in 
that area. One is placed across, and appears to interrupt, the parish boundary, here marked 
by a pronounced bank. This seems unlikely to be a coincidence, and, although the 
necessary documentary research has not been undertaken to investigate later periods, this 
feature may have been some sort of stock enclosure or pound positioned while the downs 
were being used for intercommoning in, perhaps, the centuries around 1000AD or later (for 
example Blair 1978).
5.6.3 Excavation of a section across a lynchetted field boundary
A section 1m wide was excavated by hand (by the author and others, see 
acknowledgments) across one of the lynchets on the eastern side of Moustone at a point 
where one field boundary was considered to overlie another on the same north / south axis. 
The position of the trench in relation to the earthwork is shown in figures 5.9 and 5.13. Site 
code is MVP10. The aims of this intervention were firstly, to try to confirm the above 
ground evidence of a two phase boundary, and then to ascertain any differences in terms of 
farming practice between the phases. To this end column samples were taken (by David 
Lea), the soil micro-morphology investigated (by Richard Macphail). Finds were 
numbered and bagged separately and the find spot located in three dimensions.
5.6.3.1 Excavation results
5.6.3.1.1 Context report
The south-facing section of the trench is shown in figure 5.14 and a description of each 
context follows:
141
Context 100
A dark brown, friable layer covering the whole trench with less than 5% inclusions of small 
(<8cm) pieces of broken flint, interpreted as a grazed pasture topsoil.
Context 101
A dark brown, friable layer covering the portion of the trench above the slope of the lynchet 
containing approximately 10% of small (<8cm) pieces of broken flint as inclusions, 
interpreted as a possible loamy plough-soil.
Context 102
A dark brown, compacted layer covering the upper portion of the slope of the lynchet 
containing approximately 60% of variable pieces of flint including large (>15cm) nodules 
and smaller nodules and broken pieces as inclusions, interpreted as a possible loamy 
plough-soil. The large flint nodules suggest firstly, clearance from the field to the field 
edge and secondly, that either chalk bedrock or clay-with-flint deposits were being 
ploughed rather than the Aeolian loess cover.
142
Context 103
A grey / brown, friable layer covering the portion of the trench below the slope of the 
lynchet containing <10% of chalk flecks and large amounts of charcoal and incompletely 
burnt brushwood as inclusions. Interpreted as a possible plough-soil in an area where the 
143
shallowness of the contemporary topsoil meant the ard point had been cutting into the chalk 
bedrock. Also the site of a modern bonfire which precluded sampling.
Context 104
A dark brown, compacted layer covering the lower portion of the slope of the lynchet 
containing approximately 40% variably sized flint and 10% chalk fleck as inclusions. 
Interpreted as a possible plough-soil but with less evidence of clearance than the upper 
portion of the lynchet.
Context 105
An orange / brown, compacted layer covering small areas of the slope of the lynchet and 
the area above it containing <5% small (<3cm) pieces of broken flint as inclusions. 
Context interpreted as a possible turf layer between two phases of lynchet formation.
Context 106
A dark brown, friable layer covering the upper portion of the lynchet slope containing 
approximately 30% medium (5-10cm) pieces of broken flint with a small number of 
nodules as inclusions. Interpreted as a possible plough-soil but, given the fewer number of 
smaller flint inclusions, generated at a lower energy than the overlying context 102.
Context 107
A dark brown, friable layer covering the lower portion of the slope of the lynchet 
containing approximately 20% medium (5-10cm) pieces of broken flint as inclusions. 
Interpreted as a possible plough-soil but, given the fewer number of smaller flint inclusions, 
generated at a lower energy than the overlying context 104.
Context 108
A dark brown, friable layer covering the upper portion of the slope of the lynchet 
containing approximately 30% medium (5-10cm) pieces of broken flint as inclusions. 
Interpreted as a possible plough-soil but, given the lack of flint nodules as inclusions, 
generated at a lower energy than the overlying context 106.
144
Context 109
A grey / white, compacted layer of abraded pieces of chalk covering the lower part of the 
lynchet. Context interpreted as an area of exposed chalk bedrock subjected to damage 
either by plough or by frost action.
Context 110
A very dark brown friable layer containing <5% chalk fleck as inclusions and encountered 
as intermittent, thin lenses lying above the chalk bedrock. Context interpreted as a possible 
palaeosoil dating to a period prior to formation of the lynchet.
Context 111
White, blocky chalk covering the length of the trench interpreted as frost fractured ‘natural’ 
chalk bedrock.
Context 112
An orange / brown deposit of compacted clayey loam within a possible tree hole or solution 
hollow. Interpreted as a high loess containing soil located in a relict feature predating 
lynchet formation.
5.6.3.1.2 Finds report
Two body sherds of pottery were located, one in context 102 and the other in context 104. 
Both were judged to lie within the post-Deverel-Rimbury tradition (Mike Seager Thomas 
pers comm.). A small assemblage of worked flint was recovered from contexts 102, 104, 
106 and 107, all were waste pieces from a flake industry and, although none were 
considered diagnostic, all could be accommodated within the late prehistoric period.
5.6.3.1.3 Soil micro-morphology by Richard I Macphail
Institute of Archaeology, University College London
The only a summary of the conclusions from the report written by Dr Macphail is given 
here while the main text of the report, together with all illustrations, is given in appendix 3.
145
Conclusions
Eight thin sections, from five monolith samples, were analysed employing soil
micromorphology and selective microchemical analysis employing SEM/EDAX. Lower
lynchet soils (Contexts 101, 105, 106) were found to be mainly composed of a decalcified
fine loam soil, with high coarse silt (loess) content. The latter is a drift deposit of 
Pleistocene origin which still covered the chalk in prehistory, both here and at nearby 
Ashcombe Bottom.
At Plumpton Plain, features of soil disturbance and slaking that are typical of unstable silty
soils of arable colluvial origin across Europe, were recorded despite post-depositional in 
situ biological working affecting much of the buried soil. The large quantity of cracked 
angular flint suggests plough impact and high energy colluviation at times. Relict oxidised 
and part ferruginised fine organic matter is present, including fungal material, which may 
infer manuring inputs. Confirmation of this hypothesis requires a chemical study, however. 
Localised anaerobic conditions produced by burial also led to typical iron mottling.
A negative lynchet (Context 103) exposed the chalk substrate, producing calcareous soils 
where land snails and biogenic earthworm granules were preserved. Earthworm activity 
here also introduced burned soil into Context 103, from a recent bonfire.
5.6.3.2 Discussion of excavation results
In general terms, lynchets are formed by a build up of plough soil above a barrier, the 
positive lynchet, combined with a slippage of plough soil below the barrier, the negative 
lynchet. In this case the profile of the lynchet did not display the expected depth of ploughsoil build-up, the maximum depth being in the order of 60cm. Instead a complex story of 
agricultural use can be suggested. The relict soil with a high loessic content lying in 
patches directly over the chalk bedrock (context 110) was identified by soil 
micromorphology as a plough-soil. Given that the original depth of loess is likely to have 
been considerable this probably represents only the remains of plough-soil from a period 
prior to development of the visible field boundaries.
146
This loessic layer was not seen on the lower portion of the slope of the lynchet and here a 
slump of fragmented chalk intermixed with what appeared to be a plough-soil (context 109) 
results from ploughing into the natural slope and the formation of the negative lynchet.
Above this lay three plough-soil contexts distinguishable only by the proportion of flint 
they contained. Over the lower part of the lynchet (context 107) the plough-soil contained 
relatively few plough shattered flints and no large nodules which appears to reflect episodes 
of ploughing, adjacent to the field edge and below a barrier which prevented large nodules, 
displaced by ploughing the field above or thrown during clearance, from rolling down the 
slope. A similarly nodule free plough-soil (context 108) occupied the upper portion of the 
lynchet slope but contained a rather higher amount of plough shattered pieces of flint. The 
plough-soil above this (context 106) did contain a few nodules and probably represents the 
field edge from the first phase of enclosure.
The layer overlying these (context 105) was thought at excavation to represent a turf layer 
marking the junction between the two phases of lynchet development but this was not 
confirmed by soil micromorphology and its origin is thus unclear.
Above this, and at the top of the lynchet a layer of loamy plough-soil containing very few 
flints (context 101) represents the latest arable use of the field above, and to the east of, the 
lynchet. The distribution of large flint nodules, suspended on a steep slope in contexts 102 
and 106, is counter-intuitive, with the greater number of larger flints found on the upper 
portion of the lynchet slope. Both these contexts also contained fractured flints and the 
matrix is clearly a plough-soil derived from the field to the east. Presumably a somewhat 
permeable barrier had been placed along the slope allowing soil and small flints, but not 
nodules, to roll downhill. However, the position of this barrier, now half way down the 
lynchet, and the lack of any great depth to the positive lynchet despite the steep slope, 
suggests relatively non-intensive use of at least the eastern field.
In summary, although the division between soil build-up from two different episodes of 
ploughing was not visible in the soil micromorphology, differences in flint distribution 
147
encourage the view that this feature did represent overlying lynchets. The lack of depth 
suggests a lack of intensive use although removal of a volume of loess either during the 
first phase of enclosure or during an earlier, unenclosed agricultural episode, cannot be 
ruled out. By the time fields from the second phase of enclosure were being ploughed 
chalk bedrock was above plough depth below the lynchet and large flint nodules were being 
unearthed above it. Whilst no absolute dating evidence was obtained, all the artefacts 
recovered could be accommodated within the Bronze Age / Early Iron Age and there is no 
reason to believe that the area has not remained under permanent pasture in the intervening 
period.
5.6.4 Relative and absolute chronology
Recent reassessment of the pottery from Plumpton Plain (Seager Thomas 2008) places 
the Deverel-Rimbury tradition pottery from Plumpton Plain A, the upper enclosed 
settlements, within the approximate date range 1700-1150 cal BC
o A lynchet from the earlier, rectilinear field system underlies the enclosure 
bank of one of these settlements
The groups of aggregated fields overlie the rectilinear system at every point where 
phasing is visible
A number of the possible stances noted in the present arable field appear to have a 
spatial relationship with boundaries of the aggregated fields and this relationship may 
also be temporal
The possible cross-dyke appears to be on a similar alignment to the boundaries of the 
aggregated fields immediately south-west of the scheduled area suggesting a possible 
temporal relationship with that system
The parish boundary, presumably medieval, clearly slights both phases of field system
5.7 Discussion of land use on Plumpton Plain during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
It is unlikely that the field systems noted here represent the earliest use of the land for 
farming. An earlier presence is indicated by finding Neolithic flint working areas and even 
‘Levalloisian-type cores’ (although these could have been later prehistoric [David 
148
McOmish pers comm.] have been observed (McOmish & Tuck 2004, 29-31). A Cornish 
greenstone axe from the large arable field also evidences earlier activity (English et al in 
press).
The number of contemporary settlements, and, therefore, the population on Plumpton Plain 
at any one time, is uncertain but it is clear that there are more sites probably indicative of 
settlement than have previously been recognised. 
149
Analytical survey revealed a number of unenclosed settlements within the scheduled area 
(McOmish & Tuck 2004) and the present work noted two loci where platforms terraced 
into the hillside may represent hut stances and a ploughed out feature visible on aerial 
photographs which may have been a further settlement enclosure (fig 5.15). 
In Sussex there appears to have been a period of open settlements post-dating and antedating two periods when enclosures were constructed (Hamilton & Gregory 2000, table 1), 
a situation at variance with that in Wiltshire. On the chalk downs of Salisbury Plain open 
settlements associated with Deverel-Rimbury tradition ceramics were superseded by those 
surrounded by a bank and ditch, and these latter may remain in use up to, and in some cases 
after, the Roman Conquest (McOmish et al 2002, 67 et seq). It is also clear that in Wessex 
enclosed settlements might overlie open examples, as at Chisenbury Trendle (Cunnington 
1932), that pre-existing settlements might become enclosed, and, in a number of examples, 
enclosures might overlie field boundaries.
Such an overlay of different phases is also seen at Plumpton Plain A by analytical survey 
(McOmish & Tuck 2004) and, although not recognised at the time, by excavation 
(Holleyman & Curwen 1935). Cutting III of enclosure III in site A was placed across the 
southern portion of the bank and produced a number of post holes and evidence of shallow, 
parallel furrows cut into the chalk (ibid figures 8 & 9). These furrows, probably ard marks, 
appear under the main body and the outer scarp of the bank, but not within the enclosure 
itself, and suggest that construction of the bank had encroached into an arable field. Two 
post holes occur outside the bank (nos 1 and 2), whilst a further three (nos 3-5) were 
located beneath the inner scarp of the bank and post-hole no 6, with an un-numbered 
feature, were within the enclosure. The authors felt that these postholes did not form a 
recognisable pattern but the portion of the bank overlying the area immediately north was 
not excavated, and it may be that these postholes represent some structure pre-dating 
construction of the bank. Unfortunately this trench failed to produce any diagnostic finds 
and the matter must remain unresolved but clearly the enclosure bank overlay earlier 
activity and may have been placed around an existing settlement.
150
The story of Middle Bronze Age settlement at Plumpton Plain A and Late Bronze Age at 
Plumpton Plain B (Holleyman & Curwen 1935) now seems simplistic, but pottery from 
excavations can be placed in the date ranges 1700 – 1150 cal BC and 1150 – 500 cal BC 
respectively, and the complexity of the field systems points to long-term, though not 
necessarily continuous, utilisation of the area. 
The early, rectilinear field system on Plumpton Plain appears to have been deliberately 
placed between two ridges. The boundary on the western side of Balmer Huff, on an 
alignment dictated by the topography of the ridge, appears to delineate this system, and 
separate it from that in Buckland Hole, leaving a narrow passage along the ridge for 
movement between the two. This, and the different alignment of the two systems may 
suggest tenure by different communities. The Streathill ridge to the west of this system 
may similarly represent a north / south route through the enclosed lands. This marking of 
claimed land with visible boundaries appears to very deliberately separate communities, 
and the probable enclosure of more land than was needed to support the resident population 
may indicate concern that land which might be needed in the future could be claimed by 
others.
It is not possible to say whether or not the entire Plumpton Plain field system was laid out 
at the same time; the area may have been delineated and then sub-divided into blocks of 
fields as necessary. Only a single track, running from the south, is evidenced within the 
coaxial layout; this may have been part of the original design or may have been imposed 
later, but the relative position of east / west boundaries on either side suggest the former. 
The slight nature of the lynchets within this early system, even on the eastern slope of 
Moustone where there is no evidence of truncation by later ploughing, suggests that 
specific areas of the system were used neither intensively nor over a long period. That the 
crescent-shaped earthworks located within the field system represent settlement sites is 
uncertain. However, the presence of fire cracked flint and the lack of evidence from aerial 
photographs taken in 1947 that they were bomb craters suggest that this identification is 
correct. Their date, particularly relative to the early field system, is similarly uncertain but 
a scenario of blocks of fields within a large coaxial system used sequentially for relatively 
151
short periods of time, and each with a settlement, again short lived, may be posited. This 
seems a more likely picture, given the implications for population size, than use of the 
entire system by a number of settlements for a short period of time, followed by 
abandonment.
There is no evidence regarding the type of farming undertaken within the early field system 
but a mixed regime seems more likely at this date than specialised arable production. That 
lynchets formed on their boundaries suggests some arable use of the fields but the funnelshaped entrance at the southern end of the track in reminiscent of those formed at the divide 
between enclosed land and open grazing. But it is clear that the layout became unsuitable 
either for a new form of farming or for a change in social organisation. The requirement 
was sufficient for the formal arrangement of the coaxial system, cast like a net across the 
entire landscape between the high ridges, to be broken up and sub-divided. Some of the old 
boundaries were used in part to create the new, but south of the scheduled area a different 
alignment, dictated by the topography of the re-entrant valley, necessitated complete 
remodelling. 
The groups of aggregated fields, looped sequentially onto each other, have left more 
pronounced lynchets suggesting either more intensive or longer-lived arable use. However, 
excavation showed that, for one lynchet at least, this appearance of height was somewhat 
artefactual. Several characteristics of the second phase field system suggest an increased 
importance of stock management. The curved edges of the enclosed fields create a number 
of funnel-shapes, familiar as entrances to grazing areas and commons of much later 
periods. Keeping the valleys open would provide both wide areas for the movement of 
stock and richer grazing on the colluvial soils eroded from the slopes above. It is notable 
that Moustone valley still produces good grass used for grazing cattle whilst the 
surrounding slopes can only support sheep.
Again, it is not possible either to say whether or not all the groups of aggregated fields were 
in use at the same time, or to which settlements they related, but the larger earthworks 
associated with these later fields may suggest a more stable farming landscape. A 
152
movement towards the supremacy of stock could result from greater specialisation of 
particular settlements within the model of larger ‘estates’.
The later fields represent a considerable reduction in the area enclosed and a less formal 
layout. A design driven, partially at least, by ideological considerations being replaced by 
one more closely suited to farming needs appears a strong possibility. 
Whilst the differing alignments of the adjacent early field systems may have been used to 
emphasise the different identities of neighbouring groups the ceramic assemblage from the 
Middle Bronze Age to the Late Iron Age shows evidence of integration with other Sussex 
sites. The size of Early Bronze Age collared urns, found mainly in funerary contexts, is 
thought to bear a relationship to status (Woodward 1995) and this form of vessel is an 
insular tradition (Tomalin 1995). Deverel-Rimbury pottery, however, is found more widely 
distributed both in terms of domestic as well as funerary contexts in southern Britain, and 
as an indicator of cross-Channel links but within the tradition as a whole regional variations 
have been identified. However the sub-style attributed to the Sussex area (Ellison 1978) is 
now thought to have been part of a larger pan-regional tradition (Seager Thomas 2008). 
The alignment of field systems would have been a highly visible statement of identity, clear 
to travellers long before they reached a settlement, and more suited to a group within a 
society whose horizons were expanding.
In this area, and unusually, it is possible to see later use of the land. This may not represent 
continuity, a concept that cannot be examined with the currently available dating evidence, 
but the ceramic assemblage from fieldwalking in the adjoining area to the east by Joyce 
Biggar contains examples from every prehistoric period between Deverel-Rimbury and 
Early Sussex Grog-tempered wares, through into the Romano-British. A few sherds of 
Middle to Late Saxon pottery was probably associated with the pre-Domesday, but now 
deserted, village of Balmer, one of several located high on the downs. Why there should 
have been such an emphasis on this area and, indeed, whether or not it is unique, is 
uncertain, but the presence of a junction between (present) routes from the coast, over the 
153
ridges of Waterpit Hill, Balmer Huff / Buckland Bank and Balmer Down, and descending 
into the Weald by way of Warningore Borstal may have played a role.
In western Sussex the coastal plain provided light soils, sands, gravels and brick-earths, and 
here the coastline is thought to have been up to 2km seaward of the present. East of 
Brighton, however, the change in position of the coastline between the start of the 2nd
millennium BC and the present is thought to have been far less, and the substantial rate of 
erosion of the chalk cliffs a recent phenomenon (Woodcock 2003). This lack of a coastal 
plain ensured use of the downs and, as recent developer funded excavation at Hassocks 
(Mullin et al 2010) has shown, the Lower Greensand to the north were extensively used for 
farming. 
Here in the east enclosures on high ground are fewer in number than farther west. 
Ditchling Beacon, to the north-west and Wealden in its outlook, has been dated through 
pottery found in the matrix of the rampart to the Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age 
(Hamilton 1980), although in this context the sherds could be residual and a relevant 
radiocarbon date has an unfortunately wide range of 902-340 cal BC (HAR-5935) (Rudling 
1985). To the south-west Hollingbury is exceptional in Sussex in possibly providing 
evidence of intensive occupation, although only a small area of the interior has been 
excavated and the findings may be misleading (Curwen 1932; Holmes 1984). Here the 
rampart phase produced a pottery assemblage from a limited date range within the 6th
century cal BC (Hamilton 1984) although the site appears to have been in use prior to the 
construction of the enclosure and local high status finds include an Amorican socketed axe 
(Thomas 1983) and a Sussex loop from nearby in Patching (White 1991). The now 
destroyed enclosure at Castle Hill, Newhaven, to the south-east (Field 1939; Hawkes 
1939a), produced pottery, not necessarily associated with any construction phase, but in the 
post-Deverel-Rimbury decorated tradition dated to post c 800 cal BC. The Caburn, to the 
east of Plumpton Plain, was first enclosed during the Middle Iron Age with the rampart 
sealing Caburn I ware (Hawkes ibid) and Middle Iron Age pottery with a date range c.300-
100 cal BC (Hamilton & Manley 1997), but was also the site of earlier activity producing 
post-Deverel-Rimbury decorated pottery.
154
The Plumpton Plain area may be exceptional but, in contrast with other sites, there is 
evidence of continued occupation of unenclosed sites which overlaps with the earliest 
phases of the surrounding hillforts and continues into the Romano-British period and later. 
A slightly shifting pattern of settlement seems more likely than any radical dislocation and 
continued use of the fields in Buckland Hole, close to Middle Iron Age occupation, seems 
probable. The lack of any later pottery, despite relatively large scale excavations, at either 
Plumpton Plain A or B, suggests abandonment of that occupation area, but continued use of 
the fields is, again, not impossible.
155
Chapter 6
Land use in Kingley Vale, near Chichester, West Sussex, 
during the 2nd and early 1st millennia BC
156
6.1 Summary
Earthworks of multi-phase field systems and associated settlement sites have been 
surveyed. The earliest phase is represented by a rectilinear grid crossing the central spur 
and the two small combes within Kingley Vale, and stretching for an unknown distance 
south beneath present arable fields. Small areas appear to have been added to the east and 
west of the original grid. To north, west and east it climbs the lower slopes but is bounded 
by long, continuous lynchets leaving the ridges unenclosed. No settlement sites can be seen 
which are necessarily directly associated with this system. Overlying this grid are at least 
two groups of aggregated fields; these represent a decrease in the area enclosed and there 
are proven and probable settlement sites abutting the lynchets of this later system. This 
reorganisation left the ridge and the lower area of the vale apparently unenclosed and 
allowed access between the groups of fields. Cross dykes were built across the ridges 
bounding the vale to east and west, and further examples block other access points to the 
top of Bow Hill. The narrow ridge-like summit of Bow Hill bears a linear barrow cemetery 
and was also the focus of later prehistoric and Romano-British non-domestic activity.
6.2 Definition of the study area
Consideration of the evidence for 2nd millennium BC activity will be made over an area of 
90 sq km, bounded west by SU77, east by SU87, north by SU15 and south by SU06. 
Within this detailed survey of the field system in Kingley Vale has been undertaken, and 
the results analysed in light of settlement patterns within the wider area.
6.3 Rationale for selection of the study area
The topography and geology of Kingley Vale is not dissimilar from that of other case 
studies including Plumpton Plain and the area east of the Cuckmere in East Sussex
o In contrast this area of West Sussex has a wide coastal plain to its immediate 
south, an area of more fertile soils which may have affected both the 
chronology and the nature of exploitation of the chalk downland
Kingley Vale lies within the arc of Bow Hill, the summit of which bears a number of 
monuments dating from the beginning of the 2nd millennium BC to the Romano-British 
period
157
The evidence for settlement activity has received a recent overview (Yates 2007) which 
provides a background to this more detailed study
Kingley Vale lies in an intermediate position between the sites on Bulford Ranges and 
those in East Sussex, thereby presenting the opportunity, with other sites farther west, 
to examine regional variations in field system morphology
6.4 Geology and topography of the study area
The location of the study area is shown in figure 6.1 and the geology and topography in 
figure 6.2. The study area stretches from the chalk of the South Downs, across the coastal 
plain between the rivers Ems and Lavant, towards the sea south of Chichester. In the north, 
the scarp slope of the downs lifts to the height of 170m OD at Bow Hill Farm, from whence 
158
the dip-slope descends as a series of spurs dissected by steep-sided valleys. One of these 
spurs, Bow Hill, attains a height of 206m OD. Much of the area on top of the downs 
159
carries a superficial deposit of clay-with-flints over Upper Chalk, here Seaford Chalk. Both 
the Ems and the Lavant arise on the dip-slope, the area to the north of the chalk downs 
draining eastwards into the Arun. Kingley Vale lies on a different member of Upper Chalk, 
Newhaven Chalk, which, with small local deposits of head and an outcrop of Tarrant 
Chalk, stretches south to the low-lying coastal plain. Here the Upper Chalk, Lower Chalk, 
and sandy clays of the Reading Beds are overlain by heads and gravels, and farther south 
by the aeolian deposit, brickearth.
6.5 Evidence of Bronze Age activity in the study area
6.5.1 The broad area
The locations of recorded sites either dated to the Bronze Age or of potential Bronze Age 
date are shown in figure 6.3. Despite the inclusion of data from ‘grey’ literature from 
development sites on the coastal plain (Yates 2007), the majority of sites recorded on the 
Chichester and District Historic Environment Record lie on higher ground above 75m OD. 
In most areas this is above the present and historic arable margin and may suggest 
preferential preservation.
The most notable distribution is that of barrows, which here mainly cluster in small 
cemeteries on the ends of south-facing spurs - examples include those on Lambsdown Hill 
and West Coppice, Funtington - as well as those known only from aerial photographs on 
Stoughton Down. There is also one well known linear cemetery stretching along the ridge 
of Bow Hill and this will be further described below. Cross-dykes also occur and again 
those on Bow Hill are of particular interest. Field systems, in the main not well dated, have 
been recorded, mainly from aerial photographic evidence, on the south-facing slopes of the 
chalk downs.
A number of enclosures and possible settlement sites are known, both in Kingley Vale itself 
and in the surrounding area and the locations of these are shown in figure 6.4. The area of 
a ditched, and possibly banked, enclosure underlying a Roman road at Rummages Barn, 
Binderton has produced a number of finds including Early Iron Age saddle querns (CD620) 
and a ring ditch visible on an aerial photograph has been identified as a possible ploughed 
160
161
out barrow (CD4435). Limited excavation produced pottery, mainly from the upper fills of 
the enclosure ditch (SU84741120; CD650), and dating to between the 7th and 5th centuries 
BC (Kenny 1985). A short distance west of this a ‘Celtic’ road running up Bow Hill from 
the area of Dean Cottages has been excavated (Curwen & Curwen 1925; area SU83201140; 
CD623). The road, described as a hollow-way running between ‘lynchet-fields of Celtic 
type’, proved to be unsurfaced and was provided with lateral ditches late in its life. Two 
sherds of ‘coarse, flint-tempered pottery’ were located, together with an amount identified 
as Romano-British. Bronze Age, and Iron Age and Romano-British pottery was recovered 
162
when the lynchets in this area were destroyed by bulldozing (CD626) but the nature of their 
recovery makes their use in dating lynchet formation unreliable.
At Chalkpit Lane, Lavant (Kenny 1993; Chadwick 2006; SU868095; CD2400, 2403, 5127, 
5139 & 5151) there was evidence of occupation either intermittently or over a long period. 
A number of Early Bronze Age cremation burials, associated with Deverel-Rimbury 
tradition pottery, placed within ring ditches and possibly beneath small barrows, were 
located on the side of a slight valley. One of these ring ditches / barrows was later used as 
a sighting point for the laying out of a ditched system of land division. Further Middle 
Bronze Age urned cremations were located, one of which provided a radiocarbon date of 
1420-1160 cal BC (NZA167699), but the nearby settlement post-dated these burials. That 
settlement, partially bounded by fences and ditches, was associated with local cereal 
production. During the Middle Bronze Age / Late Bronze Age a ditched drove-way ran 
roughly north - south between fields and postholes and palisades were also located. 
The same excavation also revealed almost 50 pits of which seven produced Late Neolithic 
and Early Bronze Age pottery including Mortlake ware and a primary series collared urn, 
flint scrapers, antler, a carved chalk drum and a human cranium. A further pit produced a 
Sussex loop and a gilded bronze decorated annular armring considered to date to the 
Middle Bronze Age and three pits contained Late Bronze Age pottery vessels which had 
been full of fire cracked flints, a further seven pits contained fire-cracked flints alone. One 
pit produced a mixture of emmer, spelt and barley, and a radiocarbon date of 1010-800 cal 
BC (NZA-16502). The site, which later contained an unenclosed Iron Age settlement and 
evidence of Late Iron Age / early Romano-British activity, appears, in its earlier phases, to 
have been a long-lived ‘special’ area of some local importance. 
A similar situation may have pertained at a further site at Oving, close to Chichester but 
just east of the present study area, where a Middle Bronze Age pot base contained 3.8kg of 
fire-cracked flint (Kenny 1992). Other apparently deliberate depositions of domestic 
objects or material include the burnt quern fragments from the floor of one of the Late 
Bronze Age round houses on New Barn Down, West Sussex (Curwen 1934). A review of 
163
deposits of fire cracked flint and other burnt stone including greensand, within pottery 
vessels in south-east Britain recognises these as part of a Late Bronze Age tradition of 
deposition which varied in both the type of component and its treatment (Seager Thomas 
2010). In some cases all the contained matter had been burnt but in others unburnt artefacts 
were also included. These stones, whose colour changes notably on exposure to high 
temperatures, appear to take on a symbolic importance at the end of their functional lives, 
when their deposition most frequently associated with burial contexts but sometimes occurs 
on settlement sites. Brūck (2001) links the similarity in appearance of fire cracked flint and 
cremated bone with cooking and cremation in viewing each as a portion of the life cycles of 
people and their possessions. More recently this position has been seen to require some 
modification both by the experimental finding that flints used for cooking in water, socalled pot boilers, do not take on the characteristic appearance of fire cracked flint, and by 
the inclusion in a number of depositions of burnt sandstone, which appears red not white 
(Seager Thomas 2010). One possible interpretation of this combination, retaining the 
proposition that these assemblages symbolise life cycles, is that the red of burnt sandstone 
represents flesh whilst the white fire cracked flint resembles cremated bone, thus the 
combination symbolises a fragmented body, a mid-point between life and the ‘total’ death 
of skeletal remains. A different scenario could be posited from the use of sandstone, 
particularly Lodsworth Stone to produce saddle querns found on sites dated from the 
Middle Bronze Age onwards (Shaffrey & Roe 2011). Are the small pieces of burnt 
sandstone fragments of, or pieces representative of querns – and a reference to the 
agricultural cycle?
At Knapp Farm, Bosham, on the coastal plain, field-walking and excavation in advance of 
road development produced a multi-period site which included a number of inter-cutting 
pits of Late Bronze Age date (Gardiner 1987; SU81960605; CD1893). No evidence was 
found of structures but these may have lain outside the excavated area. The pits contained 
pottery, charcoal and fire cracked flint; the occurrence of sherds of the same vessel in 
spatially separated pits, together with the apparently careful deposition of one particular pot 
(in pit 329) was used to suggest that the site was ‘closed down’ by levelling prior to 
abandonment with possible symbolic placement of the nearly complete pot (Hamilton in 
164
Gardiner 1987). Similar phenomena had been noted at an approximately contemporary site 
at Yapton (Hamilton in Rudling 1987); this latter site has a radiocarbon date of 824-777 cal 
BC and the Knapp Farm assemblage of post-Deverel-Rimbury tradition plain ware is 
thought to fall between the 10th and 8th centuries BC.
At East Marden excavation of a number of sections across a ditch produced a small pottery 
assemblage and led the excavators to place construction of the settlement enclosure ditch in 
the Early Iron Age although four sherds of Early Bronze Age pottery, including one from a 
collared urn, in the primary silts suggests activity at an earlier date (Down & Welch 1990; 
SU81291483; CD655).
On Lambsdown Hill a rectangular enclosure abuts a cross-dyke and is thought to be of Late 
Bronze Age date, although there appears to be no evidence for this assignation 
(SU82021237; CD604). Similarly lacking in dating evidence was a crouched inhumation 
burial found during building works at the White Horse pub, Chilgrove and preserved in situ 
(SU82761446; CD7131).
A little outside the study area is the banjo enclosure at Carne’s Seat, Goodwood where field 
walking and limited excavation produced a small amount of Late Bronze Age / Early Iron 
Age pottery, not associated with any features (Holgate 1986; SU88760945). Commercially 
funded archaeological interventions, largely resulting from PPG16, have produced a 
number of sites on the coastal plain of Sussex; although none are within the area of this 
case study their presence is relevant to developments in the wider area (Yates 2007, 156-
157). One just outside was at the site of the cattle market in Chichester (SU 865046; WSx 
HER 4496) where Middle Bronze Age pottery was associated with cultivation evidence.
At Ford Airfield a coaxial field system with the fields spaced between parallel drove-ways 
and a possible high status enclosure, produced Late Bronze Age pottery and radiocarbon 
dates from charcoal in a pit possibly overlying one of the drove-ways of 1130-820 cal BC 
(BETA-144445) and 1120-820 cal BC (BETA 144446). Food remains included emmer 
165
(Triticum dicoccum), spelt (Triticum spelta) and barley (Hordeum vulgare), and controlled 
movement of animals was envisaged (Clouston 2000).
6.5.2 The core area
The area to be studied in detail comprises Kingley Vale and its surrounding high ground, 
Bow Hill and Stoke Down. Bow Hill, a significant place within the local topography, with 
a wide viewshed particularly from the narrow ridge between its summit and Stoke Down, 
bears a number of monuments and has clearly been regarded as a special place over a long 
time frame. Set along the narrow ridge is a linear barrow cemetery, the Devil’s Humps, 
comprising at least six mounds, two ditched bowl, two bell and two pond barrows. Three 
were excavated in 1792 and a campaign also took place in 1853, with further work in 1933 
(CD HER), and an Early Bronze Age / Middle Bronze Age date has been assigned to the 
cemetery. A remarkable complex of cross-dykes delineates the summit of the ridge and, 
although little dating evidence exists for this class of monument as a whole, they are 
generally thought to relate to the Late Bronze Age. Two of these cross-dykes were reused 
as part of the rectangular enclosure known as Bow Hill Camp (Haskins 2009; SU82561164; 
CD577). This enclosure, with its simple east-facing entrance was thought by the survey 
team to possibly be medieval in date but recent excavation has shown it to date to the Iron 
Age (Dave McOmish pers comm.). The enclosure known as Goosehill Camp (Boyden 
1956; SU830127) has been assigned on the basis of the ceramic assemblage to the 5th to 3rd
centuries BC (Hamilton & Manley 1997). The summit of Bow Hill remained important 
into the Romano-British period when it became the site of a building, possibly a temple and 
evidence of activity around the barrow cemetery in the same period may well be of ritual 
significance (Williams 1997). 
Stoke Clump (Cunliffe 1966; SU833094; CD1029), part of a ridge running south from the 
main mass of Bow Hill, has produced pottery over a long period including a collection 
made by Rev WA Shaw (ibid). The assemblage includes one sherd each from the Neolithic 
and Beaker periods but the main bulk has been assigned to the Early Iron Age (ibid). More 
recently this pottery has been placed within the final phase of the post-Deverel-Rimbury 
166
tradition, and therefore dated towards the end of the period c.1150-500 cal BC (Seager 
Thomas 2008).
Over the lower ground of Kingley Vale is a field system (area SU82261069; CD575) and 
settlement site(s) (SU8219910761 & SU82231077; CD588) which have been subjected to 
limited survey and excavation (Curwen 1934; fig 6.5). The field system lies across a small 
spur central within the vale and the valley to its east, and does not appear to encompass 
either the surrounding steep scarps or the lower ground to the south. One proven settlement 
site lies on the spur and a further possible site on its eastern flank. Excavation of the 
former, site A, produced few diagnostic finds. A pit (site I) contained what would now be 
recognised as a placed deposit comprising, in the lowest part of the fill, a bone awl and a 
perforated vessel, possibly either a lamp or a strainer, and, in the topsoil fragments of 
167
saddle querns, two hammerstones and flint flakes. Curwen was aware of Saxon parallels 
for this vessel and this later, Early Saxon, date has been confirmed (Welch 1983, 503-4). In 
a small hollow (site IV) were found ‘four small sherds of coarse, friable and gritty pottery 
identical in quality and colour with the Late Bronze Age pottery from the New Barn Down 
site’. Pottery from New Barn Down is placed within the Deverel-Rimbury tradition 
(Seager Thomas 2008). The excavator expressed uncertainty over the period of the 
settlement and the surrounding field system, even considering a Romano-British date, but a 
single Romano-British sherd in the topsoil does not obscure the similarity with other 
prehistoric sites, and a genesis within either the Middle Bronze Age or, as Curwen 
suggested, the Late Bronze Age seems most likely.
A further possible settlement area (SU82021061; CD649) has been scheduled although no 
evidence of its origin, other than morphological, appears to be available, and World War 2 
activity, particularly the blowing up of a tank, may be responsible for some of the 
earthworks (Dave Mercer pers comm.). Aerial photographs taken in the immediate postwar period unfortunately do not cover this area.
6.6 Analytical survey of the field systems
A level 3 analytical survey (Bowden 1999), using tape and offsets, was undertaken within 
the National Nature Reserve in Kingley Vale, covering the area over which lynchets could 
be located as above ground earthworks. Fixed points mainly related to the boundary fence 
but locational checks were made using a handheld GPS Eltek. A small area was not 
accessible due to fallen yew trees (Taxus baccata) and adventitious vegetation and fallen 
trees also limited observation on the steep slopes in the north-western section of the bowl. 
It is recognised that some data may have been lost in these areas but they comprise less 
than 5% total land surface. In addition to the field systems a probable settlement site was 
subjected to detailed survey to investigate its relationship with one of the field boundaries.
6.6.1 Survey results
Results of the survey of the field systems are shown in figure 6.6 and in an interpreted form 
in figure 6.7, and that of the probable settlement site in figure 6.8.
168
169
170
The earliest visible earthworks in Kingley Vale are the lynchets bounding the fields in a 
rectilinear grid, aligned north / south, crossing the central spur within the Vale, stretching 
up the sides of the ridges to west, north and east, and continuing across present arable fields 
to the south. In the central area individual lynchets have been traced for a distance of over 
1km from the steep slopes below the summit of Bow Hill to beyond the southern boundary 
of the National Nature Reserve and these are crossed at right angles by a series of east / 
west boundaries. As the valley widens towards its southern end and below the curving 
western ridge extra rows of fields appear to have been added to the central band. Some of 
the southern fields in the western strips have notable rounded south-western corners 
suggesting a lack of intention to extend the field system westwards. A single strip was 
added outside the long eastern boundary. Within the head of the valley fields stretch onto 
steeper slopes than would seem likely to have been suitable for ploughing yet farther south, 
they do not extend up the lesser slopes.
Where a total of nine parallel north / south boundaries have been surveyed the distance 
between them averages 47m (47 ± 6m, mean ± SD; range 40-56m) whilst the distance 
between the east / west boundaries averages some 55m (55 ± 5; range 44-60; n = 9). The 
area of the fields where all boundaries had been located averages 2.5ha (2.5 ± 0.5ha; range 
1.7 – 3.6ha; n = 37). 
There appears to be a tendency for smaller fields to have been created on the steeper slopes
in the head of the valley with the northern enclosures averaging 1.9ha in area against 2.7ha 
on the flatter ground to the south (1.9 ± 0.1, n = 12 vs 2.7 ± 0.4, n = 12, mean ± SD) but 
this difference fails to meet mathematical significance (Student’s ‘t’ test, one tailed, paired 
values, 95% confidence limits). Although there is some variability, probably due in part to 
the known episode of ploughing during World War 2, the lynchets associated with the 
earlier field system are slighter that those bounding later fields.
A single track can be seen running east / west through the fields and appears to be integral 
to the grid system. At both western and, particularly eastern, ends there are funnel entrances 
to this trackway. At both ends these lead into enclosed parcels of land and, whilst this may 
171
have been an intentional part of a stock handling system it is also possible that these areas 
were enclosed as part of the additive strips. A short length of track leads north to give 
access to an area including one of the later enclosed settlements (CD649).
This grid of rectilinear fields is overlain by a number of aggregated groups of fields which, 
in the majority of cases, are bounded by larger lynchets and, in some cases, have playing 
card shaped corners at their outer limits. One of these groups occupies the central, slight 
spur and the valley to its east, whilst a second lies to its west. None of these later fields 
were placed on the lower ground at the southern end of the Vale. These fields are more 
variable in area than those of the earlier system but overall tend to be larger (4.8±1.8ha, 
mean ± SD, n = 9). However, in totality, the aggregated fields represent a considerable 
decrease in enclosed land relative to the earlier coaxial grid, probably by a factor of at least 
four. 
A number of possible settlement sites have also been located, although known extensive 
military use of the Vale from the late 19th century to WW2 may well be responsible for 
some of the scoops. However, those scattered within the fields of the early system in the 
southern portion of the Vale are within mature yew woods (Taxus baccata) and, in view of 
the lack of any apparent shrapnel damage to the trunks, are likely to be of considerable age 
and may represent prehistoric settlement sites. The finding of fire cracked flints in their 
general area adds some weight to this identification. These sites occur mainly in field 
corners and any phase relationship with the lynchets is not clear from surface evidence 
alone.
Three proven and possible settlement sites do relate specifically to the boundaries of the 
later, aggregated fields. One of these produced prehistoric, possibly Deverel-Rimbury 
tradition pottery (CD 508; SU82201076; Curwen 1934), a second (SU82001083) may have 
been the site where a tank was blown up during World War 2 (Dave Mercer pers comm.) 
and the visible earthworks may result solely from that event, whilst the third (CD 649; 
SU82021061) is that subjected to detailed survey (fig 6.8). Here a semi-circular, banked 
enclosure has been constructed abutting and post-dating the lynchet. The portion of the 
172
lynchet immediately north of the enclosure is steeper and narrower than those on either 
side; this may suggest either that the settlement was partially cut into the lynchet or that a 
portion of the field was specifically taken out of arable use after the enclosure had been 
constructed. Scoops located inside and immediately to the east of the enclosure may 
represent contemporary features or, given the amount of military activity in this area, later 
disturbance. There is access from the south by way of a track leading from that which runs 
through the earlier field system.
The two enclosures CD 508 and CD 649 bear a remarkable similarity to each other. Both 
are appended to the southern, down-slope sides of lynchets of different aggregated field 
systems and each has controlled access around its outer side created by a curving boundary 
approaching, but not abutting the enclosure bank. Gates or hurdles across these narrow 
173
points and the track approaching the western settlement would have allowed control of 
movement into a yard immediately adjacent to the habitation area. The sequence of 
development suggests an early field system used and modified at a later period. Whilst it is 
clear that the possible settlement site eventually cut into a field boundary from the later 
system, with the enclosure partially overlying the lower portion of the lynchet, it is possible 
that the settlement was originally open and the enclosure a later addition. 
To the west of Kingley Vale two cross dykes have their eastern termini within the National 
Nature Reserve. The southern example (CD644) has been extended eastwards with a 
northern return comprising a relatively slight bank with a down-slope ditch, and this 
earthwork represents the boundary between Stoughton and Funtington parishes. Farther 
west however a major bank with up slope ditch and, westwards again, a double bank with a 
central ditch crosses the spur. A cursory inspection suggests this earthwork overlies the 
presumed prehistoric field system on Stoke Down and appears to have a previously 
unrecognised square enclosure, with approximately 100m sides, appended to its northern 
bank.
The northern cross-dyke (CD 580), also with its ditch up slope from the bank, crosses the 
same spur but encompasses three alignments in its 230m length. It is situated almost at the 
top of the spur immediately south-west of the westernmost barrow in the linear cemetery 
known as the Devil’s Humps (CD562, 563, 570-573).
6.7 Pottery from Barnett Copse, Chalton, Hants
Although outside the study area this rare example of secure and early dating for a field 
system boundary has relevance to the wider area and is therefore included here.
Whilst an extensive survey of the area round Chalton, Hants was being undertaken an 
inurned cremation burial was accidentally exposed during forestry work and the pot and its 
contents recovered under rescue conditions. The site (area SU743157) has been mentioned 
in publication (Cunliffe 1973) but the form and fabric of the urn was only briefly described. 
The relevance here is that the burial was placed over a well-developed lynchet – a section 
174
drawing, photograph of the urn and fragments of the base are held by Portsmouth City 
Museum. Clearly of some status, the burial was furnished with a jet pendant, amber beads 
of both segmented and biconical type – unfortunately none of this assemblage nor the urn 
itself can now be found, but a photograph remains (fig 6.9) and its fragments have been 
assessed.
6.7.1 The urn from Barnett Copse, Chalton, Hants by Mike Seager Thomas
The main text of this report may be found in Appendix 4. In summary, the vessel is a 
biconical urn whose fabric probably dates to before c. 1700 cal BC.
6.8 Relative and absolute chronology
The rectilinear field system pre-dates the agglomerated fields
o A similar field system on Stoke Down can be seen to probably underlie a 
cross-ridge dyke
The enclosure of a possible settlement site overlies one of the boundaries of one of the 
agglomerated fields
175
o A similar settlement site has produced pottery described as similar to that 
from New Barn Down which is Deverel-Rimbury tradition dated to between 
c1700 cal BC and c1150 cal BC
6.9 Discussion of land use in Kingley Vale during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
The remarkable state of preservation of earthworks on Bow Hill and in Kingley Vale allow 
construction of a conjectural narrative of landscape development over a period probably 
approaching a millennium.
The cluster of barrows on the eastern spur (CD 582-584) were excavated in 1859 and 
produced burial urns, described as having inverted overhanging rims, and now considered 
among the later of the collared urn series dated to the first half of the 2nd millennium BC 
(Longworth 1984, pl 215). Although archives from antiquarian investigations do not 
survive, the linear barrow cemetery decorating the high arc bounding the northern ridge 
overlooking Kingley Vale, known as the Devil’s Humps, is likely to belong to the same 
period, and may predate the visible field systems and settlements.
The earliest visible field system, covering an area of at least 60ha, was draped over the 
central spur and stretched up the steep slopes. Although this system gives an impression of 
rigid formality, it is most unlikely that the entire area was under use for grain production at 
any one time. The yield of einkorn (Triticum monococcum) has been calculated from 
experimental crops as averaging 1.4 tonnes / hectare (Reynolds 1979, 59) – even a tenth of 
the visible field system could have produced 8.4 tonnes of grain with an average protein 
content of 17.5% dry weight (ibid 60). Allowing 45g protein per individual per day, this 
food source alone would be sufficient to provide the required amount of protein (although 
lacking the essential amino acid lysine) for some 90 adults. Given the prevalence of such 
field systems in the area this population figure is unlikely. The whole field system may not 
have been in use or even constructed at the same time – piecemeal development over a 
period of time but conforming to an existing template is equally possible. This field system 
cannot be securely dated and no settlements can be directly associated with it. The slight 
176
nature of the lynchets, even within yew woods of considerable age where they could not 
have been abraded by ploughing during World War 2, might suggest short-term, nonintensive or non-arable use. However, despite the age of the yews, it is not impossible that 
erosion of softer, perhaps loessic, topsoils through ploughing subsequent to the 
abandonment of the early field system reduced its lynchets to the low, chalk cut, remains 
now visible.
The early field system left only the high eastern and western ridges surrounding Kingley 
Vale unenclosed, presumably allowing access both for possible grazing on the highest 
portion of the downs, and for use by through traffic. Aerial photographic evidence suggests 
the presence of further rectilinear field systems in the valleys beyond both eastern and 
western spurs (Bradley 1971 fig 3). Whilst the main axis of the system in Kingley Vale is 
north / south that to the west, on Stoke Down, has an axis approximately 80o and that on the 
eastern slopes of Bow Hill one of 20o
east of north. These alignments appear to be largely 
determined by the local topography but may also have served as community identifiers –
certainly the rigour with which the alignment in Kingley Vale was observed suggests some 
strong cultural requirement. The question arises of the source of wood for any of these 
communities, assuming they were contemporary. Obtaining timber for construction, 
coppice wood for wattling and hurdle making, brushwood faggots for industrial and 
domestic heating would have been a constant necessity and, whilst the occasional 
requirement for the first of these would have made relatively distant production possible, 
frequent use of small-wood renders very local sources, in our terms at least, convenient. 
The Weald to the north could have provided timber and field boundaries marked by hedges 
would have been a source of brushwood but coppice wood, with the need to protect young 
shoots from grazing animals, is more efficiently grown in small parcels of land. Coppice 
stools could have been grown in some of the enclosed parcels, otherwise only the steep, 
north-facing slope of Bow Hill appears available.
It is not possible to say there was a hiatus between abandonment of the early field system 
and construction of its successor, but both cultural and economic requirements had 
fundamentally changed. The later boundaries sometimes directly overlie the earlier ones 
177
but more often do not and the ‘playing card’ shaped corners, if that was the original design, 
suggest enclosure from land considered previously unenclosed despite visible evidence to 
the contrary. However, erosion over two boundaries set at right angles might well produce a 
rounded corner. Clusters of fields left access for movement throughout the valley and the 
entire southern portion appears to have been left unenclosed. The larger lynchets suggest 
either more intensive or longer lasting use; these fields may represent the area of land 
actually necessary to support the population in terms of arable production. The lack of any 
formality in the layout is a clear break with the past, emphasised by the deliberate choice 
not, in most cases, to utilise the existing boundaries. Leaving both the flat ground at the 
southern end of the Vale and land between the agglomerates unenclosed suggests an 
increased requirement for movement, and for open grazing on the lusher vegetation, 
possibly indicating an increased importance for stock within the farming economy. 
The two main aggregated field systems are associated with enclosed settlements - indeed, 
the similarity in layout between the two is remarkable. Detailed survey of the western 
settlement indicates that it post-dates development of its adjacent lynchet. Given the 
probable finding of Deverel-Rimbury tradition pottery at the eastern settlement (Curwen 
1934) a tentative dating of c.1700-1150 cal BC may be assigned (Seager Thomas 2008), 
with both phases of field systems pre-dating those settlements.
Concern has already been expressed at the identification of the extreme eastern portion of 
the lower bank across the spur bounding the western side of Kingley Vale. Whilst the 
major earthwork is clearly a prehistoric cross-ridge dyke, the return may have been 
constructed de novo as a parish boundary or may represent medieval re-use of an earlier 
boundary. This, the upper cross-dyke on the same spur, and others in the area, have few 
visible phase relationships with other earthworks thus contra-indicating even relative 
dating, and all may not be contemporary. However, indications that the lower cross-dyke 
on the western spur overlies the field system on Stoke Down, whilst ‘British Camp’ on 
Bow Hill, which has produced Middle Iron Age pottery (Mark Roberts pers comm.), clearly 
reutilises two of the cross-ridge dykes, allows the tentative suggestion of a Late Bronze 
Age date for these earthworks. The complex of cross-ridge dykes on Bow Hill has received 
178
considerable attention and, with others on the South Down, is considered to control access 
to, and define areas of downland grazing (Bradley 1971). Those across the spurs to east 
and west of Kingley Vale combined with examples limiting access up the slopes from the 
north, do appear to isolate the main ridge of Bow Hill. It has been suggested (ibid) their 
presence might indicate that movement took place along tracks on lower ground, towards 
the coastal plain, but recognition of the southern extent of the field systems renders that less 
likely. Field observation of a major terrace-way placed along the contours on the southfacing slope below ‘British Camp’ (not surveyed) marks an undated route on high ground 
but skirting the summit of the main ridge. If the cross-ridge dykes were contemporary with 
the second phase field systems, unenclosed ground would have existed between them and 
the fields, albeit on very steep slopes. Movement along the ridge may have been made 
difficult rather than impossible – an indication of the arrangements for land division rather 
than a barrier to progress. However, assuming little tree cover, these white chalk 
constructions on high ground would have been highly visible from a distance and may have 
indicated permitted, though controlled, access points. The smaller aggregated field 
systems, located on lower ground, would have been less visible from a distance, 
particularly from the coastal plain, than the earlier rectilinear grid. The cross-ridge dykes, 
particularly if their chalk flanks were kept clear of vegetation, would therefore become 
visible indicators of a settled community in some way claiming rights to the land, rather 
than the field systems themselves. Certainly their careful positioning, across the flat topped 
ridges but ending on steep slopes on either side, acts as a considerable, though not absolute, 
barrier to progress.
The settlements and field systems in Kingley Vale are only part of a landscape remarkably 
well filled with evidence of Bronze Age activity, although few sites have provided 
sufficient dating evidence to examine their contemporaneity in any detail. What is clear 
however is that the density of use observable on the chalk downs is reflected by that on the 
wide coastal plain to the south. A notable cluster of sites close to Chichester including 
Drayton (Seager Thomas in prep), Claypit Lane, Westhampnett (Every & Mepham 2006), 
Westhampnett (BMW Factory) (Wessex Archaeology 2002a), Westbourne (Musson 1954) 
and Chichester Cattle Market (ibid), has produced collared or biconical urns dated to the 
179
first half of the 2nd millennium BC. Farther east sites at Waterford Gardens and Yapton 
Road, both in Climping (both Barber & Seager Thomas unpublished), at Ford Airfield 
(Hamilton 2004), Wickbourne, Littlehampton (Musson 1954; Gilkes 1992), Roundstone 
Lane, Angmering (Seager Thomas 2008) and close to the eastern end of the coastal plain at 
Charmandean, Worthing (Musson 1954; Seager Thomas 2008) have all produced these 
types of Early Bronze Age pottery. Whilst continuity in any literal sense cannot be proven, 
Deverl-Rimbury pottery, in Sussex dated to between c.1700-1150 cal BC, was also found at 
Drayton, Claypit Lane, Westhampnett, both the sites in Climping, Ford Airfield, 
Wickbourne, Roundstone Lane, Angmering and at a number of additional sites including 
East Beach, Selsey (Kenny 1989), Kingston Buci (Curwen & Hawkes 1931) and Centenary 
House, Worthing (Every & Mepham 2006). In all some 11 sites between Chichester and 
Worthing have produced collared or biconical urns, 16 Deverel-Rimbury tradition pottery, 
18 post-Deverel-Rimbury plainware or developed plainware, but only five locations for 
post-Deverel-Rimbury decorated wares which bridge the Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age 
transition and four for Middle Iron Age saucepan pots (Seager Thomas pers comm.).
This difference, seen elsewhere in the country, is difficult to discuss in the absence of any 
real information of the longevity of individual sites. It may be that the numerous Early 
Bronze Age and Middle Bronze Age sites were small and of short duration, to be followed 
by a more nucleated pattern of a smaller number of larger and longer-lived settlements. 
Equally this observed reduction in the number of settlements could reflect a move away 
from the coastal plain or a major reduction in the size of the population. However, even 
allowing for taphonomic processes, it is clear that a major change took place at very 
approximately the period of transition between post-Deverel-Rimbury plain ware and 
developed plain ware as the dominant ceramic form, and the currency of post-DeverelRimbury decorated pottery; the present view is that this change took place c. 800 cal BC or 
perhaps a little later (Seager Thomas 2008).
Dating of enclosures on higher ground is also less than certain. Several, both in Sussex 
(Hamilton & Manley 1997) and Surrey (Seager Thomas 2010), have produced evidence of 
post-Deverel-Rimbury or earlier pottery, but the contexts are frequently not necessarily 
180
related to the construction or occupation phases of the enclosures. Of those close to 
Kingley Vale, Bow Hill Camp has produced surface finds of Late Bronze Age and Middle 
Iron Age pottery (Mark Roberts & Dave McOmish pers comms) whilst Goosehill Camp 
has produced 5th to 3rd century BC pottery from low in the ditch fills (Boyden 1956; 
Hamilton 1977; Mark Roberts pers comm.). Further afield Harting Beacon has produced 
PDR decorated tradition pottery dated to post c. 800 cal BC from contexts clearly 
associated with the enclosure ditch (Morris 1978; Hamilton & Manley 1997; Seager 
Thomas 2008); Torberry has produced similar pottery (Cunliffe 1976), and from pits within 
the interior of the Trundle comes a mixed assemblage of Late Bronze Age and Middle Iron 
Age pottery – in both these cases the early occupation may well pre-date construction of the 
enclosure (Hamilton & Manley 1997). The location of ‘early’ hillforts set specifically to 
overlook the western end of the Weald in both Sussex (ibid) and Surrey (Hooker & English 
2009) has lead to the suggestion that Wealden resources, possibly iron, had become 
important to the economy of the period. However, none of these enclosures have provided 
evidence of intensive occupation, although larger-scale investigation may change that 
interpretation, and the location of settlements occupied by the majority of the farming 
population remains uncertain.
In Kingley Vale this change in settlement pattern appears to be reflected in the 
abandonment of low-lying settlements (although a caveat here relates to the notably poor 
dating evidence). This does not necessitate any belief that the field systems were also 
abandoned; clearly they could have been farmed from settlements elsewhere. However, the 
impression is given of a formally organised landscape with resources from a number of 
different ecozones being fully utilised during the 2nd millennium BC. What is inescapable 
is that a change in field system morphology, possibly reflecting an increased interest in 
stock raising, took place. Major changes in settlement pattern may or may not have been 
contemporary, but the determining factors, be they demographic, socio-political or 
economic, require explanation.
181
Chapter 7
Land use east of the Cuckmere River, East Sussex, during the 
2
nd and early 1st millennia BC
182
7.1 Summary
Three areas were surveyed in detail, Tenantry Ground, Fore Down and Lullington Heath. 
On Tenantry Ground an aggregated field system of at least two phases underlay a cross 
ridge dyke and overlay rectilinear systems, again of at least two phases. These latter 
systems stretched down into the valleys on either side. On Fore Down the remains were 
less well preserved but several phases of field system could be observed and here a lynchet 
could be seen to underlie a barrow of presumed prehistoric date. On Lullington Heath, 
where loess still overlies the chalk, further rectilinear and aggregated systems were 
surveyed and some lynchets could be seen to have been overlain by settlement sites. 
Notably, the large aggregated system can be seen to have clear, topographically 
determined, outer boundaries. The wider area exhibits intensive use on the chalk downs, 
and considerable prosperity in terms of rich burials and metalwork hoards, when 
compared with Kingley Vale, in a portion of the south coast lacking the fertile agricultural 
land of the coastal plain.
7.2 Definition of the study area
The area comprises some 80sq km in East Sussex bounded on the north by grid line TQ07, 
on the south by TV95, on the west by TQ/TV51 and on the east by TQ/TV59. Within this 
wider area three largely contiguous portions lying between Windover Hill and Fore Down 
has been subjected to detailed survey and analysis.
7.3 Rationale for selection of the study area
The area carries a large field system with good above-ground preservation
A series of excellent aerial photographs by Major Allen survive which covers the few 
areas which have been subjected to modern ploughing
o All aerial photographic evidence has been transcribed as a pilot project by 
the National Mapping Programme.
The location provides an opportunity to study an area of the South Downs where there 
is now no coastal plain, although the exact position of the coast during the period under 
study is uncertain, but a wide resource base would have been provided by the 
Cuckmere estuary and valley
183
o A direct comparison is available at Black Patch, on the opposite side of the 
Cuckmere
Some investigation of the settlement site on Fore Down has been undertaken
Observation of a pipeline trench dug through the southern portion of the field system on 
Fore Down provides some stratigraphic evidence
Neither of the above interventions have provided a substantial body of evidence of later 
occupation
7.4 Location, geology and topography of the study area
The location of the study area is shown in figure 7.1 and the geology and topography in 
figures 7.2a and 7.2b respectively. The area stretches from the clay of the Low Weald in 
the north, over the South Downs to the coast at a point where the chalk ridge forms a cliff, 
the Seven Sisters and Beachy Head, up to 100m high.
184
185
-
186
Towards the western side the area includes the wide valley of the Cuckmere with its 
alluvial deposits, and these also partially overlie the Lower Greensand which, together with 
a band of Gault Clay, separate the downs from the Low Weald. The block of chalk is 
bounded on the eastern side of the study area by a steep scarp overlooking the Willingdon 
Levels. The downs themselves, which reach 200m OD at Windover Hill and Coombe Hill, 
are dissected by a number of notably steep-sided valleys. On several of the ridges and 
summits of the downs the chalk is overlain by superficial deposits of Clay-with-Flints and a 
band of Melbourn Rock separates the Lower from the Middle and Upper Chalk. In the 
extreme north of the area the Weald Clay is interrupted by a narrow bank of Paludina 
limestone.
Although the detailed study area is situated on Upper Chalk, rendzina soils have developed 
and, particularly in the valleys, have formed relatively fertile and moisture retentive brown 
earths. On Lullington Heath decalcification of the loessic cover has enabled the 
development of a rare chalk heath vegetation (Burnham & Green 1983; Robinson 1999).
7.5 Evidence of Bronze Age activity in the study area
The area between the Weald and the sea, east of the Cuckmere river, provides evidence of 
extensive and successful exploitation for much of the 2nd millennium BC (figure 7.3a). It is 
just to the east of the zone of rich burials, clustered around the Hove barrow, and 
considered to date to the period 2000 – 1500 cal BC (Drewett et al 1988, fig 3.7).
A number of long and oval barrows occur within the wider study area with examples on 
Windover Hill and towards the south-western end of the Fore Down spur, and by analogy 
with other areas of the South Downs it is likely that at least shifting agriculture took place 
before the 2nd millennium BC. 
Numerous barrows are nested on the ridges and spurs of the chalk but even here some areas 
are notably blank; given the availability of evidence from aerial photography there seems to 
be no reason for the distribution not to be genuine although work in progress by the 
National Mapping Programme may modulate that view. As along much of the length of the 
187
188
South Downs barrows line the crest of the chalk, here, east of Windover Hill and there is an 
apparent gap where the ridge is lower at Filching Manor. However, the greatest 
concentration is along the crest of high ground running north / south on the west side of the 
Willingdon Levels – at the time of their construction these barrows would have faced east 
over an area of undrained marshland and abraded streams. Here, as elsewhere, a number of 
the barrows are located where a Clay-with-Flints capping overlies the chalk. Cross-ridge 
dykes are also concentrated on the spurs bounding the west side of the levels. Other 
barrows occur either singly or in small groups on the ends of spurs running in a southwestern from the main ridge. Those on Tenantry Ground and Fore Down would have 
looked westwards over the Cuckmere River to the outline of the formidable scarp of the 
downs below Firle Beacon, the flat, dark Low Weald and south-westwards to the sea. Few 
barrows have been recognised, however, on the spurs closest to the Cuckmere on its eastern 
side particularly close to the sea, although apparently suitable topographic positions are 
present. This situation contrasts with the western side of the Cuckmere where several 
barrows overlook the valley. At the southern edge of the study area a number of barrows 
were sited on high ridges close to the modern coastline and some are known to have been 
lost to erosion.
The distribution of field systems noted on the Historic Environment Record is a visible 
underestimate. Indeed, a cursory inspection shows that it is difficult to find a substantial 
area of chalk where above-ground earthworks do not survive. On steep-sided valleys 
erosion has removed some evidence such that, unusually, it is the counter-contour 
boundaries which remain. Sufficient evidence can be seen around modern arable and from 
aerial photographs to suggest that these areas were used, although the lynchets have been 
ploughed flat by later use. It is certainly not the case that all the visible earthworks should 
be seen as relating to Bronze Age, or even prehistoric, field systems. Extensive use during 
the Romano-British period and the arable maxima of the 12th
– 14th and 18th
– 19th centuries 
will have partially modified and re-used and partially obliterated evidence of earlier use.
Several settlement sites are known and pottery scatters suggest the location of others 
though, again, the area covered by field systems suggests the presence of many more than 
189
are yet recognised. On Duttles Brow a multi-period site has been subjected to a 
fieldwalking survey (Chuter 2009). A Neolithic sandstone polissoir and a polished axe 
fragment signify early activity whilst Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age pottery from within 
a field system indicates the probable presence of a settlement. The whole is overlain by 
extensive evidence of Romano-British activity and the later phase of the field system is 
considered to date to that later period although the reason for such dating is unclear. On 
Crapham Down a pit (MES549), 12ft (c.4m) deep, is recorded as having been filled with 
flint and at the bottom a few sherds of Early Iron Age pottery were found together with a 
number of animal bones and pieces of calcined flint. The presence of a later ‘occupation 
floor’ with a plain penannular brooch some 4ft (c.1.3m) from the surface of the pit suggests 
a shaft filled over a considerable period of time.
Two major coastal sites, Seaford Head to the west of the Cuckmere and Belle Tout to the 
east are now being severely eroded and it is unclear how far from the sea they would have 
been in the 2nd millennium BC. The present erosion rate of the chalk cliffs is in the order of 
0.3-0.5m/year but can be as high as 1.25m/year at Seaford Head (Robinson & Williams 
1983, 62). If such rates had been constant through time in 1000BC these coastal sites 
would have been at least 1km inland and possibly as far as 4km. However, it has also been 
suggested (Woodcock 2003) that this erosion is a relatively recent phenomenon and that the 
sites would have had commanding views over the Channel. Despite several archaeological 
interventions the chronology of neither site is clear. Seaford Head, with its extensive views 
to east and west along the coast and northwards into the Low Weald, encompasses an Early 
Bronze Age barrow and is thought to originate in the Late Bronze Age, but this dating rests 
on the discovery of a single rim sherd found in the secondary fill of the ditch (Bedwin 
1986). 
The situation at Belle Tout is even less clear. An enclosure producing Grooved Ware, Late 
Beaker and Food Vessel ceramics is considered to date to between c.2000 and c.1800BC 
(Bradley 1970; 1982). Evidence of structures, food production and craft activities suggest a 
mixed farming economy with only a Wealden Sandstone grinding stone and a shale bead 
hinting at wider contacts. However, the earthworks of the enclosure appear sharp for their 
190
supposed age and the dating could result from residual finds. The outer enclosure, weakly 
bounded but with a large interior of some 25ha, has produced little evidence to date its 
construction but Late Bronze Age pottery has been found in the interior suggesting at least 
activity at that date (Hamilton & Manley 1997) and it is understood that more recent, and 
not yet finally published, work by Miles Russell has not substantially altered this situation; 
notably unsatisfactory for a site undergoing rapid destruction through erosion. There 
appears to be some evidence of possible field boundaries within the interior and a very 
cursory examination suggests they may predate the outer enclosure. A detailed re-survey of 
the interior of the monument would be of value (from discussion with Dave McOmish).
The presence of a number of hoards attests the continuing importance of the area in the 
Late Bronze Age. On Pea Down discoveries in 1907 (MES3041) included two Sussex 
loops and three quoit-headed pins and, although a later brooch was also found, these items 
were likely to have been in circulation during the Middle Bronze Age. A considerably 
richer Late Bronze Age hoard (MES3111) was found in 1806 on the beach at Beachy Head, 
apparently close to Belle Tout. A later report (Chambers 1862; Turner 1863) suggests that 
the hoard was dug out of the cliff face after having been exposed by a fall, and had been 
buried in a dry valley immediately west of Belle Tout. The hoard included a sword hilt, 
winged and socketed axes, fragments of copper ingot and four gold bracelets. A hoard of 
four flanged axes (MES544), three of which appeared to have been deliberately broken, 
were found buried beneath a large stone, presumably as a votive deposit, within the matrix 
of a barrow, probably a bell barrow, near the Coombe Hill causewayed enclosure. A 
further hoard of Early Bronze Age flanged axes (MES7141) probably comes from the area 
of Teddard’s Barn but from a disturbed context. A small hoard of flat and socketed axes 
together with bronze waste (MES7404) was recovered, again from disturbed contexts, close 
to Birling Manor.
Reverting to the area subjected to closer study, the land between Windover Hill and Fore 
Down presents a heavily dissected landscape of deep valleys and steep scarp slopes. It 
displays field evidence of intensive utilisation during the 2nd and early 1st millennia BC but,
perhaps surprisingly, appears to have been largely abandoned since and to have undergone 
191
relatively little archaeological investigation, although there are a number of sites recognised 
mainly from above-ground evidence (figure 7.3b).
There are a number of round barrows, none of which have any recorded excavation 
evidence attached to them, but all of which are assumed to date to within the Late Neolithic 
– Middle Bronze Age periods. Some survive as clusters on the end of spurs, notably on 
Ewe Dene Down and on the end of the Fore Down Ridge, whilst the remainder occupy 
192
positions on high ground, either on Windover Hill or the spurs running from it. Of 
particular interest, given the observed relationship between single barrows and blocks of 
fields seen across the Cuckmere at Black Patch (Tapper forthcoming) are those spaced 
along the ridge east of Old Kiln Bottom, Holt Brow. The cluster on the end of the Fore 
Down ridge appears cut off by a cross-dyke and a possible cross-dyke cuts through that on 
Ewe Dene Down. Only one settlement area is known, dating to the Late Bronze Age / 
Early Iron Age, and sitting astride the Fore Down ridge on both sides of Old Winchester’s 
Pond.
Excavation of a settlement site close to Old Winchester’s Pond, on a narrow saddle of the 
Fore Down ridge, (TQ5402 0195; ESx HER MES2980) was undertaken by Rev Budgen 
but remains largely unpublished. In brief notes he reported the excavation of three hut sites 
of a short-lived settlement, ‘peacefully deserted’, and producing Hallstatt pottery (Budgen 
1927; 1928; 1932). A more recent consideration of the pottery from these excavations 
places it within the Plainware division of the post-Deverel Rimbury tradition suggesting a 
date of c. 1150-950 cal BC (Seager Thomas 2008). The area was further investigated when 
a field situated east along the top of the ridge was ploughed, and fieldwalking produced a 
concentration of worked and fire-cracked flint, and pottery at a position close to Budgen’s 
excavations (Chuter 1987). Five axe roughouts, considered to be Neolithic in form, were 
located but the majority of the worked flint was hard hammer-struck and of probable Late 
Bronze Age date. Pottery of two fabric types was found and both were considered 
comparable with that from Budgen’s work. Scrub clearance to the west of Old 
Winchester’s Pond revealed a further possible hut platform associated with pottery 
considered to date to the Early Iron Age (TQ 5391001917; ESx HER MES7317). Pottery 
from all these interventions has been subjected to further examination and is described 
below.
The recognition of a Romano-British site, probably a small farmstead, during fieldwalking 
on arable land to the immediate north-west of Fore Down, adds to the requirement for 
caution in ascribing all field boundaries to the prehistoric period.
193
A large hoard was recovered from an area of Gault Clay north of the scarp of the downs 
below Windover Hill in 1861 (Cooper 1862; MES4540). The hoard, which had been 
buried within a pottery vessel, was described as comprising 33 bronze axes, a complete 
mould and fragments of the blades of two daggers or spearheads, but examination of this 
hoard (Lewes Museum) suggests that the two blade fragments are more likely to have been 
from a Late Bronze Age leaf-shaped sword. Most of the 13 looped palstaves and the 17 
looped and socketed axes are imperfect – some bear casting flaws and some are broken. 
What is however remarkable about this hoard is the number of miniaturised items, 
particularly among the socketed axes. 
194
This relatively sparse settlement evidence is in stark contrast to the extensive field systems 
which cover the surrounding slopes and valleys. Photographs were taken by Major Allen, 
prior to modern damage by ploughing and military activity, and the results transcribed by 
Curwen (album presented to Sussex Archaeological Society deposited at Barbican House, 
Lewes). An example of those taken of Lullington Heath is shown on the frontispiece of 
this chapter, of Tenantry Ground in figure 7.4, and part of a transcription of the whole area 
by the National Mapping Programme as figure 7.5. Present within the area are a number of 
blocks of rectilinear fields, possible tracks, and ring ditches some of which are known 
barrows but others may represent reduced examples. One field system is draped over Ewe 
Dene Down, the spur running south-west from Windover Hill, whilst another lies in the 
valley between there and the Fore Down ridge, known as Deep Dene. To the south of the 
Fore Down ridge two areas of fields can be seen in Old Kiln Bottom and the lower of these 
two blocks appears to continue in Clay Bottom and through Friston Forest. Some of the 
apparent gaps may be due to destruction by ploughing within the historic period, 
particularly in the valley bottoms, but the Fore Down ridge seems genuinely free. Some of 
the tracks may relate to these field systems but others may be of later date. The cross-dyke 
west of Old Winchester’s Pond can be seen to truncate one of the fields. 
In 2008 a wish to return part of Friston Forest to grazing necessitated the installation of a 
water supply and the pipeline crossed a number of lynchets known from aerial 
photography. Observation of the pipeline trench provided information on their structure, as 
well as information about the soil profiles and a limited amount of dating evidence (Butler 
2008). The route of the pipeline is shown in figure 7.6. A total of 37 lynchets were cut by 
the pipeline trench but only two were recorded in detail. Although most of the features 
seen on aerial photographs were also observed in the trench, it is clear that considerably 
more boundaries are present than can be seen from either above ground or aerial 
photographic evidence. Of the 483 pieces of worked flint recovered approximately 20% 
were considered to date from the Early Neolithic period and the remainder, mainly hardhammer struck flakes, from the Late Neolithic or Bronze Age. One sherd of pottery was 
thought to have been from the base of a Middle to Late Bronze Age vessel.
195
196
197
During the course of this work note was made of the structure of the lynchets and the soil 
stratification throughout the length of the trench. The size of the lynchets was described as 
between ‘substantial’ and ‘discrete’ and their presence was generally revealed by 
concentrations of flint nodules. There appears to have been no evidence that the field 
boundaries were constructed, rather than resulting from soil movement against and away 
from a barrier of some form. 
One of the drawn sections is shown as figure 7.7; context 4 was recorded as ‘a darker 
brown moist silty loam’ and this probably represents a surviving portion of the palaeosoil 
under cultivation at the time the lynchet was formed. Mention of ‘mid-orange brown silty 
loam’ at various points along the trench suggests the presence of loessic soils. Whilst it is 
difficult to be certain without analysis of soil samples it seems probable that the field 
system was formed before the soils deteriorated to their present rendzinas. Whilst the 
dating evidence is, inevitably, far from conclusive, the lack of any recovered artefacts from 
periods later than the Bronze Age (except for World War 2 ammunition) encourages the 
belief that the field system, in this southern area at least, dates to the 2nd or early 1st
millennium BC.
In the valley bottoms, particularly those in the west of the area under study relatively close 
to the settlements of Wilmington, Lullington and Litlington, some downland was ploughed 
during the arable maximum of the late 18th and early 19th centuries - some of these fields 
198
remain in use whilst others have reverted to pasture or have been abandoned, but are 
identifiable on 19th century maps.. 
199
The extent of arable usage during the medieval period, particularly the arable maximum of 
the 13th and early 14th centuries is uncertain but, given the lack of well-drained land 
available for settlements in the Cuckmere valley, it is likely to have been considerable. 
Lullington was a relatively populous village in 1296 (Hudson 1910) and reduction in the 
size of the church and the village dates to the 18th century (Barr-Hamilton 1970). It has 
been suggested (Burleigh 1973) that a road ran from the present settlement towards 
Windover Hill and this would have given access to Ewe Dene and Deep Dene. 
However, an admittedly somewhat cursory search through the surviving documents of the 
period did not identify any areas of downland under arable use and high medieval pottery is 
notable only for its absence. For elimination purposes, boundaries in use in the 19th century 
fields are shown in figure 7.8, and the parish boundaries taken from the Tithe Maps for 
Wilmington, Lullington, Litlington, Folkington and Arlington (maps deposited in East 
Sussex Record Office, Lewes) and a map of an estate in Lullington, Litlington and West 
Dean dated 1828 (copy lent by Clive Bean) are also identified.
7.6 Analytical survey of the field systems
A rapid overview of the study area led to the conclusion that for certain portions the 
preservation of above ground evidence was good, and that the field systems were multiphase and complex. Other areas were covered with either deciduous and conifer plantation 
where the earthworks were masked by deep leaf mould and needle litter, or dense gorse and 
blackthorn scrub. Although aerial photographs taken of these latter areas before the 
vegetation growth had reached its present level indicated good preservation of field 
boundaries, it was felt that ground survey would be unlikely to produce further useful 
information. For that reason the survey was limited to three areas: a south-west spur 
running from the main ridge of the South Downs south of Windover Hill and known as 
Tenantry Ground; the south-western end of a long ridge similarly curving away from the 
main ridge and called Fore Down; and Lullington Heath, an area of calcareous heathland 
stretching from the narrow point of the Fore Down ridge and across the valley to its south 
onto a west-facing spur. In each case the valleys on either side of the spurs were also 
examined. The position of each of these areas is shown in figure 7.3.
200
Surveys were undertaken using tape and compass and tied to fixed points, primarily fencelines. Survey was undertaken on the steep slope between Tenantry Ground and Deep Dene 
and here a correction of measurements taken on the slope to provide a horizontal measure 
was made using fixed points visible on high level vertical aerial photographs 
(GoogleEarth), a method which may have lead to increased error in these distances. 
Elsewhere thick gorse and buckthorn curtailed survey on portions of Tenantry Ground and 
Lullington Heath, and in a few locations deep grass may have masked slight earthworks. 
Colluviation completely masked features in Ewe Dene and may have reduced their 
visibility in Deep Dene and Old Kiln Bottom. However, much of the elevated area was 
grazed grassland and detailed survey was possible.
7.6.1 Survey results
7.6.1.1 Tenantry Ground
The survey results for Tenantry Ground are shown against topography in figure 7.9 and 
with the various phases identified in figure 7.10.
Tenantry Ground occupies a south-west facing spur with a steep-sided valley, Ewe Dene, to 
its north-west and an exceptionally steep-sided bowl, Deep Dene, to its south-east. The 
lower portions of Ewe Dene are still under cultivation and the flat bottom to the valley 
suggests the accumulation of a considerable depth of erosion products from ploughing of 
the valley sides. Rectangular enclosures occupying the higher portions of the valley and 
terraces on the lower slopes appear medieval in morphology (not surveyed). Although 
detailed documentary research has not been undertaken it is considered likely that any 
above ground evidence of the prehistoric field systems crossing the valley floor has been 
lost, and the area below the terracing was not subjected to detailed survey.
In contrast, the steep-sided Deep Dene is narrow bottomed, with little evidence of colluvial 
deposits, and, although some rectangular fields bounded by large lynchets are probable 
medieval in date, the underlying rectilinear system stretching from Tenantry Ground, across 
the valley, and for an uncertain but considerable distance eastwards is thought to be 
prehistoric in origin. The preservation east of the area subjected to detailed survey appears 
201
excellent and would repay further work – a cursory examination suggests a continuous 
rectilinear field system overlain on each spur by aggregated fields.
202
The earliest field boundaries on Tenantry Ground are a series of slight lynchets, visible 
within later fields but extending beyond them onto the slopes on either side of the spur (red 
and yellow in fig 7.10). One lynchet from this series appears to underlie one of the barrows 
whilst, in all cases where a phase relationship is visible, they underlie both the larger 
lynchetted fields and the cross-ridge dyke. The majority of these boundaries can be 
assigned to one or the other of two phases of rectilinear fields set on slightly different 
203
alignments, 20o and 35o east of north. More boundaries (yellow in fig 7.10) lie on the lesser 
angle, and the boundaries crossing Deep Dene lie at right angles to this, 110o east of north, 
which might suggest this to be the later of the two. Certainly this is the alignment which 
enables the boundaries to lie with the topography, perpendicular to the main axis of Deep 
Dene. Survival is insufficient to assess the size of the fields enclosed, although they appear 
to be small. These systems were bounded to the north-east and do not cover the top of the 
main ridge of the downs; any north-western boundary is masked by colluvial deposits and 
later cultivation in Ewe Dene, to the south-east the boundaries ascend onto the spur to the 
south-east of Deep Dene and appear to continue for some distance, and to the south-west 
they do not appear to descend the steep end of the spur. Although later activity may have 
masked boundaries crossing from the end of the spur to the north-facing, steep slope up to 
Old Winchester’s Pond and Fore Down there is no sign of them on the slope itself, 
observed to be a frost hollow, whilst a boundary to the system on Fore Down can be seen 
towards the top of the slope.
Overlying these field boundaries are two, or possibly three, phases of long narrow fields 
stretching across the spur but not descending the slopes to the north-west and south-east 
(black and dark blue in fig 7.10). The boundaries of these fields are marked by relatively 
large lynchets and their down-slope outer corners are rounded, ‘playing-card’, in shape. 
The long boundaries of these fields, in general, directly overlie those of the earlier system 
whilst ploughing them has been sufficient to reduce, but not destroy the earlier boundaries 
aligned north-east / south-west.
Although fragmentary, a series of ‘playing-card’ corners can be seen to delimit fields 
effectively looped onto each other, their outer boundaries forming a more or less 
continuous north-western edge running above the steeper part of the slope into Ewe Dene. 
This series continues to the top of the spur although its alignment changes to curve with the 
land from the waist of the spur towards the top of Ewe Dene, thus fully utilising the flatter 
ground.
204
205
On the south-eastern side of the spur a continuous boundary is positioned just over the edge 
of the slope into Deep Dene (turquoise in fig 7.10). Over short lengths this may overlie a 
boundary from the earlier rectilinear field system, but in general it is at odds with that 
alignment and is governed strictly by the topography. 
Further re-modelling resulted in a series of fields looped onto each other and occupying 
only the flattest ground on either side of the spine of the spur (black in fig 7.10). Again, the 
cross-spur boundaries of the rectilinear system remained in use, the contraction taking place 
within that framework by moving the side boundaries towards the centre of the spur. It is 
not possible to see whether the contractions on either side of the spur were contemporary or 
successive but the requirement seems to have been to use only the flatter ground, perhaps 
because that area had suffered less from erosion which must have been extreme on the 
slopes and may have removed most if not all the topsoil. 
Overlying one of the boundaries which had remained in use from the earliest visible field 
system is a cross-ridge dyke, a low abraded bank with a ditch on its uphill side (orange in 
fig 7.10). This ditch can be seen to cut the lynchet marking the north-western boundary of 
one of the fields of the latest visible system (figure 7.11) and also a mound which may 
represent a field corner or, just possibly, a barrow (figure 7.12). The positioning of the 
cross-ridge dyke effectively divides the field system without putting any portion of it out of 
use, but it extends beyond the limits of the area apparently enclosed and cultivated at the 
time, stretching from above an erosion point on the north-west side of the spur onto the 
steep side of Deep Dene. This relatively minor earthwork seems unlikely to represent more 
than a local ‘property’ boundary, and the slight change in alignment of the field boundaries 
on either side may indicate that it enhanced an earlier land division. 
7.6.1.2 Fore Down
Results of the analytical survey of earthworks on Fore Down are shown in figure 7.13 and 
phase relationships in figure 7.14. Survival of above ground evidence on Fore Down was 
less clear cut and survey of minor earthworks was limited by vegetation. 
206
On the top of the spur the fragmentary remains of what may have been two rectilinear field 
systems were found; these are clearly set on differing alignments (red and yellow in fig 
7.14). One of these field systems (yellow) underlies the cross ridge dyke (orange in fig 
7.14).
Post-dating these boundaries are at least two phases of enclosure, differing in morphology 
but both clearly cut by the cross-ridge dyke. On the west- and north-facing slopes are a 
207
series of contour lynchets (dark blue in fig 7.14). The western origin of these is masked by 
woodland and may well have been destroyed by the fields shown on the estate map of 1828 
and then under the plough, but they are visible, though not surveyed in detail, crossing the 
present arable on the lower slopes of the spur. The series is bounded at its lowest extent by 
a particularly large lynchet and this may represent a contemporary limit, but it is at least as 
likely to indicate the upper limit of later ploughing. There is a known Romano-British 
settlement in the ploughed field to the west of this large lynchet. The lynchets then follow 
eastwards along the contours at the top of the steep north-facing slope and to the north of 
Old Winchester’s Pond before swinging northwards towards the head of Deep Dene. 
208
The eastern slope of Fore Down, dropping down into Old Kiln Bottom, bears a number of 
contour lynchets, again cut by the cross-ridge dyke, and, although dense vegetation 
prevented survey in some areas, they appear to run from the southern limit of the detailed 
survey area along the side of the ridge then turning east towards Lullington Heath. Just 
south of the dyke they appear to be overlain by larger lynchets, with the point of 
intersection marked by counter-contour boundaries and ‘playing card’ corners. 
To the south-east of the large barrow, and overlying the remnants of the rectilinear field 
system are two enclosures, separated by a track with a funnel-shaped entrance from the 
north (turquoise in fig 7.14). The eastern of the pair appears to have had its northern 
margin overlain by a further enclosure which is cut, in turn, by the cross-ridge dyke. If this 
is true then the enclosures must be prehistoric in date (assuming a Late Bronze Age date for 
the dyke). However, the relationships are by no means clear and the morphology of these 
enclosures tends to suggest a post-Roman date; re-use of an earlier contour lynchet is a 
further possibility.
The cross-ridge dyke, a bank standing some 0.7m high with a ditch on its south-western 
side, describes an arc between the steep north-facing slope above Deep Dene and the eastfacing slope above Old Kiln Bottom. At its south-eastern end the ditch is clearly dug into 
the back of a large lynchet whilst at its north-western end it cuts one contour lynchet before 
fading out among animal disturbance. No features other than modern tracks cut the crossridge dyke.
To the west of the large barrow lies an area of woodland, situated on Clay-with-Flints, and 
containing a number of probably relatively recent quarries. The area is delineated on all but 
its southern side, apparently by a lynchet rather than a wood-bank. A separation of 
woodland from open grazing would have been necessary for management of the former, but 
lynchet development suggests some arable use post-dating construction of the boundary. 
Only a single field boundary could be detected within the enclosure but depth of leaf mould 
may have masked further evidence.
209
The modern tracks present something of a problem in their interpretation. That from 
Lullington to Old Winchester’s Pond, and the two which run eastward from the pond, 
clearly post-date both lynchets and the cross-ridge dyke. Given the scarcity of water, tracks 
along the ridge, to the pond, may well date from the medieval period if not before but these 
present east to west running tracks at least do not appear to be prehistoric in origin. Less 
straightforward is the interpretation of the track running south from Old Winchester’s Pond 
towards Friston Forest. This was considered by Curwen to have been a prehistoric terraceway set within the field systems. The present vehicular track is certainly set on a terrace 
but aerial photographs pre-dating imposition of this modern form still show a terrace lying 
between two lynchets (figure 7.16). The cross-ridge dyke appears to cut both lynchets 
defining the terrace-way, suggesting that the track does indeed pre-date the dyke, whose 
construction effectively blocked the track, but the route was later re-instated.
After survey of the field systems had been completed improved visibility of minor 
earthworks around the barrow due to heavy snow falls over winter 2010/11, and a suspicion 
210
that two mounds in its vicinity might be of some antiquity, encouraged a detailed survey of 
that area (fig 7.15). 
The relationship between the large barrow and a field boundary abutting it north-west and 
south-east is uncertain since the ditch in the former quadrant has been extensively 
burrowed. However, the apparent finding of a lynchet overlying the ditch at that point 
might suggest that the field boundary was aligned on an existing mound. The origin of the 
small ditched mound to the south-east is uncertain, but its resemblance to a barrow is 
emphasised by a central depression, probably the result of grave-robbing or antiquarian 
activity. The small size might indicate a burial mound from later in prehistory or from the 
Anglo-Saxon period with the large barrow being used as a focus for later funerary activity. 
Similarly the mound to the south-west is also of unknown origin, but small mounds placed 
over prehistoric lynchets such that their size is enhanced when viewed from down-slope 
have been shown on Farthing Down, Surrey to be Anglo-Saxon in date (Barry Taylor pers 
comm.). Here its position over a field corner, or at least a change in alignment, would 
augment the visual effect.
7.6.1.3 Lullington Heath
Results of the analytical survey of earthworks on Lullington Heath are shown in figure 7.16 
and in phased form in figure 7.17. Although in many areas these earthworks were well 
preserved, the presence of dense gorse and scrub woodland limited survey and this, 
together with small patches of long grass, means that locales remained unsurveyed and 
minor earthworks may have been missed.
There exists a series of aerial photographs of Lullington Heath, Tenantry Ground and the 
surrounding areas, mostly taken when the vegetation cover was less extensive than present. 
Some were taken by Major Allen and copies given to E Curwen who, in turn, donated them 
to the Sussex Archaeological Society (chapter frontispiece and figs 7.4 and 7.19a-c). 
Others were taken by the RAF in 1945 and 1955 (figs 7.18 and 7.21).and some of these 
have been used to extend the evidence from ground survey into areas of dense vegetation, 
and also fields where the above ground evidence has now been truncated by ploughing.
211
The earliest field boundaries are those of a probable rectilinear system, with a main 
alignment lying almost exactly north to south (red in fig 7.17). These features are most 
clearly visible over the top and to the south of the ridge between Old Kiln Bottom and Clay 
Bottom, where they emerge from beneath a continuous lynchet bounding the southern edge 
of the later, aggregated, system. A few short stretches of the early, north / south rectilinear 
system are also visible within the later fields. Field boundaries on this alignment can also 
be seen on aerial photographs to the east of Deep Dene and have been traced on the ground 
(but not surveyed) for a further approximate 1km eastwards. Informal walkover has also 
located similar features on Friston Hill, 1.6km to the south, and in the fields immediately 
east of Lullington Heath (area TQ 553015). Whilst it would be unwise to ‘join the dots’, it 
may be that this system, or a series of systems with a common alignment, cover an area of 
some 4sq km.
No clear relationship is visible between this rectilinear system and the contour lynchets 
(black in fig 7.17) stretching round the north- and north-west facing slopes between Deep 
Dene and the ridge bearing Old Winchester’s Pond, or those on the east-facing slope 
between Fore Down and Lullington Heath.
Overlying part of the rectilinear field system is an aggregated system comprising long 
narrow bands of fields stretching from the ridge above Deep Dene, across Old Kiln Bottom, 
to the summit of the ridge between Old Kiln Bottom and Clay Bottom (dark blue in fig 
7.17). These bands are aligned approximately north-west / south-east but curve across the 
slope on the north side of Old Kiln Bottom, perhaps in an attempt to reduce topsoil loss by 
erosion. The relatively large lynchets still remaining suggest either long-term or intensive
ploughing of these fields, a suggestion which received confirmation from the form of some 
of the field corners. Large ‘playing card’ corners were probably formed by ploughing close 
to the field edge so that loose plough soil was deposited through or over the barrier in all 
directions giving the corner a rounded appearance. Other examples exist where ploughing 
in an arc round the internal angle of a corner produced deep scoops. Ploughing up one side 
of the field, round the corner, and along the adjacent edge, forming rounded corners and no 
headland, would enable the maximum area in these small fields to be placed under crop.
212
213
214
A continuous boundary (turquoise in figs 7.17 and 7.20) runs along the north side of the 
ridge between Old Kiln Bottom and Clay Bottom, then descends the slope at the end of the 
spur and crosses the low-lying land before starting the climb up to Fore Down. Its northwestern end was not located due to dense vegetation but, if it continued on the same line, it 
would pass close to the end of the cross-ridge dyke on Fore Down. No boundaries from the 
aggregated fields cross this boundary, to its south are the slight lynchets of the earlier 
rectilinear system and an enclosure which will be described below. This straight and 
uninterrupted boundary would appear to have been constructed as a clear limit to the later 
field system, leaving the ridge open for movement from the south towards Holt Brow and 
the top of the scarp of the South Downs at Wilmington Hill. 
215
216
217
218
However, the lack of any direct relationship between the continuous boundary and the 
aggregated fields means that the former could be a later feature dating to a period of reuse.
Aerial photographs show that this aggregated field system continued to fan around the 
gentle south and south-east facing slopes on the west side of Old Kiln Bottom into areas 
now under the plough. A further continuous boundary, mainly in a present arable field but 
visible in aerial photographs (fig 7.18) appears to bound the northern edge of this system 
(dotted turquoise line in fig 7.20), although more fields, probably earlier in date, can be 
seen to spread up the spur to the east of Deep Dene.
The form of these later fields is strikingly different from the aggregated systems seen thus 
far, and demonstrates a greater sense of formality in the arrangement. Indeed, it appears as 
an intermediate between the rigid formality of the rectilinear grids and the more organic 
growth of other agglomerated groups. It is possible that the strips of fields, traversing the 
local topography and thus each containing a portion of the available range of soil type, 
exposure to wind and rain, and risk of frost hollows, were farmed individually. They may 
represent a number of farms utilised at the same time or, possibly, sequentially, but if the 
former, the relatively large area enclosed could feed a population above a family or 
extended family.
The explanation presented here of aggregated fields overlying extensive regular systems, 
although probably correct in outline, is an over-simplification, particularly with respect to 
Lullington Heath. The ladder-like fields, crossing the track from Old Winchester’s Pond 
and draped across the valley to the south show some signs of alteration and it is possible 
that the ‘ladders’ were split to leave the valley floor free, with further ploughing on the 
south-facing slope. However, the degree of vegetation cover and extensive animal 
burrowing prevented assessment of all the salient points and some questions of necessity 
remain unanswered.
219
A number of scoops probably representing settlement sites were noted to the east of Old 
Winchester’s Pond and it is this area that was excavated by Rev Budgen in the 1920s. 
Given the disturbance caused by these interventions, and by later scrub clearance, it is not 
possible to be sure how many stances exist. However, the identification of at least seven 
seems secure and more may exist in the uncleared scrub around Old Winchester’s Pond. 
Field walking in the arable field to the north and chance finds of pottery to the south-west 
220
suggest further settlement in these areas. Of the seven identified during the survey reported 
here, four, and a possible fifth, have their flat platforms dug into already developed 
lynchets of the aggregated field system. Pottery excavated by Rev Budgen, collected by 
Greg Chuter and also found during this survey has been assessed (see below) and placed 
within the early part of the post-Deverel-Rimbury tradition (c. 1150 – c. 500 cal BC). Both 
the rectilinear and aggregated field systems must predate these settlements, and the 
discovery of a few sherds of possible Deverel-Rimbury pottery farther down the hill may 
point to earlier settlements of a form which has not left visible above-ground evidence.
No cross-ridge dykes were located within the detailed survey area, although parts of the 
ridge between Old Kiln Bottom and Clay Bottom were not accessible due to vegetation 
cover. However, during an informal walkover a further possible example was noted east of 
Deep Dene and is described below.
Along the northern side of the valley bottom are a number of lynchets, one of which rises to 
some 2m high in places, which do not appear to conform to either of the field systems so 
far described (green in fig 7.17). These are later in date and may relate to Romano-British 
or medieval use of the valley bottom.
Lullington Heath as a whole, and the settlement area in particular, produced considerable 
amounts of fire-cracked and worked flint, none of which was retained, and a small 
assemblage of pottery described below.
7.7 The Pottery by Mike Seager Thomas
The main text of this report including a spreadsheet detailing finds locations, diagnostic 
features and spot dates is included in Appendix 5. In summary, the pottery retrieved during 
fieldwork reported here, that obtained by excavation and recently re-assessed (Budgen 
1927; Curwen 1937; Seager Thomas 2008, table 1) and that located during field walking 
(Chuter 1987) forms an assemblege primarily of the post-Deverel-Rimbury tradition but 
with a few sherds possibly of the earlier Deverel-Rimbury style.
221
7.7 Relative and absolute chronology
7.7.1 Tenantry Ground
The earliest visible fields are disposed as two rectilinear systems on slightly different 
alignments both of which are essentially dictated by the topography of the spur on 
which they are situated
o One lynchet appears to underlie a barrow of presumed prehistoric date
These systems are overlain by aggregated fields enclosing a smaller area
o The aggregated systems were progressively remodelled to enclose smaller 
areas on flatter ground along the spine of the spur
The final phase of the aggregated field systems was itself overlain by the construction 
of a cross-ridge dyke
In the valleys on either side and around the end of the spur there is evidence of probable 
medieval enclosure and terracing
Large amounts of worked flint are visible primarily in the up-throw from animal 
burrowing
o Informal examination of those pieces considered diagnostic indicates that 
the great majority dates to the Late Bronze Age. Small amounts of Late 
Neolithic / Early Bronze Age, and a very few pieces dating to Mesolithic 
period were also noted
Two pieces of pottery were similarly recovered from the spur of Tenantry Ground and a 
single piece from Deep Dene – all these were identified as post-Deverel-Rimbury 
(confirmed by Mike Seager Thomas)
o Only a few sherds of Romano-British and medieval pottery were found and 
these were restricted to the floor of Deep Dene where late fields were shown 
during the survey to overlie those considered to be prehistoric in origin. 
Occasional pieces of World War 2 vintage ammunition were noted.
7.7.2 Fore Down
The remnants of a rectilinear field system can be seen to predate directly lynchetted 
enclosures, and indirectly a cross-ridge dyke
222
A series of contour lynchets post-date the rectilinear field system but pre-date the crossridge dyke and tracks running eastwards and westwards from Old Winchester’s Pond
Sub-rectangular enclosures post-date the rectilinear field system
o A track with a funnel entrance at its northern end appears to be 
contemporary with enclosures on either side
The cross-ridge dyke post-dates the series of contour lynchets
o Although contour lynchets are not usually associated with prehistoric 
agriculture, in the Dorking Gap they have been shown to pre-date a Late 
Bronze Age hoard (chapter 3) and here they are cut by the northern 
extremity of the cross-ridge dyke.
Earthworks surrounding woodland on Clay-with-Flints on the summit of the ridge 
appear to post-date the field systems
A north-south track-way on the eastern side of the spur appears integral with the series 
of contour lynchets and pre-dates the cross-ridge dyke although that cut was later reinstated
Two small mounds close to the large barrow post-date elements of the field systems and 
may date to the either the Late Bronze Age or the Anglo-Saxon period
Large amounts of worked flint are visible primarily in the up-throw from animal 
burrowing and particularly in the area around the bowl barrow
o Informal examination of those pieces considered diagnostic indicates that 
the great majority dates to the Bronze Age
7.7.3 Lullington Heath
The earliest field boundaries comprise the fragmentary remains of a probable rectilinear 
system
o These are visible at a few locations within the later agglomerated system and 
to the south, beyond its boundary
The rectilinear system is overlain by several adjoining ladder-like aggregations
The southern limit of these fields is marked by a continuous boundary whose position 
may relate to that of the cross-ridge dyke on Fore Down
223
A number of settlement sites can be seen to have been cut into developed lynchets of 
this aggregated system
o The area around these stances, and field walking to north and south-west, 
has recovered pottery from the earlier part of the post-Deverel-Rimbury 
tradition
Possible later use of the Old Kiln Bottom may relate to the Romano-British or medieval 
periods
7.9 Discussion of land use east of the Cuckmere during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
Occasional finds of Mesolithic flintwork point to some pre-farming activity, whilst the 
presence of Late Neolithic / Early Bronze Age flints indicates that the area was probably 
farmed prior to the construction of the earliest visible field systems. Only rarely could a 
chronological phase relationship be established between barrows and field boundaries and, 
although on Tenantry Ground the former could be seen to overlie the latter in a single 
instance, it is thought that in general the fields systems were probably placed around the 
already existing landscape markers.
In common with findings in other case study areas, the earliest field systems on downland 
east of the Cuckmere are a series of very large rectilinear grids. Indeed, only small areas 
appear to have been left unenclosed; these are mainly situated on the steepest of northfacing slopes, for example between the end of the Tenantry Ground spur and Fore Down, or 
on small areas of Clay-with-Flints, as on Fore Down. Again these large systems stretch 
across neighbouring valleys and spurs, in this case running down the sides of Deep Dene 
where ploughing would seem virtually impossible. Here, unusually, it is the boundaries 
running parallel to the contours of the western side of the valley which have been lost, a 
marker of the degree of erosion from the steep sides. The relatively shallow colluvial 
deposits in the bottom of Deep Dene suggest the sides were not cultivated either intensively 
or over a long period. This impression of the scale of enclosure is emphasised by the 
finding during an informal walkover of rectilinear grids on a similar alignment on Friston 
Hill and close to Jevington.
224
Defined routes through the enclosed areas were notable by their absence and only 
movement along the main ridge of the South Downs appears to have been unimpeded. This 
is not to say that people and stock did not move, clearly there would have been a 
requirement to move stock to different grazing areas, to access Wealden and coastal 
resources, to exchange surplus production for exotic goods and to retain social contacts. 
Routes may have involved areas enclosed but not under crop with temporary gaps in field 
boundaries which have not left evidence above ground, land which had passed out of use, 
or zones not yet incorporated within the grid of fields.
Over the wider area it is notable that the density of known settlements from the Early 
Bronze Age / Middle Bronze Age does not approach that indicated as sustainable by the 
area of land apparently under cultivation. Long barrows attest a Late Neolithic presence 
and Belle Tout, although a somewhat puzzling site, clearly has a Beaker component. 
Round barrows abound, strung along the scarp edge of the downs and in clusters, possibly 
family-scale cemeteries on spurs overlooking and within the field system areas. The 
distribution along the north / south scarp overlooking the Willingdon Levels perhaps marks 
the same liminal zone as those along the main scarp. It has been suggested that territorial 
margins were places that societies might choose to emphasise their identity and to reassert 
that identity through time (Hill & Wileman 2002, 115-122; Mullin 2011). Lane Fox (1869) 
recognised the resemblance of the boundary between the downs and the Weald to that 
between cliffs and the sea; but the symbolism of these positions, overlooking resource rich 
but ‘other’ woods and marshland, is very different from those overlooking the domestic 
environment of farms and fields. Political territories may indeed be marked, but also, and 
possibly coincidentally, may be less pragmatic boundaries. However, contemporary 
settlements producing cordoned or biconical urns, food vessels or Deverel-Rimbury 
tradition pottery are rare indeed east of the Cuckmere.
Later development follows a similar pattern to other areas studied. The rectilinear fields 
were overlain by aggregated systems of fields enclosing a considerably smaller area. With 
no certain boundaries to the earlier systems it is not possible to assess the degree of 
contraction but an estimate would suggest that the area was reduced by at least a half. The 
225
location of these aggregated systems varied within the study area, with one located high on 
the Tenantry Ground spur and the other stretching across Old Kiln Bottom. Neither of 
these systems is of a form located before in this study. That on Tenantry Ground, with long 
narrow fields stretching across the spur, may have been designed to minimise the effects of 
erosion and the successive contractions from the steep slopes to west and east would seem 
to confirm this. Ploughing eventually came to be limited to the central flatter ground. On 
Lullington Heath (fig 7.18), a lighter soil with a high proportion of loess remaining, similar 
concerns may be apparent in the field system design. The sweep of the ladders would hold 
soil after ploughing and these side lynchets are particularly well developed.
The highest ground, along the top of the scarp of the downs and the upper levels of the spur 
bounding the east side of Deep Dene, remained unenclosed. It would appear that these 
ridges provided routes for through movement, a point emphasised by the continuous 
boundary, delimiting the field system, running along the ridge to the south of Old Kiln 
Bottom. Although the earlier fields occupied this ridge the only late feature is an enclosure 
towards the western end of the late field system and to the south of its boundary. This 
enclosure may relate to the need to keep stock penned away from the fields during 
movement. Although there is now no surface water the clay soils of Clay Bottom provide 
potential for lush grazing and aerial photographs (fig 7.5) indicate bounded tracks in the 
valley. Given its steep sides and abrupt end it is unlikely that Deep Dene would have been 
used for through movement. This system may also have been delimited to the north. Most 
of the fields visible on the ridge east of Deep Dene are part of the early system stretching 
from Tenantry Ground across the valley, but some also appear to represent an extension of 
the aggregated system on Lullington Heath. If this interpretation is correct, movement 
would still have been possible along the ridge, past the present position of Old 
Winchester’s Pond, and along the track to the east of Fore Down.
Ramp-like tracks climb diagonally across the slope out of Deep Dene onto Tenantry 
Ground and onto Fore Down. These major, cart-width, features are thought to relate to 
medieval use of the valley but an earlier origin cannot be ruled out.
226
227
Both the cross-ridge dykes can be seen to post-date field boundaries but they occupy rather 
different locations. The example on Tenantry Ground acts to enhance an already existing 
field boundary and one which may have previously been of greater importance within the 
organisation of the entire system. Its position, carefully selected to run between steep 
slopes, serves to bisect the spur, but, given the very steep south-western end of the spur it 
seems unlikely that the dyke was placed across a through route. Relatively slight in 
construction, it would have been visible from the adjacent high ground but not from any 
distance. The cross-ridge dyke on Fore Down is a more substantial feature and exhibits no 
spatial relationship with the field system it slights. It does, however, have a clear 
relationship with a large barrow and two smaller mounds of unknown date or purpose. The 
large barrow occupies a position of some local importance on the highest point of the spur, 
and would have been visible from Tenantry Ground, Lullington Heath and, probably, the 
Cuckmere valley. The cross-ridge dyke was constructed in a curve across the flat top to the 
spur such that the outer side of the arc would have been visible over a wide arc from 
Tenantry Ground to Lullington Heath and the routes from the south. Neither the location 
nor the shape were dictated by any topographical considerations, and a wish for visibility 
both by local community from the settlements and the fields, and for travellers passing 
through the area, may have been the determining factor. The cross-ridge dyke separates the 
barrow(s) from the possibly contemporary settlement sites, emphasising the importance of 
the large barrow set on the highest point of the spur.
A possible third cross-ridge dyke was located during informal walking over the spur to the 
east of Deep Dene (figs 7.20 & 7.21). This is a slight earthwork comprising a low abraded 
bank with slight signs of a ditch on the uphill side and can be seen running to the west side 
of a crater of unknown, but probably recent origin (TQ 5463003104 to TQ 5473103071). 
This feature, if it is indeed a cross-ridge dyke, would have impeded access along the ridge 
to the south of Old Kiln Bottom to the main east to west running scarp top ridge of the 
downs
Taking a wider view, the area lies within one of considerable wealth during the Bronze 
Age. A notable cluster of rich Early Bronze Age burial sites, with the Hove barrow and its 
228
amber cup as the outstanding example, is centred on this portion of the Sussex coastal plain 
and chalk downs (Drewett et al 1988, fig 3.7). The distribution of these rare cups, in gold, 
silver, amber and shale, encompasses the south coast of Britain and Brittany and a few 
inland sites on the Continent and in Wessex (Needham et al 2006, fig 28).
In emphasising the importance of cross-Channel communications the term ‘maritory’ has 
been devised – a ‘high flux sphere of maritime interaction’ and a ‘set of shared and 
reciprocal interests’ (Needham 2009, fig 2.3). These influences and their effect on southern 
Britain will be discussed in chapter 10.
The concentration of round barrows along the scarp edges overlooking the Weald and the 
Willingdon Levels has already been noted. Elsewhere within the study area a number 
occupied high points close to the coast and several are known to have been lost to erosion. 
There are, however, some blank areas, particularly east of the lower reaches of the 
Cuckmere (fig 7.3a). Barrows have not been found on the northern side of Newbarn Hill, 
the ridges north and south of West Dean, or on Snap Hill or Middle Brow. Much of that
area is currently under woodland and further sites may remain to be discovered.
Although this area of Sussex lacks a coastal plain, valuable resources would have been 
available from the estuaries and their attendant marshland. Little work has been undertaken 
in the Cuckmere valley but finds farther east are relevant. Excavation in the Willingdon 
Levels has produced sites with remarkable timber preservation including a number of 
trackways. One of these, the Dittons alignment (Greatorex 2003) has been dated to the 
period 1440 – 1319 cal BC (BM-3060, 3100 ± 50BP). Only a short length of these 
probable raised track-ways were found and it is not possible to judge whether they linked 
dryer islands in the marsh but a role in the exploitation of this productive environment is 
likely.
It is not possible to judge whether this was a prosperous area throughout the 2nd millennium 
BC but by the Late Bronze Age some importance is again visible. The enigmatic wooden 
platform at Shinewater Marsh in the Willingdon Levels has been subjected to only very 
229
limited investigation (ibid). It provides evidence for probable woodland management in the 
area, not surprising in view of the degree of enclosure within field systems. A remarkable 
assemblage has been recovered from a small area and includes a rare Class I single peg 
antler bridle piece, four amber beads, two lead ‘purse’ pendants, a fragment of a shale 
bracelet, a hafted bronze reed hook, and three socketed and one end-winged bronze axes. 
The exact function of the Shinewater platform is uncertain, but its position, set in a 
sheltered inlet just behind the coast, might suggest a role in a network of sea-borne 
transport during the 9th century BC. One of the socketed axes is of a type more usually 
found in northern Holland and north-west Germany, whilst both shale and amber were 
highly valued and traded materials. 
Continuing interest in the scarp bounding the west side of the Willingdon Levels is 
evidenced in a number of cross-ridge dykes occurring across the east-facing spurs. These 
earthworks are poorly understood but a role as barriers, real or symbolic, seems likely. 
Their date of construction is uncertain but they are generally ascribed to the Late Bronze 
Age and, if that is correct in these cases, they are likely to have been contemporary with 
activity in the Levels evidenced by the Dittons alignments and the Shinewater platform. A 
marked separation between ‘us’, the farmers and pastoralists of open downland, and ‘them’, 
the marsh dwellers, appears to have been intended.
The Shinewater platform is thought to have been used for occupation but was clearly 
constructed in a physically challenging environment, requiring a large number of 
substantial oak posts to be driven into freshwater peat and the underlying marine clay 
(ibid). Some objects, recovered in pristine condition appear to have been buried in the peat 
indicating deliberate deposition rather than casual loss and the number of pieces of human 
bone recovered encouraged the excavator to speak of ‘placing … human material … as a 
way of renewing or strengthening links between the inhabitants and their predecessors’. 
Some of the artefacts found were not local in origin placing Shinewater either as part of, or 
with access to, an extensive trading network; the Dittons trackways could have functioned 
both for distribution of imported goods and exploitation of the marshland environment. It 
would be interesting to know whether the cross-ridge dykes were visible from Shinewater 
230
itself, or from the marine approach. Were they seamarks to a landing place and its tracks 
inland, evidence of the strength and sophistication of the local population, ‘boundaries’ 
around some entrepôt, or, as mentioned above, a division between peoples with different 
interests, economies and identities?
However, in many cultures marshland is the haunt of spirits and monsters; Grendel, in the 
Anglo-Saxon poem Beowulf for example, it may be these less tangible dangers that 
necessitated the construction of barriers. The symbolic importance of natural places as 
interfaces with the spirit world is well established in British prehistory (Tilley 1994; 
Bradley 2000) and in ethnographic studies (Hirsh & O’Hanlon 1995; Ashmore & Knapp 
1999).
What is surprising, yet again, is the apparent collapse in settlement activity during the 
Middle Iron Age / Late Iron Age. The field systems could have remained in use, although 
the lack of any finds of pottery from those periods would suggest at least a lack of 
manuring with domestic refuse. Seaford Head (TV 49509784; MES1699) may have been 
constructed during the Late Bronze Age and was in use later (Bedwin 1986). A site at 
Hawks Brow, just west of Seaford Head (TV 489985; MES1702) has produced evidence of 
occupation over a wide period but including small amounts of Early Iron Age pottery. The 
6
th century BC site at Heathy Brow (TV 591964; MES690) was a coastal farmstead with an 
agricultural landscape of lynchets considered to be contemporary (Bedwin 1982). 
Settlement may have become nucleated around a relatively small number of centres; 
certainly the dispersed pattern of visible downland farmsteads seen within the study area 
during the 2nd and early 1st millennia was lost.
231
Chapter 8
Land use on Stockbridge Down, Hampshire during the 
2
nd and early 1st millennia BC
Field boundaries in the eastern valley on Stockbridge Down
232
8.1 Summary
Despite occupying only a small area the earthworks on Stockbridge Down provide a 
surprising chronological depth. Fragments of a rectilinear field system appear to be 
overlain by three groups of aggregated fields; two on the western spur are on different 
alignments and separated by a bank, whilst that on the east occupies a narrow valley and is 
bounded on the west by a linear ditch, which itself may overlie earlier field boundaries. 
Boundaries of the uppermost of the western groups are cut by the ditch of the Early Iron 
Age hillfort of Woolbury Rings and there is some suggestion that the same applies to the 
eastern group. That latter group also displays evidence of later use. The wider area 
exhibits considerable prehistoric activity in a zone supplying a wide range of resources. Its 
proximity to the Test valley provides access to an important route between the Solent, a 
core location for cross-Channel links, and the chalklands of Wessex.
8.2 Definition of the study area
The triangular area of Stockbridge Down owned by the National Trust will form the focus 
of this case study and use will be made of existing surveys. Aerial transcription evidence 
alone will be used to examine ploughed out earthworks over the remainder of an area 
bounded on the north by the A30 and on the south by the B3049; the western and eastern 
limits of this wider area are defined by grid lines SU37 and SU39 respectively (fig 8.1).
8.3 Rationale for selection of the study area
The area carries a field system, of more than one phase, with above ground preservation
A number of aerial photographs survive which cover the few areas which have been 
subjected to modern ploughing
o All aerial photographic evidence has been transcribed in response to the 
need to examine the environs of Danebury hillfort (Palmer 1984)
A detailed analytical survey of the field system has already been undertaken (Bowen et 
al 1979; Eagles 1989) and the original results are available for study (English Heritage 
archives accession number AF0885724)
233
Several excavations of specific monuments, including Woolbury hillfort and a number 
of barrows and other burials on the down, have taken place, and some of these have 
provided information about both dating and relative chronology of different portions of 
the field system
The location, between field systems already studied in Sussex and Wiltshire, may 
provide an intermediate point if differences between those two areas appear to exist
234
235
8.4 Geology and topography of the study area
Location and drift geology of the area around Stockbridge Down are shown in figure 8.1, 
and the topography in figure 8.2. Stockbridge Down is part of the great chalk massif of 
central southern Britain and lies 2km east of one of the major rivers of the area, the Test. A 
ridge of high ground stretches south-west to north-east with, at its south-western end at a 
height of 158m OD, the Early Iron Age hillfort of Woolbury Rings. The field systems 
under study lie below Woolbury Rings on the south-eastern-facing slope of the ridge, and 
cover land crossing a spur overlooking the steep slope towards the Test, and in a small, 
steep-sided dry valley to its east. The drift geology is Upper Chalk with alluvial deposits in 
the Test valley and some small areas of superficial deposits of Clay-with-Flints – one such 
area not shown on British Geological Survey sheet 299 lies south-west of the hillfort and 
other small areas of cover may also have been omitted. Stockbridge Down is now a public 
open space in the guardianship of the National Trust and is mainly grassland with some 
light woodland and scrub particularly on the Clay-with-Flints areas, but surrounding this 
limited area are arable fields where the earthworks have been destroyed by ploughing.
8.5 Evidence of Bronze Age activity in the study area
Stockbridge Down has been the subject of several interventions throughout the 20th century. 
The first record appears to date to the period of World War 1 when a supposed ‘British 
road’ approaching Woolbury Rings was seen as part of a network connecting the hillfort 
with that on St Catherine’s Hill, Winchester and thence with those on the South Downs 
(Williams-Freeman 1915, 233-235, 421). Banks surrounding the remainder of the plateau 
were considered to form an outer enclosure to the hillfort and other earthworks recognised
as evidence of agriculture. Mention was also made of a then recent court case in which the 
lord of the manor had been unable to prove that Stockbridge Down had been under 
cultivation at any time during the existence of the manor, thus suggesting that the banks 
were of some age (ibid – original record not accessed).
Transcription of aerial photographs (Crawford & Keiller 1928, 154-156, plate XXV) 
showed the close relationship between the ‘ladder’ fields on the eastern portion of the down 
and Woolbury Rings. However, the ending of one boundary at the ditch of the hillfort was 
236
regarded as proof of an earlier date for the latter, rather than a possible truncation by the 
ditch. The ‘road’ to the hillfort entrance now became a ditched boundary between arable 
land to the east and pasture to the west. The ‘outer enclosure’ was re-interpreted as a 
further, western field system but, again, it was considered contemporary with or later than 
the hillfort.
A number of burials on Stockbridge Down were excavated during the 1930s and 1940s as a 
result of the antiquarian interests of the then landowner, N Gray Hill, and the approximate 
locations of these interventions are shown in figure 8.3. At a site within the western field 
system preparations for a bonfire to celebrate the Jubilee of George V in 1935 resulted in 
the discovery of an Anglo-Saxon execution cemetery (Gray Hill 1935-7), and during 
237
excavation a sherd of Bronze Age pottery was located in a rabbit scrape (Stone & Gray Hill 
1938). Excavation of the area, (X in fig 8.3), located a large pit, hour-glass shaped in 
profile. The possibility that this in fact represented two inter-cutting pits, and the finding of 
a tennis ball and a live rabbit burrow in the lowest contexts reduces the validity of the 
interpretation as a single, undisturbed feature. However, the presence of molluscan species 
Ena Montana, Helicodonta obvoluta, and Clausia rugosa, indicative of undisturbed ancient 
woodland with a build up of leaf litter (Mike Allen pers comm.), suggest firstly, that the 
origins of the pit pre-date clearance of the Clay-with-Flints, and development of the 
western field system. Secondly, it would seem that the pottery from layer 2, above a turf 
line but presumably a deposition within a still visible depression, and with hints of a more 
open environment, post-dates clearance, but any chronological relationship with 
development of the field system is uncertain. The pottery, all of which could be described 
as coming from collared urns, would now be dated to the Early Bronze Age (2000-
1500BC), rather than the Middle Bronze Age as it was in 1938 (Mike Seager Thomas pers 
comm.), was found together with apparently domestic debris including a bone awl, part of a 
sandstone quern, flint scrapers and fire-cracked flint. The ‘mixed mould’ layer overlying 
this deposit contained a few sherds of Romano-British pottery and may have derived from 
ploughing above the site of the pit.
Excavation of a small barrow lying to the east of this pit produced somewhat unexpected 
results (Stone & Gray Hill 1940). The primary burial of a young female, interred with a 
beaker and a copper awl, was found in a chalk cut grave surrounded by a discontinuous 
shallow ditch. In the grave fill were two inurned cremations and a further cremation, 
within an everted collared urn, had been deposited within a recess cut into a segment of the 
surrounding ditch. With this last cremation were a bronze awl and beads of calcite, faience, 
jet and lignite. The matrix of the surmounting barrow comprised flint nodules packed with 
only a small amount of soil, and from this were recovered sherds of Beaker pottery, 
splintered animal bone including sheep and small ox, part of an antler tine, burnt flint, part 
of a sandstone quernstone, and burnt bone, possibly human. Samples from a number of 
contexts related to the Beaker burial yielded molluscan species indicative of damp, 
undisturbed deciduous woodland.
238
A further burial, located right at the edge of what was to become the eastern field system 
(fig 8.3), was found to be severely disturbed (Stone 1948). The burial was that of an adult 
female interred with a beaker, but excavation failed to find any evidence of a surrounding 
ditch.
In summary, the Clay-with-Flints capping on the higher portions of Stockbridge Down 
appears to have remained uncleared until after c. 2000BC, but there is evidence of activity, 
intermittent or continuous, from the Beaker period, and of clearance, necessarily, prior to 
development of the western field system.
The field systems themselves were subjected to limited survey before World War 2 (fig 
8.3) but received considerable attention during the last quarter of the 20th century. 
Transcription of aerial photographs from a wide area around Danebury hillfort (Palmer 
1984) includes Stockbridge Down (fig 8.4) and identifies a number of barrows or ring 
239
ditches, and both the western and eastern field systems, the latter bounded by a linear ditch. 
Further boundaries which may relate to those on Stockbridge Down can be seen in the 
fields to the north and east, where above ground evidence has been largely destroyed by 
ploughing.
The earthworks on Stockbridge Down were subjected to analytical survey in 1979 (Eagles 
1989; figure 8.5) and it is the original large-scale drawing from this survey which has been 
utilised as a basis for the present fieldwork. Some 14 mounds were noted of which 11 were 
considered certain or possible barrows, one had been excavated in 1935 and 1936 with the 
finding of only relatively modern material (Gray Hill 1935-7), and the remainder were of 
uncertain origin.
The field systems were considered to have probably originated during the Bronze Age since 
portions could be seen to underlie the bank of the hillfort. The eastern system was 
interpreted as having a linear boundary to the south-west, beyond which there was no 
evidence of ploughing and the land may have been used as permanent pasture. Variation in 
240
the form of that linear suggests more than one phase of development, with a succession of 
at least seven fields of a ‘ladder’ system post-dating construction of, at least, the eastern 
bank of the linear bank and ditch. A possible Romano-British date was assigned to this 
‘ladder’ system. The suggestion was made of a number of points where excavation might 
add further to the evidence of multiple phases of use.
Such excavation was undertaken as part of an investigation of sites in the vicinity of 
Danebury hillfort (Cunliffe 1990; Cunliffe & Poole 2000). Only one feature was 
considered to date to the Late Bronze Age, a short length of ditch (G2/3), outside and to the 
north-east of the hillfort ditch, which had been recut on at least one occasion, and had been 
truncated by ploughing in the Romano-British period. A ‘slot’ oriented south-west to 
north-east (F8) and possible quarrying (F30) were also considered to pre-date the hillfort 
(Cunliffe & Poole 2000, fig 1.5). The hillfort was considered to have been constructed in 
the middle of the 1st millennium BC and, after a period of abandonment, an enclosure was 
built within the interior which remained in use, not necessarily continuously, from the Late 
Iron Age through the Romano-British period. 
241
The eastern field system was interpreted as a coherent entity of fields bounded by linear 
ditch complexes, pre-dating the hillfort, but continuing in use after construction of that 
enclosure (ibid fig 1.34; fig 8.6). The spinal linear approaching from the north-east could 
be traced over several km and the fields were laid out between two parallel linears 
constructed at right angles to this, some 900m apart. Differences noted at excavation of the 
western linear boundary above and below the point where a major lynchet curves across the 
valley led to the suggestion that the field system had been extended uphill at some stage 
during its use.
No investigation of the western field system appears to have been undertaken.
In 1992 the number and condition of archaeological sites within the National Trust holding 
on Stockbridge Down were assessed and recommendations made for their conservation 
(Papworth 1992).
Considerable evidence exists of prehistoric activity in the wider area around Stockbridge 
Down. A Middle Bronze Age ditch and the post holes of a possible settlement site were 
excavated at Ashley, approximately 3km to the south of Stockbridge Down, and a 5th to 2nd
centuries BC settlement was found some 1500m to its north-east (Neal 1980). An Late Iron 
Age enclosed settlement has also been located close by this last site (Wessex Archaeology 
2008; Harding in prep).
8.6 Analytical survey of the field systems
The plan produced by Bruce Eagles was used as a basis for the survey and fieldwork 
undertaken with the intention of enhancing those results where appropriate. However, it 
rapidly became clear both that some areas, particularly the western spur, had not been 
covered in detail, and that clearance of scrub in the intervening period had increased 
accessibility. It was therefore decided to resurvey using tape and compass with continuing 
reference to the earlier work.
242
Fixed points, identifiable on Ordnance Survey maps, were located on the boundary and 
certain of the barrows for which accurate Global Positioning System points were available. 
In two areas detailed work was not undertaken – one small area within woodland on the 
western portion of the plateau had been heavily disturbed by later digging, probably for 
clay, and portions close to the linear ditch bounding the western side of the eastern 
aggregated field system were on steep, heavily vegetated slopes rendered insecure by 
animal activity and were deemed unsuitable for lone working.
During the course of the survey it became apparent that the upper portion of the field 
system in the eastern valley was of considerable complexity and that area was re-surveyed 
in greater detail and at a larger scale (1:500).
8.6.1 Survey results
The overall survey results are shown in figure 8.7 and in further detail in figures 8.8 
(western spur), 8.9 (eastern valley) and 8.10 (relationship with Woolbury Rings).
The earliest visible field boundaries on Stockbridge Down are a small number of very 
slight, less than 15cm high, lynchets lying on the steeper, upper slopes close to the eastern 
valley and truncated by the western edge of the aggregated field system crossing that 
valley. Although fragmentary, these lynchets may represent the remains of a rectilinear 
field system. The full extent of this system, with its main axis aligned 30o east of north, 
cannot now be determined - it may once have covered the entire central area and spread 
beyond the down but present arable land to north, west and east has destroyed such slight 
evidence. The southern portion of the down itself is more problematic. Some damage will 
have been caused when the road ran somewhat north of its present line, and also by gallops 
parallel to its northern edge, but much of the lower area appears ‘flat’, bears slightly 
different vegetation, and may have been ploughed relatively recently.
The spur stretching south-west from the plateau carries a number of more pronounced 
lynchets comprising two systems of fields looped onto each other and lying on slightly 
different alignments. At the top of the spur three boundaries are truncated by the ditch of 
243
244
the hillfort, Woolbury Rings, and this system, with an alignment guided by the topography 
and lying 40o east of north, stretches down the spur towards a notable, but natural, knoll. 
Just to the north-east of this knoll is a constructed bank with an alignment similar to that of 
the upper set of aggregated fields. The knoll, distinctly barrow-shaped, bears two small 
barrows whilst to its south-west are the fragmentary remains of a further group of 
aggregated fields with a main axis running almost due east / west.
The remains of this system are masked by disturbance due to various routes of the road and 
the gallops to its north. The north-west boundary of both these blocks of fields is marked 
by a large lynchet at the top of a steep slope, which is also the present property boundary 
and, presumably, also the edge of the historic manorial waste, and its date of origin cannot 
245
be determined. This edge is subject to erosion and the western extent of the prehistoric 
fields may have been truncated. The upper portion of the south-eastern boundary 
comprises successive boundaries of four fields looped onto each other with rounded southeastern corners, whilst a fifth field on the same alignment is appended but within this 
composite boundary. The line then continues past the knoll, abutting the bank boundary, 
towards the lower group of fields. 
The fields set within the eastern valley (fig 8.9) appear to have a longer and more complex 
history. That they overlie the rectilinear system to their west is clear, but their relationship 
with the linear bank and ditch on their south-western limit is not. The form of the linear 
suggests several phases to its construction, and in general the fields fit within that 
earthwork, with their boundaries abutting and plough soil piled against the bank. There are 
however three places where a different sequence is suggested. Firstly, on the lower slopes 
of the valley a number of ‘playing card’ corners are visible suggesting the fields were 
originally looped onto each other in a fashion similar to that on the western spur. Secondly, 
at a point north of barrow 14 (Eagles 1989, fig 2; fig 8.5) the bank of the linear complex 
rises at a point where the field boundary to its north-east abuts as though it had been 
constructed over a field corner. Thirdly, a small mound once visible to the west side of the 
linear ditch as the valley narrows towards the top (ibid) but now destroyed by animal 
burrowing may also represent an earlier field corner. Much of the area where relationships 
between the linear ditch complex and the field system may once have been seen has been 
heavily disturbed and this interpretation must remain speculative, but the imposition of the 
linear bank and ditch over a line comprising the south-western boundaries of a number of 
fields looped on to each other remains a possibility.
The north-eastern boundary of this field system, the present property boundary, is also 
problematic. Towards the bottom of the valley this boundary is represented by only a very 
slight lynchet, and here the field boundaries can be seen, both on aerial photographs 
(Palmer 1984; fig 8.4) and as variations in the height of the crop, to continue into the arable 
field to the north-east. Farther north-west, however, the size of the lynchet increases until, 
close to Woolbury Rings, it is between 3m and 4m high. Although field boundaries to the 
246
north-east are visible on aerial photographs (ibid) they are not continuous with those in the 
valley and, in view of the height difference, it is most unlikely that they belong to the same 
phase of activity. A different scenario must be posited.
247
The top three fields are more or less level, being separated by large lynchets and having 
been cut into the eastern side of the valley. They are relatively small, are south-facing and 
are protected from the north and east. These adaptations cannot be dated but, from the 
alteration in direction of the uppermost lynchet as it approaches the ditch and rampart they 
seem likely to post-date construction of the hillfort. Their construction entailed 
considerable expenditure of labour and yet the depth of topsoil would have been at most 
slight - if crop production was intended then that crop must have been of high value. The 
modern vegetation (Iris foetidissima) suggests the presence of a spring point and the output 
appears to have been contained within an embanked channel and ducted into a pond (figs 
248
8.9 and 8.10) but, although these features must post-date the cutting of the upper fields into 
the valley side, and their position taking water round the inner edge of those fields might 
suggest a functional relationship, dating evidence is not available. One possibility, though 
speculative, might be that the complex is Romano-British in date and, given the suitability 
of the chalk soil, the relative dryness, and the southern aspect, could have been used for 
growing vines. However, the location, dug into the hill with a backdrop of the rampart of 
Woolbury Rings and with extensive views towards the ridge of Beacon Hill (Ashley) in 
front might alternatively suggest either a spectacular approach to the hillfort or a theatrical 
locus without it.
8.7 Relative and absolute chronology
The fragmentary remains of a probable rectilinear field system pre-date both the linear 
ditch complex and the aggregated or ‘looped’ field system to their north-east
The aggregated field system in the eastern valley may predate the linear ditch complex 
which in places forms its western boundary, although this latter monument appears 
itself to comprise several phases
The aggregated field system on the western spur clearly predates Woolbury Rings
o The ditch of the hillfort is considered to have been constructed during the 
Early Iron Age or Middle Iron Age on the basis of pottery dated to the 1
st
century BC/AD having been found in the lower fillings (Cunliffe & Poole 
2000, 43)
Remodelling of the upper fields of the system in the eastern valley appear to post-date 
construction of the hillfort ditch
o The measures put in place to control and conduct water from a possible 
spring point must post-date this re-modelling
The large lynchets bounding Stockbridge Down to north-west and north-east cannot be 
dated
No phase relationship between the field systems and the barrows and burials can be 
determined with certainty although two north to south boundaries comprising part of 
the lower of the western aggregated systems appear to have been aligned on barrows
249
8.8 Discussion of land use on Stockbridge Down during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
The remnant of chalk downland preserved as Stockbridge Down is in an ecozone of wide 
resource availability and, as a result, bears evidence of multi-period utility. Mesolithic 
flints have been found in the local area and a single find from the down itself, a flint core, is 
considered to belong to the Early Neolithic (Hants AHBR 55252). The presence of a 
relatively rich Beaker period burial suggests more activity and, possibly, some clearance by 
the end of the 3rd millennium BC. A change in environment shown by the molluscan 
evidence from a pit (Stone & Gray Hill 1938) may relate to further clearance, although it is 
not possible to judge the degree to which either the Clay-with-Flints capping or the chalk 
down were open. Whilst the accident of preservation may have played its part, the number 
of barrows on Stockbridge Down points towards extensive settlement in the vicinity and the 
use of this prominent point, overlooking the abraded streams of the Test valley and with its 
own elevated spring point, as a focus of interest, though not necessarily of total clearance.
Dating any of the field systems to the 2nd millennium BC is unproven and based primarily 
on their morphology. Whilst the aggregated fields on the upper portion of the western spur 
clearly pre-date construction of the ditch of Woolbury Rings that feature can only be said to 
pre-date pottery of 1st century BC / 1st century AD date found in the fill.
The survival of fragments of a rectilinear system in the central portion of the down 
indicates that the conclusions drawn of enclosed fields separated by pasture (Eagles 1989) 
may well be true for a later point in the sequence, but do not apply to the earliest visible 
agricultural use. The extent of this early system cannot be deduced from the available 
above ground evidence; the alignment is, however, similar to that of some of the features 
shown on the transcription of aerial photographs in the arable field to the north-east (Palmer 
1984 [fig 8.4]; Cunliffe 2004 fig 2) suggesting that it may have been of considerable size.
The aggregated fields on the western spur can be divided into two groups based on their 
alignments although both appear to have been placed within common boundaries to the 
north-west and south-east. The north-western boundary has been affected by erosion but, 
250
given the steepness of the slope in that direction, a boundary on approximately the same 
line seems likely even if the present lynchet is of later date. The south-eastern boundary is 
marked by a lynchet clearly integral to at least the upper of the two groups of fields. The 
very approximate area enclosed in the upper fields, given that the north-eastern boundary is 
uncertain, is 10ha; there is insufficient information to calculate that for the lower. Of 
considerable interest is the constructed bank, north-east of the barrow bearing knoll and 
separating the two sets of fields. If the change in alignment has been used as an identifier 
between different groups rather than it being a response to the topography, a strong 
possibility given the relatively flat nature of the ground at the lower end of the spur, the 
building of the bank, together with the presence of the natural knoll might serve to 
strengthen that separation. 
The similarity in morphology between the fields on the western spur and those in the 
eastern valley suggests, but certainly does not prove, a similarity in date. If this is correct, 
and the earlier rectilinear system originally spread over, and probably beyond, the zone 
between the aggregated groups, the area enclosed by these later systems represents a 
considerable contraction. As has been observed elsewhere the larger lynchets bounding the 
later fields must indicate either more intensive ploughing or use over a longer period. The 
western system, and probably also the eastern, stretch up the hill onto the area of Claywith-Flints, a geology often considered to have been avoided (for example Moffat 1988).
If the observation that the linear ditch complex appears to overlie the field system in the 
eastern valley is correct this would imply an earlier date both for this system and, by 
analogy only, for those on the western spur. Linear ditches in Wessex are, as a 
generalisation, broadly dated as contemporary with the ceramic post-Deverel-Rimbury 
Plain Ware Phase and Potterne Transitional Phase, ie. between c. 1100 and c. 750BC 
(Cunliffe 2004). The imposition of the linear ditch would have served to emphasise the 
integrity of that group of fields as a defined entity without interfering with its use, part of a 
wholesale reorganisation of the landscape evidenced by the number of linears aligned on 
the top of the plateau. It is not possible to identify the number of potential phases in the 
construction of the linear ditch complex and the evidence may, indeed, have been lost due 
251
to extensive animal disturbance, but it is notable that, although alignment of groups of 
linear on high points which later bore enclosures or hillforts is well attested (for example 
McOmish et al 2002, fig 3.6), here some phases at least were aligned on a point farther 
west on the plateau.
The construction of Woolbury Rings is somewhat insecurely dated to the Middle Iron Age 
and evidence suggests that occupation was sparse (Cunliffe & Poole 2000, 25 et seq), but at 
least two enclosures within the interior, constructed during the Late Iron Age, were in use, 
either intermittently or continually, through most of the Romano-British period (ibid, 28 et 
seq). Given this longevity of occupation it is highly unlikely that the field systems were not 
re-used and the adaptations seen at the upper end of the system in the eastern valley may 
well relate to these periods.
Within the wider landscape Stockbridge Down is part of the central southern chalklands, an 
zone of extensive prehistoric use. Large scale projects involving transcription of aerial 
photographic cover of the environs of Danebury Hillfort (Palmer 1984), extensive survey of 
parts of the Marlborough Downs (Gingell 1992; McOmish 2005), Salisbury Plain during 
the Wessex Linear Ditches project (Bradley et al 1994), the surroundings of Stonehenge 
(RCHM[E] 1984; Richards 1990) and work on the Salisbury Plain Training Area 
(McOmish et al 2002) all attest both intensive use and preservation of evidence in the 
Wessex region. Much of the chalk was covered by field systems and continuation of this 
production through the 1st millennium BC supported the construction of a number of 
hillforts (Sharples 2010, 121 et seq). The valley of the Test to the west would have 
provided lush pasture and riverine resources and is also now recognised as part of a longlasting axis of movement of early farming ideas (Shennan et al 2010), density of Neolithic 
and Early Bronze Age occupation (Field 2008) and communications throughout prehistory 
(Sherratt 1996). In view of this the density of prehistoric activity is not unexpected but the 
survival of field systems from the 2nd or early 1st millennium BC, suggesting as it does a 
lack of later ploughing other than within the defined fields, is perhaps more surprising. 
Items of Anglo-Saxon (Hants HER25231) or, possibly, Jutish (Hants HER29995) jewellery 
were apparently found in a rabbit scrape on one of the lynchets and an execution cemetery, 
252
probably of Late Saxon date (Hants HER25222), on the knoll overlooking the Roman road 
to Stockbridge, appear to be the limit of evidence for later activity. This lack of later 
ploughing or other destructive activity has preserved a remarkable sequence of earlier land 
use.
253
Chapter 9
Land use on Thundersbarrow Hill, West Sussex during 
the 2nd millennium BC
254
9.1 Summary
Limited survey of the area around the multi-phase settlement on Thundersbarrow Hill 
shows a rectilinear field system underlying the aggregated system known as Thunder’s 
Steps. The former system can be seen to extend north and south along the ridge and into 
the valleys on either side. The later field system comprises a number of fields looped onto 
each other, with tracks, not necessarily integral to the initial design, running between them 
from east to west. The track running along the ridge to the two prehistoric enclosures does 
not appear to be an original feature, and its date is uncertain. In the wider area the 
settlements on Thundersbarrow Hill can be seen to dominate a well-utilised area focussed 
on the estuary of the Adur to the south. 
9.2 Definition of the study area
This case study comprises an area of 42 sq km in West Sussex stretching from the Low 
Weald to the coast and lying between grid lines TQ20 to the west, TQ26 to the east, TQ12 
to the north and TQ05 to the south. Within this a smaller area, encompassing the ridge 
which bears the prehistoric enclosure known as Thundersbarrow and the valleys to west 
and east, will be subjected to limited survey and analysis.
9.3 Rationale for selection of study area
The field system is intimately associated with two phases of enclosure which have 
undergone limited excavation and, therefore, dating
o Unpublished data from excavation undertaken in the 1980s to assess damage 
due to ploughing, which include a section cut across one of the lynchets, 
have been made available (by David Rudling)
The location of the site is unusual
o Although many prehistoric enclosures are set in high, dominant positions, 
those at Thundersbarrow Hill are notably exposed and bleak
o Both the enclosures and a portion of the field system close to them are very 
precisely set on small, and locally relatively rare, deposits of Clay-withFlints, a geological position usually thought to have been avoided by 
prehistoric agriculturalists.
255
The field system was surveyed in the period before World War 2 but has since been 
severely damaged by ploughing
o A more detailed survey would therefore be of value whilst some above 
ground evidence remains
The site overlooks a major river valley, that of the Adur, and has access to a wide 
resource base including the Low Weald and the coastal plain
o Excavation, particularly in advance of alterations to the A27, has located a 
number of at least approximately contemporary settlement sites in the 
immediate vicinity
9.4 Geology and topography of the study area
The location of the study area is shown in figure 9.1 and the topography and geology in 
figures 9.2a and 9.2b respectively.
The enclosures are set on a high chalk spur running south from the main ridge of the South 
Downs at 150m OD, and the field system known as Thunder’s Steps is positioned along the 
ridge, immediately south of the enclosures. 
256
257
258
Aerial photographic and above ground evidence also indicate portions of the field system 
stretching into the valley to the east, and also possibly that to the west, of the spur. 
Although the surrounding geology is Upper and Middle Chalk, both enclosures and the 
fields known as Thunder’s Steps are apparently specifically located on very small Claywith-Flints deposits (it must be recognised that 1:50,000 British Geological Survey maps 
may not be sufficiently accurate in this regard).
To the north of the enclosures the land rises gradually to the main ridge of the South 
Downs, lying at approximately 200m OD, and then plunges precipitously to, successively, 
the Lower Greensand, Gault Clay which, outside the study area, borders the Weald Clay of 
the Low Weald. To the south the dip-slope of the downs gives way to the head deposits of 
the coastal plain, with occasional patches of brickearth overlying.
Some 2.5km to the west is the valley of the Adur, an area which would have provided 
diversification of the resource base but which would have been a considerable obstacle to 
east / west movement across the downs. To the east the block of chalk downs, dissected by 
a number steep-sided valleys running from north to south,, stretches a further 22km to the 
next major valley, that of the Ouse.
9.5 Evidence of Bronze Age activity in the study area
Sites known and recorded in the West Sussex Historic Environment Record are given in 
appendix 1 and those dated to the relevant periods shown in figure 9.3. Only one notable 
barrow cemetery has been located, that on Beeding Hill overlooking the northern end of the 
gap cut by the Adur through the South Downs. A number of pairs of and singleton barrows 
are scattered along the top of the scarp slope of the downs but there are relatively few on 
the spurs running southwards from the main ridge. The main spur within the study area, 
which terminates as Southwick Hill, carries only the large bowl barrow, Thundersbarrow, 
and its attendant enclosures and field systems. To its west a parallel spur has two barrows 
at its end at Slonk Hill, overlooking the coastal plain, and a settlement to their north. The 
spur overlooking the Adur valley apparently bears neither barrows nor settlement evidence. 
259
260
On the coastal plain there was a settlement site (HER3671) at Kingston Buci which 
produced a Beaker and post-Deverel-Rimbury pottery (Curwen & Hawkes 1931). 
Development of the A27 / Brighton Bypass necessitated investigation of a number of sites 
in the southern portion of the study area (Rudling 2002). On the spur to the east of 
Thundersbarrow, ending in Cockroost Hill, is the settlement of Mile Oak. Cockroost Hill 
may have been the focus of early attention as a monument comprising two concentric rings 
of interrupted ditches has been located by aerial photography (Russell 2002). A Middle 
Bronze Age settlement of round houses with a date range of between 1400 and 1030 cal BC 
(Oxa-5108; Oxa-5109) may have post-dated portions of lynchetted field system (lynchets 
1401 and 1403); lynchet 1403 appearing to underlie House 1. Whilst this relationship is 
shown in two figures (ibid figs 2.3 & 2.4), where the lynchet is drawn as surviving within 
the entrance to the house (north of feature 1562), it does not appear on the excavation plan 
(ibid fig 2.5) and the author suggests foundation of the settlement within a field system 
which continued in use after abandonment. During the Late Bronze Age further settlement, 
and more important, metal working evidence, was found but unfortunately radiocarbon 
dating for the latter is not available. A number of trenches excavated at Mile Oak Farm 
with the intention of investigating the field system/s failed to produce reliable dating 
evidence.
Investigation of lynchets on Southwick Hill (Beresford 2002; West Sussex HER 4366) 
produced evidence of two phases of field system, one, the earlier, defined by ditches, and 
the second by lynchets. Both systems run on alignments between north to south and northeast to south-west, but, unfortunately failed to produce dating evidence. Although only 
limited excavation took place, it was thought that the earlier system enclosed rectilinear 
fields whilst the later comprised contour lynchets on the south-west-facing slope of the 
spur. Combination of excavation and aerial photographic evidence suggested that these 
systems were linked to those extending from Thundersbarrow, some 1.5km to the northwest.
A recent review of data, particularly grey literature (Yates 2007, 156-157), did not produce 
any further evidence of field systems within the study area.
261
The main focus of activity on Thundersbarrow Hill lies on a slightly elevated area at a point 
where a number of spurs diverge from the main ridge, at a height of 150m OD. The placename is of unknown antiquity but a round barrow lies close to the enclosures. Now 
partially destroyed and with a fence line running over it, the barrow had apparently already 
been mutilated by the construction of a pond before 1873, when prehistoric, RomanoBritish and Saxon pottery was found (Curwen 1933 quoting Crawford pers comm).
The enclosures and their surroundings were surveyed in 1914-15 (Gurd & Jacobs 1924; fig 
9.4), prior to their disturbance by wartime trench digging and bombing. The extent of this 
survey, which acknowledged that the inner enclosure had first been noted by Toms in 1912, 
was limited by the military authorities. Only the earthworks to the south of the enclosures 
were drawn in detail, but others to the east and west are mentioned. The authors are clear 
262
that the outer enclosure overlay field boundaries but considered that the apparent lack of an 
enclosure ditch indicated ploughing after abandonment of the ‘camp’. A drawing by Gurd 
(in the collection described below) of a section through a lynchet on Thundersbarrow Hill 
dated 30.xi.18 is annotated to show that the cut was made through the 5th and 6th terraces of 
the ‘Giant’s Steps’ by the military. Aerial photographs show considerable areas of practice 
trenches of the form in use after the commencement of hostilities in 1914 and common 
elsewhere, notably on Salisbury Plain (Brown & Field 2007). 
Minor excavations took place in 1929 and recovered pottery described as ‘late Hallstatt –
La Tène I time (approximately fifth and fourth centuries BC)’ (Curwen & Curwen 1930). 
The original site drawings from Curwen’s excavation are held in the Sussex Archaeological 
Society’s research collection at Barbican House, Lewes, and have been used for the 
following discussion unless otherwise stated. Curwen’s work (1933) concentrated on 
relative chronology of the different components of the visible earthworks, field boundaries 
which he suspected represented more than one phase, the two enclosures, and the RB 
‘village’ to their east. Two trenches were sited with the intention of investigating the 
relationships between the two enclosures and one of the lynchetted field boundaries.
Section A, on the western side, confirmed the earlier view that the large lynchet to the west 
had been formed mainly, if not entirely, by ploughing after construction of the outer 
enclosure bank with Early Iron Age pottery (probably now datable to the Late Bronze Age) 
found within the matrix of the positive lynchet. The outer enclosure bank had been 
constructed on a grass covered palaeo-surface but ‘this old turf-line dips slightly over a 
slight, irregularly cut ditch or string of shallow pits’ (ibid), features clearly shown on the 
drawing (fig 9.5) and whose fill was described as ‘mould with flints’. These resemble 
examples found at Black Patch (Tapper forthcoming) where small pits filled with remnant 
Clay-with-Flints, either originating naturally or formed by roots of a possible hedge, had 
been preserved by an overlying lynchet. At Thundersbarrow they may indicate the position 
of a field boundary pre-dating the outer enclosure.
263
Section B (fig 9.6) was positioned to investigate the relationship between a lynchet 
approaching from the west curving towards, and thought to underlie, the outer enclosure 
bank. Excavation in fact indicated that the lynchet post-dated the outer enclosure ditch but 
that a small ditch, running parallel to the northern side of the inner enclosure and truncated 
to the west by two north to south lynchets, appeared to predate the outer enclosure ditch. 
264
During this work the earlier survey was extended to show a field system lying obliquely to 
Thunder’s Steps, to their west, and, possibly, overlain by them. Small platforms protruding 
from the western edge of Thunder’s Steps were thought to represent the corners of earlier 
fields (fig 9.4).
This system was associated with two trackways running towards sites at Kingston Buci and 
Slonk Hill whilst the main track running to the east of Thunder’s Steps is directed towards 
Southwick Hill. The area to the east of Thundersbarrow, leading down into Whitelot 
Bottom, could also be seen to carry a system of sub-rectangular fields but here much had 
been slighted by strip lynchets of probable medieval date. Although no earthworks could 
be seen to the north of the enclosures, a survey of a lynchetted field system north along the 
ridge on the southern slopes of Truleigh Hill included a track running in the direction of 
Thundersbarrow Hill (Williamson 1924). This track also appears to extend towards the 
north and down the scarp slope of the downs to provide access to the greensand and beyond 
to the clays of the Low Weald.
The majority of the artefacts recovered during this work related to the Romano-British 
settlement to the east of the enclosures. However the prehistoric pottery, then described as 
late Hallstatt – La Tène I, is now recognised as part of the developed plainware – decorated 
continuum within the post-Deverel-Rimbury tradition and dating to the later end of the 
period c. 1150-500 cal BC (Seager Thomas 2008). 
By 1985 ploughing had severely reduced Thunder’s Steps, the interior of the enclosures 
were being ploughed, and the condition of the monument complex, already badly damaged 
by military and agricultural processes, caused concern. Geophysical survey and minor 
excavation aimed at quantifying the damage was undertaken (Rudling 1986; forthcoming).
A section across the ditch of the inner enclosure produced pottery of the 8th century BC 
from the upper fills, and a radiocarbon date of 1680-1320 cal BC (HAR-8182) from a 
portion of antler located on the floor of the ditch. The context for which this early date was 
obtained did not contain other dateable artefacts but a dump from the middle fills produced 
265
an assemblage dated to c. 10th
– 9
th century BC (Hamilton in Rudling forthcoming). Reinvestigation of the small ditch located by Curwen (ditch a, fig 9.6) confirmed that it was 
cut by the outer enclosure ditch. The outer enclosure was tentatively dated, on the basis of 
pottery from the ditch fills from both Curwen’s excavation and that of 1985, to the 6th
– 5
th
centuries BC. At no point were stratigraphic relationships between either of the enclosures 
and the boundaries of the field system/s clarified.
A number of trenches were positioned to section lynchets to the south and west of the 
enclosures. Only the major lynchet to the west of the enclosures produced a well stratified 
collection of pottery and examination of this led to the conclusion that the initiation of 
lynchet formation may have taken place during the Early Iron Age but much of the build up 
probably related to the Romano-British settlement to the east of the enclosures. 
The section across this lynchet was subjected to environmental sampling (Thompson 1986). 
In summary, the pre-lynchet environment was one of open grassland, and the matrix of the 
266
early portion of the lynchet, as with the later, was a plough soil formed of sediments from 
further upslope. A considerable period of stable grassland separated these two phases 
which may have represented settlement abandonment. 
Geophysical survey produced evidence of features within the inner enclosure (figure 9.7), 
one of which appears, as drawn, to cut the bank of the inner enclosure. However, this same 
feature was shown during the excavation (trench D plan) to possibly comprise an 
interrupted ditch or row of pits similar to that found beneath the outer bank during 
Curwen’s excavation (Curwen 1933; figure 9.5). The features located during the 
geophysical survey could represent either settlement or field boundaries.
9.6 Analytical survey of the field systems
Survey of the field systems on the spur of Thundersbarrow Hill and the valleys either side 
was limited both by the vegetation cover and the damage to the above ground evidence. 
The fieldwork was undertaken in July and August after a spring drought followed by a 
period of cold weather. This had precluded the possibility of obtaining two crops of hay 
from the area around the enclosures and on the side of the eastern valley and the single crop 
was being harvested late to ensure maximal growth. Land to the east of Thunder’s Steps is 
covered by scrub and brambles and could not be accessed; that to the south, arable land in 
the post-war decades, is now owned by the National Trust and is under scrub and light tree 
cover. Whilst access to this area is possible, existing aerial photographs were considered 
likely to show more information than that which could be gained from ground survey.
Damage to the above ground evidence during the 20th century is greater here than in any 
other area studied. Military activity during the early years of World War 1 (noted above) 
resulted in extensive areas of disturbance to the south-west of Thunder’s Steps and 
subsequent ploughing has made differentiation between field boundaries and trench 
systems impossible. In addition and as noted by Curwen (1933), it is not certain which of 
the tracks and hollows visible within the area of Thunder’s Steps result from any period 
prior to World War 1.
267
However, much of the damage has been caused by ploughing, mainly during the 1960s and 
later. Aerial photographs from the period show the interior of the enclosures under arable 
cultivation and excavation during the 1980s (Rudling 1986; forthcoming) located plough 
marks over much of the area. From the point of view of this study it is the extensive 
damage to the field systems which is most regrettable, with even Thunder’s Steps, once 
sufficiently notable in an area of extensive field systems to be ascribed to a god, now 
reduced almost to invisibility.
For these reasons survey was limited to addressing specific questions raised both by 
previous work on the site and work in other places undertaken during this study. Any 
visible phase relationships between Thunder’s Steps and the field systems to east and west 
were examined as was the track running approximately north / south, either through or as 
an integral part of, the later system. Possible boundaries to the whole system known as 
Thunder’s Steps, particularly at its southern end, and the relationship of such boundaries 
and the earlier system /s were sought.
The alignments of possible rectilinear systems underlying the major looped system were 
investigated to determine the likelihood of a single, extensive, system straddling the spur 
and the valleys on either side. A rapid assessment was also made of the presence of any 
visible field boundaries to the north of the prehistoric enclosures, and transcription 
evidence from aerial photographs (for example fig 9.8) was used to enhance the ground 
survey particularly to the south of Thunder’s Steps in an area now under shrub cover.
A rapid scan of online resources, Google Earth and Bing indicate extensive field systems 
beyond the area under detailed study in all directions. It is hoped that a return to 
Thundersbarrow when vegetation conditions are more amenable will allow some further 
information to be obtained but the losses cannot be recovered.
9.6.1 Survey results
The survey results are shown in figure 9.9, their relative chronology in figure 9.10 and the 
location of places mentioned in the text in figure 9.11. It is clear that the earthworks 
268
surveyed by Toms, and later by Gurd and Jacobs (1924) and by Gurd (in Curwen 1933) are 
only a small portion of those still visible in the fields further north and south, and on either 
side of the Thundersbarrow ridge. The systems display considerable complexity and timedepth.
The earliest visible boundaries are those of a rectilinear field system (red in fig 9.10). These 
were apparently not recognised in 1918 (Gurd & Jacobs 1924), though that work had been 
truncated by the military authorities, but were added to the previous survey and published 
later (Curwen 1933). This system is aligned 10o east of north and clearly underlies the 
looped system running down the ridge, with corners from the earlier fields protruding from 
below the later and appearing as small platforms. The area to the west and south-west has 
been heavily disturbed by the military activity visible on aerial photographs and some slight 
269
scarps found during this survey relate to these trenches. The field boundaries shown on 
aerial photographs (for example fig 9.8) cover a subsidiary ridge running southwards and 
here it is possible to judge their maximum size as approximately 100m x 100m (1ha), 
considerably larger than those noted in other case studies. 
270
Limited examination of fields under crop and of aerial photographs indicates that 
boundaries on this alignment continue to the north as far as the Monarch’s Way 
(TQ227091), around 800m north of the Thundersbarrow enclosures. To the west the 
271
earthworks disappear under colluvial deposits in Mossy Bottom but some are visible on a 
similar alignment emerging on the east-facing slope beyond. To the south aerial 
photographic evidence indicates the presence, as soil marks, of boundaries on all three of 
the subsidiary spurs running south from the main ridge. No obvious enclosing boundary 
can be seen and the soil marks run out where the colluvial deposits increase in depth; these 
may well relate to the boundaries excavated on Southwick Hill (Beresford 2002). 
Major boundaries have been seen continuing down the Thundersbarrow ridge and these 
probably belong to the later system. However, a large lynchet bounds the top of the northfacing slope of the spur and slighter earthworks run approximately north to south down that 
steep slope. Here the slope into Whitelot Bottom reaches a gradient of approximately 30% 
in places; in other areas, Fore Down for example, north-facing slopes with such steep 
gradients do not appear to have been ploughed. To the west, soil marks and crop marks in 
272
pasture, again on an approximate north to south alignment, can be seen in a field on the 
west-facing slope of Tenant Hill (TQ 237088). If all these boundaries relate to a single 
system, and that is by no means certain, then an area of at least some 2km x 2km (400ha) 
was enclosed.
Overlying this is the field system known as Thunder’s, or The Giant’s, Steps (dark blue in 
fig 9.10); this system has clearly been subject to adaptation and alteration throughout its 
period of use. The northern portion of this system, immediately surrounding the two 
enclosures, could not be studied since it was under crop; unfortunately this means that little 
can be added to existing opinion on the relationship between the two set of earthworks. 
The large lynchet to the west of the enclosures appears to have been part of this system 
although it has been enhanced both by its re-use as a modern and historic property 
boundary, and by its re-use in part as the parish boundary between Shoreham and Upper 
Beeding and the administrative boundary between Adur and Mid-Sussex Districts. Slight 
earthworks were noted between this boundary and the enclosures (Curwen 1933) 
suggesting that they were constructed within existing fields, and two lynchets noted 
crossing the modern track to the north may indicate that this later field system stretched 
further up the ridge. South of the enclosures, the south-western boundary of the field 
system is marked by a series of rounded corners with two break points at which track-ways 
appear to cross the system. The northern of these was noted in earlier surveys and is 
probably of antiquity but the southern can be seen to have been caused by excavation of 
military trenches. 
A major question in the development of this field system relates to the track-way running 
through the fields along the crest of the ridge (turquoise in fig 9.10). The lynchet bounding 
the south-western side of the track includes a number of rounded corners to fields to its 
south-west, and the track leads to what may be an original entrance to the outer enclosure. 
However, the route of this track-way was also in use in the 1870s (Ordnance Survey 25” 
map surveyed in 1873 and used as the basis for later surveys [Gurd & Jacobs 1924; fig 
9.4]) and for an unknown period before. This use will certainly have enhanced any 
previous terracing and may indeed have created the breaches in the northern and southern 
273
sides of the enclosure. That this route is of some antiquity seems clear – its relationship 
with the double lynchetted track-way immediately south of the outer enclosure (turquoise in 
fig 9.10) is that of routes in contemporary use. However, in a number of instances the field 
boundaries to its west are matched to its east and, in two cases, slight earthworks can be 
seen crossing the track. This strongly suggests that the track-way was imposed upon an 
already existing field system rather than being integral with the original design. That 
rounded corners built up against the south-western edge of the track demonstrates that the 
fields on that side at least either remained in use or were re-used at a subsequent date. 
This suggests that the first phase of fields overlying the rectilinear system comprised a 
series of long narrow enclosures draped across the ridge from the observed boundary on the 
south-west facing slope, to an as yet unknown position among the deep vegetation to the 
north-east. Gurd’s additions (Curwen 1933) to his earlier survey (Gurd & Jacobs 1924) 
indicate an intermittent boundary to fields north-east of the track-way which, if it did bound 
an entire series, would give an approximate width of fields across the ridge of 200m. This 
may also relate to a major boundary observed but not surveyed edging the top of the northfacing slope at the Slonk Hill end of the ridge. If this is correct the second visible phase of 
field systems stretches for at least 900m south, and an unknown distance north of the 
enclosures.
The track-way running up the crest of the spur can now be seen as a later reorganisation of 
movement through the area. The date of its imposition remains uncertain but it may well 
be contemporary with the re-use of land to its south-west, resulting in the enhanced 
lynchets of Thunder’s Steps. The east to west double-lynchetted track-way immediately 
south of the outer enclosure may be contemporary but the second example noted on this 
survey between the fifth and sixth fields down the ridge probably resulted from early 20th
century military activity mentioned by Gurd (Gurd & Jacobs 1924).
This military activity caused a large area of disturbance on the south-west-facing slopes 
south of the enclosures and a number of slight scarps, with alignments at variance of those 
of the field systems (green in fig 9.10), are probably the edges of trench systems visible on 
274
aerial photographs. A number of slight scarps running more or less parallel to, and between 
the double lynchetted track-way and the modern track (green in fig 9.10) are of unknown 
aetiology but may represent gradual movement of the track north-eastwards to its present 
position. Various hollows may be dry ponds, and two such were identified by Gurd. 
However, the same survey also identified a number of bomb craters and Curwen’s (1933) 
comment that ‘certain parts of the hill are peppered over with large and small bomb craters 
which still appear as ragged cavities, but which will one day be difficult to distinguish from 
more ancient pits’ has proved prescient.
9.7 Relative and absolute chronology
The earliest visible earthworks comprise a rectilinear field system which covers a large 
area in all directions from Thundersbarrow Hill
o This system predates the larger later enclosure but may be contemporary 
with the inner enclosure which has a Middle Bronze Age date
The rectilinear system is overlain by a series of fields running down the ridge
o This system probably originated in the Late Bronze Age but part at least was 
intensively reused in the Romano-British period
o The fields may have been draped across the ridge on either side of, and predating, the double lynchetted track-way
The double lynchetted track-way seems to have been imposed through the later field 
system, either to provide access to the later enclosure or to the Romano-British area
One boundary of the later phase field system was re-used as an ecclesiastical and 
administrative boundary
Military activity, some dating to the early years of World War 1, took place on the 
south-western slope of the ridge and possibly elsewhere
9.8 Discussion of land use on Thundersbarrow Hill during the 2nd and early 1st
millennia BC
The overall impression gained from this survey is of an organised and intensive use of the 
landscape around a dominant focus on Thundersbarrow Hill, intermittently at least, during 
much of the 2nd and 1st millennia BC.
275
Middle Phase Beaker pottery, dated to around 2000BC, has been found close by at 
Kingston Buci and Shoreham (Drewett et al 1988, 68), and late collared urn material at 
Slonk Hill at the end of the Thundersbarrow ridge. Early Bronze Age activity resulted in a 
number of barrows along the scarp edge of the downs to the north but relatively few 
examples on the southern spurs. The single large Thunder’s Barrow marked this high point 
with its vista from the ridge of the downs, across the estuary of the Adur, and out into the 
Channel. This landmark, close to sheltered moorings in the estuary, could have one of the 
many which facilitated prehistoric cross-Channel and coastal trade (Wilkes 2007). 
Exchange of goods, whether by trade or as diplomatic gifts, provided a means of 
emphasizing the social position those who controlled landing places and routes from the 
coast. The importance of contacts across this narrow part of the Channel are underlined by 
the recognition that objects found in the Low Countries appeared to have travelled there not 
across the North Sea but indirectly by way of France (Fontijn 2009). This concept will be 
further addressed in the discussion.
It is again notable that certain areas, in this case the spur of land to the immediate east of 
the Adur estuary, are not known to have been used for barrow construction.
The earliest enclosure, with a last cleaning of the ditch dated to between the 17th and 14th
centuries BC, is of a remarkably early date. Although the main period of occupation is 
later, with pottery from sealed contexts dating to the 10th to 9th centuries BC (Hamilton in 
Rudling forthcoming) the earlier date is similar to that from another enclosure on a high 
point with visibility over the Channel. At Highdown, some 13km to the west, an enclosure 
in use from c1400 – c600BC has been assigned the role of distribution centre (Ellison 
1981) and this function as an adjunct to long-distance trade will be further discussed in 
Chapter 10. 
The chronological relationship between the early, rectilinear, field system and the early 
enclosure is uncertain, but their proximity and the assumed status of the enclosure suggest 
an economic interdependence, and therefore contemporaneity. The scale of land enclosed 
is, again, more than seems necessary to produce sufficient food for the likely local 
276
population. Here, however, there is some density of settlement with the Middle Bronze 
Age site at Mile Oak within sight some 1.5km to the south-west, and that at Kingston Buci 
2.5km to the south. The enclosures on Thundersbarrow Hill are set at a point where spurs
bearing these two settlements leave the main ridge.
The amount of land enclosed left only the highest portions of the downs above the scarp 
face for grazing and timber production, although the river valley could have provided the 
former and the Low Weald the latter. Here, even a steep north-facing slope was included 
within the field system. No tracks are obvious either in the field or on aerial photographs 
but some allowance must have been made for both local and longer distance movement.
The overlying fields draped over the ridge represent a considerable decrease in the area of 
land enclosed. Other similar systems may occur elsewhere in the vicinity and, in the 
absence of boundaries to the rectilinear system it is not possible to estimate the degree of 
reduction, but it appears to be considerable. Although situated on the ground most prone to 
erosion, the design of the fields would have prevented further decrease in fertility through 
loss of topsoil. Their morphology is similar to that on Tenantry Ground (Chapter 7) and 
there it is thought that they date to the prehistoric period, probably the Late Bronze Age / 
Early Iron Age. Here the situation is less clear with ample evidence of Romano-British 
agricultural activity, including corn drying, at the settlement to the immediate east of the 
prehistoric enclosures (Curwen 1933).
Excavation of a section across the large lynchet to the west of the enclosures (Rudling 
forthcoming) produced sufficient pottery to allow some attempt at dating its genesis and 
later use (Hamilton in ibid). All Late Bronze Age sherds recovered were considered to be 
residual but the lower layers contained a mixture of Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age 
pottery whilst the lowest context contained Early Iron Age with a single Late Bronze Age 
sherd. This strongly indicates the genesis of this lynchet, part of the later phase system, lies 
in the Early Iron Age and may be contemporary with the construction of the outer 
enclosure, probably during the 6th to 5th centuries BC. It is not possible to say whether or 
not there was a hiatus between the two phases of field system but on pottery evidence from 
277
limited excavation this appears possible. Re-use of the land around the enclosures in the 
Romano-British period is evidenced by the major, upper portions of the lynchet containing 
pottery of that date.
It is ploughing of this period which probably resulted in the large lynchets of the field 
system known as Thunder’s Steps and, from observations made prior to the recent plough 
damage, they were considerably higher to the south-west of the double lynchetted trackway. It may well be that the route came into use, or at least was delineated, as an approach 
to the Romano-British settlement and that only a portion of the existing, visible, field
system was brought back into use as arable land.
However, from the pottery evidence, there would appear to have been a cessation of landuse between the Early Iron Age enclosure and second phase field system and the 
development of the settlement to the east of that enclosure and re-use of the fields during 
the Romano-British period, a period of some 500 years.
A contrast with other areas of Sussex is the apparent relative lack of cross-ridge dykes. 
Only one is known, cutting across the narrow saddle west of Tottington Mount (fig 9.3) and 
isolating a spur overlooking the Adur valley as it cuts through the scarp of the downs, and 
the wide, low-lying marshy area north of the river gap. This may have been placed to 
monitor movement at a point where the river could be crossed and a high route along the 
scarp edge accessed. Certainly this point was of importance in later periods – Anglo-Saxon 
Port Cuthman (Steyning), and later Bramber, were situated as inland ports where an east to 
west land route crossed the Adur at the highest point where it was still navigable by seagoing boats. 
The hiatus between Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age and Late Iron Age / Romano-British 
activity over the wider area is less pronounced than in other areas. During the Late Bronze 
Age occupation evidence was extensive and, although the acreage under the plough had 
decreased, the land was still formally enclosed and settled. Whilst there is no evidence of 
occupation on the Thundersbarrow ridge, a little to the south-west at Slonk Hill an 
278
unenclosed farmstead survived from the 6th to the 1st century BC (Hartridge 1978). 
Evidence was found of mixed farming, with an increasing emphasis on sheep rearing as the 
period progressed; maintenance of animals into maturity for production of fleece, milk and 
use as traction suggested that fodder was available for overwintering the stock. Use of 
marine resources in the form of shellfish, and evidence of both copper alloy and iron 
production suggest a relatively self-sufficient and prosperous establishment. 
Situated between the hillforts of Cissbury and Chanctonbury to the west, the Devil’s Dyke 
to the north and Hollingbury to the east, all visible from Thundersbarrow Hill, and with 
access to riverine and marine resources, iron ore from the Weald and possible coastal and 
cross-Channel links, this area was well placed for use during the Iron Age and, indeed, into 
the Romano-British period. However, it is still the overwhelming scale of enclosure by the 
early field system which leaves a lasting impression.
279
280
10.1 The pattern
Analytical survey of the above ground evidence of a small number of field systems, mainly 
on the chalk of southern and south-eastern Britain, has produced a remarkably consistent 
general pattern, both in morphology and in change in that morphology over time.
The earliest visible field boundaries form rectilinear grids which are draped over valleys 
and spurs leaving, in general, only high ridges unenclosed. The main alignment of these 
systems is somewhat east of north, although on the South Downs at least this respects the 
prevailing topography of the spurs running south from the main ridge. On Whitmoor 
Common and, possibly, Tenantry Ground, two phases of similar field systems were 
constructed, the one overlying the other, but on different alignments. In some areas, 
Kingley Vale and Plumpton Plain for example, adjacent systems were set out on slightly 
different orientations. The grids of fields may be set within a continuous outer boundary 
(Kingley Vale and Plumpton Plain). The lynchets of these systems tend to be slight, even 
where they do not appear to have been truncated by later ploughing (for example the 
eastern side of Moustone) and there is little evidence of change or adaptation. No 
settlements can be shown with any certainty to be contemporary with these field systems, 
although the early enclosure at Thundersbarrow is a possible example. Where excavation 
has taken place on the North and South Downs, the boundaries appear to have had little 
underlying structure; certainly they did not include ditches. In a few cases (Tenantry 
Ground and, possibly, Fore Down) field boundaries can be seen to underlie barrows of 
probable prehistoric date although, given the presence of Anglo-Saxon burial mounds in the 
same area, caution must be exercised in the use of this relative chronology.
Most of these early rectilinear systems were overlain by groups of aggregated fields of 
variable morphology. However, the superficial sands of Whitmoor Common seem to have 
been abandoned, possibly because the increasingly infertile heathland became less 
attractive than the adjacent heavy clays. On Brigmerston and, probably, Milston Downs in 
Wiltshire, fields were grouped together but on Plumpton Plain and on Tenantry Ground 
fields were successively looped onto each other. At these two sites the sequential nature of 
the fields is clear with the boundaries of successive fields staggered (Plumpton Plain and 
281
Tenantry Ground), but elsewhere (Thundersbarrow and, possibly, the eastern valley on 
Stockbridge Down) it is possible that the rounded corners were caused by ploughing round 
an arc in the corner of the up-hill field with loose soil spilling over or through the corner 
barrier. Intermediate forms were found in Kingley Vale and on Lullington Heath. The 
number of case studies reported here is insufficient to judge whether this represents 
regional or chronological variation, or, indeed, no consistent pattern – personal choice 
could have played a role. These later field systems represent a considerable contraction in 
the area of land enclosed; no case study has provided enough evidence of the extent of the 
earlier systems to calculate the degree of this reduction with precision but at least 50% and 
possibly as high as 75% seems likely. These systems generally do not cross valley floors 
but may be placed on valley sides or across spurs; in all cases they enable considerably 
freer movement both within and through the area. Their lynchets are usually far larger than 
those of the earlier systems and the rounded, ‘playing card’ shape of their outer corners add 
emphasis to the interpretation that the areas beyond them was not ploughed.
Enclosed and unenclosed settlements were placed across the boundaries of the earliest field 
systems too often for this to be coincidence but it is seldom possible to prove 
contemporaneity with the later aggregated fields – Brigmerston Down is an exception here.
Wider landscape divisions, created by a network of linear ditches, also post-date the 
rectilinear field systems although, again, contemporaneity with the aggregated fields cannot 
generally be proven. On Brigmerston, Milston and Stockbridge Downs large areas were 
delineated by bank and ditch complexes, the Wessex linear ditches, and at the last 
mentioned site it is possible that a linear was constructed overlying the boundaries of a 
sequence of aggregated fields. In Sussex possible divisions are signalled by so-called 
cross-ridge dykes which can, in a number of cases, be seen to post-date field systems, but 
which are, in general, notably poorly dated.
The final phase appears in many cases to have been abandonment of arable land and of 
substantial settlements. Stockbridge Down and Thundersbarrow have produced evidence 
of substantial later use of the areas, but despite examination of upthrow from animal 
282
burrows and, in the case of Whitmoor Common and Plumpton Plain, excavation, there is 
little to indicate subsequent land use other than for pasture.
Each of these three changes involved a major and labour intensive reorganisation of large 
areas of land over, it appears, much of southern and south-eastern Britain. The timing of 
these events will be further discussed below but is likely to fall within the seventeen 
centuries between 2400 and 700BC. The aim of the remainder of this discussion will be to 
attempt to identify the drivers underlying the changes and to set them within the wider 
socio-political and economic framework of the Bronze Age and Early Iron Age.
At this stage it seems necessary to emphasise differences in the nature of evidence used in 
this report and that often used elsewhere, particularly from excavation in areas where above 
ground earthworks will have been truncated. Where lynchets on chalk downland have been 
sectioned (for example Heathy Brow [Drewett 1982, figure 6], Mickleham Downs [Currie 
2000], Black Patch [Tapper forthcoming], Plumpton Plain [this report]) they have, in 
general, been found to lack underlying structure and would not survive medieval and 
modern development on, say, the coastal plain of Sussex. By contrast, on the numerous 
sites excavated under the auspices of PPG16 where fragments of field system have been 
located (synthesised in Yates 2007) or on the rare occasions when exposure of large areas 
allows the pattern to be viewed (Framework Archaeology 2006; 2010; Hart forthcoming) 
the evidence has taken the form of ditches. This difference may relate to the soil type –
development sites tend to be on river gravels and alluvia or on the brickearths of the coastal 
plain – or it may depend on either function or date of the features. Whilst this disparity 
cannot be resolved it does need to be acknowledged.
10.2 The investigative process
Landscape archaeology, a term degraded by overuse, can be said to link geographical 
models, through cultural studies, with the human environment, and as such has a long 
genesis. In borrowing both techniques and philosophical concepts from other disciplines it 
has developed as a number of interacting traditions, but any piece of interpretation should 
be placed within one or more of those traditions.
283
The earliest surveyed plan of an archaeological site in England is taken to be that of 
Avebury created by John Aubrey in 1663 (Welfare 1989), and Wiltshire also provided the 
background for many of William Stukeley’s early 18th century plans and vistas (Piggott 
1985). The 19th century saw plans of earthworks appearing in a range of county-based 
volumes including the Victoria County Histories, and in the early 20th century this work 
was placed on a more formal basis with the creation in 1908 of the three Royal 
Commissions on Ancient and Historical Monuments of England, Scotland and Wales 
(Bowden 1999, 21). However, early landscape surveyors tended to produce maps and lists 
of ‘sites’; Rev AC Smith’s Guide to the British and Roman Antiquities of the North 
Wiltshire Downs published in 1884 is a prime example of a local intensive study to be 
placed beside the extensive Earthworks of England by Hadrian Allcroft published in 1908. 
These volumes, useful as they are to modern researchers in terms of recording monuments 
now lost or damaged, were essentially gazetteers and their authors made little attempt to 
‘people the landscape’. Survey and recording continued into the 20th century when OGS 
Crawford, trained as a geographer and a committed Marxist, became Archaeological 
Officer for the Ordnance Survey. There he set up a division responsible for the accurate 
depiction of antiquities, and also recognised the potential of aerial photography for 
archaeology. This tradition has continued though the Royal Commissions and, for the last 
decade, the Archaeological Survey and Investigation Teams of English Heritage, but these 
modern workers have widened their remit to encompass cultural concepts
A further strand is represented by the ‘English (or ‘Scottish’ or ‘Welsh’) Traveller’, an 
individual who journeyed, observed, noted, was curious, and reported on a wide range of 
aspects of the land through which he (usually) passed. Daniel Defoe (c. 1660-1731) 
travelled extensively in later life and wrote an account of the state of the country he saw in 
Tour Through the Whole Island of Great Britain (1724-27). This pursuit, with an added 
emphasis on the time dimension of landscape development, formalized and 
professionalized, evolved into the umbrella discipline of historical geography of which 
Harold Fox and, perhaps most famously, WG Hoskins, author of The Making of the English 
Landscape published in 1955, were early exponents. Place-name studies came to be seen 
as relevant to landscape archaeology rather than simply the province of philologists 
284
(Dodgson 1966; Fellows-Jensen 1985; Gelling 1984; Gelling & Coles 2000). In more 
recent years a dichotomy has developed with, on one side, those who favour an overarching approach as exemplified by An Atlas of Rural Settlement in England (Roberts & 
Wrathmell 2000), and historic landscape characterization projects (for example Cornwall 
County Council 1996). Countering these are cogent pleas for more detailed evidence to be 
sought before misleading generalizations are made, best expressed by Christopher Taylor 
(2001, 161):
“Another desire is for more detailed regional studies. Although it has always 
been axiomatic that landscape history in based on the results of such studies, 
the inevitable drive for generalization and synthesis has meant that local and 
regional differences have often been smoothed over or ignored. Yet no matter 
how awkward the results of such studies may be to the theories of the 
generalists, they remain fundamental to landscape history.”
Gordon Childe explored a different route, linking material culture with both human 
communities and spatial areas. Although he too was interested in the ideas of Karl Marx, 
Childe’s legacy has been claimed by both processual (Falkener 2007) and post-processual 
(Ucko 1990) archaeologists. In describing his own earlier work, The Dawn of European 
Civilisation, published in 1925, he said that it "aimed at distilling from archaeological 
remains a preliterate substitute for the conventional politico-military history with cultures, 
instead of statesmen, as actors, and migrations in place of battles" (Childe 1958). 
This recognition that the landscape we see results from interactions between the natural 
environment and human societies working within their cultural imperatives was also a 
concept embraced by geographers like Carl Sauer (1889-1975). In his seminal work ‘The 
morphology of landscape’, also published in 1925, he rejected environmental determinism, 
then the prevailing theory among geographers, in favour of stating that "the task of 
geography is conceived as the establishment of a critical system which embraces the 
phenomenology of landscape, in order to grasp in all of its meaning and colour the varied 
terrestrial scene".
285
During the middle of the 20th century these three strands coalesced with a number of inputs 
from other disciplines including anthropology and the hard sciences. The complexity and 
time-depth of the remaining signs of use of the landscape over millennia led to the use and 
over-use of the term ‘palimpsest’ (previously more commonly seen as a description of reused parchments or monumental brasses). Although only concentrating on the post-Roman 
landscape, Aston and Rowley (1974, 14) were able to say:
“The landscape is a palimpsest on to which each generation inscribed its own 
impressions and removed some of the marks of earlier generations. 
Constructions of one age are often overlain, modified or erased by the work of 
another. The present patchwork nature of settlement and patterns of agriculture 
has evolved as a result of thousands of years of human endeavour, producing a 
landscape which possesses not only a beauty associated with long and slow 
development, but an inexhaustible store of information about many kinds of 
human activity in the past”.
Many large-scale survey projects have now been undertaken, transforming our 
understanding of that complexity and time-depth. The hinterland of major monuments has 
been examined, setting the sites within their contexts, for example the Danebury Environs 
Project (Cunliffe & Poole 2000a) and the Stonehenge Environs Project (RCHM[E] 1984; 
Richards 1990). Large areas with good above ground preservation like Exmoor (Riley et al
2002), the Marlborough Downs (Gingell 1992), Fyfield and Overton Downs (Wilts) 
(Fowler 2000) and Salisbury Plain (McOmish et al 2002) have been surveyed. 
Occasionally excavation on a landscape scale has been undertaken and has shown the same 
complexity in areas like Heathrow Airport, where it seemed unlikely to have survived 
(Framework Archaeology 2010) and in the Fens (Pryor et al 2002; Pryor & Barnforth 
2010). Infrastructure projects often provide transects across the landscape not biased by 
archaeological concerns. Improving the Irish road system (O’Sullivan & Stanley 2005), the 
water supply for an area of the Sussex coast (Hart forthcoming) and the cross-Channel rail 
link (Glass 1999) not only locate new sites but also register areas of the landscape with 
little or no evidence of activity.
286
Attempts at understanding human relationships with artefacts and with the landscape have 
followed a number of strands of thinking, most of which originate in other disciplines, and 
which vary in their adherence to the field evidence. Borrowing from developments in 
geography, history and anthropology, the possibility was mooted that artefacts might have 
had more than practical significance and could be considered to have their own biographies 
(Hodder 1982). Parallels have been drawn between the cycle of life – birth, reproduction 
and death – and both the life-cycle of pottery vessels and quern-stones – manufacture, use, 
destruction and deposition (Brück 2001) and the farming year – ploughing, sowing, tending 
and harvest (Johnston 2000; Williams 2003). Ethnographic evidence of the procurement of 
flint by tribes in North America, which involves social sanction and suitable rituals, has 
been used to interpret archaeological evidence from flint mines on the South Downs 
(Topping 2004).
The phenomenological approach took the view that the meaning with which landscapes had 
been invested in the past could, perhaps, still be experienced (Tilley 1994) and the same 
concept could also be applied to settlements (Pollard 1999). The concept of landscape as a 
cultural concept, endowed with meaning from ancestral memories and mythologies, and 
expounded by Childe and Sauer, was continued in the 1990s (Bradley 1991a; Bender 1993; 
Barrett 1994). The importance of distinctive natural features, caves, rocky outcrops and 
springs for example, may be imbued with meaning (Kelley & Francis 1994; Humphrey 
1995; Sunderstrom 1996; Bradley 2000). Liminal zones, places between one world and the 
next, are now recognised as having been given meaning in the past. Votive deposition of 
metal objects in marshes, between earth and water, particularly during the Bronze Age and 
Iron Age (Bradley 1990), and the execution of criminals in high places, between earth and 
sky during the Late Saxon period (Reynolds 1999) exemplify this hypothesis. Imbuing the 
stone carried from a particular outcrop in Wales to take its place at Stonehenge with healing 
properties (Darvill & Wainwright 2011) adds to this view of the past. Many such 
suggestions are, of course, beyond proof, but ethnographic studies of belief structures in 
places like Papua New Guinea (Bayliss-Smith 2007) and North America (Topping 2010) 
suggest that we should not underestimate the complexity of beliefs in pre-literate societies.
287
A division has developed between those who study the ‘material’ landscape and those who 
‘experience’ the ‘mental’ version (Bender 1993; Ashmore & Knapp 1999). The accusation 
was made that landscape archaeology has, largely through Hoskins, become a pupil of the 
Romantic Movement of the 19th century, but has, at the same time, become over-empirical 
and over-concerned with ‘reconstruction’ (Johnson 2006). Whilst accepting that 
recognition of the complexity and time-depth of prehistoric landscapes had triggered 
development of methods aimed at understanding the societies that created and used them 
(ibid 136 et seq), he nevertheless condemns those who see ‘the need to get their boots 
muddy’ (ibid 34-69).
In a rejoinder (Fleming 2007) the origins of landscape archaeology are traced, not to the 
romanticism of the 19th century, but to the spirit of scientific curiosity, prevalent at the 
same time. Pointing to OGS Crawford and others and, from them Collin Bowen, Peter 
Fowler and Chris Taylor, as intermediaries, Fleming accepts the need for a variety of 
methods and concepts to aid any understanding of past landscapes and their creators. But 
he asks ‘does the site really have to be cleared by wrecking-ball and bulldozer, before the 
bright new edifice of post-processual landscape archaeology can be constructed?’
The suggestion of the development of an absolute split between field practitioners and 
theorists (Johnson 2007) was not explicitly denied (Fleming 2008), but the latter author 
does ask for a more considered view of the aims of past workers, rather than using 
hindsight to criticise their direction of travel. In a memorable sentence he says ‘to describe 
Hoskins’ perspective as “angst-ridden, conservative, anti-modernist, post-Imperial, and 
Little Englander” (Bender 1998, 28), may nail him down ideologically, but it does scant 
justice to his scholarly aims and achievements, or his influence within our discipline’.
The depth of this division is surely over-stated. Indeed, the title of a recent book The Death 
of Archaeological Theory? (Bintliff & Pearce 2011) hints that a more nuanced approach is 
necessary. With an advertised intention of discussing the need for archaeologists to be 
freed from those who preach the primacy of any single model, the requirement for a greater 
recognition of intellectual fashion, and a possible retreat from post-processualism and post-
288
modernism to a more scientifically based, rationalist view, this suggests a new, and perhaps 
less confrontational, agenda. The final sentence ‘The rumours of the ‘Death of Theory’ 
have indeed been exaggerated’ theory is not dead, it is just more pragmatic, less partisan, 
more open – it has become bricolage’ (Pearce 2011) says it all.
Whatever current theoretical framework is used to interpret the results of landscape survey, 
the evidence is a finite resource which is under constant threat of degradation. Evidence 
once recorded can be re-interpreted - once destroyed it is lost forever. During the following 
discussion it will become clear to most readers that this author is firmly of the ‘muddy 
boots’ brigade, but the complexity and time-depth of the physical evidence of such ‘simple’ 
features as groups of fields, revealed though analytical survey, tells a story. It is for us to 
try to understand that story, using whatever interpretative tools and concepts are at our 
disposal.
10.3 The process of enclosure
It has become a given that early agriculture was shifting in nature – woodland clearance 
was followed by exploitation of the land until decreasing fertility forced removal to new 
areas, and that enclosure of fields marked a change to a more permanent form of landscape 
organisation. Whilst ‘shifting’ and ‘permanent’ are simply the extreme ends of a 
continuum, experimental work suggests early agriculture could have successfully utilised 
cleared land for a considerable period. In Germany weed suites within grain crops grown 
on land cleared by ‘slash-and-burn’ contained pollen and seeds from perennial plants 
remnant from the original woodland for at least 6 years after clearance (Rösch 1998), whilst 
data from 262 Linearbandkeramik sites on the loess belt from Belgium to Poland indicated 
the presence not of these perennial weeds, but of annual weeds of disturbance (Bogaard 
2002). Similarly, Early Neolithic sites in Ireland produce weed suites recovered with cereal 
deposits in which the taxa represented are from annual plants preferring disturbed soil 
conditions (Whitehouse 2011). In southern Britain, no decrease in crop yield was noted 
when prehistoric wheat was grown on the same plots for 20 years without addition of any 
form of manure on chalk rendzina (Butser Ancient Farm, unpublished data). However, 
whilst land may have been in use for longer than is generally accepted, there does not 
289
appear to have been a requirement to enclose plots by means which left a mark in the 
archaeological record, although early examples like those in Ireland (Cooney 2000) may 
yet prove to have had wider currency.
It is unlikely that enclosure was the first event in the agricultural history of any of the areas 
under study. Brigmerston and Milston Downs are within the Stonehenge landscape and 
may well have been exploited as a resource to support those who constructed that 
monument complex; all the case study areas except Stockbridge Down and Whitmoor 
Common have long or oval barrows in the immediate vicinity and all have round barrows 
within or close to the field systems. Implements including a greenstone axe from Cornwall 
and knapping debris underlie the field system on Plumpton Plain (McOmish & Tuck 2003; 
English et al 2012) and the podzolisation process had been initiated before the field banks 
were built on Whitmoor Common either by trampling or ploughing. Colluvial deposits, 
evidence of valley side ploughing and dated to the Late Neolithic, have been found at a 
number of locations on the South Downs (for example Allen 1995), in Dorset (for example 
French et al 2003) and elsewhere. Lines of stake holes may indicate fields defined by 
fences but the advent of coaxial field systems changed the landscape to a degree that has 
not happened since – the impact would have been both visual and immediate and would 
have changed the way in which the land could have been negotiated. Routes would have 
existed and been recognised before; tramping through crops would surely always have been 
discouraged, but now they were constrained to a narrow path between permanent manmade barriers. In many cases entry onto the track would have been from a point from 
which the exit could not be seen, and no variation in route would have been possible over 
several km, an hour or more’s walk, during which time progress could be noted and 
monitored.
This level of control, and separation from open land would have been novel but would 
become, in terms even of folk memory perhaps, permanent. However, when the first field 
systems were devised there are likely to have been doubters. Even if the change was seen 
as a response to a real or perceived challenge there was only anecdotal evidence, perhaps 
from overseas, that all the necessary conditions for food production in the coming year 
290
were in place. It shows a level of confidence in the future and a willingness to bind people 
to the land in a defined spatial relationship with each other (Field 2008a). Farming had 
been the primary method of food production for many centuries and the problems inherent 
in over-grazing and over-cropping, decreasing fertility, disease build-up, soil compaction or 
soil erosion among them, would have been recognised – they had, after all, underlain the 
need for shifting agriculture. In practical terms, it shows a trust in their farming techniques 
to overcome these problems and, in less practical terms, a belief that the spirits of their 
ancestors and the land would accede to the change in the nature of this bond.
The traveller was now an outsider – probably still a welcome trader with his exotic goods 
and stories of other places, or a neighbour moving stock to seasonal grazing – but still 
someone whose track was predetermined and who could, if necessary, be watched. The 
relationship between farmer and farmed, and farmer and traveller, had changed irrevocably.
The design of these field systems is striking in its formality. The areas are bounded but it is 
not possible to be certain at what point in the life of the system the boundary was 
constructed. Although a rectilinear grid is relatively simple for us to construct – sighting 
between posts to construct straight lines, visual right angles, and knotted rope between the 
lines to achieve parallelism, achieving the desired result over variable and sometimes steep 
topography would have required co-operation between a number of people, practice, and 
trial and error. In the cases surveyed here there is little sign of entrances into fields and in 
only a few cases are tracks between the fields present. There is also little evidence of 
adaptation within the grid; with lynchets in most cases less than 0.5m high and often less 
than 0.2m minor details may well have been missed, and gaps in hedges, for example, 
would leave little sign above ground.
Nevertheless, the impression is given, correctly or not, of a design where form mattered 
rather than the practicalities of everyday farming life. This great act of enclosure, however 
gradually it took place both in terms of individual systems and over the wide-spread area 
over which it came to hold sway, was not an organic development. It involved skill, 
purpose and levels of control which will now be discussed.
291
Two major questions need to be addressed. Why did people come to believe that it was 
right, that they had the right, to place barriers across the land, particularly since it is this 
marking which seems to have represented permanence rather than the construction of more 
substantial settlements? Why was this form of rigid, formal fields, with corners which 
would be difficult to plough, chosen; and why, despite its apparent longevity, is there so 
little evidence of adaptation?
The right to enclose a large area may have had to be given and received, and the questions 
arise of who or what was perceived as ‘owning’ the land, and the nature of the covenant 
that allowed its allocation and use. Also, the rectilinear grid is unlikely to have developed 
organically; once adopted it may well have become tradition, but the origin seems unlikely 
to have been strictly pragmatic. Recent thinking has tended to decry the importance of 
these considerations: the concept of a ‘planned’ landscape on Dartmoor has been 
challenged and replaced by one whereby the coaxial reave systems are seen as ‘reflexive’ in 
their regard for earlier ties of occupation and tenure rather than ‘transformative’ (Johnston 
2005). These two concepts are surely not mutually exclusive. Enclosure did not take place 
in some tabula rasa; the alignment of the field boundaries at Heathrow Terminal 5 certainly 
respects that of the cursus (Framework Archaeology 2006) and many systems observe the 
underlying topography. But the similarity in form of coaxial field systems over a wide area 
of southern Britain points to a new mindset, not a sweeping away of the past at some year 
zero, but a fundamental change in the attitude to, and organisation of, land. Piecemeal 
enclosure and adaptations within systems have also been emphasised (Wickstead 2008) but, 
again, this does not obviate the clear overall adherence to the accepted design.
Hunter /gatherer communities have been studied by anthropologists in some detail, but the 
changing nature of the relationship between man and the natural world with the 
development of farming appears to have received less attention. Modern hunting 
communities seldom take prey ‘as of right’ but need the assent of the animal to become 
human food, a permission which is always granted (Ingold 1986). Taking a harvest from 
the soil might require a similar permission. The Q’eqchi’ people of Guatemala, swidden 
farmers who cultivate maize but also hunt (Gonzalo 1999), believe that all resources, 
292
domesticated and wild, plant and animal, organic and inorganic, are owned by the god 
Tzuultak’á. The importance of land is suggested by the name of the god which 
incorporates the words for ‘hill’ and ‘valley’. Tzuultak’á permits use of the resources 
providing the necessary rituals have been enacted but wrongdoing may be punished by 
failed harvest or a shortage of prey. In Israel also land was considered to be owned by god 
who allowed its use by man; here present political and cultural concerns may influence 
understanding of past beliefs (Kark 1992). 
Field boundaries serve practical purposes, of which probably the most important is 
separation of crops and herbivorous animals, particularly if management necessitates 
movement of stock to obtain water, or to and from non-permanent grazing areas through 
fields with growing crops. Folding of stock on stubble or on fields left fallow to increase 
fertility, the use of pigs to break up compacted ground and to remove roots, or of sheep or 
goats to graze scrub or rank fields are all techniques which would leave little trace in the 
archaeological record, and may have been used in prehistory and all would have required 
careful control of the stock. However, these are all needs which would have been present 
before the Early Bronze Age and all had been met, possibly by use of moveable hurdles or 
of tethering. It is the permanence of the new system which marks the change.
Studying the ditched field systems at Kuk in Papua New Guinea (Bayliss-Smith 2007), 
systems whose morphology closely resembles the rectilinear pattern observed here, the 
author identifies six possible reasons for their construction:
Ditches as a symbol of property in the landscape
Ditches as a reflection of economic rationality
Ditches as the outcome of social inequality
Ditches as a response to population crisis
Ditches as an investment in future security
Ditches as an adaptation to climate change
293
Although the lynchets forming the boundaries of the early field systems on chalk downland 
do not appear to have been associated with ditches (Currie 2000, Tapper forthcoming; 
Barry Taylor pers comm.; chapter 5), there is no reason to assume that ditches per se 
necessarily purposes, other than for drainage, that non-ditched boundaries did not. The 
reasons for the construction of the ditches at Kuk will therefore be tested for possible 
relevance to the situation in Early Bronze Age southern Britain.
At its most basic the enclosure of land implies some form of claim, not necessarily 
ownership in the form we understand, but at least a differentiation between owned and not 
owned, ‘ours’ and ‘theirs’, perhaps ownership in severalty or in common. Hunter / gatherer 
communities exploit the resources of a specific area of land, a territory, usually with 
recognised, although not marked, boundaries. Even with an economy based on agriculture 
mixed with hunting and gathering, the need to collect a harvest, given the time and labour 
invested in preparing, sowing and weeding land, would be likely to focus the imperatives of 
territoriality on smaller and more closely defined areas. Arresting the observable decline in 
yield as fertility decreased (although the speed at which this happened is much debated), 
and the success and probable failure of mitigation strategies, are unlikely to have been 
regarded as purely practical matters. Bounding the land gave visible expression to that 
focus, and also facilitated investment of the land with the identity of those who farmed it.
A specific boundary earthwork, rather than the outer edge of the outer field, as seen in 
Kingley Vale and on Plumpton Plain, calls attention to the enclosure of an area rather than 
the piecemeal intake of land as required. There is no evidence that the boundary came 
early in the sequence of constructing the system, and it may have been a late, or even final, 
addition; indeed, centuries may have elapsed with the originators of the field system having 
no concept of that aspect of its final form.
In some areas, Kingley Vale, the Fore Down and Tenantry Ground area and Plumpton Plain 
in particular, virtually all the available land was eventually enclosed, leaving only highest 
ground along some spurs and the main ridge of the South Downs free for movement. It is 
difficult to draw any conclusion other than that land pressure, real or perceived, underlay 
294
the inclusion of steep and eroding slopes, and, in the case of Whitmoor Common, land with 
visibly decreasing fertility, and this aspect will be amplified below.
In the areas under study the proportion of land enclosed is staggering. Although it seems 
most unlikely that the whole area of coaxial fields was in use for crop production at any one 
time, all the field boundaries on chalk soils that could be observed in detail were lynchets 
created by ploughing on a slope, suggesting that each field was, for a period at least, under 
cultivation. All the lynchets were relatively slight and, although many may have been 
truncated by later ploughing, fields on the steepest slopes – the north-western side of Deep 
Dene for example drops 65m in 160m (a 40.6% gradient) and the steep east-facing slope of 
Thundersbarrow Hill reaches 30% – were surely not used intensively. An economic 
argument would recognise that, whilst large areas might have been required if the areas 
farmed shifted within the bounded zones, inclusion of land which must have been 
recognised at the time as usable only under extreme pressure should indicate some stress, or 
a perceived risk of future stress, within society. Alternatively, the visual continuity of the 
grid of enclosures may have had an importance that overrode the difficulties in ploughing 
steep slopes, indeed, that very difficulty could be seen as enhancing the spiritual value of 
the labour involved in construction.
Two concerns seem apposite, firstly, an increase in population and secondly, a decrease in 
crop yield.
Population change is notoriously difficult to see in the archaeological record – even the 
approximate 35-50% decrease in 18 months caused by infectious illness, the Black Death 
(Daniell 1998, 189 et seq), left little direct evidence. However, ploughing steep slopes and 
the use of exhausted land is seen as a response to the increase in population from the 9th to 
the 14th centuries AD (Hare 1994), and some abandonment of agriculturally marginal land 
after the Black Death is attested both in the field and in the documentary record (for 
example English & Brown 2009) – a situation reminiscent of that seen in the period under 
study here.
295
It is accepted that population levels increased in the European Early Neolithic and 
considerations of Darwinian evolutionary theory, life history theory (Hawkes & Paine 
2006) and behavioural ecology (Winterhalder & Smith 2000) have resulted in a more 
general view to be taken of reasons for population change (Shennan 2009) which may be 
relevant to other periods within British prehistory. Population increase results from a 
combination of an innate need to maximize reproductive success (to increase the number of 
children surviving to adulthood), and a series of decisions made by individuals that children 
have value in themselves rather than simply as an increased labour force. Population tends 
to increase rapidly given the required circumstances but not, in general, up to or over the 
carrying capacity of the land, such that starvation becomes likely, but to a point of balance 
at which the available resources are being exploited sustainably (Paleston & Tuljapurkar 
2008). The trigger which allows the decisions to be made that more children can be 
successfully raised, and are thus worth the investment required, can appear simple –
provision of wells within villages increased fertility in an Ethiopian village by reducing the 
energy load on women who had previously carried water a considerable distance (Gibson & 
Mace 2006).
If, from this, the large area enclosed within the rectilinear field systems in any way relates 
to population size, a new condition or conditions must have prevailed. There could have 
been either a biological ‘push’ mechanism (Lambert 2009), population increase requiring 
more land under cultivation and providing the labour to work it, or a ‘pull’ mechanism, 
more efficient land use enabling the survival of a larger population. Discussion of these 
points, which necessitates a view on the date of their genesis, will be undertaken below.
Efforts to maintain soil fertility are in evidence in Britain and in Europe including manuring 
of sandy soils (Simpson et al 1998) and crop rotation (Schmidl & Oeggl 2005) and recent 
work at the Middle Bronze Age settlement of Black Patch on the South Downs has 
identified a probable slurry pit (Tapper forthcoming). Whilst such techniques were in 
regular use the mechanisms underlying their efficacy would not have been understood –
was there any guarantee that they would always work or might yields fail and the land 
296
become exhausted? Again, a perception of future risk may have encouraged claiming and 
enclosing more land than was immediately required.
However, the slight nature of the lynchets bounding these early fields may indicate only 
light use. Although the boundaries which were overlain by later fields at any period 
between the Late Bronze Age and the present will have been truncated by ploughing, even 
those on the steep eastern side of Moustone and other areas which appear to have remained 
under permanent pasture are less than 0.5m high. A study of colluvial erosion in dry 
valleys on the South Downs (Wilkinson 1993; - et al 2002) showed considerable variation 
in both morphology and date. In Cockroost, within the Thundersbarrow landscape (chapter 
9), only a shallow depth of colluvium was present despite the steepness of the valley sides. 
This area is visibly within a rectilinear field system which was not surveyed but which may 
be continuous with that to the east of the Thundersbarrow ridge. The authors (ibid) observe
that ‘a possible explanation for this is that the surrounding slopes were seldom under 
cultivation’. Similarly, in Sweetpatch Valley, farther to the east, colluviation, with an onset 
dated to 2140-1690 cal BC (OxA-2994 & OxA-2995, both 3560±80BP), was considered 
slight, and to probably represent only short-lived agricultural events prior to c1000 cal BC. 
This is an area where field systems are visible as soil marks, although they may date to the 
1
st millennium BC rather than earlier. Areas where only slight depths of colluvium in the 
bottom of steep-sided valleys marked by lynchets may indicate, as suggested here, a lack of 
intensive arable use, but it must be borne in mind that colluvium resulting from light, 
loessic, soils may have been swept further down the valley. Also, recognition that 
colluviation tends to result mainly from high energy storm episodes, particularly on fields 
with winter sown crops (Boardman 1992), could explain its relative lack if the crops in 
these early fields were spring sown.
Enclosure may indicate recognition of an increasing population and a perception of risk of a 
shortage of land rather than overpopulation itself. The presence of other people in the next 
valley, thus limiting the possibility of moving on, perhaps the signs of abandoned and weed 
ridden fields nearby where fertility had not been adequately maintained, and an awareness 
297
of groups having to exploit more difficult soils could trigger a mindset where ‘our’ land 
needed to be defined in case of need in the future.
There is little evidence of climate change in north-west Europe during the middle centuries 
of the 2nd millennium BC, but there is evidence of a period of bad weather at that time. 
Study of raised bog deposits in Sweden and geochemical investigations of sediments in 
Tunisia both suggest a major episode c. 1500BC. The cause of this is uncertain but glassy 
spherules found in Tunisia which resemble those from the K/T horizon and may have 
resulted from an asteroid or comet strike in the eastern Atlantic (Franzén & Larsson 1998). 
Similar findings point to a further crisis in 1000 – 950BC, and these are seen to overlie a 
natural cycle of poor weather which occurs on a c. 550 year periodicity with minima at c. 
2100 BC, c. 1500BC, c. 950BC, c. 400BC and into succeeding periods. A period of poor 
weather c. 1628BC is also by Irish tree-ring data and thought to have resulted from 
cometary debris (Baillie 1999). The degree to which these events would have affected 
farming communities in southern Britain is uncertain, but either direct experience or stories 
from elsewhere may have made a consolidation of land claims a wise insurance against an 
uncertain future in the middle of the 2nd millennium BC.
Of the reasons for the construction of ditched boundaries outlined above (Bayliss-Smith 
2007) the first, a symbol of property in the landscape, may explain the genesis of these 
large rectilinear systems. Their proliferation over the following centuries seems more 
likely to result from population increase, a real or perceived land pressure and, from that, as 
an investment in future food security.
Boundaries themselves can accrue meaning. They are, by definition, liminal zones, and 
have been seen as suitable places for a Middle Bronze Age cremation burial at Chalton 
(chapter 6) and for the deposition of a Late Bronze Age hoard of bronzes in the Mole Gap, 
a deposition marked by a cairn of flint nodules patinated white from burial in chalk (chapter 
3). At Gwithian (Cornwall) one boundary of a field system had been used for burial whilst 
another had been covered with white quartz – a material which was not available 
immediately locally (Nowakowski et al 2008). In the Mole Gap and at Gwithian these 
298
markers would have acted as visible reminders for the living of past events. The colour 
white is increasingly recognised as significant: small pieces of broken quartz covered areas 
beside carved slabs at Torbhlaren (Jones 2010) and at Ben Lawers (Bradley 2010) both in 
Scotland; the sarsens at Stonehenge and other monuments, and the split trunks at Seahenge, 
would have appeared pale when the faces internal to the ring had been freshly shaped 
(Darvill & Wainwright 2011). Chalkland barrows would have been white when first 
sealed, and those of heathland a pale gold. It has been suggested that the aim of 
excarnation was to expose white bones so that the spirit could escape the coloured, 
polluting, dead flesh and continue on its journey (Parker Pearson & Ramilisonina 1998). In 
modern Western Christian culture white is associated with purity and black with death, but 
in many cultures white is the colour of mourning. In the British Neolithic and Bronze Age 
white seems associated with ceremonial places - striking public places, and places 
sometimes of death, monumentalism and memorialisation. On the downs removal of turf 
or even simple clearance of chalk patinated flint nodules would have created white 
boundaries, and the cairn within which the hoard was buried beside the swallow holes of 
the Mole Gap was of patinated nodules with the addition of one pink (non-local rhyolite) 
pebble. The use of field boundaries for burial, hoard deposition and, occasionally their 
furnishing with a white covering, seems to hint at a greater significance. It may be that 
particular boundaries, property boundaries for example, were suitable for treatment in this 
way. Associations with death, but perhaps more pertinently, the ancestors, and, from that, 
appropriation, inheritance, lineage and permanence, may have been expressed through such 
actions.
In a mathematical modelling exercise a number of cultural, environmental and demographic 
parameters were compared with the aim of predicting development of complexity within 
society (Gavrilets et al 2010). Two conditions stood out, longevity of the chieftain and a 
smooth method of transition, and probability of success in war. The construction and use 
of large field systems can be seen as an expression of a complex society, and the 
importance of lineage, whether familial or organised in some other way, seen in the 
boundary burials.
299
That the annual cycle of crop production can be seen as a metaphor for the longer cycle of 
life and death has already been noted (Williams 2003). The similarity between burial 
cairns and field clearance cairns links memorialisation of the dead with the bringing into 
life and use of new fields (Johnston 2000). In some cases clearance cairns have been found 
to have incorporated fragments of human remains, possibly an event which marked the 
breaking in of new land and of monumentalising tenure for future generations (Johnston 
2001). That this practice dates to the very late 3rd and early 2nd millennia BC places it at the 
start in mainland Britain of enclosing land for farming (see below). Somewhat later, the 
incorporation of human skeletal material within the matrix of midden sites (McOmish et al 
2010), evidence of feasting on farming surplus despite a waste, to our eyes, of the means of 
maintaining soil fertility, again links the cycle of human life with that of the agricultural 
year. Given this linkage between agriculture, land tenure and human life cycles, the 
overlying of field boundaries being taken out of use with new and continuing settlements, 
seen so often during this work, can be recognised as tipping the balance between change 
and continuity. Again, field systems can be seen as invested with the identity of families 
or, more probably, larger groups.
The regular grid of fields within the boundaries are unusual in terms of later field systems; 
only the strip systems of Late Saxon and Medieval England and the fields created when 
they were enclosed are similarly formally organised. Indeed, straight lines are relatively 
rare in landscape organisation and are usually imposed rather than developed organically. 
Major Roman roads, together with towns, formed the basis of the administrative power of a 
city based state which had acquired a large empire, railway lines and modern motorways 
are constructed by a combination of private and public money, but by permission of 
Parliament, the open fields were imposed through strong lordship (Faith 1999) and the later 
enclosure of those fields by a combination of national and local power. All these linear 
constructs were ‘top down’ changes, imposed by secular powers, and, in many cases, 
slighted what went before. During most of European prehistory the majority of monuments 
were either circular or ovoid but a number of linear types exist from the Neolithic period. 
Cursuses, stone and timber rows and pit alignments resulted from a perceived spiritual 
requirement, albeit transmitted through human mediators, and again the requirement came 
300
from ‘outside’ the, in modern terms, exigensies of every-day life. Similarly, the grid 
pattern of these early field systems is likely to have resulted from some perceived external 
requirement. This imposition need not have been in any way dictatorial; ideas and means 
of accomplishment would have required discussion and agreement, but it seems unlikely 
that so many communities would have come to adopt similar patterns of land organisation 
without some external suggestion which was adopted at a supra-regional level. Straight 
lines can be seen as a denial of, or control over nature (Field 2004b), but this seems at odds 
with what we understand of the mindset of early agriculturalists. Perhaps the concept of the 
grid as a net, holding the land in trust or, more pragmatically, retaining the light, fertile 
topsoil, is more apposite.
Coaxial field systems cover large areas of land and little work appears to have been 
undertaken to try to understand the manner in which they were administered. The 
possibility that they can be seen as a series of smaller units invites some speculation on 
both the way in which the field system was organised and the socio-political structures 
which underlay the arrangements.
Division of land into units possibly farmed by individual families, noted here on Whitmoor 
Common and Brigmerston Down, has also been recognised elsewhere. At Perry Oaks, 
development of Terminal 5 for Heathrow Airport necessitated large-scale excavation and a 
portion of a coaxial field system was recorded. As on Whitmoor Common, some 
boundaries seemed more important than others (Framework Archaeology 2006, 94-97). In 
this case the north to south boundaries were laid out first, probably between 2000 and 
1700BC, and were better maintained and later developed into trackways, encouraging the 
excavators to consider these as dividing individual holdings. Unfortunately without clearly 
identifiable east to west boundaries to the holdings the area enclosed cannot be calculated 
but with distances between the north to south boundaries of between 100 and 250m a 
similar size to those on Whitmoor Common and Brigmerston Down is not unlikely. In the 
Netherlands a different method has been used to determine the amount of land assigned to a 
single settlement (Jongste 2008). Here the land available has been numerically divided 
301
between the number of known settlements, assuming each settlement to have been occupied 
for at least 25 years with the following results (ibid, Table 8.5):
Site Region Land per household (ha)
Arable Pasture Total
Bovenkarspel Coastal 8.2 20 28.2
Drenthe Sands 11.7 32 43.7
Eigenblok River alluvium 12.5-15.0 8.3-10.0 18.8
Whilst this data rests on a number of assumptions, all of which could be questioned, the 
areas under discussion are not dissimilar to those hypothesised in this study.
If these are indeed familial sub-units it is unlikely that all were in use at the same time; such 
intensive use would infer a population far larger than is thought to have existed at any time 
in pre-history or early history. Sequential use by one or two families within the wider 
group may have taken place over centuries, with the internal divisions within the sub-units 
constructed as necessary.
This change to farming within a field system would have imposed upon society a 
requirement for a code of practice to regulate those living within this new environment and 
ensure that relationships between individuals, families and kin enabled a smooth running of 
the farming economy. At least three layers of organisation can be glimpsed in the 
morphology of the early rectilinear systems although it is possible that these overlap. The 
day to day arrangements needed to farm the small subunits could have been made by those 
who farmed them; whether or not these were familial units which were owned or tenanted, 
decisions on exact timing of sowing and reaping, stock movement and management for 
example could have been made by a head of household or by discussion within the unit. 
Provision and maintenance of the boundaries would have become a social responsibility 
and may have been arranged on the basis of good neighbourliness but it would also have 
provided a way of avoiding conflict. Only if the blocks were worked by bonded labour 
would the organisation be likely to be undertaken at a higher level. These blocks appear to 
302
have remained constant through time and possibly imply some form of inheritance, if not 
within kin groups, then at least in terms of a productive farming unit.
Above this level, some sort of mechanism would have to be in place to ensure sharing of 
common resources. The areas enclosed left little room for, in particular, timber production; 
recognition that, in some areas at least, field systems extended onto Clay-with-Flints, 
probably precludes the general use of these areas. Hangers on steep ground could have 
been carefully managed for everyday needs but hut construction required some larger 
scantling timber. Although required less frequently, bringing large trunks from farther 
away would have been a considerable task; if this entailed use of the bostals up the scarp 
slope of the South Downs it may have been a co-operative task with the timber being 
prepared close to the area where it was felled to minimise the weight carried. Local 
production would surely have been preferable, and stands of close-grown trees, ideal for the 
production of rafters, may have occupied small unenclosed areas. But again, agreement 
would have been necessary to ensure equitable use of this valuable and necessary resource. 
The position of tracks allowing access to water and arrangements for sharing, possibly, of 
common grazing could have been discussed between those who farmed the enclosed area or 
may have been imposed on the system as a whole. Again, the common good may have 
provided an impetus, but an accepted framework within which disputes could be resolved 
would necessarily have prevented damage to others by those who did not accept their social 
responsibilities.
The exact mechanism cannot be recovered but a number of models exist, one of the first of 
which is the formalist perspective of Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations (1776). 
Ethnographic studies show a range of socio-political and economic changes underlying the 
development of complex societies and these are frequently used in attempts to bridge the 
gap between material culture and the human experience.
The Machiguenga of Peru lived in family groups in small hamlets and, although they had 
the necessary technology, did not develop economies fully reliant on farming until a lack of
resources forced that change. If disputes over the few shared resources arose within 
303
Machiguenga hamlets they were settled by discussion between the male heads of each 
household. With farming came larger settlements and a more stratified society; tighter 
control over resources was exercised on behalf each larger, interdependent group. The 
result has been an increasingly protectionist approach, a creation of boundaries (fences) to 
declare private ownership and a reluctance to interact with neighbouring groups (Johnson & 
Earle 2000, 90-120). In this situation dispute resolution, involving a greater number of 
families each under greater stress, becomes more difficult and warfare becomes more likely 
(Carneiro 1970). This situation may be reflected both in the bounding of coaxial field 
systems and the group identity expressed in differing alignments between adjacent systems 
as seen in the Kingley Vale area (chapter 6). Something similar has been observed in the 
Flag Fen Basin where fields were laid out differently on either side of a droveway 
suggested that the route may have formed a local boundary (Pryor 1980; 2001, 416).
Change in group size and organisation is paralleled by a change in attitude towards 
property, including land. Societies organised on the basis of familial groups, like the San 
of South Africa, take an ambiguous and flexible stance (Lee 1979). There are no divisions 
into bounded territory and most resources are willingly shared, only certain examples, 
water-holes for the San (ibid) and pine-nut groves for the Native North American Shoshone 
(Murphy & Steward 1956) for example, are traditionally controlled by certain individuals 
or families, and even then access is usually granted, but with the obligation to reciprocate. 
As with the Machiguenga (above), the emergence of larger groups, tribes or clans, 
necessitates a radical change in attitude to land ownership. The Tesmbaga of New Guinea 
stake out their boundaries in a ceremony involving all those with rights to the land 
enclosed, thus publicly demonstrating their agreement (Rappaport 1967). Simple 
chiefdoms like the Trobriand Islanders, living off the east coast of New Guinea, invest 
ownership of agricultural land in the chief, a respected member of the clan but not 
necessarily an inherited position. However, effective control at a lower level, with leaders 
of small groups both allocating land to households and ‘owning’ the magic needed to 
ensure successful harvest (Malinowski 1935). It is only with complex chiefdoms, the 
Hawaiian Islands prior to their ‘discovery’ by Cook in 1778 for example, that the 
304
paramount chief becomes the primary landowner who distributes land holdings to his 
family and supporters in war (Kirch 1984).
This apparent linear development is simplistic in the extreme, but, at a superficial level at 
least, has relevance to changes in land divisions observed from the Late Neolithic to the 
Early Iron Age in north-west Europe. At Thy in Denmark, a Late Neolithic subsistence 
farming economy underpinned a social structure based on exchange of prestige goods. 
However, since wealth accumulation could only be modest, the goods exchanged were of 
local materials – flint daggers, strike-a-lights and arrowheads, and ceramic vessels – often 
imitating styles of the Beaker tradition but made locally. In the Early Bronze Age however, 
prestige goods changed to items which had to be made by specialists from non-local 
materials and imported, fine swords and jewellery for example. Control of pasture land 
now became important, since cattle products, particularly hides, were exported as part of 
the exchange. The status of the chieftains was dependent on land ownership. In Denmark 
these chieftaincies proved short-lived, maintaining privileges access to long-distance trade 
was difficult and, with the collapse of the prestige good exchange networks, society 
retrenched and intensified its agricultural production (Earle et al 1998).
A study of neighbouring areas in southern Britain, Wessex and the Thames Valley, both 
uses these observations to interpret the archaeological evidence, and sounds a warning 
against overarching, generalised interpretations (Bradley 1991b). In Wessex the 
development of field systems and, later, linear boundaries, is seen as a rejection of a 
landscape organised by relationships with ceremonial and symbolic structures, and its 
replacement by one of physically defined territories. In turn, decline in Wessex, possibly 
caused by erosion of the fertile covering of loess enabled the Thames Valley to form new 
alliances, gain access to prestige goods networks and develop a system of territories centred 
on ringworks (Yates 1999). In both areas control over land and its produce underlay 
economic change, but that change took different trajectories.
These developments may explain the need to enclose land and develop field systems, and 
also suggest organisational framework within which they could be used. But above this 
305
must have been a layer of authority which determined the overall morphology of the field 
system and passed on the skills necessary for its production. Whilst decisions may have 
been made communally or have been imposed they were clearly in place from the start of 
construction – although field systems may have been additive they maintain overall pattern 
and alignment. This could have involved tradition – this is how we have always organised 
our land, but traditions have to have a genesis and the rigidity of the coaxial layout implies 
a powerful basis to that tradition.
Over short distances at least, the construction of parallel lines and right angles is technically 
simple – looking along a line of upright posts ensures straightness, parallelism can be 
achieved using string to maintain the distance between two lines and the human eye is a 
good judge of a right angle. Visualising the end product, and transmitting that vision is 
more difficult. The initial spread of the idea may have involved travelling surveyors but the 
methods and the reason behind them would quickly have become part of the wisdom and 
identity of the group.
In some areas, Sussex for example, the alignment appears to have been influenced, if not 
determined, by the topography, with alignments along the contours of steep-sided, southeast-facing chalk spurs. On Salisbury Plain, the relative larger-scale topography does not 
appear to have been as important and many field systems were laid out with a main 
alignment east of north (McOmish et al 2002, fig 3.4) – this seems to have had little to do 
with practical benefits but may have accorded with a contemporary cosmology. In some 
cases linear barrow cemeteries have been shown to address the setting sun, linking the dead 
with diurnal and seasonal rhythms (Garwood 2007). The preferred alignment of field 
systems places the long axis facing into the rising sun, as do contemporary doorways, thus 
linking the living with dawn light, re-birth and fertility.
On Whitmoor Common and, possibly, Tenantry Ground, two rectilinear systems overlie 
each other on slightly different alignments despite the visibility of the early boundaries. On 
the former site, the second alignment would have allowed more intensive use of the land 
and formalised the route through the field system to water, a route named as the Gryme’s 
306
Dyche and shown by trace element analysis (Dolan et al 2004) to have been used as a drove 
way. A growing importance of stock as opposed to arable may underlie this change, 
particularly as the fields of the later phase were clearly not intensively ploughed since the 
boundaries of the earlier phase survived within them despite the soft sandy nature of the 
soil. On Tenantry Ground, however, there is no apparent reason for the change in 
alignment. These changes, together with the observation that field systems in adjacent 
valleys to Kingley Vale and Plumpton Plain were constructed on slightly different 
alignments, and the apparent change in alignment on either side of the cross-ridge dyke on 
Tenantry Ground, together suggest subtle differences may have been used to enhance the 
investment of identity on a particular area of land.
This containing or enclosing of the land probably represents the greatest visual change 
wrought by man on his rural environment. Although the development of lynchets indicates 
that all parts must have been ploughed at least intermittently, for much of the time most of 
the individual fields would not have been under crop. A changing patchwork of ploughed 
land, arable, stubble, fallow, grazing stock and weedy ‘set aside’ between straight lines of 
hedges, fences or even simple grass baulks lay as a visible symbol of man’s control over 
the land in the present and into the future. Whatever had changed within society to 
necessitate this metaphor in everyday life is uncertain but the complexity of managing such 
a system must have impacted on every aspect of social organisation. Any decision made in 
the design of these rectilinear field systems would have affected all those involved in the 
use of the fields and in the production of food for the whole community. The decisions 
have to result in a field system that ‘works’, both in terms of both production and the sociopolitical requirements of that culture, and clearly did so since they were present over a wide 
area and for many centuries, possibly a millennium.
But those imperatives changed and, for a second time, the way in which land was organised 
was radically altered. The amount of land enclosed decreased substantially as the 
rectilinear field systems were overlain with small areas of aggregated fields. Some of 
these, Brigmerston Down and Kingley Vale for example, comprise small groups whilst 
others consist of long chains of fields looped sequentially onto each other. Of this latter 
307
type there may be two rows with outer ‘playing card’ corners and a pair of continuous 
straight inner lynchets bounding a track through the system as on Stockbridge Down and 
Thundersbarrow Hill, or the fields may form groups on valley sides as on Plumpton Plain 
and in Buckland Hole, or draped over a spur as on Tenantry Ground or across a valley as on 
Lullington Heath. These differences appear to be a response to the immediately local 
topography – the valley sides at Tenantry Ground are too steep for convenient use whilst 
those on Plumpton Plain and the eastern side of Stockbridge Down are more gentle, but the 
spurs to the west of Stockbridge Down and on Tenantry Ground are relatively flat. The 
change marks a withdrawal from the topographically marginal land, the steepest of the 
valley sides. The variable morphology of these field systems does not appear to have a
regional basis within the area of southern Britain studied. The aggregates in the Nine Mile 
River valley on Salisbury find their closest parallel in Kingley Vale, West Sussex whilst the 
‘looped’ ladder system at Thundersbarrow Hill, West Sussex bears a striking similarity to 
that on Stockbridge Down, Hampshire and to a further example surveyed by Royal 
Commission on the Historical Monuments of England at Dunch Hill on Salisbury Plain, 
Wiltshire (McOmish et al 2002, fig 10.1).
The lynchets bounding these later fields tend to be larger, in some cases much larger, than 
those of the earlier rectilinear systems. This should imply either more regular ploughing or 
a longer period of use but the visible survival of earlier boundaries within the later fields in 
the majority of cases studied militate against this unless the former boundaries were 
deliberately respected.
The form of the systems strongly suggests an increasing interest in stock raising and 
management. Larger areas were left clear for movement including, in most cases, the 
valley bottoms where water retaining alluvial deposits produce the lushest grazing. The 
funnel-shaped entrances, seen much later at the margins of common land, both facilitate 
control of stock entering a narrow track between enclosed land, and allow an immediate 
spread on the release of stock from confinement. These smaller enclosed areas are closer to 
what we understand as individual, possibly family run, farms, with arable fields surrounded 
by open areas of grazing and associated with settlement sites. They sit within an 
308
increasingly hierarchical range of settlement types but, although again there is insufficient 
evidence of longevity and contemporaneity, the amount of food produced would accord 
more closely with the size of population thought to have existed at the time. This 
population size may be a real decrease relative to that supported by the rectilinear systems, 
or the imperative of demonstrating enclosure of large areas may have eased. Greater belief 
in their ability to maintain fertility could enable a withdrawal from land recognised as 
marginal, but neither of these factors necessitated a complete remodelling of the field 
systems – abandonment of certain areas would have sufficed. 
Division of the larger landscape is overt in Wessex where the linear ditches are sufficiently 
well preserved on the Salisbury Plain Training Area and the Marlborough Downs among 
other areas to enable reconstruction of the system. Similar features have been studied in 
other areas, the Tabular Hills (Spratt 1989) and the Wolds (Fenton-Thomas 2003) in 
Yorkshire for example, but in Sussex, despite excellent preservation, this type of feature 
does not appear. The farthest east that linear ditches have, as yet, been recognised is close 
to the West Sussex / Hampshire border on Butser Hill, and they have not been identified 
with certainty in Surrey, although further transcription of aerial photographs by the 
National Mapping Programme may correct this impression. Cross-ridge dykes, a somewhat 
generic term for a highly variable landscape feature, may, in some cases, serve the same 
purpose particularly when skilfully combined with the more dissected landscape of the 
South Downs. Draping the bank, with its usually up-slope ditch, so that it reaches a point 
where a valley side steepens, as on the western spur at Kingley Vale, across Tenantry 
Ground or across Fore Down, enables a relatively short earthwork to block, if only 
symbolically, a route to downland grazing. Boundaries do not have to form an impassable 
barrier – the white of a chalk bank, if kept clear of vegetation, had been used to define areas 
since the ritual monuments of the Neolithic period.
Similar changes in landscape organisation were also taking place on the other side of the 
English Channel. At Saint-Vigor-d’Ymonville (Seine Maritime) a Middle to Late Bronze 
Age settlement set within an enclosure with adjacent fields was bounded to the west by 
larger areas of land contained with what are considered to be ranch boundaries (Lepaumier 
309
et al 2005). The site is set on a promontory and the authors suggest stock could have 
ranged widely over the marais excluded from the settlement area by banks surmounted with 
high hedges. 
With these later field systems and with several of the ditched systems seen elsewhere and 
an increasing concern with control over access to water is indicated. On Whitmoor 
Common the alterations in alignment of the later system, perpendicular to the stream, may 
have been designed to allow stock to be driven from grazing areas beyond the arable fields 
to water; phosphate analysis suggested that the track, Gryme’s Dyche, had been used as a 
droveway (Dolan et al 2004).
This relationship with water sources is not straightforward – on Brigmerston Down a linear 
earthwork was constructed parallel to the Nine Mile River effectively isolating the field 
system and settlement area from their water supply. In other areas water-holes were 
constructed and carefully maintained despite the proximity of a natural water source. On 
the west London gravels, holdings thought to represent individual farmsteads were each 
provided with water-holes. In some cases these were late insertions into the landscape, 
some designed with ramps for animal use and others from which water could be drawn by
bucket, between 3260 ± 57BP and 2569 ± 62BP (Framework Archaeology 2006, fig 3.3), 
this despite water being available from the Colne close-by. At Swalecliffe in Kent a 
complex of 17 wells, probably used sequentially and with a time-frame lying between 1210 
and c.700BC, lay adjacent to open water. In the Runfold and Tongham area of Surrey, an 
ecozone set where the Blackwater skirts the western end of the Hog’s Back (chapter 3), 
multi-period sites excavated in advance of gravel extraction have provided evidence of 
Middle Bronze Age activity, and a number of wells probably dated to the Middle to Late 
Iron Age set within a mixed farming landscape (Poulton 2004; Rebecca Lambert pers 
comm).
Whilst practical reasons for separating human from animal supplies are obvious, the motive 
underlying construction of water-holes for animal use, rather than allowing stock to use the 
river, is less clear. It may be that previous communal arrangements were seen as 
310
inadequate given the amount of water now required and that, with reorganisation of the 
land into smaller arable units divided by grazing land, each unit was held responsible for its 
own water supply. At Heathrow Terminal 5 this situation does appear to have occurred: 
one of the consequences of the decision to use the main axis of the coaxial field system as 
the basis for later tracks thought to separate individual holdings parallel to the Colne was to 
effectively bar their direct access to water, something that would clearly have been 
recognised at the time (Framework Archaeology 2010, 143). Both waterholes (Framework 
Archaeology 2010, 159 and others) and flowing water (Bradley 1990) were considered 
suitable locations for votive deposition, and differences in the ways in which each could be 
used may have had a basis in the contemporary cosmology.
That stock had become of prime importance has been recognised for some time; the linear 
earthworks in Wessex and elsewhere are known as ‘ranch boundaries’ and their users 
described as ‘Wessex cowboys’ (Cunliffe 2004). Recognition of ‘midden sites’ has 
enabled a glimpse to be seen of the scale of stock production. East Chisenbury midden 
(McOmish 1996) is estimated, from a small sample excavated, to contain the skeletal 
remains of in the order of 255,000 sheep, 125,000 lambs, 60,000 cattle and 45,000 pigs 
deposited over a period of about 100 years (although assessment of a larger number of 
samples for radio-carbon dates with Bayesian statistical analysis may amend this period 
[Richard Madgwick pers comm]). Many of the bones were fragmented either through 
butchery or by gnawing by dogs, and horses and dogs were also eaten. Soil microanalysis 
indicated the presence of large amounts of faecal material, much of it ashed, a high 
proportion of which came from sheep / goats but with human also present. The amount of 
straw incorporated suggests the presence of waste from pens or byres. Charred remains 
from economic plants included bread wheat (Triticum aestivum type), spelt (Triticum 
spelta), emmer / spelt glume base (Triticum dicoccum / spelta), Barley (Hordeum sp), rye 
(Secale cereale), oats (Avena sp), hazel nut shells (Corylus avellana) and large legume 
fragments, probably ‘Celtic’ beans. The presence of free-threshing bread wheat, relatively 
unusual in sites of this period, has been noted in ritual deposits on other sites. Pottery 
analysis indicated that a small proportion of the sherds present had come from non-local 
production sites. The sherds had not been exposed to weathering prior to deposition and 
311
the differences in the types of vessel placed together in separate layers led to the suggestion 
that a ‘complex set of relationships’ was being expressed. Dating of the ceramics suggest 
that the site was in use from c. 800 to c. 650BC. Tools for cloth manufacture and leather 
working and evidence of bone and antler working attest some industrial production. Layers 
of chalk encountered within the matrix of the midden may represent attempts to consolidate 
or protect the growing accumulation or, from their white colour, to improve its visibility. 
The mound is located in a prominent position and an observation by Frances Raymond, 
when talking about settlement sites (given as a pers comm in McOmish et al 2010) that 
‘there was a move towards locations with wider views that might have been an expression 
of the increasing important / prominence of relationships between, rather than within, 
communities’ seems prescient. Material may have been gathered elsewhere, stored, and 
then brought to the midden site, or large numbers of people brought grain, cooking pots, 
live animals with their fodder and bedding and craft tools to this central locus. But the 
scale and the communal involvement are telling; the authors remind us of Biblical feasts 
and modern rock festivals.
Within the Pewsey Vale a further nine certain and three possible ‘black-earth’ sites are 
known (Tubbs 2011). Most have not been fully investigated and it is far from certain that 
any are as large as, or are contemporary with, East Chisenbury, indeed such an apparent 
prevalence of contemporary sites seems inherently unlikely. Nevertheless, substantial 
flocks and herds must have been maintained in order to supply surplus stock on anything 
like this scale.
A number of similar sites in southern Britain have been the subject of large-scale 
archaeological interventions. At Potterne (Lawson 2000) a site covering more than 3ha 
appears to have been in use for a longer period, c. 1200 – c. 550BC. The mound was 
constructed on an eroded subsoil, perhaps indicating ‘cleansing’ prior to its special use, and 
activity in the area was spatially organised. A ‘road’, pits, post-holes and hearths 
suggesting domestic buildings, and evidence of metal working in addition to other crafts 
were also located. Here the lower portion of the matrix of the midden deposit contained 
large amounts of animal dung together with coarse charcoal, fused ash and heavily burnt 
312
bone. A preponderance of plain-ware post-Deverel-Rimbury ceramics, and copper alloy 
objects from the Penard metalworking tradition, together with three radiocarbon dates, 
place this primary period of accumulation of the midden material soon after c. 1200BC. 
The upper, and larger, layers also contained large amounts of material from domestic, 
agricultural and herding activity including coprolitic material from sheep, pigs, cattle and 
dogs. These later deposits dated to the 9th century BC.
The majority of middens so far identified are on the chalklands of Wessex, but two distant 
from this area shed further light on the development and use of the sites. At Runnymede 
Bridge (Surrey) an area of refuse disposal, area 16, was excavated as part of a multiple 
period site close to the Thames (Needham & Spence 1996). Radiocarbon dating placed 
deposition to a period between 250 and 430 years (68% probability) during the 9th to 5th
centuries BC. Analysis of the animal bones from Late Bronze Age contexts (Serjeantson 
1996) showed the main species to be sheep, cattle and pigs and, although sheep were the 
most numerous identified (40.5%), most meat would have come from cattle (27.6%) and 
pigs (29.2%). These two latter species are identified as important to Celtic society from 
law codes and legends of the early 1st millennium AD; cattle for beauty and milk, not meat, 
production, and pigs and wild boar for communal hog roasts. The site, controlling as it 
does traffic along the Thames corridor, produced evidence of high status, and a role as a 
gathering place for feasting, exchange, and taking part or observing ceremonial events was 
postulated. Stabling of horses may have been one of the specialised activities which took 
place at this ‘nodal’ site. 
At Llanmaes in the Vale of Glamorgan the bones from a midden site have been the subject 
of intensive study (Madgwick et al in press [a]; in press [b]). At this site a high percentage 
of the skeletal material, some 74% Minimum Number of Individuals, derived from pigs, 
over double the percentage seen at other midden sites at Whitecross Farm (Wallingford), 
Runnymede bridge, Potterne and Whitchurch). These sites in turn contrast with 
contemporary non-midden sites where pigs usually provide less than 10% of the skeletal 
material. At Llanmaes isotopic analysis indicates that a number of the individual pigs had 
not been fed on material from the immediate vicinity of the midden. A number of scenarios 
313
may be posited; the animals were brought live from a distance and killed on site, they may 
have been killed close to their home areas and only the meat transported, or sufficient 
fodder may have been carried from distant pastures to feed the animals from weaning to 
slaughter. Given the omnivorous diet of pigs the last of these three suggestions seems the 
least likely explanation, but the first cannot be differentiated with any certainty from the 
direct evidence. Long-distance droving of pigs, not necessarily transhumance (Turner in 
prep), is well attested during the Late Saxon and Medieval periods, and, given the evidence 
of penning and preponderance of dung in midden matrices, this is the more likely 
explanation.
Further insight into the treatment of stock at midden sites can be gained from the element 
composition of the pig bones from Llanmaes (Madgwick 2008). Of the limb elements 88% 
derived from the fore-limb, and of these 79% were right-sided. This disparity was not 
observed in other species. The evidence from Llanmaes of formalised, and perhaps 
ritualised, practices in the processing, consumption and deposition of a single of species of 
animal, with individuals probably brought from far away, emphasises the difference 
between midden sites and ‘routine’ disposal of ‘rubbish’. 
Production of stock for use as meat in feasting contexts continued into the Late Iron Age. 
At Hallaton (Leic) (Score & Browning 2010) an area of animal bone deposition outside a 
shrine complex contained pits in which the skeletal remains showed selectivity based on 
both species and age. Here again, pigs were the dominant species but at this site the right 
fore limb was under-represented. During this later period, pigs dominate the bone 
assemblage at a number of sacred sites in south-east Britain including Chanctonbury, West 
Sussex (Rudling 2008, 115), Hayling Island, Hants (King 2006) and Wanborough, Surrey 
(Williams 2008); and pigs are associated with feasting, war and the underworld (Green 
1992, 18). Evidence from some Late Bronze Age to Early Iron Age midden sites suggests 
this favouring of pork was of considerable longevity.
A study of deer hunting during the Middle Anglo-Saxon period (Sykes 2010) shows that 
bones from different parts of the carcass were found on rural, elite and religious sites, 
314
suggesting social differentiation in the distribution of the kill. Perhaps unsurprisingly, 
rural sites produced the poorest joints, lower jaws and shanks, whilst prime cuts went to 
religious houses. Only with post-modern irony do we serve shepherd’s pie at competitive 
dinner parties!
Increasing emphasis on stock raising imposes different priorities in land use and can also 
create a very different society. The ‘ranch’ boundaries patrolled by Cunliffe’s (2004) 
‘Wessex cowboys’ divided the land into large grazing areas. Stronger boundaries would 
have been needed to keep the stock out of fields in use for crop production, as would access 
to water on a daily basis and, given the propensity of cattle to trample and pollute open 
water, perhaps the advantage of separating sources used by stock and by humans would 
have been recognised. The number of young animals whose remains have been found on 
some midden sites points to the need to over-winter large numbers of pregnant females –
both cattle and sheep are short day breeders and will abort if malnourished during gestation. 
Storage of fodder and its provision either in the grazing areas or to stalled animals would 
have needed specialised buildings and increased labour requirements particularly in periods 
of bad weather. These requirements are met by the new design in field system and 
excavation has shown evidence of further characteristics of stock management in the form 
of sorting gates and funnel entrances onto open grazing at Peacehaven (East Sussex) (Hart 
forthcoming) and in the complex use of lush fenland grazing (Pryor 1996).
The break with the past did not go unrecognised; placing settlements over or cut into 
existing field boundaries has been observed too often to be coincidental, and has already 
been mentioned. Re-use of boundaries from the old system as part of the new could have 
been a pragmatic choice to reduce the labour involved, but a step running through a 
settlement or perhaps even through a building would have created practical and structural 
difficulties. An act of incorporation, involving the past within the present, instead of 
rejection of the ancestral world and all the risks that entailed, may explain this observation.
Although iron came into use by the earlier part of the 1st millennium BC production was 
small-scale and its use was apparently not common in southern Britain before the 3rd
315
century BC (Ehrenreich 1994). This lack of early use should not be overstated; the 
comparison with the amount of bronze is distorted by an increasing amount of that metal 
becoming redundant and being deposited and therefore visible, whilst iron may have been 
intensively recycled (Needham 2007). But, in contrast with the ores of copper and tin, iron 
ore is widely available in southern Britain (Salter & Ehrenreich 1984, 147-148; Ehrenreich 
1985, 16-19) and metal objects would have been made locally (Sharples 2007) – production 
no longer entailed long-distance trade agreements, and access to products would have been 
more difficult to control (Bradley 2007, 232). If command over production of particular 
items cannot be restricted by an elite, those items are unlikely to attain high status, a 
position never held by iron despite its novelty and utility. Indeed, there is a general lack of 
material culture associated with the Early Iron Age and weapons and jewellery are seldom 
found. This need not suggest a general collapse, the archaeological record tends to be 
biased towards high status goods in non-perishable fabrics, and, if the exchange spheres are 
separated (Rowlands 1980) then local trading networks could have continued in use. But 
for the elite, status and identity had to be defined in other ways (Sharples 2007). 
One possibility is that control over labour, rather than the ownership of elite goods, acted as 
a mark of status, and the use of that labour to create bounded enclosures gave visible 
identities to members of the elite (Sharples 2007). Early hillforts, now dated in Sussex to 
the Late Bronze Age (Hamilton & Manley 1997), were products of that labour placed in 
dominant positions in the landscape emphasizing the power of the communities that created 
them. In contrast with those who created coaxial field systems as markers of land 
ownership, their successors saw iconic monuments and conspicuous consumption as their 
social identifiers. The ownership of stock, horse riding with its attendant paraphernalia, 
and the provision of ostentatious feasts, doubtless accompanied by alcohol, music and story 
telling, also became the currency by which status was expressed. All these forms of wealth 
are portable and horse borne raiders driving off a herd of cattle have greater panache than 
the slow loading and movement of carts of grain. Changes can be seen in the nature of 
society exemplified in types or settlement and in artefact assemblages – these changes 
show, above all else, an increase in the tendency towards aggression. 
316
An increasing tendency towards nucleation of settlement, increasing evidence of settlement 
hierarchy and the location of high status settlements in dominant locations, not in itself 
new, can be seen within the area under consideration. In Sussex the earliest ‘hillforts’ can 
be dated to the Late Bronze Age (taken as c. 1000 – c. 750 cal BC) (Hamilton & Gregory 
2000). Their ramparts served to emphasise separatism and hierarchy (Bowden & McOmish 
1987; 1989) but their power and defensive potential would have been understood within a 
militarised society. Weapon technology advanced from relatively ineffectual bronze 
rapiers to heavy slashing swords and such items were seen as suitable for deposition in 
water, particularly close to the confluences of east-flowing rivers like the Kennet and the 
Thames (Darvill 1987, fig 69). 
Evidence of warfare itself, rather than the need to prepare for a perceived risk, needs more 
consideration than it is usually given. By the Late Iron Age and possibly the Middle Iron 
Age, such evidence comes from a number of sources. Written sources from classical 
historians cannot be taken at face value; Gaius Cornelius Tacitus in his Germania, for 
example, gave hearsay evidence of the Continental situation during the 1st century AD, and 
the relevance, if any, of these descriptions to Britain at the beginning of the 1st millennium 
BC is uncertain. On the Continent physical evidence is widespread, particularly in Gallia 
Belgica, but much of this dates to the Late pre-Roman Iron Age and relates to the Caesarian 
invasions. Whilst the evidence from southern Britain is less clear cut there is a general 
acceptance that warfare in the centuries before the Claudian invasion was ‘real’. In an 
examination of the evidential basis on which the probability of war might be acknowledged 
(Wileman 2009), a number of correlates were identified, and the Late Bronze Age in the 
Middle Thames Valley used as a case study. Here it was notable that the correlates for 
preparation for warfare, including field system and settlement abandonment, were stronger 
than those resulting from actual aggression. The point is made that, although war was still 
a possibility, the event may have been averted, for a while at least. 
In all the case studies reported here abandonment, or at least a hiatus in utilisation, takes 
place after the Late Bronze Age to Early Iron Age transition and other explanations must be 
suggested. Nucleation of settlement has been mentioned above; most settlements set 
317
among or close to field systems show little evidence of occupation into the Early Iron Age. 
Abandonment of field systems presents problems of both definition and recognition. Some, 
for example at Woodcorner Farm to the north of Whitmoor Common, are in use today but 
that does not necessarily mean they have been in continual use since the Middle Bronze 
Age. Boundaries, fossilised in the landscape, could be seen as convenient and re-used at 
any period and many, if not most field systems have probably been thus re-used. What is 
clear is that if the Late Bronze Age to Early Iron Age field systems continued in use 
manuring practices changed, and domestic debris, which included pot sherds, was no longer 
used. Pottery later than the post-Deverel-Rimbury tradition, and earlier than Late Iron Age, 
is seldom found stratified within the matrix of lynchets and there is no reason to believe 
that it would not have survived as well as that made during earlier or later periods.
Arable farming clearly continued but we have difficulty in ‘seeing’ its fields if, indeed, 
there were any. A population collapse is possible, but the lack of evidence may be more 
perceived than real. In Kent, excavation in advance of development of linear infrastructure 
routes has shown variations in the density of settlement during the Early Iron Age and, 
although several areas of Middle Iron Age activity were located, structures were rare and 
probably ephemeral (Champion 2011). What seems more likely is that, with the primacy of 
stock as a source and expression of wealth, and a mobile, raiding culture, focus, in terms of 
labour, identity and status, turned to the hilltop enclosures. More stock meant that manure 
to retain soil fertility was available from non-domestic contexts, possibly simply from 
folding animals on fallow areas. The old fields may have remained in use without addition 
of household rubbish, and therefore contemporary pottery, perhaps taken to build middens, 
leaving only residual Bronze Age to Early Iron Age artefacts being deposited within the 
lynchets.
However, the type of land where above ground earthworks survive is, of course, that which 
has since been used primarily for grazing. A movement towards the supremacy of stock on 
downland sites could result from greater specialisation of particular settlements within the 
model of larger ‘estates’. Crop production, might be undertaken on more fertile soils, 
318
precisely those used since, particularly after the downs had been subject to erosion, whilst 
stock predominated on the chalk leaving little trace. 
In the Late Iron Age coaxial field systems were again being constructed (for example Giles 
2007) and southern Britain produced sufficient grain to export a surplus (Jones & Mattingly 
1990, 57). By that time division of the country into large tribal areas would suggest that 
land would have been in the gift of the paramount chieftains, through a hierarchy of his 
trusted family and followers (Kirch 1984).
10.4 Chronology, causation and context
Our inability to provide accurate dates for the construction of field boundaries, even less 
field systems, bedevils attempts to place their genesis, their remodelling and their 
abandonment within the wider framework of socio-political and economic change.
The generally accepted date for the genesis of the earliest coaxial systems lies in the range 
1800-1600BC but recent work is pointing to an earlier date. Field boundaries, mainly in 
Dorset, have been assigned dates from radio-carbon measurements of stratified sequences 
and, to a lesser extent, by Optical Stimulated Luminescance with the earliest pre-dating 
2000BC and possibly as early as 2400BC for developed lynchets (Mike Allen pers comm). 
On Thanet a coaxial field system, with ditched boundaries has provided dates for the first 
ditch infilling of 1910-1750 cal BC (at 95% probability; 1880-1770 cal BC at 68%) and a 
recutting of the ditch of 1860-1690 cal BC (at 95% probability; 1870-1680 cal BC at 68%). 
A grain of emmer wheat and a spelt glume base from probably associated features gave 
radiocarbon dates of 1890-1690 cal BC (at 95% probability, SUERC-32250 and 32886) 
(Barclay et al 2011). At Newark Road, Peterborough, in the Flag Fen Basin a radiocarbon 
date associated with an inhumation burial of 3030-2500 cal BC (at 95% probability HAR780) provides a very early date for the start of use of the area of the central field system but 
not necessarily of the field system itself, there being no direct relationship between the 
burial and the ditch system (Pryor 1980; Bayliss & Pryor 2001). Other dates place the use 
of the field system within the date range c. 1700 to c. 800 cal BC (UB-676, 1690-1400 cal 
319
BC; UB-677, 1430-800 cal BC; HAR-785 1300-910 cal BC, all at 95% confidence limit) 
(Bayliss & Pryor 2001, table 16.1, fig 16.4).
Whilst it is not yet possible to say whether these are exceptionally early, and apply only to 
southern Britain, placement within the Beaker Period is of major importance. And yet 
placement within a period of mobility of people and ideas on a European scale, suspected 
for some time by a small coterie, seems right. The increased marking of visible status 
through ownership and, presumably, display of personal items – gold jewellery, 
wristguards, copper and bronze objects, the ‘new’ ceramic, highly decorated and, in the 
main finely made, beakers – which spread throughout and beyond Europe from Algeria to 
Norway and Ireland to Hungary marks a move towards an increasingly complex and 
hierarchical society. Rather earlier than we had thought, competition for objects might 
have led to a need to claim and husband the most basic of resources, land.
Whether coaxial field systems, or indeed field systems in general, were an insular 
development or were a cultural development adopted from the Continent is uncertain. 
Given the problems in dating the earthworks and, particularly, the lack of a tradition in 
landscape archaeology in Belgium and France, the relative dating of the earliest examples 
in Britain and on the Continent is unclear. However, the distribution of coaxial field 
systems in southern Britain, stretching from West Penwith, Cornwall over the moors, 
chalkland, coastal plains and river valleys of south-western, central southern, south-eastern 
and eastern Britain as far north as East Anglia (for example Yates 2007, fig 12.2) strongly 
suggests a Continental origin. Contact across the southern North Sea, and the Channel 
from the Dover Straits to the Western Approaches, could have provided the necessary links.
Alpine space was restructured from c. 2500 BC when the first substantial, stone structures 
were built to facilitate use of high altitude pastures, and influencing routes to and between 
them (Walsh & Mocci 2011). This intensification was contemporary with movement of the 
centres of copper ore mining from the Massif Central into the Alps and seems to signal an 
increasing importance of trade and exchange of animal products. Work in north-western 
France is starting to identify field systems associated with single farms and clusters of 
320
farmsteads and to date the complexes to the middle of the 2nd millennium BC. At Tatihou, 
now an island but probably then an area of relatively high ground, fields surrounded an 
open settlement whilst at Nonant investigation in advance of development of some 200ha 
produced plans of two contemporary farms within sub-rectangular enclosures both 
associated with field systems (Marcigny & Ghesquière 2008). Both these sites close to the 
north Normandy coast produced Deverel-Rimbury style pottery but at St Vaast la Houge, 
on Tatihou, finds of imported Deverel-Rimbury and Trevisker pottery attest cross-Channel 
contacts (Marcigny 2008). Whilst in general these sites appear later than the earliest found 
in Britain, there is a general view that field systems in northern France originate c. 1800 BC 
(Cyril Marcigny pers comm); given the problem with assigning a date to this development 
a probable model suggests a cultural spread of the concept of permanent visible enclosure 
of land from the Continent to Britain.
Cross-Channel links, included within a framework of increasing exchange networks, are 
evidenced long before the beginning of the 2nd millennium BC but varied in their nature 
and intensity. Although there was little cultural linkage, a limited number of high status 
items or materials travelled between southern Scandinavia, Armorica and southern Britain 
(Jockenhövel 2004). This movement of objects, not ‘trade’ in the sense that we understand 
it, but a one-sided need by the recipient community or individual with no balancing need to 
export, was ‘a form of raiding’ (Needham 2000). Amber found in southern Britain had 
travelled far from its source but much of the workmanship involved in turning it into 
objects of high status appears to have been local (Beck & Shennan 1991). This type of 
connection need not infer any common cultural linkage as might be expected between peerpolity relationships.
The changing relationship between communities on either side of the Channel is 
exemplified by developments in the incorporation of items within Beaker grave groups in 
southern Britain (Needham 2005). Between c. 2500 and c. 2250 cal BC few Beaker goods 
are found in grave assemblages – any individuals who crossed the Channel retained their 
own specialised identity, and were assimilated only slowly into the burial rituals of the 
indigenous culture. Later, from c. 2250-1950 cal BC, the fission horizon, this Beaker 
321
identity became more widespread and was itself more subject to diversification. By c. 
1950-1700/1600 cal BC few grave assemblages are purely Beaker in content and a greater 
cultural mix is evident. This chronology appears to mirror the period of occurrence of the 
first coaxial field systems described above. The earliest are probably dated within 
Needham’s fission horizon, suggesting an advent linked to the spread of Bell Beakers from 
the Continent with acceptance and general use delayed until later in the 2nd millennium BC. 
The apparent lack of settlements contemporary with these earliest systems may be 
addressed, partially at least, by the observation of Beaker activity, possibly associated with 
settlement, beneath colluvial deposits in the dry valleys of the South Downs and elsewhere 
on the chalklands of southern Britain (Allen 2005c).
Social inequality was an early explanation for the genesis of the Dartmoor reaves (Fleming 
1978, a view that one man (probably) had the right to order division of a large area of land. 
The same author has since modified this argument (Fleming 1987; 1988) and the 
observation of a relative lack in differentiation in wealth expressed by grave goods has also 
been noted (Bradley 2007, 160). However, in a model of wealth distribution under 
contrasting modes of ‘Margin’ and ‘Best-price’, agricultural economies were seen as 
delayed-return systems (Bentley et al 2005). Land ownership, if to the exclusion of others, 
tends to divorce the majority from the fruits of their labour (Barnard & Woodburn 1987). 
This, under the ‘Best-price’ model, tends towards a hierarchical society with the wealth 
concentrated in only a few hands. Although used in the original paper to explain 
ideological differences between hunter-gatherers and agricultural colonists, the model may 
have relevance when examining the ownership of prestige items during the Beaker period if 
agricultural products. In a modelling exercise based on archaeological information from 
Early Bronze Age south-east Arabia the relationship between specialisation and wealth 
inequality has been explored (Rouse & Weeks 2011). Here the specialists, those involved 
in copper smelting, ceramic production, oasis agriculture and baked steatite bead 
manufacture, accumulated wealth which they were then able to use to procure exotic goods 
from elsewhere in the region; textiles, semi-precious stones and ivory, for example. Wealth 
inequality through control of land, and therefore of its produce, may yet have its place in 
322
explaining the agency through which new ideas and goods from Beaker specialists might be 
exploited. 
The ability to obtain prestige items from other than local sources may have depended on 
‘straight forward’ trade as we understand the term, but is more likely to have involved a 
network of exchange between individuals of perceived equal status. This diplomatic gift 
exchange, of ‘non-local raw materials, exotic artefacts and esoteric knowledge – but also 
people, for example, marriage partners, adoptees, ambassadors, interns or craftsmen’ would 
have served to demonstrate the mutual status of a small group of individuals at the very top 
of the hierarchy within cross-Channel ‘maritories’ (Needham 2009).
Closer links appeared a little later and continued, in the metalwork traditions particularly, 
throughout the Bronze Age (Burgess 1968) but, on the British side of the Channel, these 
links involve, among others, a region based on recovery of Willerby and Arreton stage 
metalwork which stretched along the southern coast from Cornwall to Kent (Needham 
2006, fig 38). Notably, this region excludes Wessex – although the ritual centres of 
Wessex continued to attract prestige items, or perhaps more importantly far-travelled 
materials with special qualities, like amber with its electro-magnetic properties (Helms 
1998). Access to the area could have been controlled by coastal communities around 
Hengistbury Head, the Solent and Portsmouth / Chichester, an area with numerous safe 
anchorages. 
Identification of landing places is notoriously difficult given the ephemeral nature of any 
structures and the rare conditions under which they are likely to be preserved. A different 
approach, studying the requirement for such locations, has recognised a number of 
characteristics (Wilkes 2007):
Favourable tides and currents
Prominent landmark visible from the sea
Approaches free from obstacles
Safe anchorage sheltered from prevailing westerlies
323
Capacity for secure storage of high value imports and exports
Access to navigable rivers for forward movement of goods and people
Although this piece of work relates to sea journeys during the Iron Age there is no reason to 
doubt that these concerns pertained in earlier prehistory and, indeed, to any period predating electronic aids. ‘Nodal’ points are identified along the entire south coast (ibid fig 
12.1) but on the eastern portion Poole Harbour, Hengistbury Head and Christchurch 
Harbour, the Solent, and Portsmouth and Pagham Harbours are noted. Along the Sussex 
coast the estuaries of the rivers Arun, Adur and Ouse, Pevensey Bay, Coombe Haven / 
Bulverhythe, Fairlight Cove and Rye Harbour are high-lighted as are further locations on 
the southern coast of Kent as far east as Dover. Note has already been made of the possible 
role of Thunder’s Barrow (chapter 9) as a seamark and the wealth of graves in an area 
centred on Hove. The amber cup from the Hove barrow is one of a small number in gold, 
silver, jet and shale which exemplify contacts within the Channel maritory, contacts 
facilitated by the development of plank-sewn boats in the early 2nd millennium BC (Wright 
2004). Looking at the shore from close to these potential anchorages the traveller would 
have seen a newly enclosed and formally organised landscape of fields. Assurance, surely, 
that these people were ‘civilised’, ‘like us’ and understanding of the requirements of 
modern cultural exchange. 
Work close to the 6th century Merovingian emporium of Quentovic in the Canche estuary 
has produced extensive evidence of prehistoric activity in an area ideally positioned for 
cross-Channel contacts (Philippe 2009). At Mont-Bagarre near Étaples, some 5km up the 
estuary, a large oval enclosure with three entrances, produced pottery more overtly in the 
British tradition than that from contemporary local sites, which in Britain would be dated to 
the period c. 2000 - c. 1700BC (Desfossés 2000, 39-40). A nearby but later enclosure, 
dated to the 19th to 16th centuries BC, and with a period of expansion between the 17th and 
15th centuries BC, also produced pottery with strong cross-Channel references. Occupation 
continued and the later phases produced pottery reminiscent of British Deverel-Rimbury 
tradition (ibid). Whether the people who lived at these Canche estuary sites were British 
recipients of trade from British or were British colonists cannot be determined, but contact 
324
over several centuries places this sheltered estuary as a possible point of linkage with the 
Sussex coast, particularly the area of high status burials around Hove (Drewett et al 1988, 
fig 3.7).
If indeed the earliest field systems do date to the Beaker period, Needham’s (1996) periods 
2/3 as already discussed, then they were probably few in number. A fission period, when a 
rapid change in Beaker form has been identified along the southern side of the Channel 
(Needham 2005) may also relate to the time when they first occurred; at first they may have 
been limited to their Continental predecessors and to Wessex, then still an area of prime 
spiritual importance, probably on a European scale. A spread of the new and highly visible 
marker of status during the Channel Bronze Age to encompass wider coastal areas of 
southern Britain and the Continent may be postulated. Inevitably, high status objects 
trickle down the social scale to be replaced at the top by the latest products of the newest 
technologies, and field systems were no exception. The coaxial arrangement was clearly 
successful in terms of food production and became part of the general landscape, with 
many systems being formed during the middle centuries of the 2nd millennium BC. Despite 
the change of burial practice, the second phase on Whitmoor Common (chapter 3), 
constructed on a palaeosoil dated to the 14th to 12th century BC, may well have been one of 
the last; for a period of at least eight centuries the division of land into a formal grid marked 
the agricultural landscape of southern Britain.
If this chronology is correct and the great expansion of coaxial field systems took place in 
the middle centuries of the 2nd millennium BC this more general reorganisation, and 
possibly democratisation, took place against a background of major change in other aspects 
of society. In the Early Bronze Age the British Isles, with their sources of gold, tin and 
copper, produced bronze before areas close-by in Europe (Bradley 2007, 156). An 
extensive network of sea routes facilitated movement of both raw materials, and a few 
finished products, with, in this study area, an emphasis on control of the export of Cornish 
tin (Sherratt 1996). Burial of the dead in barrows situated on higher ground, but with a 
concern for overlooking water sources, provided a visual link with the living and, possibly, 
a right through ancestry to exploit the land for food production.
325
By c. 1650 BC Britain had lost its pre-eminence in metal production, ore sources on 
mainland Europe were increasingly exploited and, despite the availability of local supplies, 
Continental metals were imported into southern Britain. From c. 1500 BC there appears to 
have been an increase in settlement activity, with substantial buildings associated with 
larger artefact assemblages. Some areas were abandoned - the rab soils of the southwestern moors became acidic and waterlogged, and rivers became clogged by erosion 
products and flooding increased (French 2003, chapters 6-10). Mitigation strategies 
included specialised use of marginal land. Riverine grazing areas beside the Thames 
(Sidell et al 2002) and low-lying areas like the Somerset Levels (Coles & Coles 1986) and 
the fens (Hall & Coles 1994) were accessed, possibly only seasonally, by brushwood 
causeways. Use of heavier soils, London Clay (Lambert 2008) and Weald Clay (Wells 
2005), for example, and the instances noted here of fields extending on to areas of Claywith-Flints (Stockbridge Down [chapter 8] and Thundersbarrow Hill [chapter 9]) (contra
Moffat 1988) add to the impression of a system under some pressure. This pressure, 
perceived or real, due to deterioration of certain types of land, and perhaps increasing 
population, may underlie the increased claiming of land by extending the area enclosed in 
field systems and the bounding of those systems. Certainly some of the aspects of land use 
recorded here, use of marginal land including heavy soils and steep slopes, the relative lack 
of land for grazing and timber production have resonance when compared to the situation in 
the 12th and 13th centuries AD – an example of population stress only released through the 
agencies of the Great European Famine and the Black Death (Dyer 2002, 228-254).
Although the wholesale change in emphasis towards stock farming is thought to have taken 
place at a later date (see below), some settlements appear to have developed specialisations 
during the Middle Bronze Age. At Peacehaven the extensive area with its ditched 
boundaries designed for stock handling and management, and its contemporary settlements, 
dates firmly to the Middle Bronze Age (Hart forthcoming). Although situated on top of the 
South Downs, overlooking the Channel, the chalk is here overlain by Woolwich Beds, an 
Eocene deposit of clay up to 10m deep (Gallois & Edmunds 1965, 48) and more difficult to 
cultivate. In the Fens this specialisation was earlier in date, with land divisions suitable for 
controlling stock laid out at right-angles to the wetlands, and radiocarbon dated to around 
326
1800 BC (Pryor 1998, 89 et seq). They remained in use, probably as part of a 
transhumance pattern, until approximately 900 BC when the fen became too wet for use as 
summer grazing. Analysis of pig and sheep husbandry south of the Thames (Serjeantson 
2007) also shows some evidence of specialisation on some sites, with both sheep and cattle 
kept for milk production in the Late Bronze Age.
Nevertheless, most of the evidence places the settlements most likely to have been 
associated with the later field systems approximately within the period of production of 
post-Deverel-Rimbury pottery, c. 1150 – c. 500 cal BC (Seager Thomas 2008). More 
precise dating within this period is not possible given the nature of the available evidence. 
Although some pottery has been recovered it is, in general, not from sealed contexts and is 
certainly not securely placed in relation to the construction of any of the field systems. 
Settlements cut into or overlying lynchets from the second phase of the field systems 
described here have produced post-Deverel-Rimbury plainware (Fore Down, Plumpton 
Plain B), developed plainware (Plumpton Plain B, Thundersbarrow, Black Patch [Drewett 
1973; Tapper forthcoming]) and decorated ware (Thundersbarrow, Black Patch). By 
definition these settlements, whose genesis may cover a wide time span, post-date 
development of the field boundaries. Given the length of time over which coaxial field 
systems were constructed and used there is no reason to postulate a rapid transition to those 
more suited to a stock-based economy. However, within the area studied the change 
appears to have been universal, the only exception being Whitmoor Common where 
deterioration of soil structure on superficial Eocene sands probably lead to abandonment, 
or, at least, use only for rough grazing. 
Other changes during this period seem to have taken place over a shorter horizon. The 
abandonment of large quantities of bronze in hoards containing Ewart style metalwork has 
long been recognised (Burgess 1979). The reasons for this increase in deposition are 
obscure but seem to indicate some crisis, either evidence of a change in the way status was 
expressed or a perceived need for extra propitiation of the gods. The scale, however, was 
considerable, with Ewart metalwork being deposited at a rate in the region of five times that 
of the preceding Penard and Wilburton traditions (Needham 2007, fig 6). Ewart metalwork 
327
dates to the period c. 1020-800 BC with ‘mature’ Ewart, found in many hoards, post-dating 
c. 920 BC, and contemporary with post-Deverel-Rimbury decorated ceramics (ibid fig 2). 
A perhaps justifiable speculation might then place abandonment of the agglomerated field 
systems, with their overlying settlements, roughly contemporary with Stuart Needham’s 
(2007) ‘Great Divide’ at c. 800 BC.
Climatic change is often suggested as the driver for changes seen during this period, with 
colder and wetter weather causing silting of river valleys and having a deleterious effect on 
farmed landscapes. The evidence is variable and dating extremely difficult – many of the 
observed changes are down-stream events; it is also apposite that, whilst rain and cold 
might cause abandonment of the moors of the south-west, lower slopes on the chalk downs 
of central southern and south-eastern Britain would benefit from extra rainfall. The reason 
for the downturn is uncertain but asteroid or comet impact has again been implicated 
(Franzén & Larsson 1998). This change, occurring at c. 850 BC, may have been relatively 
abrupt (van Geel et al 1998). If, as thought, the cause was a combination of low solar 
radiance with a high intensity of cosmic ray flux, the results would have been observed at 
the time in the form of an atmospheric veil, increased rain and cloudiness and decreased 
temperature (ibid). Occurring within living, or at least folk, memory, these changes may 
well have been too rapid for mitigation strategies available at the time to have taken effect, 
and may have precipitated social and economic dislocation. In Britain it is thought that 
average temperatures in the 2nd millennium BC were about 1oC warmer than those of the 
present day, and that the climate cooled during the early 1st millennium BC (Tinsley 
&Grigson 1981). Whilst the degree of cooling would have had little effect on modern crop 
growth in areas below c. 300m OD, prehistoric grain, with some 3000 fewer years to adapt, 
may well have been more vulnerable.
10.5 In summary
Two cycles of field construction and use have been observed. A few examples of enclosure 
seem to have started in the centuries around 2000BC, followed by a peak period in the 
middle of the 2nd millennium BC when huge areas were included within rectilinear grids. 
328
These grids were replaced, often overlain, by smaller agglomerated systems about 1000BC 
or a little later, only for most to be abandoned during the Early Iron Age. 
The possible causes for these periods of growth and collapse have been discussed, but 
polities in general can be seen to go through such stochastic cycles. Using communities 
from the circum-Alpine Late Neolithic and a range of archaeological and environmental 
parameters, the size of populations is noted as fundamental to understanding cultural 
persistence (Shennan 2000). Small communities may be more mobile and subject to takeover, with their cultures dissipated, whilst larger groups have greater stability. Populations 
are dynamic, and in the Chalain / Clairvaux region the correlation between changes in 
population size and fluctuations in 14C concentrations indicate climate change as a causal 
factor (Arbogast et al 1996; Pétrequin 1996). However, these lake-edge settlements would 
have been particularly susceptible to the effects of climate change and, although climate in 
the Holocene is now known to have been more variable than had been assumed (O’Brien et 
al 1995; Bond et al 1997), the effect on the chalklands of southern Britain may well have 
been less pronounced.
Mathematical modelling of interactions between chieftain led communities (Gavrilets et al 
2010) indicates that the most powerful drivers of collapse are social - defeat in warfare, 
rebellion by sub-chiefs and fragmentation following the death of the paramount chief –
notably the conditions we tend to emphasise, overpopulation and climatic deterioration, 
appeared less effective.
Population increase, enabled by an adequate supply of food and resulting from personal 
decisions, may have resulted in a perceived need to claim land and to define the areas 
claimed. A profound social change towards a raiding culture, with the ownership of stock 
rather than bronze and land denoting status, resulted in a reorganisation of the farming 
landscape. The causes underlying this change are unclear, but the result appears to have 
been an increase in aggression and eventual population collapse and concomitant settlement 
abandonment.
329
10.6 Finally
Although the work presented here has provided some information about the changes made 
to field systems during the 2nd and early 1st millennia BC it has, perhaps inevitably not 
provided answers to all the questions posited, but has posed further queries in need of 
solution. A greater understanding of the effects of climatic fluctuations on different 
geologies, and finer resolution of the timing of those variations would assist. Better dating 
of field systems in general and of their components in particular is essential. The need for 
present food security is likely to result in ploughing more of our permanent grazing land 
and destruction of our primary evidence. Protection of the best preserved field systems, in 
their entirety, and over differing environmental regions, is necessary if future generations 
are to be enabled to read their story.
330
Conclusions
Survey of the above ground evidence for prehistoric field systems in a number of areas of 
southern and south-eastern Britain has shown evidence of the deliberate construction of 
different phases, one overlying the other, rather than adaptation of existing patterns. 
The earliest systems, preserved only in agriculturally marginal, upland areas, are 
represented by the enclosure of large areas within highly formally organised, rectilinear 
grids. These grids are draped across the topography but where routes for movement can be 
seen they are generally along the scarp edge of the downs and ridges running from it. The 
main alignment tends to be just east of north and, although governed to a large extent by the 
local topography, slight differences in adjacent field systems may have been used as a 
signal of group identity. Possibly by chance, given the general lie of the land, this 
alignment ensures that the main axes present their length towards the south-east, the 
direction also faced by doors and porches of contemporary round houses. The manner in
which these large areas were used is uncertain, but the entire area may not have been 
enclosed as a single event. Piecemeal additions may have been made but the form of the 
grid was scrupulously maintained. In a few cases some of the grid of fields can be divided 
into smaller units as a size suitable to maintain a family, and this may introduce the concept 
of inherited land. A considerable level of social organisation would have been required to 
create the systems and to ensure agreed routes of access to communal resources. 
It seems unlikely that the sole, or perhaps even the primary, purpose of these systems was 
agricultural. People had been growing crops on plots for two thousand years without any 
perceived necessity either to permanently mark their individual boundaries or to organise 
them into formal systems. These rectilinear grids of fields appear to have their genesis on 
both sides of the Channel around 2000 BC or a little earlier, at a time when cross-Channel 
trade underpinned the development of elites who demonstrated their status by the 
possession of prestige objects. If field systems can be regarded as objects, their visibility, 
sometimes from the river or coastal routes, could have signalled an understanding of the 
prevailing orthodoxy by those in the area. As such, they can take their place within an 
assemblage of goods designed to enhance the reputation of the recipients of cross-Channel 
331
trade. The concept of a maritory, an economic rather than a cultural union, may account for 
the distribution of early systems in Wessex and the south-east.
By the middle of the 2nd millennium BC field systems were no longer new, their 
availability had trickled down the social strata, and their prevalence suggests at least a 
perception of land pressure, caused either by population increase or by decreasing fertility. 
Even if used piecemeal, and allowing for periods of fallow, the carrying capacity of the 
land if used to grow high protein content grain would have provided nourishment for a 
greater population considered probable at the time. In addition, field systems were 
constructed on slopes too steep to be ploughed with ease, and where erosion would have 
rapidly removed topsoil. On Whitmoor Common both phases of field system were 
constructed on land where podzol development was sufficiently well advanced to have 
visible effects on the vegetation and to have reduced crop yield. The land may not have 
been needed in strictly practical terms, the requirement was to mark areas as owned in case 
of necessity at some time in the future.
By the turn of the 2nd to the 1st millennium BC these requirements had changed. Smaller, 
less formally organised, agglomerations of fields were constructed over those of the 
previous generations. Some boundaries were re-used, others created de novo. The past was 
not forgotten – in acts of incorporation new settlements were constructed directly over the 
earlier lynchets, despite the inconvenience that may have caused. These smaller systems, 
with areas of open land around them, avoided the lusher grazing in the valley floors and 
their design seems most suitable for a stock-based economy. In Wessex, and as far east as 
eastern Hampshire, wider areas were enclosed by linear ditch complexes placing the 
enclosed fields with their settlements within defined zones of open grazing land. In Sussex, 
where the natural topography is more dissected, the same function may have been fulfilled 
by cross-ridge dykes. This term is generic for a monument type, largely undated, and 
probably constructed for a range of purposes. Some cross ridge dykes block, visually and 
symbolically if not strictly practically, the ridges previously left free for movement.
332
The change from regarding land, immobile and permanently marked, as a visual show of 
wealth to stock, mobile and more easily acquired through raiding, resulted in a different 
culture. Instead of agreements on land division being formally arranged, social cohesion 
could be maintained though a system of patronage and gift-giving. Ostentatious and 
competitive social gatherings, at set places with people and stock attending from far and 
wide, with meat to feast on, alcohol to drink, and doubtless story-telling and music, trading 
in goods and marriage partners, resulted in the sites we know as middens. These sites, with 
their high coprolitic content, attest the primacy of stock since they are a clear statement of 
the ability of the community to waste, in our terms, their main source of manure.
Whilst the mobility of a raiding culture with its ability to appropriate portable, or at least 
drivable, wealth is likely to lead to an increase in aggression within society, it does not 
make warfare a necessity. At an uncertain date, but possibly around 800 BC a third change 
occurred in the majority of the areas studied. Field systems and their settlements appear to 
have been abandoned; however, it is possible that nucleation of settlements accompanied 
by a change in manuring practice such that domestic sources, which include pottery, were 
no longer used. Given the increased amount of manure available from the change in the 
stock / crop ratio, piles left to mature in the fields or even folding may have superceded the 
need to collect every scrap from close to settlements. Certainly pot sherds from the Early
to Middle Iron Age are seldom found within the matrices of lynchets.
There remain many uncertainties, not least in converting relative to absolute chronologies. 
A ‘wish list’:
If the early fields are to be accepted as late Beaker in date more well-dated examples 
are needed
o If the distribution in southern Britain does reflect a Continental origin, early, 
and similarly well-dated examples need to be identified across the Channel
o The dating of field systems needs to be subjected to greater rigour that it 
frequently receives
The origins of settlement sites producing Deverel-Rimbury tradition pottery need to be 
clarified
333
o A number produce very small amounts of Beaker style pottery which may 
point to an earlier genesis
o The present broad periods to which particular pottery styles are assigned 
need to be narrowed and the possibility of regional variations examined
The possibility of multiple, possibly shifting, unenclosed settlements set within the 
early fields needs to be addressed
o Development, and therefore developer funding, rarely provides for largescale, open area excavation of agriculturally marginal land
 Sites on this type of land are under greater threat as food security is 
recognised as a major issue
 Only Peacehaven (Hart forthcoming) and Blackpatch (Drewett 
1982b; Tapper forthcoming) meet this requirement
If contemporary settlement sites were not positioned within the early fields, and, given 
the scale of the systems, where were they?
The later settlements, set within small areas of agglomerated fields, and often overlying 
or cut into earlier lynchets, seldom appear to have survived beyond c. 800 BC
o Is the apparent dearth of Early to Middle Iron Age settlement sites ‘real’, 
and, if so, did it result from population collapse or a different cause?
This work is limited to zones where above ground evidence is well preserved, by definition 
those later regarded as marginal and not subjected to intensive ploughing. It is therefore 
not possible to say with certainty that the pattern observed here was a general one in the 
later prehistoric period, but the similarity of the pattern within the study areas selected 
suggests that it was at least widespread.
Where sections have been excavated across lynchets formed on chalk downland, as part of 
this report and by others, little or no structure has been found. They therefore leave no 
below ground evidence, and are totally destroyed by ploughing or other truncation of their 
visible earthworks. Phase differences can only occasionally be seen as soil marks on aerial 
photographs, and even on open land only the larger examples are visible. LiDAR has yet to 
334
be fully tested in terms of detecting very minor earthworks, less than 0.2m high, 
particularly in dense vegetation including gorse, heather and conifer plantations.
Field systems, ubiquitous and inconsequential though they may seem, still have a story to 
tell. Further analytical survey, and statutary protection of the best preserved examples is 
strongly recommended.