Rare Byzantine swords found in medieval stronghold
By Laura Geggel published February 05 , 2022

Experts are calling them hybrid Byzantine ring pommeled swords . 

Archaeologists in Turkey have discovered two " rare and unique " swords in a heavily fortified city from the Byzantine Empire , a new study finds . One of the swords , unearthed in a church , may have been placed there as an offering . 

Both iron weapons are ring pommeled swords , meaning that the pommel — a rounded knob at the end of the handle — is shaped like a ring . Ring pommeled swords were a rarity in the Byzantine , but these blades are also unique for another reason : Intriguing features on the swords distinguish " them from the ring pommeled swords of the nearby civilizations ,  " the researchers wrote in the study . 

The swords are so unique , it ' s difficult to determine what ethnicity or mercenary group wielded them about 1 , 000 years ago , the researchers said . 

Sponsored Links
Pakistan : The Cost of Solar Panels May Surprise You
Solar panels | Search ads
Related : In photos : The last century of Samurai swordsmen 

Archaeologists discovered the swords in Amorium , a Byzantine city that was an important crossroad between Constantinople , the empire ' s capital , and other major cities , such as Nicaea and Ancyra ( modern-day Ankara )  . Amorium was also , temporarily , a military hotspot and became a stronghold that served as the region ' s first defense line against the Arab invasions , including the Arab conquest of Amorium in A . D . 838 , the researchers said . 

Researchers have done systematic excavations in Amorium since 1988 , leading them to find the two ring pommeled swords : They unearthed the first , a fragmentary and corroded sword , in the atrium of a church in 1993 , while they found the second sword in 2001 in the lower part of the city . Both swords date to the 10th and 11th centuries , during the middle Byzantine period ( A . D . 843 to 1204 )  . 

The discovery of a sword in a church may be " considered bizarre ,  " as it was custom at that time to lay down weapons in holy places , said study lead researcher Errikos Maniotis , an independent researcher who has a master ' s degree in Byzantine archaeology from Aristotle University of Thessaloniki , in Greece . 

The ring pommeled sword discovered in the lower part of Amorium , a major city in the Byzantine Empire . 

The ring pommeled sword discovered in the lower part of Amorium , a major city in the Byzantine Empire .  ( Image credit : Amorium Excavation Project ) 
It ' s possible that the sword wasn ' t brought into the church with the intention of violence , however , but as a votive offering — a special object purposefully left for god ( s )  , religious leaders or establishments .  " It is known from the [ historic ] sources that weapons have been deposited as votive offerings in churches ,  " Maniotis told Live Science in an email . 

For instance , Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos , the Byzantine emperor from A . D . 913 to 959 , wrote that St . Theodore Teron ' s shield was hung as a relic under the dome of a Byzantine church honoring him , Maniotis said . Weapons placed in churches are " usually associated with holy relics connected with the warrior saints ,  " he noted .  " Moreover , we have the deposit of armament in Mount Athos monasteries [ in Greece ]  , such as a chainmail shirt that is stored in Iveron Monastery . So , this sword could have a votive character , offered by its owner to the church along with other objects , perhaps .  " 

The second sword , found in the lower city , has a 5 . 5-inch-long ( 14 centimeters ) handle and a double-edged blade that was at least 24 inches ( 61 centimeters ) long , Maniotis and study co-researcher Zeliha Demirel-Gökalp wrote in the study . Demirel-Gökalp is the director of the excavations at Amorium and a professor in the Department of Art History , with an expertise in Byzantine art , at Anadolu University in Turkey . 

Related : The coolest ancient weapons discovered in 2020

The dimensions of this sword suggest that a soldier in the Byzantine army may have used it as a secondary , optional sword during battle , the researchers said . 

Though rare in the Byzantine Empire , ring pommeled swords are known from other cultures . The earliest known ring-shaped pommel can be traced back to the Chinese Han Dynasty ( 206 BC . to A . D . 220 )  , and the practice spread to the nomadic Scythians and Huns , the researchers said . Ring pommeled swords are also seen in other cultures , including the Sarmatians , who lived in Central Asia , and the Romans , who may have adopted the practice from Sarmatian mercenaries . 

However , unlike previously discovered swords , the sword found in the church has a structure that looks like a cross-guard — a piece of metal that sits perpendicular to the blade at the end of the handle . Cross-guards are often used to identify old swords , and this one resembles a " sleeved cross-guard ,  " the researchers said . This feature , as well as others , have never been seen on ring pommeled swords before ,  " which is a fact that makes this specimen unique ,  " the researchers wrote in the study . 
The swords are so unusual , the researchers proposed giving their design a new name : hybrid Byzantine ring pommeled swords . Given that they were found near each other in Amorium , perhaps " there was a specific armory in the city that manufactured this certain type of ring pommeled swords ,  " the researchers said in the study .  " Or , it is just maybe a coincidence .  " 

The Amorium excavations are supported by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Turkey , the Turkish Historical Society and Anadolu University . The study was published in December 2021 in the Journal of Art History . 